AFFIDAVIT FOR COMPLAINT AMD SEARCH WARRANTS 
**  On June . , 1971, before  
  t at Mew Orleans, Louisiana in 
the Eastern Judicial District of Louisiana, personally appeared 
the undersigned affiant, FLOYD D. MOORE, who being duly sworn, 
deposes and says: 
(1) I am Chief, Intelligence Division, Internal 
Revenue Service for the Mew Orleans Internal Revenue Service Dis- 
trict which includes all of the state of Louisiana and have held 
such position since September, 1967. 
(2) Since September, 1967, I have supervised in- 
vestigations conducted by Special Agents of the Intelligence 
Division, Internal Revenue Service, in the State of Louisiana, 
including potential violations of the criminal provisions of 
the Internal Revenue laws, to wit, Title 26, United States 
Code, Section 7201 - "Attempt to evade or defeat tax," and 
Title 26, United States Code, Section 7206(1) - "Fraud and 
false statements," by JIM GARRISON, aka JAPES CAROTHERS 
GARRISOM, District Attorney, Parish of Orleans, Captain 
FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., New Orleans Police Department 
assigned as an investigator ’to the staff of District Attorney 
GARRISON, PERSHING CEP.VAIS, and other individuals, some named 
herein and others un-named, who have been and are engaged in 
illegal gambling businesses in the State of Louisiana. 
(3) As a result of evidence discovered in the fore- 
going investigations and evidence discovered in investigations 
of potential violations of other Internal Revenue laws relating 
to gambling devices, I have, in the past 8 months supervised a 
portion of an investigation of offenses involving the Louisiana 
pinball industry and certain public officials including law 
enforcement officers, and as a result of my personal direction 
of that investigation and of reports made to me by federal 
agents under my supervision, as well as reports to me from ^ 
agents of other federal Agencies, I am familiar with the cir- 
cumstances of the offenses involving violations of certaino me by federal 
agents under my supervision, as well as reports to me from ^ 
agents of other federal Agencies, I am familiar with the cir- 
cumstances of the offenses involving violations of certain

--- PAGE BREAK ---nts under my supervision, as well as reports to me from ^ 
agents of other federal Agencies, I am familiar with the cir- 
cumstances of the offenses involving violations of certain

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sections of the ''Organised Crime Control Act of 1970”, . 
including Title 13, United States Code, Section 1511 
- ’’Obstruction of state or local lav/ enforcement”, and 
Section 1955 - Prohibition of illegal gambling businesses;” 
as well as violations of Title 18, United States Code, Section 
1952 - ’’Interstate and foreign travel or transportation in aid 
of racketeering enterprises” and Section 2 - ’’Princ-ipals”; and 
Title 18, United States Code, Section 371 - ’’Conspiracy to 
»y 
■' commit offenses or to defraud United States"; which have been 
and are being committed by certain persons among whom are JIM 
GARRISON, a/k/a JAMES CAROTHERS GARRISON, District Attorney for 
the Parish of Orleans, Louisiana; Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE, 
SR., New Orleans Police Department; Sergeant ROBERT N. FREY, 
Commander of the New Orleans Police Department Vice Squad; 
LOUIS M. BOASBERG, holder of a partnership interest in New 
. Orleans Novelty Company and New .Orleans Novelty Sales Company, 
both partnerships. New Orleans, Louisiana; JOHN J. ELMS, JR., 
a partner in TAC Amusement Company, New Orleans, Louisiana, a 
partnership; LAWRENCE L. LAGARDE, a partner in TAC Amusement 
Company, New Orleans, Louisiana; KARBY S.. MARKS, JR., an 
employee of New Orleans Novelty Company, New Orleans, 
Louisiana; R03ERT NIHS, principal stockholder of REN Enter- 
prises, Inc., a holding company for Lucky Coin Machine Company, 
Inc., AMA Distributors, Inc., RDM Corporation and Le Cafetierie, 
'Inc., all of New Orleans, Louisiana; JOHN ELMO PIERCE, owner and 
operator of Pierce Amusement Company, a so’le proprietorship. 
New Orleans, Louisiana; JOHN ARUMS CALLERY, New Orleans, 
Louisiana; PERSHING GERVAIS, former chief Investigator in the 
Orleans Parish District Attorney's Office; CHARLES PACE, owner 
and operator of Palace Amusement Company, New Orleans, Louisiana, 
a sole proprietorship; and Santo Di Fatta, former owner and 
operator of New Orleans Coin Machine Company, New Orleans, 
Louisiana, a sole proprietorship. ! 
2sement Company, New Orleans, Louisiana, 
a sole proprietorship; and Santo Di Fatta, former owner and 
operator of New Orleans Coin Machine Company, New Orleans, 
Louisiana, a sole proprietorship. ! 
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---Orleans, Louisiana, 
a sole proprietorship; and Santo Di Fatta, former owner and 
operator of New Orleans Coin Machine Company, New Orleans, 
Louisiana, a sole proprietorship. ! 
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(M) I have personal knowledge from my own Investi- 
nations and from Investigations conducted by Special Agents under 
my supervision of the following background information on the 
Individuals mentioned in Paragraph (3) above: . * 
a. JIM GARRISON is currently the District Attorney 
for Orleans Parish, Louisiana. He was first elected to this 
office in November 1961 and he took office in May of 1962. He 
was elected to his third consecutive four-year term in November 
of 1969 and began his third term in May of 1970. His name was 
officially changed to JIM GARRISON in 1961. Prior to this date, 
his name was JAMES CAROTHERS GARRISON. 
b. JOHN ARUNS GALLERY has been involved in various 
phases of the pinball industry for many years. He is the 
lobbyist for the pinball machine industry in the Louisiana state 
legislature. He formerly had an interest in New Orleans Novelty 
Company (19^7 - 1968), New Orleans, Louisiana, a company dealing 
in various amusement devices and in the Bally in-line gambling 
type pinball machines. In 1968 he was President of State Novelty 
Company, Inc., Baton Rouge, Louisiana, a business also engaged in 
the placing of Bally in-line gambling type pinball machines in 
public places for use by the'general public. In 1968 and 1969 he 
was a stockholder and director in Business Loan and Investment 
Corporation, which company held at least 502 of the stock of 
State Novelty Company, Inc. 
# 
c. FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., is currently a 
Captain of Police assigned to the investigative staff of the 
District Attorney's Office, Orleans Parish, Louisiana. From 
May 5> 1962, to June 30, 1968, SOULE was Commander of the Vice 
Squad, New Orleans Police Department, New Orleans, Louisiana. 
SOULE was employed by New Orleans Novelty Company, New Orleans 
Louisiana, during the late 1930*s and early 19^0!s. 
• d. Sergeant R03ERT N. FREY is presently Con- 
- mander of the Vice Squad, New Orleans Police Department, New 
Orleans, Louisiana. He has held that position since April 2, 
1969. .Among other things, the Vice Squad is in charge of en- 
forcing the State of Louisiana and City of New Orleans ramblir. 
i 
i 
:lOrleans, Louisiana. He has held that position since April 2, 
1969. .Among other things, the Vice Squad is in charge of en- 
forcing the State of Louisiana and City of New Orleans ramblir. 
i 
i 
:l

--- PAGE BREAK ---. He has held that position since April 2, 
1969. .Among other things, the Vice Squad is in charge of en- 
forcing the State of Louisiana and City of New Orleans ramblir. 
i 
i 
:l

--- PAGE BREAK ---

laws, including Article 90 of the Louisiana Criminal.Code j_R.S. 
14:90 - "Gambling;", and New Orleans City Code, 1956, Section 
4 * 
27-2.2 - "Same [Gambling generally - Defined] - Prohibited". 
e. LOUIS M. BOASBEP.G is a partner in Hew Orleans 
Novelty Company and New Orleans Novelty Sales Company, both of 
New Orleans, Louisiana. BOASBERG has been engaged in the pin- 
ball business since the 1930's. He is the sole "prime" dis- 
tributor of Bally in-line gambling type pinball machines for the 
States of Louisiana and Mississippi. He sells machines to other 
dealers through New Orleans Novelty Sales Company. New Orleans 
Novelty Company places its gambling type pinball machines in 
various bars and other public places for use by the general 
public. 
f. JOHN J. ELMS, JR., and LAWRENCE LAGARDE are 
the principal figures in TAC Amusement Company, a partnership, 
New Orleans, Louisiana. The principal business of TAC Amusement 
Company is placing Bally in-line gambling type pinball machines 
and juke boxes in bars, restaurants and other public places in 
the greater New Orleans metropolitan area as well as elsewhere i 
the state for use by the general public. LAWRENCE L. LAGARDE, 
who is the general manager and a partner, has been associated 
with TAC Amusement Company for more than 30 years. JOHN J. ELMS 
JR. inherited an interest in TAC Amusement Company upon the 
death of his father in 1969. LAGARDE and ELMS also control 
Operator's Sales, Inc., a corporation which buys and sells gam- 
bling type pinball machines. 
g. HAR3Y S. MARKS, JR., has been employed by 
LOUIS BOASBERG and/or New Orleans Novelty Company since about 
1940. 
h. ROBERT MIMS is the principal stockholder of 
REN Enterprises, Inc., a holding company for Lucky Coin Machine 
Company, Inc., AMA Distributors, Inc., RDM Corporation and Le ! 
Cafetierie, Inc., all of New Orleans, Louisiana. Lucky Coin 
Machine Company, Inc., -.was- .in the .business .of T>lnain~- Bally 
in-line rambling type pinball .machines and still Is in theand Le ! 
Cafetierie, Inc., all of New Orleans, Louisiana. Lucky Coin 
Machine Company, Inc., -.was- .in the .business .of T>lnain~- Bally 
in-line rambling type pinball .machines and still Is in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---e, Inc., all of New Orleans, Louisiana. Lucky Coin 
Machine Company, Inc., -.was- .in the .business .of T>lnain~- Bally 
in-line rambling type pinball .machines and still Is in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

business of placing juke boxes and amusement devices in public 
places such as bars and restaurants for use by the general 
public. AHA Distributors, Inc., is a corporation used by 
NIKS for the purpose of purchasing and selling Bally in-line 
gambling type pinball machines, amusement devices and juke boxes. 
i. JOHN ELKO PIERCE is the owner and operator of 
Pierce Amusement Company, a sole proprietorship. Hew Orleans, 
^Louisiana, which owns and places Bally in-line gambling type 
pinball machines in public places for use by the general public. 
j. CHARLES PACE is the owner and operator of 
Palace Amusement Company, a sole proprietorship. New Orleans, 
Louisiana, a company which placed Bally in-line pinball machine 
type gambling devices in public places for use by the general 
public. 
k. SANTO DI FATTA, is the former owner and 
operator of New Orleans Coin Machine Company, New Orleans, 
Louisiana, a company which placed Bally in-line pinball machine 
type gambling devices in public places for use by the general 
public. ' , 
l. PERSHING GERVAIS was first employed by the New 
Orleans Police Department during the mid-1940's. He left this 
employment around 1952 or 1953, when he became self-employed as 
a private investigator and did investigative work for the New 
* ' , * V» 
Orleans Metropolitan Crime Commission. In 1962, he became 
employed as Chief Investigator on the staff of JIM GARRISON, 
Orleans Parish District Attorney. He left that employment in 
October, 1965. Since then he has been engaged as a private 
investigator; in the bailbond and surety bond business; 
president of Industrial Bonding Agency, Inc.; and formerly was 
a stockholder in the Emerald Door, Inc., and has owned and 
operated other such bars and lounges in New Orleans, Louisiana, 
•.and has also owned and operated Bally in-line gambling typo i 
' * i 
pinball machines and has placed such gambling devices in public 
1 t 
places for use by the general public. During the year 1967? 
GERVAIS worked for General Bonding Agency, New Orleans, 
5i 
' * i 
pinball machines and has placed such gambling devices in public 
1 t 
places for use by the general public. During the year 1967? 
GERVAIS worked for General Bonding Agency, New Orleans, 
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---achines and has placed such gambling devices in public 
1 t 
places for use by the general public. During the year 1967? 
GERVAIS worked for General Bonding Agency, New Orleans, 
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Louisiana, on a fee basis. PERSHING CHP.YAIS has assisted 
Special Agents of the Internal Revenue Service in investigations 
in the past, including the investigations, indictments, and 
federal jury trials in the 1950’s of E. J. PATERHOSTRO, a former 
member of the New Orleans Police Department, as well as 
MILTON L. DUREL, THOKAS J. BROOKS and MATEO J. AZCOHA, all former 
members of the New Orleans Police Department. 
(5) Unless otherv/ise indicated herein all state- 
ments made by me in this affidavit are as a result of (1) my 
own personal knowledge, (2) the personal knowledge of othei 
federal agents who communicated their personal knowledge directly 
to me, (3) the personal knowledge of other federal agents who 
# 4 
have communicated such personal knowledge to me indirectly 
through official channels, or (*0 the personal knowledge of 
PERSHING GERVAIS, which was communicated to me by him both 
directly and through JOHN VJALL, Attorney-in-Charge of the Justice 
Department's Organized Crime Strike Force in New Orleans, and 
ARLIE G. PUCKETT, Special Agent, Intelligence Division, Internal 
Revenue Service. 
(6) Based on the personal knowledge, experience and 
expertise of other federal agents concerning Bally in-line 
gambling type pinball machines, I can state that such devices are 
coin-activated electrically operated machines. Each machine when 
assembled and ready for use consists of a vertical section 
attached to a base section to which are secured four legs. The 
base section contains a plunger device, a number of holes drilled 
into an inclined playboard and a quantity of posts with rubber 
bumpers placed at intervals thereon. The device is eo.uipped 
with from five to eight metal balls, five of which are released 
for play upon insertion of a coin. The vertical section has a 
glass front upon which the results of play are recorded by 
electrically operated equipment. The object of play of the 
device is to propel the balls by means of the plunger onto the 
inclined playboard so that the balls will fall into certain hole-:; 
and thereby light corresponding light bulbs located on the ver- 
‘lical'-sectlon of the machine. When throe -or more bulbs are 
6inclined playboard so that the balls will fall into certain hole-:; 
and thereby light corresponding light bulbs located on the ver- 
‘lical'-sectlon of the machine. When throe -or more bulbs are 
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---so that the balls will fall into certain hole-:; 
and thereby light corresponding light bulbs located on the ver- 
‘lical'-sectlon of the machine. When throe -or more bulbs are 
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lighted in a row, or in some-other predetermined order,- the — — 
machine registers so-called "free plays". The machine is so 
constructed that any number of coins may be inserted therein , 
before actual play of the game begins. The number of "free 
plays" to be awarded for successful operation of the device can 
be increased by insertion of additional coins prior to play of 
■the machine, although the rate of increase of free play awards 
^cannot be controlled by the player and may or may not increase 
S 
upon the insertion of a particular coin. After having been 
struck with the plunger, a ball is propelled onto the playboard 
and descends the inclined plane dependent upon the lav/ of gravity 
and chance contacts v/ith the posts affixed to the board. Free 
plays v/on on the machine are recorded on a three or four digit 
counting meter (replay register). Free games so recorded may 
be used by depressing appropriate buttons to activate the 
mechanism which controls the increase of the free game awards, 
or to activate other features of the machine. Each such use 
decreases the number shov/n on the replay register by one. The 
replay register can be immediately cleared by operation of an 
on-off switch located on the base section of the device or by 
disconnecting the device from its power source and then recon- 
necting it. Inside the base section are located two additional 
meters referred to as the total plays meter and the replays 
meter. The total plays meter records the number of coins 
inserted in the device and the number of free-plays used in 
the play of the machine. The replays meter records the total 
number of free plays which have been won by playing the machine. 
Subtracting the total registered on the replays meter and the 
total of coins in the coin box from the total registered on 
the total plays meter will result in the number of free games 
eliminated from the machine without being used in play. The 
. devices are so equipped that the replay meter may be readily 
rewired in order to record only the number of free games 
eliminated from the machine without being used in play. Also, 
7in play. The 
. devices are so equipped that the replay meter may be readily 
rewired in order to record only the number of free games 
eliminated from the machine without being used in play. Also, 
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---ces are so equipped that the replay meter may be readily 
rewired in order to record only the number of free games 
eliminated from the machine without being used in play. Also, 
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

additional meters may be installed to assist in the making of 
other calculations. 
(7) While Dally in-line pinball machines are not illegal 
in themselves (contraband) in the state of Louisiana (15LRS, Section 
31(b)), the use of such machines for gambling purposes - such as 
payoffs to the players for "free plays" accumulated - is illegal 
in the City of Hew Orleans (City Code, 1956, Section 27-2.2) and 
throughout the State of Louisiana (Article 90 of the Louisiana 
Criminal Code, R.S. l^^O). 
Personal inspection by federal agents of company 
records, together with actual physical surveillance by federal 
agents from the Intelligence Division, Internal Revenue Service; 
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Division, Internal Revenue Service; 
Federal Bureau of Investigation; Postal Inspection Service of 
the Postal Service; Customs Agency Service, Bureau of Customs; 
Labor Management Services Administration, Department of Labor; 
Immigration and Naturalization Service; and the United States 
Secret Service, disclosed that Hew Orleans Novelty Company has 
placed Bally in-line gambling type pinball machines in at least 
139 known locations, and that during the past 90 days payoffs 
were obtained or observed by or admitted to the above federal 
•agents at 113 locations, the most recent' such payoff 
having been on June 28, 1971, for a percentage of payoffs of 
8lJ (percent); that TAC Amusement Company has placed 3ally 
--in-line gambling type pinball machines in at least 65 
known locations, and that during the past 90 days payoffs were 
obtained or observed by or admitted to the above federal agents 
at 53 locations, the most recent such payoff having been on 
June 19, 1971, for a percentage of payoffs of 82" (percent); that 
State Novelty Company, Inc. of Baton Rouge, Louisiana, has placed 
Bally in-line gambling type pinball machines in at least 66 
known locations, and that during the past 90 days payoffs were 
obtained or observed by or admitted to the above■federal agents 
8placed 
Bally in-line gambling type pinball machines in at least 66 
known locations, and that during the past 90 days payoffs were 
obtained or observed by or admitted to the above■federal agents 
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---ne gambling type pinball machines in at least 66 
known locations, and that during the past 90 days payoffs were 
obtained or observed by or admitted to the above■federal agents 
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

at 64 locations, the most- recent-such payoff havine-becn on  
June 25, 1971* for a percentage of payoffs of 9755' (percent)y~thafc ~ 
Pierce Amusement Company has placed Dally in-line gambling type 
pinball machines in at least 4 .known locations, and that during 
the past 90 days payoffs were obtained or observed by or admitted 
to the above federal agents at *1 locations, the most recent such 
payoff having been on June 26, 1971, for a percentage of payoffs 
of 100^ (percent). Of a total of 274 known locations in which the 
above named 4 companies have placed Bally in-line gambling type 
pinball machines, during the past 90 days payoffs were obtained 
or observed by or admitted to the above federal agents at 234 
locations, for an overall percentage of payoffs of 852 (percent). 
These federal agents have reported that the payoffs were made 
after the machines were played and a number of so-called "free 
plays" were accumulated; and that the payoffs were made by 
personnel of the locations on the basis of 5 cent per free play, 
which plays were taken off the replay registers by operation of 
on-off switches or by disconnecting the machines from their power 
sources as described in (6) above. 
(8) Based on information received from other federal 
agents through their personal knowledge and experience regarding 
the Louisiana pinball industry, on direct knowledge obtained 
from dealers in Louisiana, and on direct knowledge obtained from 
several location owners in Louisiana, I -can state that the above 
mentioned pinball companies have collected and do regularly 
collect the proceeds of the play from the gambling type pinball 
machines from within the machines, that the companies and their 
employees have exclusive access into the machines and their 
contents, that the companies reimburse the location owners for 
payoffs made, that companies charge a set service charge which is 
then subtracted from the total proceeds and the remaining pro- 
ceeds are then split (usually on a 50-50 percentage basis) with 
the location owners, that the amount of income thus derived and 
1 
the operation of the machines is dependent upon the location 
owners’ willingness to award players payoffs in exchange for the 
9h 
the location owners, that the amount of income thus derived and 
1 
the operation of the machines is dependent upon the location 
owners’ willingness to award players payoffs in exchange for the 
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---rs, that the amount of income thus derived and 
1 
the operation of the machines is dependent upon the location 
owners’ willingness to award players payoffs in exchange for the 
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

free games the players _h&ve accumulated on the machines, and 
that the location owners’ willingness to pay off its customers 
is directly and totally dependent on the companies1 willingness 
to reimburse the location owners for such payoffs.' * 
(9) Based on surveillance as well as personal obser- 
vation of company records conducted by other federal agents, 
including the information set forth in paragraph seven above, I 
can state that each of the above named pinball companies is and 
has been in business in excess of thirty days and that each has 
had and does have at least five persons involved in the conduct, 
financing, management, supervision, direction and ownership of 
all or part of the gambling type pinball machine business. 
(10) Based on my personal knowledge and experience 
and on information received from other federal agents with 
personal knowledge and experience regarding the Louisiana- 
Mississippi pinball industry, and also on direct knowledge 
obtained from dealers in Louisiana-Mississippi and from the 
Bally Manufacturing Company in Illinois, -I can state that Bally 
in-line gambling type pinball•machines are manufactured exclu- 
sively in Chicago, Illinois, and are not and never have been 
manufactured in the State of Louisiana; that when such machines . 
are shipped from the manufacturer, there are located in the rear 
of the vertical sections or cabinets, operating.instructions and 
parts catalogs together with business reply cards on which are 
prominently displayed the manufacturer’s name and Chicago, 
Illinois, address; that other accompanying documents containing 
the manufacturer's name and address include electrical circuit 
diagrams, patent notices, and warranties; that the electrical 
circuit diagrams are for referral when the devices are being 
repaired and that the manufacturer has conducted and does conduct 
schools in Chicago, Illinois and elsewhere on the care and main- 
tenance of the gambling devices, which schools some of the local 
repairmen have attended; that the manufacturer's name appears on 
the glass face of the vertical section of all of the Bally in-line 
gambling type pinball machines manufactured from .1963 through .1967 
10men have attended; that the manufacturer's name appears on 
the glass face of the vertical section of all of the Bally in-line 
gambling type pinball machines manufactured from .1963 through .1967 
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat the manufacturer's name appears on 
the glass face of the vertical section of all of the Bally in-line 
gambling type pinball machines manufactured from .1963 through .1967 
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

und that the manufacturer's name and t.ric place or manufacture 
appear on all such devices manufactured from 1968 through .’the 
present time; that there is permanently impressed into and clearly 
visible on bouh the vertical section and the base section of each 
of the said gambling devices, the date of manufacture of such device 
and its permanent serial number as required by the Gambling Devices 
Act of 1962; and that therefore there is probable cause to believe 
that the recipients and purchasers of the Bally in-line gambling 
type pinball machines have knowledge and in fact know that said 
machines have traveled in interstate commerce. 
(11) Records of New Orleans Novelty Company, the sole 
prime" distributor of Bally in-line gambling type pinball 
machines for the States of Louisiana and Mississippi and of the 
manufacturer, Bally Manufacturing Company, have been examined by 
federal agents and these federal agents have reported to me that 
Nev; Orleans Novelty Company, TAC Amusement Company, Lucky Coin 
Machine Company, Inc., Pierce Amusement Company, State Novelty 
Company, me., and Palace Amusement Company have purchased and 
received Bally in-line gambling type pinball machines within the 
past five years on a regular basis. Moreover, actual physical 
surveillance by federal agents discloses that gambling type pin- 
ball machines manufactured and shipped to Louisiana within the past 
five years have been observed in commercial locations within the 
past ten days, said machines bearing ownership indicia of the above 
companies (except for Lucky Coin Machine Company, Inc., and Palace ' 
Amusement Company which went out of the pinball business on 
November 2‘\, 1970) and the ownership of said machines being 
reflected on documents, records and reports of the companies. 
(12) On June 2k, 1969, I met with PERSHING GERVAIS at 
which time GERVAIS agreed to assist the Internal Revenue Service 
in the investigation of violations of federal'law and:in the 
accumulation of intelligence information regarding criminal 
activity in the New Orleans area. Special Agent ARLIE G. 
PUCi\_i.} Intelligence Division, Internal Revenue Service, was 
assigned by me to work with GERVAIS who thereafter furnished 
i-ccial n;.ent ?UC.\s,TT with facts regarding numerous violati ens 
i 
» 
1 
Of 
n} Intelligence Division, Internal Revenue Service, was 
assigned by me to work with GERVAIS who thereafter furnished 
i-ccial n;.ent ?UC.\s,TT with facts regarding numerous violati ens 
i 
» 
1 
Of 
n

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion, Internal Revenue Service, was 
assigned by me to work with GERVAIS who thereafter furnished 
i-ccial n;.ent ?UC.\s,TT with facts regarding numerous violati ens 
i 
» 
1 
Of 
n

--- PAGE BREAK ---

law, particularly bribery payoffs to elected public officials 
and law enforcement officers, including transactions in vihieh 
GERVAIS had been a participant. 
(13) On July 27, 1970, together with Special Agent 
PUCKETT, I introduced PERSHING GERVAIS to JOHN WALL, Attorney- 
in-Charge of the Justice Department's Organized Crime Strike 
Force in New Orleans. GERVAIS agreed to assist the Strike Force 
in its investigative and prosecutive efforts and Special Agent 
^PUCKETT was authorized by GERVAIS to furnish WALL with all infor- 
mation previously obtained from GERVAIS. 
(I1)) On August 31, 1970, and on subsequent-occasions, 
GERVAIS outlined to WALL various illegal aspects of the pinball 
business in Louisiana (much of which had been previously told 
to Special Agent PUCKETT), including the fact that JOHN ARUMS 
CALLERY makes bribery payoffs for protection of the pinball 
industry to public officials including law enforcement officers 
and state legislators; that in the New Orleans area, JOHN ELMO 
PIERCE of Pierce Amusement Company collect's protection bribe 
money from certain pinball dealers, then brings it to JOHN ARUMS 
CALLERY, who passes it on to public officials for protection of 
the pinball industry; that JOHN ARUNS CALLERY delivers money to 
him (GERVAIS) for delivery to District Attorney JIM GARRISON; 
that the relationship between GARRISON and the pinball dealers 
' began in the year 1961 when the pinball dealers gave GARRISON 
.$10,000 during his campaign for the Office of District' Attorney 
for Orleans Parish; that since 1962 he (GERVAIS) has been the 
conduit, through CALLERY, for payoffs from pinball machine 
dealers to JIM GARRISON; that when the pinball payoffs began to 
GARRISON through GERVAIS in 1962, the payoff amount from CALLERY 
to GERVAIS was thirty-six hundred dollars ($3600) every two months, 
but that over the years the payments varied, dropping as low as 
twenty-seven hundred dollars ($2700) bi-monthly and as high as 
forty-four hundred dollars ($1I,I00) bi-monthly, which latter figure 
1 
was the one in effect at the time of the instant August 31a 1970, 
interview. GERVAIS further stated that generally during the 
year 1962 and for a time thereafter, he retained seven hundredigure 
1 
was the one in effect at the time of the instant August 31a 1970, 
interview. GERVAIS further stated that generally during the 
year 1962 and for a time thereafter, he retained seven hundred

--- PAGE BREAK ---e in effect at the time of the instant August 31a 1970, 
interview. GERVAIS further stated that generally during the 
year 1962 and for a time thereafter, he retained seven hundred

--- PAGE BREAK ---

dollars ($700) from each bi-monthly pinball payoIT that GALLERY cave 
him, and 'passed the balance on to GARRISON; that for several 
years he retained nine hundred dollars ($900) from each 
bi-monthly pinball payoff he received from CALLERY and passed * 
the balance on to GARRISON; and that when the bi-monthly pinball 
payoff amount reached to forty-four hundred dollars ($*1*100), he 
(GERVAIS) had retained fourteen hundred dollars ($1*100) from 
each bi-monthly pinball payoff he received from CALLERY, and 
passed the balance of three thousand dollars ($3000) every two 
months to GARRISON. 
(15) On November 13> 1970, Attorney WALL told GERVAIS 
that the federal government intended in the near future to take 
major action against some dealers in the pinball industry for 
violations of federal laws; that as a result of this action at 
least some of the pinball dealers would no longer have illegal 
gambling businesses to protect; and that the most accurate and 
reliable evidence of the commission of the above described and 
• . t • # *•» 
other crimes would be ta'pe recordings of the participants them- 
selves planning and executing their criminal activity. It was 
suggested to GERVAIS that the latter*s conversations with certain 
other persons be monitored by Special Agents of the Intelligence 
Division, Internal Revenue Service, who would also record the 
‘conversations. GERVAIS was further told by Attorney WALL that 
such consensual eavesdropping and recording of conversations has . 
long been held by the United States Supreme Court, to be legal and 
admissible in evidence at trial, from as far back as the time of 
the case of On Lee v. United States, 3^3 U.S 747 (1952), through 
Lopez v. United States, 373 U.S. 427 (1963), Lewis v. United 
States» 385 U.S. 293 (1966), and Osborne v. United States, 385 
U.S. 323 (1966); that these Supreme Court decisions had been 
scrupulously adhered to by the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fifth Circuit, Koran v. United States, 408 F, 2d 1321 
..(CA 5, 1969); and that, these Supreme Court decisions had been ‘ 
• * t 
codified by the United States Congress in the Omnibus Crime Con- 
trol and Safe Streets Act of 1965 in Title IS of the United 
13A 5, 1969); and that, these Supreme Court decisions had been ‘ 
• * t 
codified by the United States Congress in the Omnibus Crime Con- 
trol and Safe Streets Act of 1965 in Title IS of the United 
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---, these Supreme Court decisions had been ‘ 
• * t 
codified by the United States Congress in the Omnibus Crime Con- 
trol and Safe Streets Act of 1965 in Title IS of the United 
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

States Code at Section 2511(2)(c) and (cl). GERVAIS agreed at 
this November 13, 1970, meeting to the action proposed by WALL. 
(16) On November l'l, 1970, Attorney General John 
Mitchell authorized the Installation, v;ith the consent of * 
GERVAIS, of electronic listening devices on the latter's person, 
his telephones and in any rooms under his dominion and control. 
(17) On November 16, 1970, Special Agents of the 
Intelligence Division, Internal Revenue Service, began monitoring 
and recording conversations between GERVAIS and various other 
f 
persons. 
(18) On November 16, 1970, CHARLES PACE of Palace 
Amusement Company met v/ith GERVAIS in Room 27S of the Fontaine- 
bleau Motor Hotel in New Orleans, Louisiana* PACE said that on 
Tuesday, November 10, 1970, JOHN ELMO PIERCE of Pierce Amusement 
Company visited him and told PACE he had been sent by LOUIS M. 
BOASBERG of New Orleans Novelty Company; that PIERCE said he 
(PIERCE) v/ould be the "pickup man" .to collect money from each of 
the dealers and that PACE should contribute five hundred dollars 
a month; that he (PACE) was visited by LOUIS BOASBERG of New 
Orleans Novelty Company on Friday, November 13, 1970, and.that 
the latter acknowledged sending PIERCE three days earlier to 
solicit $500 a month from PACE; that he (PACE) said to BOASBERG 
"tell me where my money is going to go at. You know where yours 
is going"; that BOASBERG refused to say where "the bite is going", 
but that when questioned specifically about the District Attorney; 
BOASBERG replied, "Well, you don't think I'm going to leave, that 
we are going to leave that stone unturned, do you?" 
PACE and GERVAIS also made reference to a meeting 
between PACE and ROBERT. NIMS of Lucky Coin Machine Company, Inc., 
In September, 1970. At that time NIMS*asked PACE to contribute to 
, i 
a fund among local pinball dealers to be paid out for protection 
of gambling type pinball machines in New Orleans. NIMS sug- 
gested that PACE'S share should be around $700 a month, which \ 
would be about $10.00 a machine.» PACE told MIMS that he would 
go along with the proposed collection only if PERSHING GERVAIS, 
V * ...ested that PACE'S share should be around $700 a month, which \ 
would be about $10.00 a machine.» PACE told MIMS that he would 
go along with the proposed collection only if PERSHING GERVAIS, 
V * ...

--- PAGE BREAK ---are should be around $700 a month, which \ 
would be about $10.00 a machine.» PACE told MIMS that he would 
go along with the proposed collection only if PERSHING GERVAIS, 
V * ...

--- PAGE BREAK ---

v/ho Y/CLS "GARRISON ’S man", said "yes" to the deal, and PACE 
suggested that NIMS get together v/ith GERVAIS on the matter. 
PACE and GERVAIS also made reference to a meeting that 
GERVAIS had on October 15, 1970, v/ith ROBERT NIKS of Lucky Coin* 
Machine Company, Inc., and JOHN ARUNS CALLERY, At that meeting 
HIMS and CALLERY were seeking GERVAIS1 evaluation of proposed 
payoffs for protection of pinball machines in New Orleans through 
’.JOHN J. ELMS, JR., of TAC Amusement Company v/ho claimed to have 
% 
-a "connection" with certain officials whom he would not name. 
(19) On November 24 and 25, 1970, Special Agents of 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation executed approximately one 
thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) search warrants throughout 
the states of Louisiana and Mississippi for locations containing 
gambling type pinball machines owned by persons and companies 
which had not registered with the Attorney General of the United 
States as required by the Gambling Devices Act of 1962, Title 15, 
United States Code, Section 1173(a)(3)- Approximately 3,000 
gambling type pinball machines and more than 1,000 slot machines 
were seized for forfeiture, as well as one hundred fifty thousand 
dollars ($150,000) in cash. 
' (20) On November 30,-1970, PERSHING GERVAIS talked by 
telephone from Room 376 at the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in New 
Orleans with CHARLES PACE of Palace Amusement Company. PACE 
told GERVAIS that he lost more than 70 machines (the current 
retail price of a new Bally in-line gambling type pinball machine 
then being approximately $2,000) in the FBI raids of November 24 
and 25, 1970, and that the FBI also seized between thirty and 
forty thousand dollars in cash from him at that time (During the 
pinball raids of November 24, 1970 while executing a search 
warrant for the garage and trunk of an automobile in the garage 
portion of No. 8 Central Park Drive, Metairie, Louisiana, Special 
Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, accompanied by 
Special Agents of the Intelligence Division, Internal Revenue 
Service, seized ninety thousand, three hundred thirteen dollars 
■ ($90,313) in cash belonging to CHARLES PACE, from the trunk of a 
‘ white Lincoln 4-door sedan).'ligence Division, Internal Revenue 
Service, seized ninety thousand, three hundred thirteen dollars 
■ ($90,313) in cash belonging to CHARLES PACE, from the trunk of a 
‘ white Lincoln 4-door sedan).'

--- PAGE BREAK ---ternal Revenue 
Service, seized ninety thousand, three hundred thirteen dollars 
■ ($90,313) in cash belonging to CHARLES PACE, from the trunk of a 
‘ white Lincoln 4-door sedan).'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

— (21) On December 1, 1970, PERSHING GERVAIS talked by 
telephone from Room 376 at the Fontainebleau Kotor Hotel .in llcw 
Orleans with Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., who said he heard- 
that the whole pinball industry in Louisiana was likely to fold * 
up as a result of the FBI raids of November 24 and 25, 1970. 
SOULE also said that LOUIS BOASBERG of Mew Orleans Novelty Com- 
pany may be taking over some pinball locations belonging to 
CHARLES PACE of Palace Amusement Company and ROBERT NIMS of Lucky 
Coin Machine Company, Inc. SOULE said that BOASBERG told him 
(SOULE) that there would be no payoff this month because things 
are so bad, and that he (BOASBERG) has been subpoenaed to appear 
before a federal grand jury with all his records and is very 
upset about it. SOULE said he explained to Sergeant ROBERT FREY, 
Commander of the New Orleans Police Department Vice Squad, that 
"the gate was closed" as .far as payoffs viere concerned, but that 
BOASBERG might possibly reopen it after the first of the year,. 
(22) On December 1, 1970, JOHN ARUMS CALLERY met with 
PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 376 of''the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in 
New Orleans and told him that because of the FBI raids of Novem- 
ber 2k and 25, 1970, most of the dealers- in New Orleans were out 
of gambling type pinball machines except-LOUIS M. BOASBERG of 
New Orleans Novelty Company, who had been registered with the 
Attorney General of the United States as required by the Gambling 
Devices Act of 1962 and that because of this development and 
the fact that BOASBERG was in Chicago, CALLERY did not have the- 
* payment that was due for District Attorney ^JlM GARRISON on 
December 1, 1970. 
CALLERY went on to discuss with GERVAIS the arrangement 
whereby CALLERY had always refrained from taking bribe money 
directly from BOASBERG, even when they were partners together 
in the pinball business, and money collections from the pinball 
dealers, including B0AS3ERG, were made by another individual who 
• gave it to CALLERY, who passed it on to public officials for i 
pi’otection of the pinball industry, and that when he (CALLr-RY) 
was in partnership with BOASBERG, the monies paid to public 
officials were covered in the partnership books as partners' 
‘I f.or i 
pi’otection of the pinball industry, and that when he (CALLr-RY) 
was in partnership with BOASBERG, the monies paid to public 
officials were covered in the partnership books as partners' 
‘I f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the pinball industry, and that when he (CALLr-RY) 
was in partnership with BOASBERG, the monies paid to public 
officials were covered in the partnership books as partners' 
‘I f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

draw, that they paid tazes on it, and _that if they-v/ere "ever 
asked about it their cover story would be that they couldjiot 
recall for what or to whom they paid the money: .—   
CALLERY: Oh, I don't v/ant to get into it, no. I don't want 
go get into it, but, uh, I have never -- I have never 
actually done anything with him [BOASBERG]. 
GERVAIS: 
Then you are a lucky bastard. 
• = 
CALLERY: 
you 
\ \ 
I mean, it was handled by somebody else, 
about that insulation. 
I told 
GERVAIS: 
it. 
Yeah. I guess I remember you said something about 
CALLERY: 
In other words* I even v/ent through another guy. 
GERVAIS: 
Yeah, but you knov; him for years, though. uh? 
CALLERY: 
Who? . 
GERVAIS: 
Boasberg. 
• 
CALLERY: 
Oh, I been — I was in business with him for, for 
— from 19JI5 until 1967 
GERVAIS: That's the best commentary I' knov; to be in business 
with a guy and not trust him. How the (( ))* could 
anybody that's not in business with him trust him? If 
you was in business with him and wouldn't trust him. 
CALLERY: Well, as I say, I mean, I, uh,T handle a lot of 
things but I handle them in such a way that, uh — 
GERVAIS: One man always between you. That's the way to do 
it -- insulation. 
CALLERY: I handle a lot of things and, of course, I, I handle 
a lot of things personally that he [LOUIS BOASBERG] didn't • 
even knov; I handled, you know — 
GERVAIS: You know where I bet you a lot of (( *. )) blowup 
is going to come from too, though? That young ounk 
[JOHN ELMS, JR.] over there at TAC [TAC Amusement Company]. 
CALLERY: That's, boy, that's a — I'm just frightened to death 
of him. He [JOHN ELMS, JR.] came to that meeting Saturday 
* morning. Of course, nothing was said there other than they 
were trying to decide whether — he wanted to decide whether 
to go back in the business or not [because of the FBI pin- 
ball^ raids of November 2*1 and 25, 1970, described in para- 
graph 19 above], you knov;, so I — I hesitated going to it 
but Rooney [ROBERT J. "BC3" ROONEY, president of State 
Novelty Company, Inc,, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] asked me to 
do it because he wanted to, he was trying to make a decision 
in Baton Rouge, you see. 
GERVAIS: What, every operator was there, all of them? 
CALLERY: Rooney, John Elms, Nims, Louis, myself. You see what 
I am afraid of right now, I am afraid that they may be ' 
tailing him. 
! 
*A double parenthesis, indicates the deletion of either 
a proper name or of other words, including obscenities.ou see what 
I am afraid of right now, I am afraid that they may be ' 
tailing him. 
! 
*A double parenthesis, indicates the deletion of either 
a proper name or of other words, including obscenities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---raid of right now, I am afraid that they may be ' 
tailing him. 
! 
*A double parenthesis, indicates the deletion of either 
a proper name or of other words, including obscenities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GEHVAIS: Who? 
CALLERS: Louis. '* 
GERVAIS: V/ell,' let’s put it this v/ay — 
CALLEHY: I, I don’t know. I keep watching, I don’t know — * 
GERVAIS: If you was the agent in charge of the people, whoever 
•it is working on that, would you be tailing him? 
CALLEHY: I don’t think he’s smart, enough to know whether they 
are tailing him or riot. 
\ GERVAIS 
yCALLERY 
' GERVAIS 
Oh, no, he isn’t. • 
Of course, I look — 
Of course, let me say this though, if he’s scared. 
but — 
CALLERY: I always look behind me, you see, when my car’s 
- . ( ) to see if anybody’s — 
GERVAIS: But, you see, when you get that way, every other guy 
you see you know he’s an agent. 
CALLERY: But I don’t worry too much about it, I just figure 
they figure that — 
GERVAIS: if they tall ya, they tail ya, that’s all. 
CALLERY: I mean, I think you ought to be very careful about 
how you talk on the phone, I am sure you are, you don’t, 
uh — 
GERVAIS: Listen, like I tell everybody-you got liberty to say 
any (( )) thing if it- comes to a showdown cause I ain’t 
going to say (( )), nothing! 
.CALLERY: (laughter) • 
GERVAIS: You know, you know what they tell me, they say — 
listen, uh — 
CALLERY: You see, they've got, uh, uh, they got all of Louis' 
records. They took all of his records. 
GERVAIS: I wonder what they got in his records. 
CALLERY: Eight years, eight years [The Gambling Devices Act of 
1962, Title 15, United States Code, Sections 1171-1178, 
provides that every person required to register under the 
Act must keep records of certain specified information which 
records must be made available at all reasonable times to ' 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation for inspection and 
copying]. They got everything. 
GERVAIS: You think they got all his contributions and his 
gifts in there. 
CALLERY: Oh, -I am sure he does. 
GERVAIS: Well, all them people'll be in trouble. j 
CALLERY: No names. , • ’ i 
GERVAIS; 3ut they will make him account for it.ontributions and his 
gifts in there. 
CALLERY: Oh, -I am sure he does. 
GERVAIS: Well, all them people'll be in trouble. j 
CALLERY: No names. , • ’ i 
GERVAIS; 3ut they will make him account for it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---gifts in there. 
CALLERY: Oh, -I am sure he does. 
GERVAIS: Well, all them people'll be in trouble. j 
CALLERY: No names. , • ’ i 
GERVAIS; 3ut they will make him account for it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GALLERY: - Mo, they won't. He don't have to say ho forgot, he 
" can say what the hell, uh, I, I, presume they will ask me 
a lot of that stuff. Sure, I v/ould, I would have to say, 
■- - . well. I gave a political contribution but I can't remember 
who — just like I did — with that other thing. 
GERVA1S: Yeah. Well, I am sure it will all come to that. 
Then I would say that this punk over here [JOHN ELMS, JR.] 
is going to play the role of a — who is his lawyer? 
CALLERY: (( 
)) 
GERVAIS: 
(( 
'CALLERY 
LGERVAIS 
What the (( 
)). 
))?• (( 
(laughter) 
Row'd he wind up with (( 
)) is a dumb kind of 
I 
. ))? 
CALLERY: There’s nothing in the records that would be damaging, 
you see, what I mean it's a — lot of it would show, it 
v/ould show, it would show money v/ithdrawn out of the 
business and charged to the partners. You see, that was 
handled that way. What the hell, you do what you want, 
you know what.I mean, if you took money as long as you 
pay taxes on it. 
GERVAIS: Right. 
CALLERY: See, that's just the way I covered it, that's the 
way I handled it. ; 
GERVAIS: Yeah, but you think 3oasberg did? Tight as he is? 
t * * • * 
CALLERY: We11, now in the last three years, I can't answer for 
that. But/ I mean, up til the time.I — 
GERVAIS: You, you mean like the draw. You make the draw 
charged against you. 
CALLERY: No, no, charge it against their, prorate it among 
every partner. 
GERVAIS 
CALLERY 
GERVAIS 
CALLERY 
GERVAIS 
Among the partners, right, shows a.draw, 
A draw. 
Who, so that now becomes income. 
No, no, we pay taxes on it. 
for you. 
That’s what I'm saying — it now’becomes income 
CALLERY 
GERVAIS 
CALLERY 
That's right, that's right, 
So you got to pay tax. 
Yeah, they might say, well, what you draw it (( 
— but I never — ... 
GERVAIS: Well, (( )) — • » 
CALLERY: I just drew it out the business -- • 
GERVAIS: I give it to some whore. • ’ 
CALLERY: Here's the, here's the taxes, taxes been paid. 
'CERVAIS: -"Thaf's -all right.'RVAIS: Well, (( )) — • » 
CALLERY: I just drew it out the business -- • 
GERVAIS: I give it to some whore. • ’ 
CALLERY: Here's the, here's the taxes, taxes been paid. 
'CERVAIS: -"Thaf's -all right.'

--- PAGE BREAK ---• » 
CALLERY: I just drew it out the business -- • 
GERVAIS: I give it to some whore. • ’ 
CALLERY: Here's the, here's the taxes, taxes been paid. 
'CERVAIS: -"Thaf's -all right.'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(23) On December 3, 1570, Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE, 
SR., of How Orleans Polic e <Department met with PERSHING GERVAIS 
* * , ' » 
in^Room 376 of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in Mew Orleans. 
SOULE said that right after JOSEPH GIARRUSSO retired as Super- 
inte.ndent of Police in New Orleans (JOSEPH GIARRUSSO retired on 
August 21, 1970), BOASBERG came to Captain SOULE and told the latter 
that no one can get to Sergeant ROBERT FREY, Commander of the 
New Orleans Police Department Vice Squad, and asked SOULE to 
talk to FREY; that SOULE then invited Sergeant FREY on a trip 
regarding an extradition matter (On September 2, 1970, Captain 
SOULE and Sergeant FREY delivered a State of Louisiana Governor's 
Warrant to the Colorado Springs, Colorado, Police Department and 
took custody of a prisoner named PAUL DAVID PIERCE, who had been 
charged in Louisiana with possession of narcotics) at which time 
SOULE told FREY about previous and current payoff arrangements for 
pinball protection and solicited Sergeant FREY's agreement to take 
payoffs for protection of pinballs and that that was when it started 
with FREY. 
Captain SOULE and GERVAIS went-on to discuss how BOASBERG, 
after initiating the corruption of Sergeant FREY, then began to 
Vi 
delay and renegotiate regarding amounts of payments'. They also 
discussed payments made to SOULE through CALLERY from TAC Amusement 
Company and ROBERT NIMS of Lucky Coin Machine Company, Inc. 
GERVAIS: He [LOUIS BOASBERG] started you and then wouldn't 
come up — 
SOULE: He started — wouldn't come up because he, he told me — 
GERVAIS: Why didn't you tell him, you (( )), you 
the one that's — 
SOULE: In the meantime, I speak to Callery, you know, and I 
tell Callery, I said, uh, I said, look, uh, I got Frey 
[Sergeant R03ERT FREY, Commander of the Mew Orleans • 
Police Department Vice Squad] and'wants to go and I said, 
uh, I said, uh, how much you think we ought to hit 
Louie [30ASBERG] for? He said, well, look, the son of a 
bitch owes me for the legislature, I'd like to get 
something for myself. I said, I tell' you what, I said, 
before I get you to accept anything ( 
) Frey ( ) 
if you're going to handle it, you tack on, you say, j 
you want to get something, tack on your, your 500 for 
you and ask for two thousand, so I mec Louis myself when 
I come back, we had arranged to meet ( ) I said 
look, we want two, its going to cost, was cost him twosomething, tack on your, your 500 for 
you and ask for two thousand, so I mec Louis myself when 
I come back, we had arranged to meet ( ) I said 
look, we want two, its going to cost, was cost him two

--- PAGE BREAK ---our, your 500 for 
you and ask for two thousand, so I mec Louis myself when 
I come back, we had arranged to meet ( ) I said 
look, we want two, its going to cost, was cost him two

--- PAGE BREAK ---

thousand we want Callery to handle It cause v/c been 
dealing with Callery, deal with Callery, he says, oh. 
I’ll get that, that's fine, so he went back to each .one 
of them guys [some of the other pinball dealers] and 
wanted them each to come up with a share but they wouldn't 
do it. 
GERVAIS: With him. . 
SOULE: They [the other pinball dealers] wanted him [BOASBEP.G] to 
go [provide the entire payoff amount himself] this time, 
-and he wanted them all to share it, so he called me back 
and he says, Freddie, he says, uh, none of them v/ill go, he 
said. I'll go for a thousand, he said, but none of them will 
got I says, well ( ) take a thousand. So I go see, so 
I come back and I talk, I talk to, ah, Aruns [CALLERY] 
v ( ) and the son of a bitch ( 
' ) thousand ( ) so he [CALLERY] says, 
well, whatever you want to do, I said, well, I'll take 
that and that'll take care of me and Frey and you can run 
the other business, so then I come and tell Louis, okay, 
! 
vie'll, we’ll take a thousand. He says, all right, the 
first of the month. 
GERVAIS: He's a stalling ((.)). 
SOULE: So the first of the month comes and he [B0AS3ERG] still 
. don't come up, he, then I, see, we knocked a few machines 
off, he wants to see me, I go see him, it's about the 
sixth, I said, well, you know, you never did come up, he . 
says, well, let's start the first of next month. He 
said, I'll tell my people to quit paying off. But that's 
all I ever got, the first of the month, he alv.'ays to 
start on the first and he don't want to catch up. 
GERVAIS: No. He's a bad (( ))'man. 
SOULE: Yes, he is. • . 
I’ » 
. GERVAIS: He started the thing and then he wouldn't come up. 
SOULE: That' s right. ' 
GERVAIS: Let me ask you this though, if he started it and 
Viouldn't come up, how did you finally get the (( )) 
money? 
SOULE: Well, all I aid was tell Callery — after I meet with 
Louis, I tell Callery this was what went on, you know 
cause Callery's been square with me — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: So,.uh, Frey [Sergeant RQ3ERT FREY, Commander of the 
New Orleans Police Department Vice Squad] was knocking 
• the piss when, when he didn't come up on the first, 
Frey went out and knocked the piss out of about ten of 
them [The Sunday, October ^, 1970 'edition of the New Orleans 
Times Picayune newspaper carries a story that on October 3, 
1970, the New Orleans Police Department Vice Squad confiscated 
ten Bally in-line gambling type pinball1 machines from nine 
establishments in New Orleans, where seventeen persons -were 
arrested for making illegal payoffs to players of pinball 
. '• machines for games won], you see. . • 
GERVAIS: He did, he did, huh. . I 
SOULE: And I told Callery, I said, we've got ten, he said,' 
wait a minute, and that's when TAC come UD with the 
• -O) -money. ' -nes for games won], you see. . • 
GERVAIS: He did, he did, huh. . I 
SOULE: And I told Callery, I said, we've got ten, he said,' 
wait a minute, and that's when TAC come UD with the 
• -O) -money. ' -

--- PAGE BREAK ---you see. . • 
GERVAIS: He did, he did, huh. . I 
SOULE: And I told Callery, I said, we've got ten, he said,' 
wait a minute, and that's when TAC come UD with the 
• -O) -money. ' -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: Oh. ~.J' •'* ? 
SOULE: So, uh, TAG [TAC Amusement Company] come up with it, 
Frey called the investigation off, so v/e got 500 a’piece 
'"’from TAC. ' .• 
GERVAIS5 Uh-huh. 
SOULS: That went on for, for.— 
GERVAIS: A couple of months. 
SOULE: Two months, and then v/e were gonna knock them off 
again and so Mims [ROBERT MIMS of Lucky Coin Machine 
Company, Inc.] come up. TAC — 
SOULE said that he had given FREY about $500 a month 
of*pinball bribe money for three or four months, but that he 
had told Sergeant FREY that the FBI pinball raids had tightened 
up the money situation but that FREY could expect to get some- 
thing more starting at the beginning of 1971* 
(2*0 On December 7, 1970, Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE, 
SR., met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 876 of the Fontainebleau 
Motor Hotel, Mew Orleans, Louisiana. Captain SOULE said that 
he had been employed by LOUIS M. BOASBERG of New Orleans Novelty 
Company as a pinball mechanic • before he was drafted in V/orld V/ar 
II and that his father has been employed by BOASBERG for about 
*J0 years. When asked by GERVAIS whether he had met with BOASBERG 
recently, SOULE said he doesn't like to do so because BOASBERG 
is hot and is being followed by the FBI. Captain Soule said 
that when he wants to talk to BOASBERG he calls HARBY S. MARKS, 
JR., an employee of BOASBERG, who "does all Louis* running*'. 
SOULE also said that MARKS is a "route man"; that "he service's, 
the machines ana all" and that "he's the one who puts the 
machines on location". SOULE then had GERVAIS call telephone 
number 529-7321 (the December 1970 South Central Bell yellow 
pages show this to be the business number for New Orleans Novelty 
Company at 1055 Dryades Street in New Orleans) and ask for HAR3Y 
MARKS Who was not in. SOULE then told GERVAIS about his rela- 
tionship with MARKS: , 
SOULE: That why usually, I talk to him. All right, when I 
call him, there’s a coin phone about a block down the 
•way, he walks down to that coin phone. * • j • 
GERVAIS: And calls you back. , 
22, 
SOULE: That why usually, I talk to him. All right, when I 
call him, there’s a coin phone about a block down the 
•way, he walks down to that coin phone. * • j • 
GERVAIS: And calls you back. , 
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---sually, I talk to him. All right, when I 
call him, there’s a coin phone about a block down the 
•way, he walks down to that coin phone. * • j • 
GERVAIS: And calls you back. , 
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

f 
SOULE: ( ) I call, I call him at that phone and 
talk to him, I got the number there in my little briefcase. 
GERVAIS: Oh, I got you. 
SOULE: I'll, I'll contact him. I'll talk to you tomorrow. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. l 
(25) On December 9, 1970, ROBERT NIMS of Lucky Coin 
Machine Company, Inc., met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 876 of 
the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in Hew Orleans. NIMS told GERVAIS 
‘ . i 
•that in the FBI pinball raids of November 2b and 25, 1970, he 
•'lost 201 machines; that he is out of the business and that he 
doesn't think he will go back in for fear of what sort of action 
the federal government might take next. 
ROBERT NIMS said that CHARLES PACE of Palace Amusement 
Company had told him (NIMS) that he (PACE) is out of the pinball 
business because of the FBI raids and will be staying .out. NIMS 
also said that the prospective deal for payoffs to city officials 
about which he and CALLERY consulted with GERVAIS on October 15, 
1970, is finished as far as he (NIMS) is concerned and that he 
(NIMS)' had been in touch with Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., 
and that SOULE had received protection payoff money paid by NIMS. 
NIMS acknowledged that he knew that District Attorney JIM 
GARRISON has been receiving prior payoffs: * • 
NIMS: Well, what does our big friend think about all of this 
shit. 
GERVAIS: Who's that? 
NIMS: Huh? ' ' • . . ’ 
GERVAIS: Who's that? .. 
NIMS: Jim. 
GERVAIS: Oh, Garrison, oh, to be honest with you I haven't 
- talked to him yet. Only because I haven't got enough 
intelligence from your side of the fence. 
NIMS: Yes, yes. * . • 
GERVAIS: You see, to talk to him,- ‘ . 
NIMS: Yes. • 
GERVAIS: Because naturally he is going to say what are them 1 
people going to do, or they going to stav in business 
or they ain't. Uh, this or that. j 
NIMS: Yes. •. * 
GCRVAIS: But of course, when I tell him the sugar is gone.is going to say what are them 1 
people going to do, or they going to stav in business 
or they ain't. Uh, this or that. j 
NIMS: Yes. •. * 
GCRVAIS: But of course, when I tell him the sugar is gone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t are them 1 
people going to do, or they going to stav in business 
or they ain't. Uh, this or that. j 
NIMS: Yes. •. * 
GCRVAIS: But of course, when I tell him the sugar is gone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N1MS:-“'Right. —1 
GERVAIS:- He is going to miss that. • 
(26) On December 11, 1970, JOHil ARUIIS CALLERY met 
with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 876 of the Fontainebleau Motor 
Hotel in New Orleans and' discusse.d with GERVAIS, LOUIS M. 
BOASBERG'S efforts to take over CALLERY'S position as "middle 
man" in the pinball bribery payoffs to Sergeant ROBERT FREY, 
Commander of the New Orleans Police Department Vice Squad, 
/• through Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE, SP.., and to District 
Attorney JIM GARRISON through PERSHING GERVAIS. CALLERY said 
that LOUIS M. BOASBERG of New Orleans Novelty Company wants to 
meet with GERVAIS for breakfast at 9:00 a.m. one morning of the 
following week; that he (CALLERY) asked BOASBERG what he wanted 
to do regarding the District Attorney and that he (CALLERY) told 
BOASBERG he would go see GERVAIS about that; that BOASBERG re- 
sponded that he could not do anything just now, that things were 
too bad; that he (CALLERY) replfed'.to BOASBERG that if he wanted 
to stay in business, "You got to pay to stay in it. It's the 
license." CALLERY said further that he could not get a commit- 
ment out of BOASBERG, that he thinks BOASBERG wants to do some- 
thing but not much. * 
.. CALLERY asked if GERVAIS had talked to JIM GARRISON 
about this thing and GERVAIS replied "no", that.he had nothing to 
talk to GARRISON about. CALLERY asked if JIM GARRISON knows why. 
the payoffs have stopped to which GERVAIS replied that GARRISON 
reads the papers. CALLERY said that BOASBERG- always wants to 
start "next month"; that B0AS3ERG has not come up with his end 
of the package for GARRISON since the first of August, 1970; 
and that the October 1, 1970, payment to GERVAIS which took care 
of October and November, had been paid by ROBERT NIMS (of Lucky 
Coin Machine Company, Inc.) and LAWRENCE L. ;LAGARDS (of TAC 
Amusement Company). GERVAIS commented that BOASBERG cannot want 
•''him to offer JIM GARRISON $200 or $300 a month and CALLERY | 
replied that he (CALLERY) does n'ot want GERVAIS to tell BOASBERGTAC 
Amusement Company). GERVAIS commented that BOASBERG cannot want 
•''him to offer JIM GARRISON $200 or $300 a month and CALLERY | 
replied that he (CALLERY) does n'ot want GERVAIS to tell BOASBERG

--- PAGE BREAK ---ny). GERVAIS commented that BOASBERG cannot want 
•''him to offer JIM GARRISON $200 or $300 a month and CALLERY | 
replied that he (CALLERY) does n'ot want GERVAIS to tell BOASBERG

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NIKS:-Right.- 
1 
GERVAIS:- He is going to miss that. 
(2g.j Qn DeceiTiber 11} 1970j JOH;J ARU].IS GALLERY met 
with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 876 of the Fontainebleau Motor 
Hotel in New Orleans and'discusse.d with GERVAIS, LOUIS M. 
BOASBERG'S efforts to take over CALLERY1S position as "middle 
man" in the pinball bribery payoffs to Sergeant R03ERT FREY, 
;Commander of the New Orleans Police Department Vice Squad, 
•('through Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., and to District 
Attorney JIM GARRISON through PERSHING GERVAIS. CALLERY said 
that LOUIS M. BOASBERG of New Orleans Novelty Company wants to 
meet with GERVAIS for breakfast at 9:00 a.m. one morning of the 
. following week; that he (CALLERY) asked BOASBERG what he wanted 
to do regarding the District Attorney and that he (CALLERY) told 
BOASBERG he would go see GERVAIS about that; that BOASBERG re- 
sponded that he could not do anything just now, that things were 
too bad; that he (CALLERY) replied'.to BOASBERG that if he wanted 
to stay in business, "You got to pay to stay in it. It's the 
license." CALLERY said further that he could not get a commit- 
ment out of BOASBERG, that he thinks BOASBERG wants to do some- 
thing but not much. 
CALLERY asked if GERVAIS had talked to JIM GARRISON 
about this thing and GERVAIS replied "no", that,he had nothing to 
talk to GARRISON about. CALLERY asked if* JIM GARRISON knows why. 
the payoffs have stopped to which GERVAIS replied that GARRISON 
reads the papers. CALLERY said that BOASBERG- always wants to 
start "next month"; that 30AS3ERG has not come up with his end 
of the package for GARRISON since the first of August, 1970; 
and that the October 1, 1970, payment to GERVAIS which took care 
of October and November, had been paid by R03ERT NIMS (of Lucky 
Coin Machine Company, Inc.) and LAWRENCE L. ;LAGARDE (of TAC 
Amusement Company). GERVAIS commented that 30ASBERG cannot want 
•■’him to offer JIM GARRISON $200 or $300 a month and CALLERY \ 
replied that he (CALLERY) does rfot want GERVAIS to tell BOASBERGTAC 
Amusement Company). GERVAIS commented that 30ASBERG cannot want 
•■’him to offer JIM GARRISON $200 or $300 a month and CALLERY \ 
replied that he (CALLERY) does rfot want GERVAIS to tell BOASBERG

--- PAGE BREAK ---ny). GERVAIS commented that 30ASBERG cannot want 
•■’him to offer JIM GARRISON $200 or $300 a month and CALLERY \ 
replied that he (CALLERY) does rfot want GERVAIS to tell BOASBERG

--- PAGE BREAK ---

foe * 11 a c cp *0 that.- CALLER/- *—decis-ion 
whether to meet with- D0A.53Eh!>-or^ not and-that-he- (CALLERY) -is— 
"only a middle man". - — — 
CALLERY and GERVAIS again talked about MIMS and 
LAGARDE coming up with BOASBERG's. snare of the October 1st pay- 
ment for JIM GARRISON and about no one coming up with JIM 
GARRISON'S December. 1st bi-monthly payment because of the FBI 
pinball raids in November. They then talked again about 
| * » 
‘BOASBERG'S intentions. 
✓ 
^GERVAIS: What the (( )) does he want to talk to me about? 
CALLERY: On, I know v/hat he wants to talk — he's going to 
be crying on you like he's crying on my shoulder. Why 
don't you go back and tell him, business,is bad, that, 
uh, that, uh, I got, I got to take care of my employees. 
They come first, that something — Louis — 
GERVAIS: That's okay. 
CALLERY: I said, if you want to take care, take care of them 
out of your capital. You got a -- you a millionaire. 
So I said, if you want to, close the business up, but if ' 
you want to stay in this business- you have got to, there's 
no way you can stay in it without, uh, without, uh — 
• v' t *.* 
GERVAIS: Without taking care of people. * 
CALLERY: Without taking care of people,.there's no way. 
GERVAIS: He's ( . ) ", 
CALLERY: I said, what do you expect, do you expect Garrison 
to take all this heat at a time like this? This is, 
this is worse now than it's ever been. I said, you are 
lucky this (( )) finished. Why should Garrison take 
• any heat now? 
GERVAIS: Cause you know what he told Freddie. [Captain 
FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR.] He told Freddie that he told 
everybody to quit paying off [for free games won by 
players of the machines]. 
CALLERY: Well, that's bullshit. You know better than that. 
After some further discussion about how, where and 
when LOUIS M. 30AS3ERG should meet GERVAIS the conversation 
continued as follows: 
GERVAIS: Tell him he can meet me here because I feel safe here. 
I don't want to meet him in no (( )), public place. 
Listen, I never met him when things was cool, why the 
(( )) should I meet him when things is hot? 
• CALLERY: (laughter) ' ‘ I 
GERVAIS: You know, and then on .top of it all, to have him to 
tell me that he don't want to come up with no money. 
•• '-CALLERY,- „No, .he-wants...you...to.-help.li.im ..for.nothing.aughter) ' ‘ I 
GERVAIS: You know, and then on .top of it all, to have him to 
tell me that he don't want to come up with no money. 
•• '-CALLERY,- „No, .he-wants...you...to.-help.li.im ..for.nothing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---AIS: You know, and then on .top of it all, to have him to 
tell me that he don't want to come up with no money. 
•• '-CALLERY,- „No, .he-wants...you...to.-help.li.im ..for.nothing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: Well. And then he told Freddie he wanted to come 
up with d 2J.ttle toi-cen thing like three or four hundred 
dollars for Freddie. Mow, Freddie refused it, of course, 
for Freddie, but you know how Freddie is, I don't know 
— you can't always believe Freddie. 
GALLERY; Did he swallow it, did he take it? 
GERVAIS: I donTt know, I don't know, I really couldn't   
don't know, I told Freddie, I said, you're a damn fool, 
I saxd you should have took the money because it's token, 
okay, it — it done it, he told you, you know, he's quit" 
paying ofi, so if he told you he quit paying off— 
GALLERY. Then he, then he'd be — he had no reason to be on 
the street. 
s' 
GERVAIS: Yeah, right. 
CALLERY. Ii he Quit paying off. Then he's got —— he's 
wasting his time with his machines on the street. Let's 
. • • face it. 
GERVAIS: You can't do no business — 
- CALLERY: Ke not going to do any business with the damn 
machines. You know, it's — he's just trying to con 
with that. I don't— 
CALLERY and GERVAIS then discussed LOUIS M. BOASBERG'S 
appearance before a federal grand jury, and their concern about 
1 ' t • 
what the latter's testimony might have been. The conversation 
continued as follows: 
GERVAxS: Sure they re [federal grand jury] going to call you. 
They re going to call everybody. Tell him [30AS3ERG] I 
-dpn't want to meet him there.. I'll meet him here and, 
U1 j . ) that's it. (( j) him, if he don't 
want to come here, (( )) him, I don't want to meet 
him. I don't know him, why — I meair, this is crazy 
though. Listen for all these (( )) years, every- 
thing's been through you. Now when all of a sudden, he's 
insisting on talking to me. You know, tell him if he 
v/ants to talk* to me, I'm here. ((# )) him. 
  - CALLERY v»ent on to say that part of the reason for 
the bitterness between B0AS3ERG of New Orleank Novelty Company 
and the other pinball dealers was that 30AS3ERG'S pro rata share 
of of the payoff package to District Attorney JIM GARRISON 
by the dealers was set up years ago when BOASBERG had far more 
. machines on the street than he has now, and TAC Amusement 
Company had fewer than it has now, and that BOASBERG feels his 
I 
•.share should now be correspondingly smaller, 
j CALLERY called BOASBERG from the telephone inRoom * 
876 and told him that GERVAIS did not want to meet him at Union- 
"" "Strati on "as "bad been'proposed *by"'BOASBERG', '••'Gervais then took'thej CALLERY called BOASBERG from the telephone inRoom * 
876 and told him that GERVAIS did not want to meet him at Union- 
"" "Strati on "as "bad been'proposed *by"'BOASBERG', '••'Gervais then took'the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ASBERG from the telephone inRoom * 
876 and told him that GERVAIS did not want to meet him at Union- 
"" "Strati on "as "bad been'proposed *by"'BOASBERG', '••'Gervais then took'the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

\ 
telephone and he and BOASBERG agreed to meet at the Fontainebleau 
Motor hotel the following Monday, around 11 a.in. CALLERY told 
I 
GERVAIS to call him (CALLERY) after the Monday meeting, and then, 
had further conversation with GERVAIS about BOASBERG'S intentions 
and about recent payments by the. dealers to Sergeant ROBERT PREY, 
Commander ox the New Orleans Police Department Vice Squad, 
through Captain SOULE: 
CALLERY--. Tell you what to do, why don't you just talk to 
V him [BOASBERG] see what the hell, see what — 
^.GERVAIS: Where will you be so I could —- at home or — 
CALLERY: Aw. . 
GERVAIS: You get in touch with me. 
CALLERY: I'll get in touch with you. 
GERVAIS: Call me Monday. 
CALLcRY: See what the deal is, you know, I mean, comes up 
with anything at all, could be, I'm sure he's the 
guy's got to be nuts, he don't have some proposition. 
GERVAIS: If he's ( ) 
CALLERY: If he's wasting time, then you ought, I'd, I'd, 
' ) just tell him, you know. 
GERVAIS: You see, it's short money. You know Garrison's 
been too used to big money. 
CALLERY: That's right. 
GERVAIS: If it's short money, what I might do, and I don't 
know yet, cause, see. Garrison's kind of hoggish about 
money, you know, he's a little hoggish. I was going to 
say, I would go to him and say, listen,- how about letting 
. B,e £et this, you know, but he ain't that kina of bastard. 
CALLERY: 
GERVAIS: 
CALLERY: 
GERVAIS: 
CALLERY: 
GERVAIS: 
CALLERY: 
GERVAIS: 
CALLERY: 
GERVAIS: 
CALLERY: 
Well, then, listen — 
4 * 
I'll decide after I talk to him — 
Talk to him but don't, I just don't — 
I won't, I won't — 
Tell you got to talk — 
I can't give him a positive commitment — 
xell him you got to talk to you know. 
I gpt to talk to Garrison first. 
Tell him you got to go talk to your man. 
But you be sure to get in touch with me Monday. 
All right. 
I 
--GERVAIS :‘ -..-So..then I can-tell you, .you .know.know. 
I gpt to talk to Garrison first. 
Tell him you got to go talk to your man. 
But you be sure to get in touch with me Monday. 
All right. 
I 
--GERVAIS :‘ -..-So..then I can-tell you, .you .know.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CALLEJii : Yeah. 
GEJiVAIS: V/'hat he said, you know ( 
) 
“L™ib/S could^handle'-- al3° Sai<i ««*>“»* »*«* 
GERVAIS: That's a European suit. 
• GERVAIS-: Oh, Soule handles Prey. What's the matter with.him? 
^CALLERY: Who? ' . 
*✓ ‘ , 
GERVAIS: Ha's [BOASBEP.O] got an In with'soule, I could see - 
TWSSWK ™I*—??. 
G“VA»nn £ej ?o$ a0e5 he [B0SSBES« “Ant me to (( 
)) 
CALLERY: No, ha said, maybe but couldn't they bypass Soule. 
GERVAIS: And go direct to Prey? 
CALLERY: Yeah. * .. . 
GERVAIS: Oh, I see what-he thinks,‘"he thinks ~ 
CALLERY: He thinks he can save something.' 
GEaV”ou^H?aS"our?o? himself.WilateVer. ?r * <*“•«<» B»ule 
CttLE»e:thSi;5foJeSht- BU‘ y°" ««» *ey. You to: 
GERVAIS; 
Aw, I wouldn't fool with him. 
Frey is^Souie^6 °nly gUy looks like that can talk to 
GERVAIS: He is the only one. ■ 
CALLERY:- Yeah. • ' 
GERVAIS: Soule is absolutely the- only one. 
CALLERY: The only guy that can talk to him. 
C*ll*£* mori thanlhat?" I’" ‘ryln« t0 tMnk' 1 k»o», he 
GERVAIS: He said he got a thousand two time's. 
•CALLERY: He may be right. . • 
GERVAIS: You know. 
!AUfsm:e Lollt^hat?*’S What they told ne no:’e but I'm not

--- PAGE BREAK ---t0 tMnk' 1 k»o», he 
GERVAIS: He said he got a thousand two time's. 
•CALLERY: He may be right. . • 
GERVAIS: You know. 
!AUfsm:e Lollt^hat?*’S What they told ne no:’e but I'm not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

, ' :. -.JSPR.tL five. 
CAXLERYr; I 'in not sure whether it's two or three. I can't 
J thought it v/as three, to tell you the truth. 
. GERVA1S: 
You do. 
* 
CALLERY: 
I'm still — think that's what it was. 
* 
GERVAIS: 
You do. 
• . 
CALLERY: 
I think — 
•* 
GERVAIS: 
: 
He might (( )) Prey out of some money. 
*• 
CALLERY: 
Well, I, I wouldn't want say it like that. 
J3ERVAIS: 
Oh, I don't know but — 
CALLERY: 
( . ) 
. 
GERVAIS: 
Listen, I don’t have — 
■** . . 
CALLERY: 
I don’t, I don’t -- 
■GERVAIS: 
ain' 
I could care the (( )) less. Yeah, supDOse he 
t got it. But you knov/ —- 
CALLERY: 
for 
I'm sure he got if. I think it was three, 
it. 
I arranged 
GERVAIS: 
Three thousand — 
• 
CALLERY: 
I think. \ . • 
GERVAIS: 
— a month? . 
CALLERY: 
only 
Oh, no, no, no. No, no. (laughter) Oh, no, he 
got that, he got that a month. 
GERVAIS: 
was 
A month? That's what I'm saying. Oh, you 
three times instead of two times. 
mean it 
CALLERY: 
Yeah, now I think. 
. 
GERVAIS: 
Yeah, a thousand a month. 
CALLERY: 
I think it was three thousand. 
GERVAIS: 
been 
It might have been that, I tell you it might have 
, cause I believe.he said you handled it once. 
CALLERY: 
• 
I gave a thousand. 
- . . 
GERVAIS: 
You did? 
CALLERY: 
I paid them a thousand but I got it back. 
GERVAIS: 
Yeah. • .. . 
CALLERY: 
I got it back. 
GERVAIS: 
Yeah. 
* 
CALLERY: 
Co., 
I fed it to Nims [R03ERT HIMS of Lucky Coin 
Inc.J, he give it back to me. 
Machine 
! 
GERVAIS: 
Yeah, but then after that he got it direct 
I 
from Nims. 
29

--- PAGE BREAK ---* 
CALLERY: 
Co., 
I fed it to Nims [R03ERT HIMS of Lucky Coin 
Inc.J, he give it back to me. 
Machine 
! 
GERVAIS: 
Yeah, but then after that he got it direct 
I 
from Nims. 
29

--- PAGE BREAK ---

f. 1 
CALLERY: 
That's right. 
# 
GERVAIS: 
Collect — 
CALLERY: 
That's right. 
GERVAIS: 
From Bob [MIMS], 
CALLERY: 
That's right, that's right. 
GERVAIS: So. Well, anyway, he said he gave Frey five hundred 
each time and then the last time, his words to me was he 
.told Frey, listen, babefs, things is tough and Frey says 
\ well, it v/as good v/hile is was lasted. In other words, 
Frey was t- ... (phonetic) satisfied v/ith five hundred. 
^CALLERY: 
Prey was — yeah.' 
; 
GERVAIS: 
But Soule wasn't. 
• 
CALLERY: 
Soule wasn't satisfied'with — 
. • 
1 
GERVAIS: 
(( 
No, he's hoggish, man. Soule would drive 
)) crazy. He drives me nuts. 
you 
GERVAIS: 
You know what he does to, feeds you a lot of 
bullshit to make you think he's knowing something. 
But one thing we know, he [SOULE] is- the only one who 
can handle Prey. . 
. CALLERY: It's poss.ible then that' maybe you know if Louie 
[BOASBERG] v/ants to stay, if Louie wants to stay on the 
street he better take care of this situation. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. \ 
CALLERY: Sure, I don't, I don't — I guess he ought to take 
care of this end [GARRISON'S end] but even then if these 
guys [Vice Souad] go out, keep knocking them off, it's 
going to put a lot of heat on y'all, you can't you 
can't -— . . 
GERVAIS: Can't, can't ( ) • ' 
CALLERY: No, No, I think, Pershing, I think you ought to tell 
him that. '. t 
GERVAIS: Oh, I will tell him. 
CALLERY: You'd better tell him [BOASBERG] that he better, 
he's got to — 
GERVAIS: To take care of both ends [GARRISON'S end and the 
Vice Squad's end], he's gonna have to decide and he's 
• going to have to decide what he can afford to do. 
CALLERY: What he wants to do, that’s all, and as far, as far 
as I'm concerned, you all can leave me out of it, you 
knov/, I don't ( ) 
» . X 
GERVAIS: 
the 
I don't know why. No, because he's, he's checking 
lock in to you, you won't be able to add nothing on. 
‘CALLERY: 
can 
No, no, that's what I'm saying, say that you all 
leave me out of the thing, I'll, I'll bow out. 
GERVAIS: Cause I will tell him, I'll say — 
l 
s 
1won't be able to add nothing on. 
‘CALLERY: 
can 
No, no, that's what I'm saying, say that you all 
leave me out of the thing, I'll, I'll bow out. 
GERVAIS: Cause I will tell him, I'll say — 
l 
s 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---d nothing on. 
‘CALLERY: 
can 
No, no, that's what I'm saying, say that you all 
leave me out of the thing, I'll, I'll bow out. 
GERVAIS: Cause I will tell him, I'll say — 
l 
s 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GALLERY: 1 don't know whether you want to do business with him 
direct, that's the only trouble. 
GERVAIS: Now, listen, I want to only listen to him. 
CALLERY: ( ) money invested, but I'll, I',11 step 
out of the picture. 
GERVAIS: Well, let me ask you — no, well, wait a while, up 
to nov/ you have never taken no money from him LBOAo^Er.GJ. 
. CALLERY: No, no, no, no, but the only thing I did get was 
some expense money once in a while, you know, but I 
can't get that any more. 
\ . ;■'■%? At the close of the conversation, CALLERY mentioned 
-[iiis "commitments" in Baton Rouge as well as the effect of the 
Organized Crime Control Act of 1970: 
CALLERY: Well, I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll be in touch 
•with you. • 
GERVAIS: Monday afternoon. 
CALLERY: I'll call you Monday afternoon. 
GERVAIS: Right. j • 
CALLERY: And then we'll see. 
GERVAIS: And then you come down and we'll cut it up, we patch 
it up. 
CALLERY: Patch it up, that's all we can do. 
GERVAIS: See what, see what he says and'then, then we'll 
decide what — 
CALLERY: Decide what he wants to do. 
'GERVAIS: What to do. 
CALLERY: But I told him, I said, Louis [B0AS3ERG], I said, if 
you want to stay in this business, you got to be crazy 
to stay in it if you don't — 
GERVAIS: What you going to do — 
! ; ‘ 
CALLERY: . — take care — .. 
GERVAIS: What you going to do in Baton Rouge [regarding State 
Novelty Company, Inc.], nothing? 
CALLERY: What you mean, about taking them [pinball machines] 
.. off the street? 
‘ GERVAIS: Yeah. • 
CALLERY: 'What I, what I'm doing, Pershing, is, uh, is getting 
an opinion, you know what I mean, if, they may try,- we may 
try the merchandise for a while. You see, any commitment 
we got in 3aton Rouge, we are keeping, you know what I 
mean. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
• CALLERY: Any,personal commitments we got — 
31try,- we may 
try the merchandise for a while. You see, any commitment 
we got in 3aton Rouge, we are keeping, you know what I 
mean. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
• CALLERY: Any,personal commitments we got — 
31

--- PAGE BREAK ---he merchandise for a while. You see, any commitment 
we got in 3aton Rouge, we are keeping, you know what I 
mean. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
• CALLERY: Any,personal commitments we got — 
31

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-GERVAIS: Yeah, to keep thlngsi:goIng.TK^^ 
CALLERY: To keep things going. L -  
GERVAIS: You gonna keep things up there, that 's-what you do.  
% 
CALLERY: ( ) and if, if, if opinion comes out that 
under this new law [Organized Crime Control Act of 1970] 
the thing, it looks to me that under this new lav/ they 
going, the federal — 
GERVAIS: You talking'about the federal lav/? 
CALLERY: Yeah, federal lav/, that they could actually come in 
\ and arrest you if you paid off cash, not merchandise. 
, This is the way I interpret the law. If you gave merchan- 
/ dise, they can't arrest you, but if you paid off cash, 
they can arrest you. If they can come in and take — 
GERVAIS: Well, v/hat are you going to do? You can't — 
CALLERY: Well, you, v/e could, we could give, we could give 
merchandise until we phase out. 
GERVAIS: Oh, I see. ' ; - 
(27) On December 14, 1970, LOUIS M. BOASBERG of New 
* 
Orleans Novelty Company met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 275 
of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in New Orleans. BOASBERG said 
• that things do not look good for the pinball .industry and that he 
(BOASBERG) has good reason to believe that there will be four or 
five bills in the legislature'in May of-1971 to outlaw gambling 
type pinball machines in Louisiana. 
B0AS3ERG said that ROBERT NIKS of Lucky Coin Machine 
Company-, Inc., came to him this morning and offered to have 
B0AS3ERG take over his (NIM'S) pinball locations; that JOHN J. 
ELMS, JR., of TAC Amusement Company has ordered 20 gambling type 
pinball machines from BOAS3ERG and got a lot of old games 
(gambling type pinball machines) for. a total of about.80 games that 
he put on the street after complying with the registration provi- 
sions of the Gambling Devices Act of 1962. B0AS3ERG said that he 
has carried the burden of the pinball payoffs for years in New 
Orleans but that he has been decreasing and decreasing the volume 
of his machines on the street ana that he has a lot of obliga- 
tions, and what can he do? GERVAIS responded that all he 
i 
(GERVAIS) can do is bring the message to District Attorney JIM 
i 
GARRISON but that he (GERVAIS) can't make any promises. BOASBERG 
"■ •said 'that-he -(BOASBERG) and' JOHN J .' ELKSJR 
of:TAC'AmusementERVAIS) can do is bring the message to District Attorney JIM 
i 
GARRISON but that he (GERVAIS) can't make any promises. BOASBERG 
"■ •said 'that-he -(BOASBERG) and' JOHN J .' ELKSJR 
of:TAC'Amusement

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing the message to District Attorney JIM 
i 
GARRISON but that he (GERVAIS) can't make any promises. BOASBERG 
"■ •said 'that-he -(BOASBERG) and' JOHN J .' ELKSJR 
of:TAC'Amusement

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Company have to get together because they are the only ones left 
after the FBI pinball raids. BOASBERG said of District Attorney 
JIM GARRISON that "He really stood by us", and went on to describe 
his dealing with Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR. 
BOASBERG: Pershing, let me tell you what I did do, between you 
.and I — 
... ■ 
GEP.VAIS: Yeah. 
BOASBERG: I was talking to Freddie [SOULE] and, and, and, uh, 
.trying to put things together for him — 
'GERVAIS: Yeah. 
BOASBERG: Well, we, we, we couldn’t do it because TAC [TAC Amuse- 
ment Company] had heavy obligations someplace else but — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. • •• 
BOASBERG: Now, where it was, I don't know, I have no idea — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. - 
BOASBERG: Listen, what his story was, unless they finance that, 
uh, that, that election for those constitutional amendments, 
something like that, but we couldn't, couldn't put anything 
together, so I told Freddie, I said, look, let.'s cut this 
down temporarily, so, so for some unknown reason, he hit 
about 8 or 10 spots [The Sunday, October , 1970 edition of 
the New Orleans Times Picayune newspaper carries a story 
that on October 3, 1970, the New Orleans Police Department 
Vice Squad confiscated ten Bally in-line gambling type pin- 
ball machines from nine establishments in New Orleans, where 
seventeen persons were arrested for making illegal payoffs 
. to players of pinball machines for games won.] 
GERVAIS: Uh. 
BOASBERG: So I said I can't — 
GERVAIS: That's to get your attention. 
B0AS3ERG: Yeah. - - 
• , i 
■GERVAIS: (laughter) , . • • 
' BOASBERG mentioned that JOHN ARUNS CALLERY and JOHN J. 
ELMS, JR., of TAC Amusement Company do not get along; again that 
he has to get together with JOHN J. ELMS, JR., and what tough 
financial shape he (BOASBERG) is in for a number of reasons 
including a drop in sales by him of gambling type pinball machines 
since most of the dealers are apprehensive about the federal 
government's next move. GERVAIS suggested that maybe BOASBERG can 
place amusement games in his locations: j 
* • I 
GERVAIS: Maybe you could work other things, other games, other — 
BOASBERG: Oh, but they can't make any money with that amusementmaybe BOASBERG can 
place amusement games in his locations: j 
* • I 
GERVAIS: Maybe you could work other things, other games, other — 
BOASBERG: Oh, but they can't make any money with that amusement

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: Ho 
BOASBERG: You're kidding (laughter) 
BOASBERG acknowledged that CALLERY has got his interests 
in Baton Rouge, hut that CALLERY says that Rooney (ROBERT J. "BOB" 
ROONEY, president of State Novelty Company, Inc., Baton Rouge, 
Louisiana) wants to get out. GERVAIS suggested that perhaps 
CALLERY should go to District Attorney JIM GARRISON directly 
and'explain the problem in money supply caused by the FBI'pinball 
^raids and see how JIM GARRISON reactsj that if there's going to be 
less money, JIM GARRISON might want to cut GERVAIS out as his 
middle man and deal directly with CALLERY. GERVAIS continued as 
GERVAIS: But that other one's going to be a back breaker wii.n 
Freddie and Frey. You see, you could plan, that you are 
going, I, I'd tell you by listening to Freddie talk, you 
gonna .plan, you might get by with 800 a month. 
BOASBERG: Can't do it. 
GERVAIS: But they ain't — 
BOASBERG: Can't do it, I offered him one [$1,000] when all of 
were in. Now we don't have Bob [ROBERT MiMS of Lucxy Coi 
Machine Co., Inc.], we don't have anything. 
GERVAIS: ( ) but you see, Freddie ought to be 
willing since he only the middle guy — 
BOASBERG: Certainly he ought — 
GERVAIS: He ought to be willing to take short money. 
B0AS3ERG: Why sure' — 
GERVAIS: Short money and give the other guy — 
B0AS3ERG: Why sure — 
GERVAIS: The big money, see, but he don't want to do that — 
B0AS3ERG: Don't want to do that — 
■Ors“I • 
yt)U L J MCAi iVA-i. V, J. J » * 
do, which would be all right v/ith me. 
BOASBERG: I know, 
GERVAIS: But — 
BOASBE.RG: I know damn well we going to have to do something.

--- PAGE BREAK ---■Ors“I • 
yt)U L J MCAi iVA-i. V, J. J » * 
do, which would be all right v/ith me. 
BOASBERG: I know, 
GERVAIS: But — 
BOASBE.RG: I know damn well we going to have to do something.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

G&RVAIS asked BOASBERG if he had a money figure in mind 
and BOASBERG responded that he and JOHJI ELMS, JR. t were supposed 
to get together. GERVAIS said that "you got to go to Soule too. 
I could only handle one [GARRISON]." BOASBERG said he had in mind 
. * 
a figure of a "total of one [$1000] a month, that!s two every two 
months." GERVAIS questioned BOASBERG further on this point: 
GERVAIS: So your total would be one [$1000] a month? 
BOASBERG: Now this.is — last year, last year New Orleans Novelty 
•' vlCompany made ( ) thousand. Course this is divided 
between 9 people, this is not a hell of a lot. This year we 
make 20,000 ( ) 
GERVAIS: Well, let me ask you, if your end was one a month, what 
about John [JOHN ELMS, JR., of TAC Amusement Company]? 
Would you, roughly what would you expect him to make? 
.BOASBERG: Until he builds up, until he builds up, John was by 
far bigger than all of us, three hundred and some games — 
GERVAIS: Yeah, right. He took a rap. 
GERVAIS had further discussion*with BOASBERG about how 
best to approach GARRISON with the news that the payoffs from 
the pinball dealers will be considerably reduced, as follows: 
GERVAIS: It might not be a bad — now let me tell you something, 
man, nothing magnanimous on my part, but I realize the 
. problem, but it just might not be a bad idea when the 
time comes to have, uh, to have Callery go, if you willing, 
. after I made certain declarations to Garrison, you see, if 
I do it right, you see, it's real Important, if I prepare 
his mind properly, for, uh', Callery to go back to Garrison, 
and I have to think of how to do it, but I think I could have 
Garrison*s mind conditioned to where he would accept someT 
thing nominal to make it easy — 
BOASBERG: Yeah, and Freddie [SOULE] could accept something 
nominal. t . 
# . 
GERVAIS: Oh, well, that mother, I could, I, let me say this, I 
will talk to him, you know him as well as I do, he talks and 
he*s pleasant and after, he*s kind of a, kind of a back alley 
guy. 
BOASBERG: Careful ~ 
GERVAIS: Uh. Of course, like you say, you figure you could go 
a thousand a month. Do you think that other fella could go 
a thousand a month? 
BOASBERG: I'll talk to him, I am going to talk to him, I'm uh 
sure ask at. least for the present — 
GERVAIS: .Let me say this to you — 
BOASBERG: I think what we ought to do is hold off at least until 
after the xirst, to see if we can't out something together by 
the first, maybe by that time, John [JOHN ELMS, JR., of TAC 
Amusement Company] may know where he stands and I may know 
where I stand with this damn grand jury — 
35can't out something together by 
the first, maybe by that time, John [JOHN ELMS, JR., of TAC 
Amusement Company] may know where he stands and I may know 
where I stand with this damn grand jury — 
35

--- PAGE BREAK ---together by 
the first, maybe by that time, John [JOHN ELMS, JR., of TAC 
Amusement Company] may know where he stands and I may know 
where I stand with this damn grand jury — 
35

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BOASBERG went on 'to *s&y"'that" collectlonsriare"down' snd 
that the Question is' whether they can weather the storm in. the “ 
Hay, 1971, session of the legislature. BOASBERG also discussed 
why the gambling type pinball machines, of State Novelty Company 
Inc., Baton Rouge, Louisiana, were-not seized-in the FBI pinball 
raids of November 2k and 25, 1970: 
BOASBERG: You know somebody always surmises. You know what, some 
people blame Aruns [JOHN ARUNS CALLERY] and myself for this 
goddamn thing, they figure State Novelty [of Baton Rouge] 
registered [as required by the Gambling Devices Act of 
1962, Title 15, United States Code, Section 1173(a)(3)], 
we been registering for 8 years, you know. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. ' . 
B0AS3ERG: And we begged operators to register, Pershing, but you 
know what a lot of them said, "Oh, I don't want the govern- 
ment checking my books." You tell a guy like Charlie Pace to 
register — 
GERVAIS: He don't even hear you — 
BOASBERG: "Aw no, I don't want the FBI — 
GERVAIS: He don't hear you, he don't hear you — 
BOASBERG: — FBI to come in and check my books." 
GERVAIS: That's all, then he dismisses it.,-.anything further you 
say, I mean, he's got a way of blocking things off, you know. 
BOASBERG asked if GERVAIS is willing to meet with JOHN 
ELMS, JR: 
GERVAIS: You know, unless you, now I'm willing to do it, and I'jn 
willing to withdraw just so you all can keep it going. I'm 
willing to do it and stay in, I'm not trying to get out. 
B0AS3ERG: You willing to talk to him? 
GERVAIS: To who? ‘ . 
BOASBERG: To Elms. •. 
GERVAIS: To young John? 
B0AS3ERG: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, I guess so. Well, I would prefer you to talk to 
him first. • ■ . 
B0AS3ERG: Yes. . 
GERVAIS: Lay some kind of ground work — 
BOASBERG: Certainly, I will. 
GERVAIS: To tell me what we're up against 
BOASBERG: Yes, yes 
GERVAIS': — you seeo talk to 
him first. • ■ . 
B0AS3ERG: Yes. . 
GERVAIS: Lay some kind of ground work — 
BOASBERG: Certainly, I will. 
GERVAIS: To tell me what we're up against 
BOASBERG: Yes, yes 
GERVAIS': — you see

--- PAGE BREAK ---. • ■ . 
B0AS3ERG: Yes. . 
GERVAIS: Lay some kind of ground work — 
BOASBERG: Certainly, I will. 
GERVAIS: To tell me what we're up against 
BOASBERG: Yes, yes 
GERVAIS': — you see

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: Wonder how he found out. 
SOULE: lie must, he must have got some wind somewhere or-other 
that, uh, that — 
GEEVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: — they were out. So I checked it and I, and I came 
back and they had about five or six — now TAC [TAC Anuse- 
.ment Company] took care of us for a month or two and then 
...Hims [ROBERT JJIMS of Lucky Coin Machine Company, Inc.], but 
Louj.e hadn't did anything for. around October of last year. 
, GnRVAIfj,. Yeah, |but, but Louie was taking care of just you thourh 
• •at- that time. 6 
•'SOULE: Louie had never given me a penny, everything I got was 
from Callery. 
GERVAIS: Right. Oh, yeah, but, but it was coming from Louie. 
SOULE: It was coming from Louie — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: I, I would assume that — . 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: I nev.er did ask him where it was coming  
GERVAIS: But that was, that was different. But this was a 
new ball game — 
SOULE: Yeah. 
• . , « 
GERVAIS: Where TAC, TAC, uh,sTAC picked the freight up, I 
believe Callery told me for two months — 
SOULi^: For two months and then Mims [of Lucky Coin Machine Com- 
pany, Inc.] picked up for about two months — 
GERVAIS: Two months — 
SOULE: And he, now he, I know he hadn't come up with his part 
as far as I'm concerned. 
GERVAIS: But you have never dealt with young Kims, uh, young 
uh, Ej.ms, John Elms [from TAC Amusement Company] —— 
SOULE: I wouldn't even know the guy'if I run into him. 
GERVAIS: He wants me to talk to him but I Just, and, I just • 
SOULE: I don't even know the guy, I wouldn't know him if I 
bumped, I know the old man now -- 
GERVAIS: Oh, I know him, too. 
SOULE: But as far as him —■ *. 
3 
GERVAIS: But — 
SOULE: I know by his reputation he runs his (( • )) mouth. 
GEnVAIS: How that's it, you see, Boasberg wants me to talk to ' 
him. 
33know him, too. 
SOULE: But as far as him —■ *. 
3 
GERVAIS: But — 
SOULE: I know by his reputation he runs his (( • )) mouth. 
GEnVAIS: How that's it, you see, Boasberg wants me to talk to ' 
him. 
33

--- PAGE BREAK ---E: But as far as him —■ *. 
3 
GERVAIS: But — 
SOULE: I know by his reputation he runs his (( • )) mouth. 
GEnVAIS: How that's it, you see, Boasberg wants me to talk to ' 
him. 
33

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Alter some speculation by Captain SOULE as to who else 
had been and who now might be eating payoffs from the pinball 
interests, the conversation continued as follows: 
4 
SOULE: Now, I can't prove it but that's something I suspect. 
Now, uh, Louie did tell me that — 
GERVAIS: Well, listen, you know what I'd have told him [LOUIS 
BOASBERG] if I was you? Say, listen, you can handle, you 
got somebody handling the D.A.'s office, yeah, I mean, the 
front office. Why don't you make that guy handle Frey? 
And just leave me out of it. 
SOULE: Well, you know, what could I tell him, he offered me a 
", .few bucks and, uh — . 
GERVAIS: Yeah, 
SOULE: I just told him I'd go see, you see, I'm in a position, 
my daddy works for this guy. 
GERVAIS : Still? 
SOULE: 
Yeah. I don1 11 v/ant to alienate him and, uh — 
GERVAIS : Naw, yeah, you canft tell him to go (( 
)) yourself 
SOULE: 
I can't, no, I can’t do that. 
GERVAIS : ( 
) . ■ ' 
SOULE: 
So Y/bat, I tell him, I said, look,^ I'm just the middle 
man, I, I like to help you all I' can, do what I can for you, 
but I got to go talk to the other man. How, I talked to Frey 
and Frey told me, I said, Frey, he wants to give six and he 
says, uh, he says, well, I'm not very interested, he said, 
matter of fact, right now, he said, I'm so scared, he says, 
about the whole situation what they, telling me, I just as 
soon get out of it. He said, however, if you .want it, I'll, 
go for it for you, to help you out. That's the way he put 
.• it to me. 
GERVAIS: Oh, yeah, but (( )), I'd go, you know what I'd do, 
I'd hike, I'd hike Boasberg up to about 750 — 
SOULE: Louie ain't going to go for it, it, the (.( )), I, 
I just — . ‘ • . 
GERVAIS: Another 150 dollars over 600? 
SOULE: 'Well, you see, he, he's got me over a barrel, I don't want 
to be bickering with him and (( )) with him, he, my 
daddy's working for him, he, he treats the old man real 
good — ' 
GERVAIS: Does he? ' 
SOULE: So, I, I — 
GERVAIS: Tell him, all right, listen, it's 600 effective the 
first — 
SOULE: You see, the way he puts it to me, zero for me — j 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
39good — ' 
GERVAIS: Does he? ' 
SOULE: So, I, I — 
GERVAIS: Tell him, all right, listen, it's 600 effective the 
first — 
SOULE: You see, the way he puts it to me, zero for me — j 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
39

--- PAGE BREAK ---Does he? ' 
SOULE: So, I, I — 
GERVAIS: Tell him, all right, listen, it's 600 effective the 
first — 
SOULE: You see, the way he puts it to me, zero for me — j 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
39

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SOULE: Do him a favor, but he does say after Kay — 
GERVAIS: Yeah, but he knows before you all were getting a 
thousand a month, right? 
SOULE: Oh, yeah, sure. 
GERVAIS: So he figures you was getting five, the other guy 
-was getting five — 
SOULE: Yeah. . • 
GERVAIS: So now he's-going to throw a six so you can have a 
little ( ) 
•SOULE: That's, that's what he figures, sure. 
GERVAIS: And he figures you to give Prey the five like he been 
getting — 
SOULE: You see, the (( )), we carried him for the 
whole month of December, he was supposed to, he said, look, 
he wanted to give us two apiece, 200 apiece, so I, I told, 
I told Prey and Frey didn't want to fool with it, I went back 
and said, look, we going to carry you, don't wor-, we'll take 
care of you but we don't want a dime,- he said, I'll give you 
a nice Christmas present, I, I said, okay, he never come ..with 
no f- ..., he never come up with, nothing for me — 
GERVAIS: Nothing — (laughter). 
SOULE: (laughter) But I wasn' t. expecting nothing but v/e didn't 
didn't, didn't, didn't touch' a machine in the whole month of 
December. 
GERVAIS: But ain't he the first guy to get you rolling that you 
was, wound up (( )) with Nims [ROBERT NIKS of Lucky 
Coin Machine Company, Inc.] and all' them, ain't he the first 
•one that get you started — 
SOULS: He's the first one called me, yeah. 
GERVAIS: And then wouldn't, then didn't come up? 
SOULS: That's right. He come up to me, he says, Fred, while 
back, he, he told Aruns is quit, the'first, I remember the... 
words he said, he, he asked my daddy to — 
. The conversation was interrupted by a telephone call 
then continued as follows: 
GERVAIS: Uh, so, uh, he's such a stalling (( )), how 
the (( )) did you, uh, did he send you to Nims? 
SOULE: Who? . • 
GERVAIS: Boasberg. 
SOULE: Oh, no, no, no, no, no, uh, when, v/h'en Boasberg wouldn't 
come up with any money, Aruns had told Mims that — 
/'GERVAIS: Oh. ' . . ’ ' ' 
SOULE: — that there was no money available. Now, Nims didn't 
want to, he wanted me to kn'ow that he was coming up, you see. 
GERVAIS: Yeah.ey, Aruns had told Mims that — 
/'GERVAIS: Oh. ' . . ’ ' ' 
SOULE: — that there was no money available. Now, Nims didn't 
want to, he wanted me to kn'ow that he was coming up, you see. 
GERVAIS: Yeah.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ims that — 
/'GERVAIS: Oh. ' . . ’ ' ' 
SOULE: — that there was no money available. Now, Nims didn't 
want to, he wanted me to kn'ow that he was coming up, you see. 
GERVAIS: Yeah.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SOULE: So I — 0 
GERVAIS: You had to meet with him. 
SOULE: I met him and I met Nims and I spoke with Mims and I tqld 
Nims, I said, look, I'd rather, I know what you want, I said, 
I'm for it, I said, but I don't want you to (jive me nothing, 
I said, because I know Callery and I rather do it that way, 
. 'so he give the money to Callery and he let me knov: that he 
was giving it to Callery and Callery let me know. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. . 
\ SOULE: But as far as then, the only one's ever give me anything 
is Callery — 
V 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: Of course, Callery, it didn't come out of his pocket — 
GERVAIS: No, it come from — 
SOULE: I, I knov/ it come, one for,, month or two come out of 
TAC's pocket and a month or two come out of Nims' pocket — 
GERVAIS: But you never dealt with either one of them guys 
direct — . 
SOULE: Never- have got, no, never have gotten a penny from them. 
GERVAIS: Urn. Let's see, now that uh, so I had a misunderstanding 
cause I thought that Callery handled, no, matter of fact, it 
ain't a misunderstanding, Callery told me that he handled it 
once or twice but after that you handled it yourself, direct 
with the people. 
SOULE: No, uh-uh, he's wrong'. 
GERVAIS: He's wrong. 
SOULE: Yeah, Cause Nims, I set in the car with Mims and he 
wanted to give' me the money, I told him wait, I said, I'd 
rather, I said, I know you're a nice .fella and all that sort 
of thing, but I know Callery, I rather do business like I 
always do — 
< ’ * V 
GERVAIS: I, I could swear that Callery told me he only handled 
_7 it twice. 
SOULE: Well,, he, uh, he told me Callery, I know that time I got 
it from Nims cause I met Nims and spoke with him, he did tell 
me another time, you see, when Joe Giarrusso [JOSEPH 
GIARRUSSO, former Superintendent of the New Orleans Police 
Department, who retired on August 21, 1970[1 first went out, I 
don't remember, when was it, October, November, somewhere — 
After some further conversation by SOULE as to why and 
how CALLERY was now apparently retiring from the position of 
I * « 
"middle man" in the transfers of monies from the pinball interests 
/.to officials, the conversation continued as follows: 
SOULE: He had about five [the Vice Squad had picked up about 
five gambling type pinball 'machines] so Louie [D0AS3EEG] got, 
I think they kind of panicked, you know, they wanted to 
■- —-.know..what, was going., they .had no, .no pipeline. .So .Louie 
n -bout 
five gambling type pinball 'machines] so Louie [D0AS3EEG] got, 
I think they kind of panicked, you know, they wanted to 
■- —-.know..what, was going., they .had no, .no pipeline. .So .Louie 
n -

--- PAGE BREAK ---type pinball 'machines] so Louie [D0AS3EEG] got, 
I think they kind of panicked, you know, they wanted to 
■- —-.know..what, was going., they .had no, .no pipeline. .So .Louie 
n -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

calls, now, Louie and.:7L,_-LquIc knows he .can.. .talk_with-tne  
cause I worked for him, I know him well, I spoke many times 
and I think I told you this —  ; —  
GERVAIS: Yeah. .   : ;—7    
SOULE: V/hen I v/as in the service — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. < 
t 
SOULE: He gave me .fifty dollars a month way back in 19*10 and 
'*12 v/hen fifty dollars meant a lot- — 
.VGERVAIS 2 Yeah. * * 
^SOULE: Cause I v/as only getting 135 dollars a month — 
GERVAIS: Guess so. 
SOULE: And I had a v/Ife and a, and a kid, so you know, he 
knows that I’m Indebted to him to that amount, see. 
. GERVAIS: Yeah. . ' . 
SOULE: And he knows that he can talk to me — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. ’ 
•SOULE: So he called me up, he said, Fred, he said, Callery wants 
out, he said, v/e have no, no pipeline, he didn!t say pipe- 
line, but v/e have no v/ay of‘knowing anything, he said, I'd 
like you to find out, and so -- 
GERVAIS: ( ) 
SOULE: I v/ent to Frey and, uh, matter of fact, he had the trip 
going up to Denver so I arranged for him to go, he wanted to 
go’on a little trip (on September 2‘, 1970, Captain SOULE and 
Sergeant FREY delivered a State of Louisiana Governors 
Warrant to the Colorado Springs, Colorado, Police Department, 
which is 65 miles from Denver, and took custody of a prisoner 
named PAUL DAVID PIERCE, who had been charged in Louisiana 
with possession of narcotics) so then’during that time I got 
to talk to him, he said, man, v/e got five, v/hen Joe Giarrusso lef 
he told me to, you know, to build up a fev/ cases, he said, 
we got five or six, so, I go back and, I, I told, when, v/hen, 
when I talked to Louis, I said, look, if I have anything to 
do. I’ll do through Callery, it’s been going that way, so 
Louis said, okay, fine. I told Callery he had about six, 
% well, I checked on the and about five of-them were TAC’s 
and so, course, then TAC come up with the money and, and 
we, we kind of, I told Frey, man, cut the goddamn things — 
After some further conversation about Sergeant FREY'S 
authority to refrain from concentrating any effort against the 
gambling type pinball machines for violations of Louisiana state 
gambling laws, SOULE continued as follows: 
1 
.SOULE: So anyway, he [FREY] pulled it up [stopped concentrating 
effort against the gambling type pinball machines] then and, 
Ta... and ‘TAC come up with the bread, cause TAC v/as, v/as the 
one, anyway, I give them the location and everything, you 
see, and TAC v/as shitting cause one of them v/as a place on 
Carrollton that had been before the [city] council four or 
.-five times —the 
one, anyway, I give them the location and everything, you 
see, and TAC v/as shitting cause one of them v/as a place on 
Carrollton that had been before the [city] council four or 
.-five times —

--- PAGE BREAK ---give them the location and everything, you 
see, and TAC v/as shitting cause one of them v/as a place on 
Carrollton that had been before the [city] council four or 
.-five times —

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVA’IST'But you never did talk to TAC? 
-SOULE:—Never did talk to them. 
Further conversation transpired, about Captain SOULE's 
dealing with the pinball interests: 
GEP.VAIS: But anyv/ay — these guys all tell such (( )) 
stories, though, you see they — again as I said, Callery 
tells me one thing, Boasberg tells, tells me something else, 
but I know you telling me like it is — 
SOULE: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: And I don't know, I don't know how to balance these 
y ’guys. Callery wants to stay in touch with Boasberg said, 
Boasberg don't want me to tell Callery — 
SOULE: (laughter) 
GERVAIS: You know. And then Callery comes and tells me that he 
handled it twice [payoffs] for you and that, that you were 
handling it yourself — 
SOULE: No, I never, never have, uh-uh, now he might think that 
Louie might have given something, Louis don't give nothing — 
GERVAIS: No, no, no, he, no, he meant with, uh, with Nims 
SOULE: No, no, he, he knows that I was right there cause I told ' 
•him, in other, words, he, me, him and Nims in one car and he 
got out the car — t. 
GERVAIS: And Nims tried to hand you the money. 
SOULE: And Nims tried to hand, and I said, look, I said, you 
know, I know you're a nice fella and all, I said, I think 
it would be better if you let Callery handle that and 
.cause I been doing — talking with Callery — 
% « • 
GERVAIS: Right. 
SOULE: So he said, I agree with you and he walked, got right 
out the car and I seen him hand it to Callery — 
GERVAIS: And then Callery — 
‘ ; V •. *V 
.SOULE: And Callery got in the car and he left, Nims left, and 
then Callery give it to me — 
GERVAIS: He brought you the money. * -> 
SOULE: So, uh, I guess in his interpretation he could feel that 
. • maybe Nims was, you know — 
GERVAIS: No, no, no, he meant, what he meant to imply to me Is, 
he, he didn't want to fool with it no more, that you were 
handling it direct yourself with, uh, with Elms and Nims. 
SOULE: I don't even know Elms [JOHN ELMS, JR., of TAC Amusement 
Company]; don't even know him. 
SOULE said that he thinks he’ll tell BOASBERG that he ; 
(SOULc.) and FREY will take a reduced amount, but only on a month 
to month basis. SOULE also said that at a meeting he had thatven know him. 
SOULE said that he thinks he’ll tell BOASBERG that he ; 
(SOULc.) and FREY will take a reduced amount, but only on a month 
to month basis. SOULE also said that at a meeting he had that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

morning with BOASBERG, the latter said that JO:i.I—> iP**> of . 
TAC Amusement*Company"vTouM "take care of" District Attorney JI• ■ ■ 
GARRISON through GERVAIS, as well as someone else "up in the front 
office of the police department", and that BOASBERG would be 
taking care of Captain SOULE and' Sergeant ROBERT FREY. SOULE also 
said that he is a little scared to deal with BOASBERG, because 
"this guy's not too sharp", and that "Gallery's much smarter, he's 
been doing it for so long". * • 
(29) On January 15, 1971, PERSHING GERVAIS talked by 
telephone from Room 876 of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in New 
Orleans to Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., who stated that he had 
been trying to see Sergeant ROBERT FREY all day long but had been 
unable to do so because of demonstrations at Martin Luther King 
school. SOULE also stated that he had spoken to LOUIS BOASBERG 
and had accepted a package for FREY and himself of $500 for Janu- 
ary and $500 for February. SOULE said he had not yet given FREY 
his share. 
GERVAIS: See. Have you talked to as, to ah, King Louie [LOUIS 
BOASBERG]? . . • 
SOULE: Yeah. . 
GERVAIS t You did? 
SOULE: No, I didn't talk, oh, yeah, yeah. 
• GERVAIS: Louie B., you know. 
SOULE: You mean Lyndon Johnson [an alias for LOUIS BOASBERG]. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
! 
- SOULE: Yeah, I spoke with Lyndon. 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. * " " * ‘ 
1 
So'uLE: And ah, we accepted the package, you see. 
GERVAIS: Huh? Oh, you accepted it. 
SOULE: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: What was it. 
SOULE: Mainly for you. You know. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, right. What was it? six chickens [$600]? 
•"it'l

--- PAGE BREAK ---you see. 
GERVAIS: Huh? Oh, you accepted it. 
SOULE: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: What was it. 
SOULE: Mainly for you. You know. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, right. What was it? six chickens [$600]? 
•"it'l

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SOULE: No, five [$500]. 
‘GERVAIS: Down* to five? • t 
SOULE: Five chickens. (laughter) * 
CERVAIS: I be damned. 
SOULE: But that, that was for two, for two months. On a 
trial basis, other than that, after that it’s — you 
know . 
GERVAIS: Two months. ‘ • 
SOULE: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: You mean the five is for two months? 
SOULE: No, no, no — 
GERVAIS: Oh, no,^ive a month. 
SOULE: Five for each. 
GERVAIS: For each month. 
SOULE: Five chickens for, for the first month, five for the ' 
second month. . 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. The first month being January. 
SOULE: Yeah, right. Effective-.January. 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh, you ain’t told the other guy nothing about it, 
hull? The fryer [Sergeant ROBERT FREY, Commander of the New 
Orleans Police Department Vice Squad], 
SOULE: Yeah, I, I got some told — 
* . *, 
GERVAIS: Huh? What'd he do tell you to, ah — 
SOULE: ( ) to take care of t^at. 
GERVAIS: He did, as a favor, or ah — . ' 
SOULE: Mo, no, no, I told hiir. about the,' you know, I told him.., 
him that, an — - ' = 
GERVAIS: Well, I mean, listen, did you give him the chickens? 
SOULE: No, I haven't seen him yet. 
GERVAIS: Oh. But he knows you got them. 
SOULE: I just happened to be able to talk with1 him for a. little 
while on the telephone. 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. 
SOULE: I didn't have time to go into great.detail with him. 
GERVAIS: You think he'll accept’ah, half of that? 
SOULE: Yeah, he's already told me so. 
SOULE said further that he would call GERVAIS the next 
day.,'.after-he ^(SOULE) talks-with PREY.

--- PAGE BREAK ---: You think he'll accept’ah, half of that? 
SOULE: Yeah, he's already told me so. 
SOULE said further that he would call GERVAIS the next 
day.,'.after-he ^(SOULE) talks-with PREY.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(30) On January 16, 1971, PERSHING GERVAIS .talked. Jjy ~ 
telephone from Room 876^of the Fontainebleau Kotor Hotel in New - 
Orleans to Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., who said that he. had 
spoken to FREY and given him his share of the payoff money frqm 
BOASBERG. ; ‘ 
(31) On January 13, 1971, LOUIS M. BOASBERG of New 
\ Orleans Novelty Company met with PERSHING GEP.VAIS in Room 876 of 
✓the Fontainebleau Kotor Hotel in New Orleans. BOASBERG si.ai.ed 
that his attorneys have told him that it is a violation of the new 
federal gambling act (Organized Crime Control Act of 1970) if pay- 
offs .are made to players for games won on the pinball machines. 
BOASBERG stated that he sent a letter to every one of his 
locations and told, them: "Don't pay off anything but merchandise, 
I put that in the letter and I cited all the opinions, etc. Of 
course, you and I know they not going to get any play with any 
merchandise." BOASBERG said that he was still trying to put the 
deal together and has been for three months; that JOHN ARUNS 
CALLERY said he washed his hands of it, -so ^OASBERG has been 
trying to do something. BOASBERG said he would have to hold off 
further negotiations regarding payoffs to GARRISON through GtRVAIS 
until he tried to contact ELMS one more time for a yes or no 
answer regarding the payoffs. BOASBERG stated that he was sure 
JIM GARRISON would at least let him (GERVAIS) get a little 
"chicken feed". BOASBERG stated that "we're" taking care of 
.-FREDERICK SOULE right now and will continue to do so until they 
I 
go out of business or things get better. 
BOASBERG asked C-ERVAIS to talk with JIM GARRISON and 
see if GARRISON can do anything with the governor and any of the 
legislators with respect to any anti-pinball machine bills being 
*Tt 
introduced in the 1971 session of the legislature. B0AS3ERG told 
GERVAIS to have JIM GARRISON approach the governor with the 
approach — "V/hy are you pushing these people? I've got, I've 
got a lot of requests from a lot of little businessmen here," 
•but -that GARRISON '•'should r»^‘,av?roT»ch'^ho--‘p3fveTnor-'frDTa- the pin- 
., /— "V/hy are you pushing these people? I've got, I've 
got a lot of requests from a lot of little businessmen here," 
•but -that GARRISON '•'should r»^‘,av?roT»ch'^ho--‘p3fveTnor-'frDTa- the pin- 
., /

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing these people? I've got, I've 
got a lot of requests from a lot of little businessmen here," 
•but -that GARRISON '•'should r»^‘,av?roT»ch'^ho--‘p3fveTnor-'frDTa- the pin- 
., /

--- PAGE BREAK ---

- ball machine operators '-point-of-view. ■ D0ASi3ERG-s tated that if- 
QARRISON can communicate with the governor and the governor does^ 
not push anti-pinball legislation,_he doesnl.t think that the  
, f 
legislature will have the required votes to introduce anti-pin- 
ball machine legislation in the May, 1971, session. At the close 
of the conversation, 30ASBERG brought up the name HAR3Y MARKS 
(1IARBY S. MARKS, JR.) and stated that if he (BOASBERG) sends 
MARKS to see him (GERVAIS) in the future, that MARKS can be 
‘ 'trusted. BOASBERG stated that MARKS had been with him for 30 
years and that-MARKS is also JOHN ARUMS CALLERY'S right hand man. 
(32) On January 27, 1971, LOUIS M. BOASBERG of New 
Orleans Novelty Company met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 876 of 
the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel, New Orleans, Louisiana. BOASBERG 
/ ' 
stated that he had gone to see LAWRENCE L. LAGARDE of TAC Amuse- 
ment Company who told him (30ASBERG) -that "We have been more than 
generous'-the last few years and we obligated ourselves sometime 
;V . • 
ago to something, it was all in. advance ... and he (LAGARDE) says, 
• -** 
you (BOASBERG) should carry us, he (LAGARDE) says, we are carrying 
something else —". GERVAIS said to BOASBERG that he (GERVAIS) 
r 
did not come to the operators for payoffs, that they came to him. 
B0AS3ERG stated that he (BOASBERG) originally set up the contact 
and deal with Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE,.SR., and agreed with 
GERVAIS that somehow SOULE got in touch with ELMS, CALLERY and 
other pinball operators. 30AS3ERG stated* that after he contacted. 
* V 
SOULE before Christmas, the Vice Squad "started raiding some 
. games"; that about 'three weeks later when he could not put 
together a deal with SOULE he (BOASBERG) went to a "party" with 
whom he had been "very generous with in the campaign" and inquired 
why he had been singled out for the raids. BOASBERG stated that 
the Vice Squad hasn't done anything since so he thinks that the 
"party" did raise hell. 30ASBERG stated that had he not trusted 
I • 
JOHN ELMS, JR., he would not have made the deal with SOULS 
.'because he would rather do business with GERVAIS. BOASBERG told 
GERVAIS that CALLERY used to handle the payoffs, but that right 
JI7I • 
JOHN ELMS, JR., he would not have made the deal with SOULS 
.'because he would rather do business with GERVAIS. BOASBERG told 
GERVAIS that CALLERY used to handle the payoffs, but that right 
JI7

--- PAGE BREAK ---he would not have made the deal with SOULS 
.'because he would rather do business with GERVAIS. BOASBERG told 
GERVAIS that CALLERY used to handle the payoffs, but that right 
JI7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

after the last election (the New Orleans municipal general elec- 
tion for mayoralty and city council seats took place on April 7, 
-1970. and the city fathers took office on May A, 1970) 
* 
CALLERY said he was out, and that this is when he (BOASBERG) 
made a move to reach SOULE: 
i 
GERVAIS: Don't you know ... and I don't know how to — before 
Christmas, and I, I'm, I can only tell you in sketches cause 
you could fill it in better than I can. 
1 ’ 
BOASBERG: No, I can't, I can't. 
/ GERVAIS: Well, here, let me, let me explain it to you — 
BOASBERG: You-know something, let me tell you, Pershing, nobody 
works like I do in this business, I get down six, I do 
everything, I make moves, do all the buying and selling 
and everything, and I, but I leave other things to other 
people and I've left it to Aruns [CALLERY] — 
GERVAIS: Okay, but wait, let me, let me just tell you ... way 
before Christmas, I'm trying to get this in my mind ... I 
was contacted, said, look, uh, young Elms, I'm trying to 
get this straight in my mind, has the connection in the 
city ... we want Charlie Pace to.come up with his pro rata, 
I, at this time, didn't know who they were talking about, 
you see, but Charlie says he will not do it unless you say 
its okay — _ . 
• 1 • 4 v 
BOASBERG: Oh, I, I did ‘issue part of that, Aruns and I both, 
we were trying to put, trying to put a new deal together — 
GERVAIS: Right! Okay, babe— 
B0AS3ERG: See — 
GERVAIS: But, but, but, now mind you, I'm in the dark, I don't 
know who, who's talking to who — 
BOASBERG: You know what started this whole thing? Aruns come 
to me and says, uh, Freddie tell him, look, I'm out now, 
can't do any good, can't do any good, can't do a thing. 
So he says, Aruns say, I'm bowing out so you fellas are orr- 
your own — 
GERVAIS': Right. 
BOASBERG: So when he told me that, now let me tell you how 
long ago he told me that, he told me that ... right after 
the election so I started, that's when I started trying — 
GERVAIS: To do something. •' ' 
BOASBERG: — trying to do something. 
GERVAIS: Well, of course, I'm in the dark at this stage, I 
don't know who's — • ' ‘ 
..BOASBERG: Yeah. . * 
GERVAIS: — doing what, you see. So, now Nins [R03ERT NIMS i 
of Lucky Coin Machine Company, Inc.] comes, finally, so 
Nlms talks to me, he said, we negotiating and it's this 
and it's that and he still, he pretends like he don't know 
• •* •.•Af-who.-it- is,-you sae.- .Coin Machine Company, Inc.] comes, finally, so 
Nlms talks to me, he said, we negotiating and it's this 
and it's that and he still, he pretends like he don't know 
• •* •.•Af-who.-it- is,-you sae.- .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BOASBERG-:—Yeah. 
GERVAIS: So, I said, well, look, I said, as a test, if they 
-- ■“‘“can deliver what they saying to you, then they could 
 .deliver the guy in charge — 
BOASBERG: Yeah, you told me that. 
GERVAIS: See. ' .' 
1 ,i 
BOASBERG: Yeah, I heard that. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, right, I said, so then, they said 
BOASBERG: No. ’ 
GERVAIS: So, okay, so I said, if they can't deliver that, 
then they bullshitting you, see, not knowing at that 
time, what was really going on. Subsequently, Freddie 
comes and he said, look, Louis contacted me, you — 
BOASBERG: Um. 
GERVAIS: Boasberg-- 
BOASBERG: Oh, yeah, we had breakfast many times — 
GERVAIS: He says, and he want's to put a. deal together — 
•BOASBERG: Um. , • • 
, # « 
GERVAIS: But somehow or another, and I don't remember the 
details, but he ends up instead of talking to you, he 
ends up talking to, uh, to, uh, Callery and, uh, what's 
his name — 
BOASBERG: Nims. ‘ 
GERVAIS: Nims. And he got from them, uh, a thousand a month 
I think for four months or something like that, you know 
I don't know how much the money was, he got it. from Nims 
... and, uh, and now I'm wondering Nims got it part from 
uh — . 
•BOASBERG: From TAC — 
GERVAIS: From TAC and I'm wondering if they thinking maybe - 
B0AS3ERG: No, that's.not it. • 
GERVAIS: — You didn't come up with your p'ar't in that. 
BOASBERG: No, that's that's not it, that's not it there. I 
remember Aruns took two grand from me at that time, I 
• remember now. • . 
GERVAIS: Oh. 
BOASBERG: Mo, they not talking about that, Pershing, I, 
Lawrence — 
. * * . * l 
GERVAIS: Well, in other words, you took you — care of your 
part in that. .. .. 
B0AS3ERG: Well, certainly I did. 
GERVAIS: Well, then you —

--- PAGE BREAK ---Pershing, I, 
Lawrence — 
. * * . * l 
GERVAIS: Well, in other words, you took you — care of your 
part in that. .. .. 
B0AS3ERG: Well, certainly I did. 
GERVAIS: Well, then you —

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAXS: You all are—even.— /-ifi1; —— 1— 
BOASBERG: I, I remember when Aruns came in the, in the • 
office ... they, they came in the offices. Let me 
tell you — - —, then you —

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAXS: You all are—even.— /-ifi1; —— 1— 
BOASBERG: I, I remember when Aruns came in the, in the • 
office ... they, they came in the offices. Let me 
tell you — - —

GERVAIS: I don't know where I get the idea that they think 
that you owe something — 
BOASBERG: Oh, man — •' 
GERVAXS: Some place — but go ahead. 
•.BOASBERG: They're stupid. Let me tell you what Lawrence 
[LAWRENCE LAGARDE of TAC Amusement Company], here's the 
x remark he made to me — not this time but about a month 
ago when I went to him, he says, I said, well, who is this 
mysterious people that you, that you, in other -words, when 
we tried, -when Aruns and I tried to put the deal together, 
they reneged then. It's not now that they reneging, they 
were, they been reneging for two months, don't you under- 
stand? 
GERVAIS: Well, it, was that on the square or was that — 
BOASBERG: What do you think I been — what do you think I been 
trying to do — how long do you think I started negotia- 
tions with Freddie? • Man — 
GERVAIS: I don't know. • 
BOASBERG: Three or four months, three months- ago, three months 
ago, Persh, after the legislature started, longer than that. 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh.' 
BOASBERG: That man must think I'm a fool, I mean, I can't, 
I couldn't put that thing together by myself, for what the 
package I wanted to deliver — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. ... 
• B0AS3ERG: I wanted to deliver uh, something decent — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
BOASBERG: Well, then these raids [FBI pinball raids of November 
2ll and 25, 1970] came up, that stopped it, but Lawrence says 
to-me, I said, well, Lawrence, who is this that you — 
Earlier in:the conversation, BOASBERG had brought up the 
new federal gambling statute (Organized Crime Control Act of 1970) 
and stated that LAWRENCE L. LAGARDE 'was informed by his attorneys 
that if the "F3I or task force man" goes to one of the locations 
and gets a payoff on a pinball machine, they can arrest you and 
charge you with conspiracy. 
(33) On January 31, 1971, LOUIS M. 30A33ERG of New 
Orleans Novelty Company, and JOHN J. ELKS, JR., of TAC Amusement 
Company met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room S76 of the Fontainebleau 
50onspiracy. 
(33) On January 31, 1971, LOUIS M. 30A33ERG of New 
Orleans Novelty Company, and JOHN J. ELKS, JR., of TAC Amusement 
Company met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room S76 of the Fontainebleau 
50

--- PAGE BREAK ---January 31, 1971, LOUIS M. 30A33ERG of New 
Orleans Novelty Company, and JOHN J. ELKS, JR., of TAC Amusement 
Company met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room S76 of the Fontainebleau 
50

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kotor Hotel. At the-bcglnnlng-of -the_-_cpnvcrsation BOASBERG- ^r- 
advised ELKS that he has brought GERVAIS up to date on most of the 
facts and told ELKS that GERVAIS knows .the_de.al _that BOASBERG has 
with Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR.' ELMS replied’ that he will do 
the same thing that BOASBERG is doing with FREDERICK SOULE. BOASBERG 
stated that ’’compared to what it was before, it’s peanuts, but —", 
GERVAIS stated that from talking to BOASBERG and FREDERICK SOULE that 
\ 
■BOASBERG is paying SOULE $1,000 a month. BOASBERG replied that 
•"he pays SOULE $500 a month. BOASBERG said he sent SOULE a thousand 
dollars three weeks ago but that was for January and February. 
GERVAIS told both BOASBERG and ELMS that he seriously doubts that 
District Attorney JIM GARRISON will be interested in $500 a month 
but that he (GERVAIS) will take it to him. GERVAIS informed the 
two individuals that he hated to tell JIM GARRISON the payoffs 
would be dropping off to only $500 a month to which ELMS, replied, 
"Yeah. Can’t blame him either.",.ELKS stated that after the session 
of the legislature, they could get'back together and refigure the 
payoffs. ELMS said that the FBI picked up'about 360 of his 
gambling type pinball machines on the raids of November 2 b and 25, 
1970, and that it is costing him sixteen thousand dollars ($16,000) 
a week in income. GERVAIS told ELMS and BOASBERG that what they 
are really saying is that he can tell JIM'GARRISON that the five 
hundred dollars ($500) per month is just temporary until after the 
legislature meets. BOASBERG replied that' it is temporary until, 
about July as they should know something when, the legislature 
adjourns in June, that they will re-negotiate or be out of busi- 
* f • 
ness. With respect to future payments, BOASBERG, ELMS and GERVAIS 
agreed that Captain SOULE would be the go-between and pass the 
money to GERVAIS for District Attorney JIM GARRISON. Later in the 
conversation, BOASBERG asked GERVAIS when the payoffs would start, 
in February or March. GERVAIS stated that ^IM GARRISON is already., 
aware of someone in the city being paid off. BOASBERG replied, 
January, that's right." GERVAIS stated that December arid January 
had passed without any payoffs and BOASBERG said that it was they., 
aware of someone in the city being paid off. BOASBERG replied, 
January, that's right." GERVAIS stated that December arid January 
had passed without any payoffs and BOASBERG said that it was the

--- PAGE BREAK ---e in the city being paid off. BOASBERG replied, 
January, that's right." GERVAIS stated that December arid January 
had passed without any payoffs and BOASBERG said that it was the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

federal.government ralus that put a stop to "thin whole deal", that 
"We been trying to put a deal together for a long while". BOASBERG 
wentf'on to say that he and ELKS "will come up with a dime [a thou- 
sand dollars] for January and February" for JIM GARRISON. BOASBERG 
said that CALLER'/ put together the arrangement whereby the pinball 
dealers passed money on to officials, when nobody said he could: 
\ , 4 
BOASBERG: I got a partner [CALLER’/] who took what he wanted and 
I trusted him and, and, and I think he did all right, I 
think he did, I, I, I think Aruns has been all right, after 
all didn't he put this thing together — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
BOASBERG: — when nobody said he could — 
GERVAIS: Oh, yeah. 
BOASBERG: He put the thing all together, you got to give him 
credit — 
GERVAIS: Oh, yeah, he done that. 
BOASBERG: I'll admit that, you know, he's, he's gone a little 
bit too much from — • 
GERVAIS: For some areas. • 
BOASBERG: You know, in some areas,, it can't do any good, you 
know, you don't take care of this maid out here, she can't 
do you any good. 
GERVAIS: No, no. 
BOASBERG: She might sell a few things 
* * , * 
GERVAIS: She'll give you a couple of towels — 
BOASBERG: Yeah. That's, that's Aruns —'Aruns is an easy mark. 
ELMS: Yeah. 
BOASBERG: He's been an easy mark, he really has. 
GERVAIS.: Yeah. •' . . * 
ELKS: He's giving away your money, why not? ‘ 
BOASBERG: Well — he's giving away part of his. 
BOASBERG and ELKS discussed the danger., to them from 
the federal lav/ (Organized Crime Control Act of 1970) and ELKS 
outlined his plan to lease machines to get around the provisions 
of the law.- • ‘ 
.GERVAIS: We will then sit down and talk about some serious 
futures — • , . 
B0AS3ERG: Yes, but give us a couple of months to get organized. 
GERVAIS: Well — 
BOASBERG: I mean, not immediately when the legislature closed, 
let's be realistic —'t some serious 
futures — • , . 
B0AS3ERG: Yes, but give us a couple of months to get organized. 
GERVAIS: Well — 
BOASBERG: I mean, not immediately when the legislature closed, 
let's be realistic —'

--- PAGE BREAK ---res — • , . 
B0AS3ERG: Yes, but give us a couple of months to get organized. 
GERVAIS: Well — 
BOASBERG: I mean, not immediately when the legislature closed, 
let's be realistic —'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS : I v;uu bulking about Juneyou talking about ...June —_l_. 
BOASBERG: — about the thing, if, if they don'{Tdo that; then 
he's probably going to go a little bit further ,—course* vre  
don^t know what the federals are going to do by then — and, 
I, I wished I knew — 
^ # 
9 
GERVAIS: Uh-buh. . • • 
• % • • * 
ELMS: Will we know something about the machines and just what's 
going to happen, uh, when this three judge, uh, hearing 
supposed to be before them on February 20th, that's when 
the notice, uh — 
\BOASBERG: I know, but John, look, any federal officer who can 
get a payoff and you can be arrested for conspiracy, they 
can arrest the location owner and we can be charged with 
conspiracy, that's the law, I've had four attorneys, that 
new federal law is, is that thick and they got more, it 
tells you’get out of business, even Bally's attorneys told 
me that, so we just have to play it by ear — 
GERVAIS: Well ~ 
. * 
ELMS: I'm going to lease all my games out — 
. BOASBERG: Um? ' . 
ELMS: I'm going to lease them out. - ... 
BOASBERG: Well, here's a good --— that, that's, that is a good — 
GERVAIS: But if that’s true, if any federal'officer can go 
play a game and get' a payoff, see — ' 
BOASBERG: Certainly they can. 
GERVAIS: It's a wonder they haven't done that. 
t 
BOASBERG: They may be doing it now, how do you know — how 
many months you think they worked on that, on that regi- 
. stration thing [registration reauirement under the Gambling 
Devices Act of 1962, Title 15, united States Code, Section 
1173(a)(3), upon which the F3I pinball raids of November 
.24 and 25, 1970, were based], they worked three months at 
'least they worked — we didn't know they were working, 
nobody knew it — nobody knew it, did we? V/e had no idea — 
I • V 
.ELMS: No word, no Inkling, no nothing — 
(34) On February 2, 1971, PERSHING .GERVAIS had a 
telephone conversation from Room 276 of the Fontainebleau Motor 
Hotel in New Orleans, with LOUIS B0AS3EEG, wherein B0AS3ERG 
described a meeting he had in his office with LAWRENCE L. LAGARDE 
of TAC Amusement Company, at which time 30AS3ERG was expecting to 
receive ^>1,000 as TAC's end of the $2,000 bi-monthly package that 
.JOHN J. ELMS, JR., of TAC Amusement Company and BOASBERG agreed 
'upon at the January 31, 1971,-meeting with PERSHING GERVAIS in 
!Room 
1 
876 of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel. BOASBERG said that LAGARDE 
S3ELMS, JR., of TAC Amusement Company and BOASBERG agreed 
'upon at the January 31, 1971,-meeting with PERSHING GERVAIS in 
!Room 
1 
876 of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel. BOASBERG said that LAGARDE 
S3

--- PAGE BREAK ---usement Company and BOASBERG agreed 
'upon at the January 31, 1971,-meeting with PERSHING GERVAIS in 
!Room 
1 
876 of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel. BOASBERG said that LAGARDE 
S3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.tbrcv»._ $500 .on .BOASBEhu •£> (leak, rather than the $1,000 that B0AS3K; 
was expecting toward the $2,000 package. ' 
 (35) On February 3, 1971, PERSHING GERVAIS had a tele- 
phone conversation from Room 276 of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel 
in New Orleans, with JOHN ARUNS CALLERY, who stated that he would 
check with LAV,'RENCE LAGARDE of TAC Amusement Company regarding the 
N. # 
truth of BOASBERG'S claim that LAGARDE dropped $500 payoff money on 
•, BOASBERG's desk rather than the $1,000 promised by JOHN ELKS, JR. 
^CALLERY said LAGARDE wants to talk with CALLERY about a subject 
LAGARDE has talked to him about before — the leasing of pinball 
machines to the location owners. CALLERY said that he went to 
GARRISON'S house on February 2, 1971, to explain about the'payoff 
situation regarding plnballs in view of the FBI raids of November 
u '** 
2*1 and 25, 1970, and that GARRISON replied "when the cow is killed 
# / 
there's no more milk." 
. (.36) On February 10, 1971, JOHN ARUNS CALLERY met with 
PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 276 of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in 
. * * . t* • 
New Orleans, and said that he (CALLERY) had talked to LAWRENCE L. 
LAGARDE of TAC Amusement Company and that GERVAIS had been told 
the truth by BOASBERG about LAGARDE delivering only $500 from TAC 
Amusement Company to B0AS3ERG .for the payoff rather than $1,000 
as had been agreed to by JOHN J. ELMS, JR., of TAC Amusement 
Company. CALLERY said he thinks that they feel that BOASBERG "has 
taken them in the past." * . 
4 * , * • * 
CALLERY began a discussion of the payoffs since August, 
1970, and said that he (CALLERY) understood that 30AS3ERG gave 
Captain SOULE a thousand dollars and if he did, that is all he 
has put up; that LAWRENCE (LAWRENCE LAGARDE of TAC Amusement 
Company) paid two $1,000 payments for SOULE for September, and 
October. CALLERY then stated that the payments to SOULE and 
GERVAIS since August were made by TAC Amusement Company and ROBERT 
NIKS. CALLERY stated that "we" gave $*1,000 to SOULS and $*l,*)00 
to GERVAIS for a total of $8,*100, none of which was put up by 
BOASBERG. CALLERY said that he.recalls that LAWRENCE LAGARDE putERT 
NIKS. CALLERY stated that "we" gave $*1,000 to SOULS and $*l,*)00 
to GERVAIS for a total of $8,*100, none of which was put up by 
BOASBERG. CALLERY said that he.recalls that LAWRENCE LAGARDE put

--- PAGE BREAK ---tated that "we" gave $*1,000 to SOULS and $*l,*)00 
to GERVAIS for a total of $8,*100, none of which was put up by 
BOASBERG. CALLERY said that he.recalls that LAWRENCE LAGARDE put

--- PAGE BREAK ---

up ¥5,000 of the $8,'100. With respect to the forthcoming reduction 
-of--the-share of the payoff to be'made .to JIM GARRISON, CALLER! 
stated that he thinks•GARRISON would be foolish to take it; that 
he has a chance to get out of the deal; forget about it and let it 
die. CALLERY stated that BOASBERG put up $2,000 for the payoffs 
on August 1, 1970, but has not put up anything since.. CALLERY 
stated that the payoffs to GERVAIS were $1,800 years'ago (1962) 
..when the original deal was made; that he added $200 a little later 
for GERVAIS, and that he subsequently added another $200 to "take ' 
care of some of the boys .on the Vice Squad". CALLERY stated that 
he talked to JIM GARRISON and that GARRISON understood the cut in 
the payments; that when CALLERY talked to GARRISON, GARRISON said 
he had read about the FBI pinball raids in the papers and that 
"When the cow is dead, there's no more milk." During the conver- 
sation, CALLERY was told by GERVAIS about the latter's meeting 
with LOUIS M. BOASBERG and JOHN j. ELMS, JR., and their agreement 
to pay $1,000 every two months retroactive to January 1, 1971. 
CALLERY replied that he doubted that JIM GARRISON would take that 
reduced amount but he might. CALLERY stated that he believed 
he owed it to JIM GARRISON to .go and talk with him about the 
decrease in the payoffs since he (CALLERY) had made' the original 
deal. CALLERY said that he told-JIM GARRISON that there was 
. * 1 
only one man (BOASBERG) still operating; that he (CALLERY) was 
* *•* • 
no longer involved in the payoffs because he had had a "package 
going", but that the "package has been dismantled". . 
(37) On February 11, 1971, PERSHING GERVAIS placed a • 
long distance telephone call to JOHN J. ELMS, JR., of TAC Amuse- 
ment Company, in Monroe, Louisiana. ‘ELMS stated that LAWRENCE L. 
LAGARDE of TAC Amusement Company had contacted LOUIS H. BOASBERG. 
The following is the conversation that ensued pertaining to 
LAGARDE’s contact with LOUIS BOASBERG: 
OPERATOR: Mr. John E-Elms, please, long distance is calling. 
Unknown male: All right, hold on. • 
ELKS: Hello. • 'the conversation that ensued pertaining to 
LAGARDE’s contact with LOUIS BOASBERG: 
OPERATOR: Mr. John E-Elms, please, long distance is calling. 
Unknown male: All right, hold on. • 
ELKS: Hello. • '

--- PAGE BREAK ---

OPERATOR;.—Is this Mr. Elms? 
ELKS; Yes. ' • 
OPERATOR: Lone distance. 
' 
GERVAIS: Hey, John. 
ELMS: Yeah. ... • 
' ’ * * 4 
GERVAIS: Heay, Gervais. 
ELMS: Hey, babe, how you doing?. *. ■ . 
GERVAIS: All right, podner. 
'ELMS: Can you hold on for a second-.- . • • 
GERVAIS: Yeah-, I'll hold on. 
ELMS: Hello. - . - 
GERVAIS: Heah. . / 
ELMS: Heah, baby,'-how you doing? . ; • 
GERVAIS: All right, I'm checking on our friend, Louis. 
"ELMS: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: Ah, you know, I, I don.'t know, I never know when that 
guy's bullshitting'or not. He come and he brought a nickel 
[$500] instead of a dime [41,000], for two months and, ah, 
be said that Lawrence [LAGARDE] went and dropped that on 
him and said that was it, and of course I explained that, 
I said (( )), no way I'm going to the [JIM GARRISON] with 
that. . . 
ELMS: No, I tell you what happened. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. . ' ' . 
ELMS: Remember we thought Lawrence wasn't willing to go along 
with, ah — •. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. • 
ELMS: But what had happened when I was out of town — 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. __ • 
V * *» . 
ELMS: He talked to Lawrence. ■ 
-• GERVAIS: He did. ' 
ELMS: And Louie told him that, ah, instead of a dime [$l-,000] he 
[B0AS3ERG] would come up with twelve fifty [$1,250] 
GERVAIS: Twelve fifty [$1,250]? 
ELMS: I mean fifteen [$1,500], , 
GERVAIS: He tried to shake Lawrence for fifteen [$1,500]? 
\ I 
••ELMS: Ho, no, no, that Louie would come up with fifteen [$1,500] 
GERVAIS: Oh, oh, no, but he wouldn't do that.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, 
GERVAIS: He tried to shake Lawrence for fifteen [$1,500]? 
\ I 
••ELMS: Ho, no, no, that Louie would come up with fifteen [$1,500] 
GERVAIS: Oh, oh, no, but he wouldn't do that.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ELMS: And for Lawrence to come up — 
GERVAIS: VJith five [$500]. 
ELMS: — with five [$500]. 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. Well, he didn’t do that all he offered me was 
five [$500] and I, you know a nickel [$500], I said, man, 
no way I am goine to bring that to the man, I said it s bad 
enough bringing him one [$1,00 0] for tvio months. 
ELMS: Yeah. 
t 
GERVAIS: I said I just can't do it, but ah, so he said, well, 
podner, that's the best I could do. I said. Well, I °hly 
need to know, you know, exactly and then, then that s what 
I'm doing calling you, cause I never know, I, you know, I 
meet that fella coming back. 
ELMS: Right, no, well, what happened, I, I had told Lawrence 
that, ah, you know, that everything was ah — 
GERVAIS: Yeah, set. 
ELMS: Set. 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh’. , . 
ELMS: And then, ah, so he went over by Louis. 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. ' 
ELMS: And — ' v . •• 
GERVAIS: Louis said he bawled, that Lawrence came in there and 
bawled the piss out of him, threw five hundred on his desk 
and walked out. 
ELMS: Because, yeah, because Lawrence, Louie had told Lawrence, 
ah, five. 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. . . 
ELMS: Oh, no, two, no let's, yeah, five. 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. 
ELMS: And that he was going to come up with fifteen. 
. *> 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. Well, he didn't come up with nothing, he come 
up with the one [$1,000] for- the other fellows, you know, 
and then he come wanted him, he wanted you know, and then 
he suggested that I take the five and swallow it, I said, well 
(( )), you pissing your money away cause I can't do 
nothing by myself. 
ELMS: (laughter) 
GERVAIS: I said, I'm, and I wouldn't do that anyway. You know. 
So he says, well, (( )), I guess he, he thinks he's got 
something going for him I don't know. 
ELMS: Okay, well, let me get back to Lawrence and see if I can 
get him and Louie to straighten this damn thing out tomorrow. 
Because Lawrence is in 3aton Rouge today. 
GERVAIS: Oh, well, ah, well', let me say this that ain't my • 
reason for calling you, now. 
1 
57him and Louie to straighten this damn thing out tomorrow. 
Because Lawrence is in 3aton Rouge today. 
GERVAIS: Oh, well, ah, well', let me say this that ain't my • 
reason for calling you, now. 
1 
57

--- PAGE BREAK ---aighten this damn thing out tomorrow. 
Because Lawrence is in 3aton Rouge today. 
GERVAIS: Oh, well, ah, well', let me say this that ain't my • 
reason for calling you, now. 
1 
57

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ELMS: Uh-huh. ' 
GERVAIS: You know, cause you know Incidentally, and I don't .. • 
know if you know, you know I didn't go looking for this 
(( ))• • • 
ELMS: Ho. • 
GERVAIS: Louie [BOASBERG] come looking for me. . 
‘ j 
ELMS: Right. 
GERVAIS: You know that, huh? „ 
. « , • ■ . 
ELMS: Yeah. ’ ‘' • * 
'GERVAIS: Yeah, okay, because I don't want to feel like I'm 
hustling nobody. But since they initiated the (( >> 
thing I can't get nothing positive, and he's still holding 
the five [$500], I guess he thinks that ah,’ somehow, some- 
body's going to take it, but I'm (( )),I'dbe embarrased 
• to go offer a man that. .. ' •• 
ELMS: Yeah. ' • 
GERVAIS: You know. 
ELMS: You right. . 
(38)' On February 11, 1971, Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE, 
SR.,.met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 276 of the Fountainebleau 
Motor Hotel. In Mew Orleans. SOULE said he. had breakfast with LOUIS 
M. BOASBERG of New Orleans Novelty Company the other day and was 
told that TAC Amusement Company has agreed to take care of the pay- 
offs to GERVAIS for District Attorney JIM GARRISON and that 
BOASBERG will be taking care of SOULE and Sergeant ROBERT FREY. 
SOULE said that ROBERT NIMS of Lucky Coin Machine Company, Inc., 
is now out of the pinball business. SOULE said that the last pay- 
ment he received was from BOASBERG for one thousand dollars 
($1,000), which was for January and February, 1971; that HARBY S. 
MARKS, JR.’, employee of New Orleans Novelty Company, delivered it 
to him; and that he split it evenly with Sergeant FRr.Y, Commander 
of the Vice Squad. SOULE said that the payment prior to the last 
one was paid by MIMS and the other one before that was paid by 
TAC Amusement Company, and that each one was for $1,000. SOULE 
said that he (SOULE) is going to tell BOASBERG that his and FREY'S 
share is to come through GERVAIS from now on; that GERVAIS will 
I 
.handle the whole package. SOULE said he wants to get one thousand 
5Shat he (SOULE) is going to tell BOASBERG that his and FREY'S 
share is to come through GERVAIS from now on; that GERVAIS will 
I 
.handle the whole package. SOULE said he wants to get one thousand 
5S

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing to tell BOASBERG that his and FREY'S 
share is to come through GERVAIS from now on; that GERVAIS will 
I 
.handle the whole package. SOULE said he wants to get one thousand 
5S

--- PAGE BREAK ---

dollars ($1000) a month, five hundred dollars ($500) for him and 
five hundred dollars ($500) for FREY, rather than the present one 
thousand dollars ($1000) every two months. SOULE and GERVA1S had 
some conversation about savings and investments, and SOULE said 
that he has a safety deposit box with seventy five thousand dollars 
($75,000) in it of money that he made with CALLERY and GERVAIS: 
GERVAIS: (laughter) ... You got money in legitimate savings 
account? * 
SOULE: I got about ... fifteen hundred dollars. 
GERVAIS: Fifteen hundred? ... You ain't going to get much 
on that, Freddie. 
SOULE: No, well, that's all I can afford to put in there. Mo, 
I got, I got a few thousand dollars, I got (( )) safe 
box. 
GERVAIS: But you -can't (( )) ('( )) with that money. 
SOULE: No. . 
GERVAIS: You let that money out, you'll be in real trouble. . 
SOULE: I got about seventy five thousand 
GERVAIS: Do you? If you admit,that, you (( )), you must 
have a hundred fifty — 
SOULE: No, no, I'm, I'm, (( )), I'm'telling you straight. 
Most of it, you know ( * ) 
GERVAIS:* Yeah, made with them things. 
SOULE: Most through you. (laughter) 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: I, well, I, tell you the truth, I, everything I got, 
I got either through you or Callery — 
' l 
GERVAIS: Yeah. T : * 
SOULE: Everything I got — 
• * • • • 
GERVAIS: Boasberg, huh? 
SOULE: Boasberg never did give me but one time, that's all. 
I got everything from Callery. , 
SOULE said that he can't do anything with that seventy 
five thousand dollars except when he gets old, just before he's 
ready to die, he'll give it to his children ‘and that their problem 
with that amount of money will be less than his would be. SOULE 
said that if he wanted to spend that money he'd have to say he won 
it gambling and pay taxes on it and for that reason, "I have to 
live modest, I can't spend it."l be less than his would be. SOULE 
said that if he wanted to spend that money he'd have to say he won 
it gambling and pay taxes on it and for that reason, "I have to 
live modest, I can't spend it."

--- PAGE BREAK ---ould be. SOULE 
said that if he wanted to spend that money he'd have to say he won 
it gambling and pay taxes on it and for that reason, "I have to 
live modest, I can't spend it."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(39) On February 19, 1971, at 7:00 a.m., Special Amenta 
of the Intelligence Division, Internal Revenue Service, observed 
Captain FREDERICK SOULE', SR., and HARBY S. MARKS, JR., employee of 
Hew Orleans Novelty Company, meet and converse at the Coffee-Shop, 
Jung Hotel, New Orleans, Louisiana. At approximately 11:30 a.m. on 
th'e same day, in the first floor men's room in the hotel part of 
the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in New Orleans, Captain SOULE Gave 
PERSHING GERVAIS a sealed brown envelope, which envelope was 
• ■ ... 
retrieved, still sealed, by Special Agents of the Intelligence 
Division, Internal Revenue Service. The envelope contained one 
thousand dollars ($1000), which money was retained as evidence. 
The Special Agents then prepared an envelope containing one thou- 
sand dollars ($1000) in fifty dollar ($50) bills, the serial 
numbers of which were noted, for delivery to JIM GARRISON. 
('(0) On February 25, 1971, PERSHING GERVAIS had a tele- 
phone conversation from Room 752 of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel 
in New Orleans, with Captain FREDERICK SOULE, SR.', who said that 
the package for January and F'ebruary, was delivered to him by 
HARBY S. MARKS, JU. [see paragraph (39) above], and that at that 
meeting MARKS told him (SOULE) that BOASBERG had told MARKS that 
TAC Amusement Company had not fulfilled its obligation: 
GERVAIS: Listen, don't forget our friend [30AS3EP.G] on the 
first. Nov;, look — 
SOULE: What? 
GERVAIS: You know there was a (( )) this last time. 
• V 
SOULE: How's-that? ' ' ' 
GERVAIS: Well, you know, ah, ah, he came to you [with delivery of 
the payoff] instead of coming to me. 
SOULE: Yeah, well. 
GERVAIS: So it'll be up to you, I guess, didn’t you, you'd 
prefer to, that I would handle it wouldn't you? 
SOULE: Yeah, well, I didn't get to talk to him [BOASBERG], 
all, all I did, his, his emissary [HARBY S. MARKS, JR.] — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. ... . 
SOULE: — called me — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. ' * J 
SOULE: — you see . 
60Yeah, well, I didn't get to talk to him [BOASBERG], 
all, all I did, his, his emissary [HARBY S. MARKS, JR.] — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. ... . 
SOULE: — called me — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. ' * J 
SOULE: — you see . 
60

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS:. Yeah. -—I — — 
SOULE: — and he said can you have a little breakfast? So' I 
v/ent and he cave me that, now I didn't even know what it  
was for, but I assumed it was, you know. » 
GERVAIS: Yeah. \ T 
SOULE: But that was about the extent of it. So I’ll have — 
GERVAIS: Your meeting, but viho did you meet his emissary or 
him? 
SOULE: No, I met his emissary. 
GERVAIS: Oh, I be damned. 
SOULE: He didn’t meet me. He, ah — 
GERVAIS: He sent his emissary. 
SOULE: — sent his emissary. 
GERVAIS: I be God damned. 
SOULE: I know the guy pretty well. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: The emissary tells, tells, me, the only thing the 
emissary [HAR3Y S. HARKS, JR.] told me, he said, Lyndon 
Johnson [an alias for LOUIS B0AS3ERG] said to tell you 
that Mr. T [TAC Amusement Company] didn't ah, didn't, 
didn't fulfill his obligation, that he had to come up, 
you know. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. A little'more. 
SOULE: Yeah, just like I told you. So that's — 
GERVAIS: Well, listen, you know how he'll stall when the first • 
of March comes. 
SOULE: Oh, he'll do that, yeah. 
(Jll) On February 25, 1971, PERSHING GERVAIS drove to 
the residence of District Attorney JIM GARRISON, il600 Owens 
Boulevard, Hew Orleans, Louisiana, for the purpose of delivering 
a blue envelope containing one thousand dollars ($1000) in United 
States currency, which had been furnished to him by Special Agents 
of the Internal Revenue Service, and which had been previously 
substituted for the one thousand dollars ($1000) delivered to 
GERVAIS by Captain FREDERICK SOULE, SR., on February 19, 1971 
(see paragraph (39) above). The currency consisted of (20) fifty 
dollar bills with the following serial numbers: 
• C*/

--- PAGE BREAK ---VAIS by Captain FREDERICK SOULE, SR., on February 19, 1971 
(see paragraph (39) above). The currency consisted of (20) fifty 
dollar bills with the following serial numbers: 
• C*/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

~F 012877**1 A 
' B 00180^98 A 
G 01709501 A 
C 00612793 A 
X 03862676 A 
B 29632730 A 
D 05523382 A 
H 030223**A A 
G 05503*113 A 
D 11029311 A 
C 06739*186 A 
L 00*170390 A 
F 00033*11*1 A 
E 09792580 A 
C 018293*13 A 
G 03253*132 A 
G 0,3163817 A 
G 06763218 A 
F 00*132220 A 
D 05523382 A 
GERVAIS told JIM GARRIS011 of his meeting with LOUIS M. 
BOASBERG of New Orleans Novelty Company and JOHN ELMS, JR., of 
TAC Amusement Company, and stated that he had received one thou 
sand dollars ($1000) for the months of January and February, 1971; 
that in March he will receive another one thousand dollars ($1000) 
for the months of March and April, 1971; and that the one thousand 
dollars ($1000) every two months would be the new reduced payoff 
until after the legislature meets, in May. When GERVAIS produced 
the envelooe with the money in it, GARRISON snatched it from his 
* * ■ - . 
hand and GERVAIS'said, "You burned my fingers! Bring the butter 
up! Here ... Jesus Christ, you burned my fingers, James." GERVAIS 
informed GARRISON of BOASBERG'S reo.uest that he (GARRISON) contact 
the governor with respect to possible anti-pinball legislation in 
the coming legislature. GARRISON said- for.GERVAIS to tell BOASBERG 
and ELMS that he would contact the governor. GARRISON stated, "I 
will guarantee them —". GERVAIS told GARRISON that JOHN ELMS, 
JR., was "very apologetic" and "embarrassed" to come up with only 
one third of what the payoff used to be, but that BOASBERG"S attiT 
tude was that that amount is sufficient. GERVAIS advised JIM 
GARRISON that payoffs were also being made to the Vice Squad. 
GERVAIS also stated that if things work out with the legislature, 
the payoffs will go back up in amount. GARRISON stated.that it 
would take about 6 months to settle the legal points on the pin- 
ball machines seized in the F3I raids of November 2*1 and 25, 1970, 
but that in the meantime they had "a couple of guys to keep this 
going — for $500 a month.". GARRISON mentioned that CALLERY had 
visited him to tell him he (CALLERY) was now "out". C-ARRISON 
62-, 
but that in the meantime they had "a couple of guys to keep this 
going — for $500 a month.". GARRISON mentioned that CALLERY had 
visited him to tell him he (CALLERY) was now "out". C-ARRISON 
62-

--- PAGE BREAK ---eantime they had "a couple of guys to keep this 
going — for $500 a month.". GARRISON mentioned that CALLERY had 
visited him to tell him he (CALLERY) was now "out". C-ARRISON 
62-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mentioned that GERVAIS should deal with ELMS instead of B0ASJ3ERG 
in receiving the payoff money, but stated that he v/ould not want 
BOASBERG out completely because he might "blow the whistle on 
everybody". GARRISON went on to explain how he would put the 
matter of anti-pinball legislation to the governor in terms of the 
governor's own self-interests: 
GARRISON: ( * ) but I am going to tell John 
[John McKeithen, Governor of Louisiana], John, don't kill 
yourself as senator. 
/ 
• GERVAIS: By attacking this? 
GARRISON: You might not be running in '72 — you might be running 
several months later — 
GERVAIS: For the senate, for the senate, huh? 
GARRISON: Yeah ... New Orleans, always think of New Orleans — 
the Irish Channel and the Ninth Ward. He will understand. 
„ GERVAIS: * Uh-huh. % 
GARRISON: -He will understand. The Irish Channel and the Ninth 
Ward, a guy got bottle of beer, on a pinball machine, bang, 
bang, he gets, another beer, bangs it —that's Mew Orleans. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. Yeah. •' 
GARRISON: ( ) 
GERVAIS: Hello, baby. 
t 
GARRISON: ( ) that's not Mew Orleans, that's 
South Carolina and Virginia — • .* 
GERVAIS: Yeah. . . 
GARRISON: That's not New Orleans — 
GERVAIS: Yeah, all right. . t . 
; • ■> 
.GARRISON: The Channel, baby, and the Ninth W*ard, cause whoever 
I'm for, they're for. 
GERVAIS: Okay. 
» 
GARRISON: In other words, I'm gonna guarantee him — 
GERVAIS: Okay, that'll satisfy him — 
GARRISON: Don't worry, I'm going to tell him, look — 
GERVAIS: See, I haven't committed, I haven't, I said, listen, 
I don't know anything, I can't give you no answers, I have 
to find out — ' 
.GARRISON: John, I'm going to tell you — j 
GERVAIS: I even said, listen, I might have to bring this package 
back to you — [give the thousand dollars back if GARRISON 
refused to take that small" amount] 
G?1: John, I'm going to tell you — j 
GERVAIS: I even said, listen, I might have to bring this package 
back to you — [give the thousand dollars back if GARRISON 
refused to take that small" amount] 
G?1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GARRISON: lio. 
GERVAIS: 
(laughter) 
GARRISON: ( 
GERVAIS: Okay. 
Don't bring him a dollar. ( 
) 
GARRISON: Tell them this, tell them I'm gonna, I’m gonna go 
to John and tell him you happened to be my personal choice 
but if I change my mind at the last minute and name Carlos 
Marcello, he will be the next senator from New Orleans. 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. Yeah, yeah, that'll shake him up. 
GARRISON: I'll tell him, I'm just kidding him — 
GERVAIS: Kid him, yeah, kid him, sure. 
GARRISON: We1 re friends ( ) but he knows I'm only 
half kidding him — 
GERVAIS: Yeah, yeah, he don't want to tempt you. 
GARRISON: Yeah. •' *• 
GERVAIS: Right after March the first' I'll be back ... like 
you're gonna be — ' 
GARRISON: Treat these guys as friends, as business' friends. 
' t* t 
GERVAIS: Okay. ' ’ . • 
GARRISON: And, uh, have them respect our word like we respect 
theirs. 
GERVAIS; Right. 
GARRISON: And it goes on forever like to you and me and Callery — 
GERVAIS: Right. 
GARRISON: And he said always face to face — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. . 
GARRISON: Never any other way — 
GERVAIS: Right, okay, let rr.e go. See you-later. And right 
after March the first — hello, baby. 
02) On Tuesday, March 2, 1971, Captain FREDERICK SOULE, 
SR., met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 752 of the Fontainebleau 
Motor Hotel in New Orleans. They discussed how much cash was in 
the sealed envelope that Captain SOULE had given to GERVAIS in the 
\ 
restroom of the Fontainebleau Kotor Hotel on Feburary 19> 1971, 
.after SOULE had met with HAE3Y S. MARKS, JR., at the Jung Hotel. 
I 
SOULE also discussed how much payoff he used to get when he was 
Commander of the New Orleans Police Department Vico Squad:

--- PAGE BREAK ---had met with HAE3Y S. MARKS, JR., at the Jung Hotel. 
I 
SOULE also discussed how much payoff he used to get when he was 
Commander of the New Orleans Police Department Vico Squad:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: But, listen, but didn’t be pull some kind of switch on 
us the last time — 
SOULE: I — 
GERVAIS: Cause let me say this — 
» 
SOULE: He's always trying to sv/itch — 
GERVAIS: You know he gave me, all he gave was a thousand for the 
man [GARRISON]. 
SOULE: Yeah. 
> GERVAIS-: For January and February. 
.✓SOULS: Oh, I thought that was for one month. 
GERVAIS: Two months. 
SOULE: Oh. - • 
GERVAIS: January and February. 
‘SOULE: I thought you got that per, per month. 
GERVAIS: Mo, indeed. Same as you — 
SOULE: Oh — 
GERVAIS: The same Identical thing. 
SOULE: I thought that was per month. 
GERVAIS: No. January and February, one for two — 
SOULE: I'm going to tell you, now, listen, let me tell you, if he 
comes up with this (( )), I might go one more time for 
the two months because he's waiting for April — 
.GERVAIS: April. 
SOULE: But if the, but if the legislature, uh, lets them along, 
he's going to have to pay the (( )) price Der month, 
that's — ' 
GERVAIS: A thousand a month, that's ridiculous really   
SOULE: It, it ain't use, listen, it ain't no use — ■ 
GERVAIS: Listen, you know — * • . 
SOULE: — fooling with it for less than that. 
GERVAIS: You see that envelope you give me — [the sealed enve- 
lope that SOULE gave GERVAIS on February 19, 1971, in the 
Fontainebleau Motor Hotel restroom]. 
SOULE: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: I, you know I ain't going to (( • )) you T- 
SOULE: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: When I, I brought it to Garrison — j 
SOULE: Yeah. . . \ 
65

--- PAGE BREAK ---leau Motor Hotel restroom]. 
SOULE: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: I, you know I ain't going to (( • )) you T- 
SOULE: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: When I, I brought it to Garrison — j 
SOULE: Yeah. . . \ 
65

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: He just snatched it out of my (( )) hand. 
SOULE: Yeah, I can understand — 
GERVAIS: But I think he thinks I got, I got money and I didn't 
• want to tell — 
SOULE: Yeah, right. 
GERVAIS: — him I didn't get nothing. 
SOULE: Yeah, right. 
GERVAIS: Because he might have said no — 
SOULE: I know he — that poor (( )), doctor bills and every- 
^ thing else — 
GERVAIS: He, he snatched the whole (( )), see, didn't let me 
SOULE: Lucky he didn't pull your arm off — 
GERVAIS: (laughter) 
SOULE: You know, I, if I was him — 
GERVAIS: But I didn't want to — I guess he thinks I got a thou- 
sand too, you see. 
SOULE: But he, uh — 
GERVAIS: You know, (( )), you got the envelope. 
SOULE: I didn't know what, I didn't know what — 
GERVAIS: Well, I mean you know ( ) they ain't 
no ( ) dori't worry — 
SOULE: But, uh — uh — 
•GERVAIS: But, uh ~ 
SOULE: No, I think that'ought to be a month, man, gee — 
GERVAIS: There's no question about it, that's cheap enough, but 
like you said, we got to go to April. 
SOULE: I'm going to tell you, I, you know, we leveling with each’, 
other — 
(knock at door) 
GERVAIS: V/ait a minute, wait! 
(conversation at the door) 
Getting careless there, Freddie. • 
SOULE: (laughter) I'm going to tell you the truth, you under- 
stand — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: Now, when I run, when I was running the Scuad [SOULE 
commanded the New Orleans Police Department Vice Squad from 
May 5> 1962, to June 30, 1968], I used to get seven and a half 
a month — 
— GERVAIS: Seven and a hail f a month?

--- PAGE BREAK ---OULE 
commanded the New Orleans Police Department Vice Squad from 
May 5> 1962, to June 30, 1968], I used to get seven and a half 
a month — 
— GERVAIS: Seven and a hail f a month?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SOULE: Course that.was only, only for me and that's what J- got — 
GERVAIS: Jesus Christ, that v/as pretty good. 
SOULE: Well, that's all I got, that's why I say, you, that's 
what I got, I had to be tough with them, you see, he [CALLERY] 
used to tell me if TAC ain't come up, I would- knock the piss 
out of TAC, you understand, .but they all coming up and I was 
getting — 
GERVAIS: ( ’ ) * 
SOULE: — seven and a half a month. Plus was what I was getting 
from you, so — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
y, . , 
(knock at door) . 
SOULE: (laughter) 
GERVAIS: That wasn't bad — yeah. That wasn't a bad deal at all. 
SOULE: So, uh, I used to get about fifteen hundred every two 
months, you see — 
GERVAIS: Every two months, that wasn't bad. But, listen — 
SOULE: But I, I was getting that even before I was doing business 
with you, that was the only thing I was out getting, you see 
when I — 
GERVAIS: Well, you had to get that the minute, you got, they must 
have got you in the Squad, huh? 
SOULE: Yeah. Well, as soon as I got in there, I knew Aruns, Aruns 
[CALLERY] approached me and, uh — well, first I was getting 
less, he was coming with just for Boasberg and this and I 
started rapping a few other — 
GERVAIS:’ (laughter) 
SOULE: And he said, look, you want to take this down and take this 
and so, anyway, I had, you know, it kept going up and up. 
GERVAIS: But you got 750, you know Aruns must have been swallowing 
SOULE: Sure. 
GEgVAIS: At least — 
SOULE: He stole a little bit — 
GERVAIS: Maybe five hundred. 
(1)3) On March 3, 1971, LOUIS BOASBERG telephoned PERSHING 
GERVAIS. During the conversation, GERVAIS informed BOASBERG that 
he had talked to FREDERICK SOULE and that in the future, he 
(GERVAIS) would be the go-between between BOASBERG and SOULE for 
passing the payoff money to SOULE. BOASBERG also made arrangements 
i 
with GERVAIS to have HARBY MARKS deliver the payoff money to him 
67AIS) would be the go-between between BOASBERG and SOULE for 
passing the payoff money to SOULE. BOASBERG also made arrangements 
i 
with GERVAIS to have HARBY MARKS deliver the payoff money to him 
67

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.(GERVAIS') the coming Friday. 
GERVAIS: Hello. 
BOASBERG: Hi, this is Hr. Reynolds [an alias for LOUIS EOASBERQ]. 
I just got back in town. 
GERVAIS: Oh, Mr. Reynolds, (laughter), I always got to hesitate. 
BOASBERG: (laughter) Uh-huh. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, ah, you just got, yeah, I know. 
BOASBERG: Just got back. I'm gonna probably see my friend. 
•GERVAIS: Well, let me say this to you now, he came to see me. 
BOASBERG: Urn.. 
GERVAIS: You know, Fred [SOULE]. 
BOASBERG: Uh-huh. 
GERVAIS: You understand. 
BOASBERG: Uh-huh. 
GERVAIS: And ah, he's, he's a 
rather, ah, ah, the total 
to him. 
little oueasy about, he would 
contact be made with me and then me 
BOASBERG: Oh, all right. 
GERVAIS: Rather than the other way, now this is his idea. 
BOASBERG: That's better. 
GERVAIS- So we'll keep em comfortable, we'll do it that way. 
BOASBERG: And ah, I mean, in any real estate deal like that, its 
much better, because you, hell -- 
GERVAIS: Yeah, right. And I know more about what I'm doing. 
Right. 
BOASBERG: You don't count in this deal at all, see. 
GERVAIS: No, right. 
BOASBERG: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: Right, yeah, so there’s less contact. 
BOASBERG: I agree. 
GERVAIS: Right. 
BOASBERG: Uh. 
GERVAIS: So, when will I see you. 
BOASBERG: Uh, I tell you what I'll do, 
bottle of perfume [payoff package] 
GERVAIS: Harby Marks? 
I' 
by 
m gonna you a little 
my boy, Harby Marks. 
i 
BOASBERG: Yeah, I'm going to sent him out. I tell you what I'm 
going to do.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS : Uh-huh. _L_—  _ - -  
BOASBERG: Ah, ah, I’m gone to send him out Friday.^---He's_okey 
with anything, he's —I'm going to sent him out. I tell you what I'm 
going to do.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS : Uh-huh. _L_—  _ - -  
BOASBERG: Ah, ah, I’m gone to send him out Friday.^---He's_okey 
with anything, he's —

GERVAIS: Yeah, I know. He's your man. . 
BOASBERG: Heavens, yes, he's my man. 
GERVAIS: Right, Friday. . ; 
BOASBERG: He's my boy, ah, what time is convenient? 
GERVAIS: Friday, I would say a good time would be, you see I make 
" it a practice now, I come in the back way here. Cause I 
don't want people grabbing me, I don't even want them to know 
y. when I'm around. 
BOASBERG: Uh-huh. 
GERVAIS: So, he could ... 
BOASBERG: Ask for you at the desk? 
GERVAiS: Huh? *' 
BOASBERG: Ask for you at the desk? 
GERVAIS: Ho, he walks in and grabs the house phone and asks for 
me • * 
BOASBERG: Oh, I got it, I got it. 
GERVAIS: Then nobody sees me. 
BOASBERG: Any time, it doesn't make any'difference, any time its 
convenient for you. 
GERVAIS: All right, well, let me say. 
BOASBERG: You don't need the perfume for that gal before, Friday, 
tomorrow's Thursday. 
GSRVAIS: 
Mo, Friday's okay • 
• 
BOASBERG: 
Yeah > 
GERVAIS: 
Friday, say about ah. let’s make it about 12 o’clock. 
BOASBERG: 
12 o'clock, what you want, Christian Dior perfume? 
GERVAIS: 
Christian Dior's fine 
BOASBERG: 
All right. 
GERVAIS: 
Okay ? 
BOASBERG: 
Okay, black. 
• 
GERVAIS: 
Friday. 
. 
BOASBERG: 
See you later. 
GERVAIS: 
Bye-bye. 
• 
BOASBERG: 
Okay. 
• ♦ 
(f

--- PAGE BREAK ---Dior's fine 
BOASBERG: 
All right. 
GERVAIS: 
Okay ? 
BOASBERG: 
Okay, black. 
• 
GERVAIS: 
Friday. 
. 
BOASBERG: 
See you later. 
GERVAIS: 
Bye-bye. 
• 
BOASBERG: 
Okay. 
• ♦ 
(f

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fW On March 5, 1971> PERSHING GERVAIS tallied by tele- 
phone from Room 752 of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in Hew 
Orleans, to Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., v/ho said he received 
a call from BOASBERG'S "emissary" (HARBY MARKS) stating that he 
was sick in bed with the flu. SOULE stated that MARKS had men- 
tioned to him that there were several policemen on the streets 
YJorkin'g pinball machines. SOULE said he told MARKS that the "pre- 
, * 
scription" was up and that "that's why they were out trying to get 
some.new patients." 
GERVAIS: Hello. • • 
SOULE: Heah, Doctor Long (an alias for SOULE) 
GERVAIS: Heah, Doctor. - . ; ' •* ' 
SOULE: How are you? 
GERVAIS: All right. 
SOULE: Ah, you told me to get in touch with you today. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, well, well, I haven't heard from them yet. 
SOULE: Uh-huh. Ah, I've heard' from his emissary. Well, to 
tell you his emissary is sick- in bed. 
GERVAIS: His emissary's sick in bed? 
SOULE: Yeah. ‘ _ . 
GERVAIS:’ That sounds like ((. )). 
SOULE: Well, he's ah, — sounds that way to me tod. But ah, 
his emissary called me early this morning. Of course he 
never told me anything else other than the fact that he 
was been in bed for two days with the flu, and he's still 
in bed. 
GERVAIS: That (( )). That (( ‘ )) [B0AS3ERG] 
always got something, well — was, was he instructed to call 
you and tell you that? 
* 
SOULE: No, well, I, I didn't want to talk too much on my, my 
phone, I wa on my, he [HAF3Y MARKS] called me at my home. 
And ah, and ‘.hat's about as a matter, let me tell you what 
happened, he, ah, I told him I said look, I didn't want, you 
know, he was getting a little, a little op'enly and I. told him 
I didn't want to discuss anything too much with him. 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. 
SOULE: And I told him I'd call him back later. Now, when I called 
him back later — ... 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. . 
SOULE: He wanted to know, he said he heard that there was a lot 
of, ah, lot of interns out.on the street, you know. 
70l him back later. Now, when I called 
him back later — ... 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. . 
SOULE: He wanted to know, he said he heard that there was a lot 
of, ah, lot of interns out.on the street, you know. 
70

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: Uh-huh. 
SOULE: And I. told him, yes, that was so. Ah, I said, ah, he asked 
me why I said, well, I understood that, ah, that, ah, the pre- 
scription was up, you see, and that's why they were out try- 
ing to get some new patients. 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. 
SOULE: How I'm sure he must have got that word back to his head 
physician. However, he did tell me that he, he couldn't get 
out of the house. 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. 
SOULE: So, so I didn't know who, who, you was supposed to meet. 
✓ But the emissary — 
GERVAIS: That's v/ho I'm supposed to meet, the emissary. 
SOULE: Unless he gets out, he told me he was sick in bed. 
GERVAIS: That was yesterday. 
SOULE: He was supposed to meet you yesterday? 
GERVAIS: No, today. * , 
SOULE: What time? • 
GERVAIS: Right after noon. 
SOULE: After noon,' huh? 
* ’ * *** 
GERVAIS: Yeah. . 
SOULE: Well, he may not show, he may, however, he might, he 
didn t tell me anything about not showing. I didn't 
know who you were suppose to meet. • 
GERVAIS: Yeah, I'm supposed to meet him, but let me ask you 
abouv the ah, all the guys on the street, the interns. 
SOULE: Look ah — \ _ 
GERVAIS: Are they ah, are they — 
SOULE: Let me ask you, where you at now? ‘ . ' • 
GERVAIS: I'm up in the room. 
SOULE: Well, you busy? 
GERVAIS: No. 
SOULE: What number? 
GERVAIS: 752. ’ ’ 
SOULE: Be up there 
GERVAIS: You corning? . * 
SOULE: In the next two minutesi 
GERVAIS: Oh, two minutes. * j 
SOULE: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: Okay. ’ - 
71

--- PAGE BREAK ---What number? 
GERVAIS: 752. ’ ’ 
SOULE: Be up there 
GERVAIS: You corning? . * 
SOULE: In the next two minutesi 
GERVAIS: Oh, two minutes. * j 
SOULE: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: Okay. ’ - 
71

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C'I5) On March 5,,^^1971,1 Captain FREDERICK SOULE, jR.,_met 
vjlth PnRSHIJIG GaRVAlS in Room 752 of the Fontainebleau-Motor-Hotel 
in Hev; Orleans. During the conversation, SOULE told GERVAIS how 
he was appointed as Commander of the Vice Squad, Hew Orleans 
i 
Police Department, and how he was first approached with respect to 
payoffs from the pinball machine operators: 
GERVAIS: I be damned. Well, Louie uh, what, did Louie [30AS3ERG] 
get you in the Vice Squad — or was it Callery? 
.SOULE: I, man, look, I never did know that — 
GERVAIS: You never knew? 
SOULE: I never did know. The only thing I knew, I was in the 
TACT Unit [Hew Orleans Police Department Tactical Unit] and, uh — 
GERVAIS: Somebody had to, cause that was not a bad move. 
SOULE: It had to be Callery because Callery was, I know was 
making a connection v/ith (( . ))  
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: Now (( )) called me in one day and he said, Freddie, he 
said, uh, I'm thinking (( ' )) in the Vice 
Squad, what do you think about it. I told him I don't think 
I want to go.- 
GERVAIS: You kidding? 
SOULE: That's what I told him. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULc.. and he says, why. I said, well, I know too many people 
and, you know, and that — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: And I don't want to hurt them cause I'm feeling him out 
__ too, I'm — don't know. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, right. 
SOULE: I don't know what he's got in his mind. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: He's put up a big front, you know, that he was righteous 
and all — 
GERVAIS: Yeah, yeah. 
SOUL^: I said I know too many people in the game. He savs, well 
why don’t you take it, he says, — so I said, well, okav. if 
you feel that way ... I said, but I want to let you know I 
got a lot of friends. So he said, well, I rot a lot of 
1 
friends too. ( 
GERVAIS: He tell you that? Well, that's good. 
7?well, okav. if 
you feel that way ... I said, but I want to let you know I 
got a lot of friends. So he said, well, I rot a lot of 
1 
friends too. ( 
GERVAIS: He tell you that? Well, that's good. 
7?

--- PAGE BREAK ---feel that way ... I said, but I want to let you know I 
got a lot of friends. So he said, well, I rot a lot of 
1 
friends too. ( 
GERVAIS: He tell you that? Well, that's good. 
7?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I 
SOULE: So, I went in there then [SOULS commanded the Hew Orleans 
Police Department Vice Squad from May 5, 1962, to June 30, 
1966] — ub, it wasn't long after that Callery called me 
asked me could he meet me and ... you know, he said, per- 
sonally you need anything you can help me on. Well, so> 1 
think he was giving me about two — wasn't much, about two * 
hundred a month or something like that — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: But that was only — course I knew he was with Boasberg 
[JOHN ARUMS CALLERY and LOUIS BOASBERG were partners in 
Mew Orleans Novelty Company from 19^7 to 1968] and I only 
associated with for BOASBERG, so I used to knock the piss 
out of TAC and all [seize TAC Amusement Company's pinball 
machines for illegal payoffs to players for games won], 
see — 
GERVAIS: Say, yeah, that brought them around (laughter) 
SOULE: He say, uh, he says, look, TAC wants to come up with 
200, so I said, that's all right, put it in the pot — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. *; 
SOULE: Oh, I got up to about 750 — 
GERVAIS: You never could find out who, who won, who manuever, 
who uh, maneuvered you into the Squad though? 
SOULE: (( )) never would tell me that, you know — after a 
while, uh, heused to talk to me about my friend, you know, 
uh ... course, see. I'm sure.it must have Callery anyway — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: But he didn't even know Louie, he knew Louie but he 
never did talk to Louie, never had no dealing with Louie — 
GERVAIS: No, he knew, but he knew, uh, Callery — 
SOULE: Callery, yeah, Callery. 
GERVAIS: Callery was slick. > 
SOULE: Well, you know, you know how I, I .found out later as you 
know, the more, the longer you in this thing — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: — the more you find out. It was through (( )) 
that (( )) met Callery. 
Later in the conversation, after discussing how 30ASBSRG 
keeps stalling and reneging on his own proposals and promises, 
SOULE described how prompt CALLERY had been as a go-between for 
payoffs: ( 
I 
SOULE: You, you see, another thing, when I, v/hen I was doing 
business with Gallery, he used to Give me every three months 
in advance — * i 
GERVAIS: Three months? t ! 
SOULE: I’d get twenty one hundred and something in advance — 
zswhen I, v/hen I was doing 
business with Gallery, he used to Give me every three months 
in advance — * i 
GERVAIS: Three months? t ! 
SOULE: I’d get twenty one hundred and something in advance — 
zs

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: Phev/. 
* jfV 
SOULE: Three months. 
GERVAIS: That's pretty good. 
* 
SOULE: You know how it got to be that way though, huh? 
GERVAIS: No. • 
SOULE: I hit the piss out of them [seized pinball machines for 
illegal payoffs to players for games won]. Boy, when they 
didn't corne up, I went out — cause I had to have some- 
thing on the record, I went out and hit them. 
(1|6) On March 8, 1971, HAR3Y S. MARKS, JR., an employee 
of LOUIS M. BOASBERG, met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 87^ of the 
Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in New Orleans. MARKS gave GERVAIS an 
envelope containing two thousand dollars ($2,000) in United States 
Currency, which GERVAIS counted in the presence of MARKS: 
GERVAIS: How you feel, doctor? 
MARKS: Pretty good, pretty good. 
GERVAIS: First time we, I ever really seen you? 
MARKS: Huh? • ’ ' ' 
* t * € *»• 
GERVAIS: First time I recognized you. 
HARKS: I»m Harby Marks. 
GERVAIS: Harby Marks, yeah. * How you do.ing? 
MARKS: All right. Uh, look, I know he's ah, he [BOASBERG] said 
wait, yesterday, I don't understand, the man's crazy. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, I know, he's crazy. 
MARKS: 
Yeah. 
GERVAIS: 
Uh ... he's always got-stalls 
MARKS: 
Yeah, put it off. 
GERVAIS: First he told me you had it — 
MARKS: No only — fact I've been home since Wednesday with the 
flu — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
MARKS: I shouldn't have come down, I bone down this morning just 
to take it to you. 
GERVAIS: Did you, did you? 
•.MARKS: Yeah, I should be home — 
GERVAIS: Really. 
MARKS: I should be home In bed. Yean, my chest is — had Dr. 
Sampson come out and look at me and this and that and he 
<%s^id .you ,r.ot,a little chest cold, ret .some medicine —

--- PAGE BREAK ---MARKS: I should be home In bed. Yean, my chest is — had Dr. 
Sampson come out and look at me and this and that and he 
<%s^id .you ,r.ot,a little chest cold, ret .some medicine —

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: Oh> yeah, well/ 11 in always got it — 
MARKS: Huh? 
GERVAIS: I always have it. 
$ 
MARKS: Aruns [GALLERY] said Ifm nuts, I talked to Aruns, he 
said you crazy going downtown, I said> I got to go downtown 
~ V/hat for? 
GERVAIS: Yeah. * J 
» • 
MARKS: Said I had some things to take care of. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
'MARKS: So — 
GERVAIS: Uh ... just got to be sure [sound of rustling paper], 
• 'huh, you know Louie is, always gets things screwed up — 
supposed to have two [$2,000] in here. 
MARKS: I don't know what's in there, I don't know nothing about 
that — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
MARKS: Just deliver the envelope. 
GERVAIS: Right ... uh — 
MARKS: ( ) 
GERVAIS: Ever see these things? 
MARKS: Uh? 
PG: UH? Ever see this — there's something you ought — 
MARKS: Ah, yeah. 
GERVAIS: ' Always looking at to give things away — 
MARKS: Official ... I be damn, hundredth anniversary huh. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, one — 
MARKS: Pretty neat. * r 
GERVAIS: Two, three, four, five, six, seven [sounds of rustling 
paper] — 
MARKS: That's pretty neat, really. 
GERVAIS: Seven, ain't that nice. 
MARKS: Nice for a bar, you know, rather than individual. 
GERVAIS: Nice gifts, you know that — 
MARKS: Yeah, real, real nice. 
GERVAIS: Seven, that's 3, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 1A, 15, 16, 17, 
18, 19, 20 — good [sounds of rustling paper throughout 
counting]. Listen — j 
MARKS: Huh? 
GERVAIS: Uh, you'll see, uh, Louis when you go back, huh.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, 11, 12, 13, 1A, 15, 16, 17, 
18, 19, 20 — good [sounds of rustling paper throughout 
counting]. Listen — j 
MARKS: Huh? 
GERVAIS: Uh, you'll see, uh, Louis when you go back, huh.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

r. 
HARKS: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: riell him I need to, uh, after today ... probably tomo- 
rov/, I 
frn going to £;o see the rnan tonight, but I’m gonna have 
some messages to give him, him and the other fella. 
HARKS: Uh-huh. 
GERVAIS: You see, so it'll be in a day or two — 
MARKS: Tell him you have a message for him in a day or two — 
GERVAIS: A day or two and it should be for him and the other 
guy, it would be nice if they were both around so I could 
give it to them both and, and, uh, but maybe I'll talk, but 
I'll call him. 
"MARKS: Yeah. . ’ 
GERVAIS: In a day or two. - * 
MARKS: Good. All right. 
GERVAIS: Okay. 
* 
MARKS: Okay. 
GERVAIS: Okay, Harby, 
MARKS: Nice meeting you, Pershing. 
GERVAIS: Okay, podner. So in the meantime, course I guess we're 
going to be seeing each other pretty much — 
MARKS: I don't know, it's up to Louie. • ' 
GERVAIS: Yeah, right. So, well, we'll work it out with Louie. 
Okay? 
MARKS: Thank you. 
Immediately upon MARKS' departure from Room 87!) of the 
Fontainebleau Motor Hotel on March 8, 1971> Special Agents of the 
Internal Revenue Service entered Room 87^ from adjoining Room 876. 
The $2,000 passed to GERVAIS by MARKS was retrieved and retained 
as evidence. The Special Agents then prepared an envelope con- 
taining one thousand dollars ($1,000) in fifty dollar ($50) bills, 
the serial numbers of which were noted, for delivery to Captain 
FREDERICK SOULE. 
(^7) On March 8, 1971j soon after HAR3Y S. MARKS, JR., 
had delivered an envelope with $2,000 in it to GERVAIS, Captain 
FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 874 
of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in New Orleans, at which time 
P*-ROMJJG Gc.RV>iIo passed to SOULr. an envelope containing twenty 
• (20) fifty dollar bills. The serial numbers on the bills passed 
are as follows:ebleau Motor Hotel in New Orleans, at which time 
P*-ROMJJG Gc.RV>iIo passed to SOULr. an envelope containing twenty 
• (20) fifty dollar bills. The serial numbers on the bills passed 
are as follows:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

F 00532023 A 
F 00532028 A 
F 00532025 A 
F 00532022 A 
F 002390^7 * 
F 00239044 * 
F 00239041 * 
F 00532027 A 
F 00532024 A 
~F OO532026 A 
F 00532023 A 
F 00532021'A 
F 00532020 A 
F 00239046 * 
F 00239045 * 
F 00239042 * 
F 00239043 * 
F 00239040 * 
F 00239039 8 
F 00239038 * 
SOULE: ( 
) 
GERVAIS: I wished you was a real doctor. 
SOULE: Why, you don't feel well? 
GERVAIS: I don't think — I'm about to catch a cold — here's 
the loot! 
SOULE: Okay. Very good. 
GERVAIS: I put it in there, so it's all there. 
SOULE: What you got, all ones? 
GERVAIS: No, I don't know, check it. 
SOULE: Fifties. 
GERVAIS:. I think it's all fifties 
SOULE: What else is new, man? 
GERVAIS: Nothing. 
SOULE: What's this for — how did — what this for, you, you 
don't know, of course, you, he, he didn't tell you nothing 
he don't — 
GERVAIS: Naw, he don't know — ( 
March and April, huh — 
SOULE: March and April. We got to tell him next time, it's got 
to go up — 
GERVAIS: Oh, yeah, but, but they ain't no sense in telling — 
SOULE: When, when is it, April the what, you know? 
GERVAIS: Oh, I don't know, let's see, January and February, 
March and April — 
SOULE: Naw, I mean, what, what part — 
GERVAIS: May the first. 
SOULE: What part of April, what part of Aoril is that, uh, ; 
session — 
GERVAIS; -Oh, I-don it .know hut.we ain't due t±l J!av ..the 
first again.

--- PAGE BREAK ---part — 
GERVAIS: May the first. 
SOULE: What part of April, what part of Aoril is that, uh, ; 
session — 
GERVAIS; -Oh, I-don it .know hut.we ain't due t±l J!av ..the 
first again.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

F 00532032 A 
F 00532036 A 
F 00532039 A 
F 005320A2 A 
F 002390*19 4 
F 00239052' 5 
(40) on March 9/1971, Pzr.SHi:lC GERVAIS mat to the 
residence of District Attorney JIM GARRISO), « °»«* *"■*- 
vard, Mow Orleans, Louisiana, ..-here he delivered *1,000 to . _ 
CARR1S0M, in denominations of fifty dollar bills, which UN bore 
the following serial numbers: 
F 00532030 A F 00532031 A 
p 00532033 A » OOS3203" A 
p 00532037 A 1 00532038 A 
00532010 A ‘ P 00532091 A 
00532093 A * 00239098 • 
p 00239050 * F 00239051 ' 
p 00239053 
55 F 00239059 
There follows a portion of the conversation between 
GARRISON and GERVAIS at this March 9, 1971, meetinsi 
GARRISON: Come on up, Pershing 
GERVAIS: Yeah. • . . 
GARRISON: I want to use the phone. 
GERVAIS: All Right. 
GARRISON: ( 
GERVAIS: ' Huh? 
) first of all, 
GARRIwhat. do you want to see me about? Let’s get that out of _ 
the way. 
t . m 
GERVAIS: The money. 
GARRISON: Oh. ' • 
v . 
GERVAIS: Oh, this is, uh March and April, it'll be due now - 
that won't be due again til flay. 
GARRISON: Uh, but, uh, our mutual friend was here — 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. 
GARRISOR: Oh, Knickerbocker [an alias for JOBS' ARUMS GALLERY]. 
GERVAIS: Uh. 
GARRISON: Real good, nice as he could be, but explained 
things kind of broke down — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. But he’s out of it, I told you that 
' GARRISON: Yeah, but you were working on repairing wnat, vhot 
was left — 1 
) 
70

--- PAGE BREAK ---but explained 
things kind of broke down — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. But he’s out of it, I told you that 
' GARRISON: Yeah, but you were working on repairing wnat, vhot 
was left — 1 
) 
70

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: I wasn't wbrfcihg on anything. Let me say this to you, 
when it broke down, I thought it was broke down forever — 
GARRISON: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: Knickerbocker [an alias for JOHM ARUMS GALLERY] came to 
me and said these people wanted to talk to me, I said, well, 
fine, you know, send them over. I'll talk to them. 
GARRISON: You mean like young TAC [JOHN J. ELMS, JR.,] and so on — 
GERVAIS: Yeah, and, uh, Boasberg — 
GARRISON: ( ) 
'GERVAIS: So — 
v 
GARRISON: Sit over there. 
GERVAIS: So, so they came over and talked to me and, uh ... as 
I told you they were very apologetic ... and, uh, they said, 
well at this point, they couldn't meet what they used to 
meet, you know, in dollars — 
• » 
GARRISON: It's a long time, then it is for me. 
GERVAIS: But, but they would, uh ... they would like to keep 
the doors open and if the legislature don't do anything — 
GARRISON: Other words — 
GERVAIS: — maybe it would be better. 
GARRISON: They like having, uh, having us as a back stop and 
so forth — 
GERVAIS: They just, they just want to keep the lines, the com- 
munication going since Knickerbocker [JOHN ARUMS CALLERY] is 
now out. 
GARRISON: . Uh-huh. • 
GERVAIS: So, and it’s that simple. 
GARRISON: Well, then what, what, how much is in there? 
. GERVAIS: A thousand dollars. 
GARRISON: Gee, that's great. : 
GERVAIS: Now there's a thousand every two months. See, the 
last one was for January and February, this is — 
GARRISON: In other words, it's dropped down considerably because 
they've grabbed so many of their machines — 
GERVAIS: Right, it's dropped down considerably — 
GARRISON: But I think they're going to have to end up letting it 
go, I haven't looked at the law but in this state that those 
machines are, are not contraband and, uh, I think they may be 
able to — course you can't tell — the Federal Courts,- 
Federal Government, isn't it? 
GERVAIS: Yeah. . ' i 
GARRISON: But they may be able to get them back, ultimately. 
GERVAIS: V.'ell, that’s not our problem, now that's theirs — 
: 7.7:ederal Courts,- 
Federal Government, isn't it? 
GERVAIS: Yeah. . ' i 
GARRISON: But they may be able to get them back, ultimately. 
GERVAIS: V.'ell, that’s not our problem, now that's theirs — 
: 7.7:

--- PAGE BREAK ---eral Government, isn't it? 
GERVAIS: Yeah. . ' i 
GARRISON: But they may be able to get them back, ultimately. 
GERVAIS: V.'ell, that’s not our problem, now that's theirs — 
: 7.7:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

*. • > 
GARRISON: If they E^t them back ” 
GERVAIS: Well, no, that ain't the problem. . . 
GARRISON: Well, then what Is the problem? 
GERVAIS: The problem Is that the legislature in Baton Rouge ... 
now, I, I thought, let me, let me, look, the last thing was 
January and February, this envelope [the payoff] is February 
and March, uh. How Aoril they due aga-in, is that right 
April? Mow, the 10th‘of Hay — no, the first — when does 
the legislature meet next — May, right? 
GARRISON: -First week in May. . 
GERVAIS: The first week in May, all right. Now ... so, the 
y first week in May, now they looking for trouble from the 
legislature that they might legislate them out of business 
... and — 
• I 
GARRISON: No — 
GERVAIS: And the things that they really concerned about is 
the governor pushing. Nov; here's what I proposed to do, T 
was thinking ahead — I was gonna send for Boasberg and 
young, uh, Tac, and say now, listen, what legislators can 
you count on ... so that you won't have to go over the same 
ground work that they — 
• GARRISON: That we don't have to and also so we don't have to, 
too. • .. 
GERVAIS: Right, orecisely. So once they give me that list I 
bring that list to’you and then you know what you have to 
do from there. But they really want only is the governor, 
that's the only one they really afraid of — 
GARRISON: Uh-huh. 
« 
GERVAIS: Mow, Boasberg today told me that he's been told two 
things — (A) the legislature wouldn’t go into it and (B) 
yes, they would go into it, so he really don't know. 
GARRISON: Vie 11, I think I've helped the governor enough and 
gotten to know him well enough that it took this — uh, uh, 
one reason it took us so long to get to know each other is 
• because we've very much alike really as far as relating, 
you know, I don't relate to real easy, neither does he 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. 
GARRISON: But, uh, he trusts me now, where he's long since 
stopped trusting a lot of people around him cause I've never 
let him down — 
GERVAIS: 
GARRISON: 
stop 
GERVAIS: 
GARRISON: 
GERVAIS: 
GARRISON: 
GERVAIS: 
Uh-huh. 
And, uh, if it's down to the governor, I think I can 
it — 
Uh-huh. , • 
By Just plain asking ;— . 
Right. Cause he knows — | 
I can talk — t 
Veil,v'it,s-the thing they r.ost afraid of — 
i 
I 
ft-*And, uh, if it's down to the governor, I think I can 
it — 
Uh-huh. , • 
By Just plain asking ;— . 
Right. Cause he knows — | 
I can talk — t 
Veil,v'it,s-the thing they r.ost afraid of — 
i 
I 
ft-*

--- PAGE BREAK ---wn to the governor, I think I can 
it — 
Uh-huh. , • 
By Just plain asking ;— . 
Right. Cause he knows — | 
I can talk — t 
Veil,v'it,s-the thing they r.ost afraid of — 
i 
I 
ft-*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GARRISON: I, I can"talk a little trash with him. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. .Mow, Boasberg, boy, he's a whining, grimy     
(( )) to get money out of but, uh, uh ... I mean, he 
stalls and stalls, see, and I was sweating April out because 
I figured April the first, the leg ... he will stall us 
until after the legislature meets but there's no way he 
could stall til Kay ... so, uh, now, you see, Soule, I 
talked, I talked to Soule yesterday, when, when the April 
payment comes, after that, Soule says he wants more money 
... he said, they will come with more money and the only way 
you get their attention like Sou-... 
•GARRISON: Where does Soule come in? 
^GERVAIS: Soule — gets money for him and Frey — since he's on 
the — Soule's always gotten money — 
GARRISON: Oh, he's not with me any more? 
GERVAIS: Yeah, he's in your office. 
GARRISON: Yeah, oh I see — 
GERVAIS: But he's handling the thing for the Vice Squad. 
GARRISON: Oh, oh — (laughter) 
GERVAIS: You know, he 'always did you see — 
GARRISON: I didn't know that. 
GERVAIS: Oh, yeah, he always did. 
GARRISON: You mean even Frey; who's been a pain in our ass is, 
uh, all right as far this thing, this, uh, area is concerned? 
GERVAIS: Him and Soule is making the money. 
GARRISON: Okay. 
GERVAIS: So, uh — evidently that's, you know — but, uh ... 
course you got to watch Soule, Soule's a bullshitter, you 
know, Soule will tell you something — 
GARRISON: ( ) 
GERVAIS: For instance, for instance, Soule's got em believing 
that Sirgo [LOUIS SIRGO, Deputy Superintendent of the New 
Orleans Police Department] gets some of the money, which is 
* not true. 
GARRISON: Well, that doesn't matter. 
I 
GERVAIS: No. But anyway, okay, so that's, that’s the thing in 
a nutshell. 
GARRISON: Okay. Now let me t- ... tell you, at least we have the 
background, halfway in bed with, uh — 
GERVAIS: Right, now, uh, when they meet and give me the names, 
then I'll come and deliver those names to you, the people 
that they can deliver and they, of course -- primarily they 
only asked that you try to do something with the governor ,— 
GARRISON: 
And uh, they feel I can talk trash to, uh, uh —o you, the people 
that they can deliver and they, of course -- primarily they 
only asked that you try to do something with the governor ,— 
GARRISON: 
And uh, they feel I can talk trash to, uh, uh —

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat they can deliver and they, of course -- primarily they 
only asked that you try to do something with the governor ,— 
GARRISON: 
And uh, they feel I can talk trash to, uh, uh —

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: Yeah. But — 
GARRISON: As, as insurance — 
GERVAIS: Right, 
GARRISON: The governor — 
GERVAIS: And there's no sense in you talking to somebody that 
they already have — 
x * * 
GARRISON: I'll get it across to him that, uh — 
GERVAIS-: Well, you can — maybe him, guys like (( ))  
^GARRISON: No, uh, the, the way to present it to John [Governor 
John HcKeithen] you got to present it in terms of his own 
self-interest ... as politician of the future, that, uh, 
the biggest thing he has in his future is, uh, he's from 
,• North Louisiana and he's got the potential tremendous vote- 
from New Orleans — 
GERVAIS: Right. . .. 
GARRISON: And we want to keep it that way   
GERVAIS: Right. • . 
•GARRISON: That's how I got the last judgeshiD for the old regu- 
lars • . . 
GERVAIS: Right. 
GARRISON: See. And, uh, just after I got.one before ... two in 
a row ... but that just gives me a.certain amount of control 
in the court, — 
GERVAIS: Of the situation — 
GARRISON: — the money there and in other words I've been, uh, 
impress John with the fact that I'm getting nothing out of • 
it. It's for him — 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. 
t 
GARRISON: You see. Well, I'm — sell him the same way on this — 
that the largest part of New Orleans, the Ninth Ward, the 
Irish channel, or places like that, the Diriball machines are 
a source of amusement and, uh, livelihood for small busi- 
nesses and he could destroy himself with that — 
GERVAIS: Right. 
GARRISON: Ana, uh, just to be vague about the thing and let it 
. peter out — 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. 
GARRISON: But do not be known as the governor who cut out oinball 
machines in New Orleans, because if you run for the Senate 
against Ellender you're going to lose New Orleans — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. Uh-huh. 
GARRISON: Lose an awful lot of small people. j 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
82hines in New Orleans, because if you run for the Senate 
against Ellender you're going to lose New Orleans — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. Uh-huh. 
GARRISON: Lose an awful lot of small people. j 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
82

--- PAGE BREAK ---, because if you run for the Senate 
against Ellender you're going to lose New Orleans — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. Uh-huh. 
GARRISON: Lose an awful lot of small people. j 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
82

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAKRISON: Cause they're fcbing to think of you as Mr. Clean and 
Hew Orleans is like South Louisiana, they don't like the 
.., you see — 
GERVAIS: Yeah, yeah. 
GARRISON: That's the way I'd sell it. 
GERVAIS: Right. 
GARRISON: It's okay, anyway, but I want to get — 
GERVAIS: Hi, Jim. 
- * -Jzt - 
Child: 'Hello. . 
GARRISON: Honey, uh, I'm — going to have to start — I'm gonna 
y want to watch the show too, but I have to talk to Pershing 
about business first, so — 
Child: How long? 
GARRISON: In about five minutes, watch it on granny's TV and then 
come in here in five minutes — 
Child: Okay. 
GERVAIS: Let me say this about Freddie [SOULE], Freddie shocked 
me. You know Freddie been getting money from pinballs as 
long as we have — " . ' 
GARRISON: Ub-huh. 
GERVAIS: Maybe longer. _ ’•• 
GARRISON: Uh-huh. ' 
GERVAIS: How much you think he's got stashed away? 
GARRISON: How much? 
GERVAIS: Seventy five thousand dollars. 
GARRISON: Jesus Christ! 
GERVAIS: Never, never spent a penny of it. Just salted it and 
salted it — seventy five "thousand. 
GARRISON: Wow — 1 
GERVAIS: And he's had eight years of it too — 
('19) On March 13, 1971, LOUIS BOASBERG met with PERSHING 
GERVAIS in Room 376 of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in Mew 
Orleans. B0AS3ERG said he has talked to attorneys about the new 
federal law [Organised'Crime Control Act of 1970]: 
BOASBERG: Now look — I talked to Bally's attorneys from Wash- 
ington and Chicago, they are afraid of,t'ne federal law; 
GERVAIS: (cough) ' 
i 
.BOASBERG: Guy Johnson's given me one opinion, I've got 10 opin- 
ions, Jake Martin give me another one, riy man Foto gave me 
another one — look — here's what I'm afraid of, Pershing, 
I'm afraid that in this lav:, it states that a Federal offi- 
cer, any FBI man, any federal officer can do the same thing 
0?n Foto gave me 
another one — look — here's what I'm afraid of, Pershing, 
I'm afraid that in this lav:, it states that a Federal offi- 
cer, any FBI man, any federal officer can do the same thing 
0?

--- PAGE BREAK ---her one — look — here's what I'm afraid of, Pershing, 
I'm afraid that in this lav:, it states that a Federal offi- 
cer, any FBI man, any federal officer can do the same thing 
0?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that a city policeman _b r a-state policeman can do or" a member 
of the District Attorney's office, can go~ out and get a pay- 
off, a cash payout on a machine, arid charge the operatornot.. 
* the location, the location doesn't corne under that federal 
law because he doesn't take in 2000 dollars a day or he 
hadn't got that many employees * so what they'll do to make an 
example, a test case, they may do this before the legislature 
— they may charge some operator, you know who the operator's 
going to be, it's going to be me, probably going to be one of 
the Marcellos, probably TAC ... see — : 
BOASBERG also discussed how he is attempting to build a legal 
defense for himself if he's charged with violating the federal 
BOASBERG: Sent them letters, to the locations stating all the 
laws in favor of merchandise, tell them, don't pay anything 
but merchandise, pay off at your own risk. I've, I've 
given written instructions to my collectors to tell everybody 
to pay merchanside. Now, my lawyer wrote up some form and 
I'm, uh, have each ... — 
GERVAIS: Any merchandise or whatever they happen to sell in the 
•particular location. 
BOASBERG: Anything but money. 
GERVAIS: Anything but money. 
BOASBERG: Anything but money, I'm telling them that. Operate 
legally, no pay outs. Now, my attorney's written up a thing 
I'm going to get all — 
GERVAIS: Let me interrupt a minute though. Isn't merchandise 
the same as money? 
BOASBERG: Not under the law, Pershing. 
GERVAIS: Under the federal lav;, too? 
BOASBERG: Under our law we can pay merchandise, it's legal to 
pay merchandise, you understand? 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh^ I see. 
BOASBERG: So to protect myself, now look, let's say that you 
- got, you got one of my machines in your place — 
GERVAIS: Right. 
BOASBERG: All right, so you get, Pershing, you get caught — 
GERVAIS: I got a barroom. 
BOASBERG: You got a barroom. And, and — 
GERVAIS: Ah, guy give you 5 dollars ( ) 
BOASBERG: Now, wait, now, the FBI man comes in there and he 
catches you and, uh, who, who owns your machines? New 
Orleans Novelty Company. Bam! They charge Boasberg, New 
Orleans Novelty Company with conspiring, you understand, 
with conspiracy to break the state laws. So we go to ! 
court and, uh, uh, my attorney gets up and says, well, your 
honor, Mr. Boasbcrg has warned these people repeatedly,, 
look, here jt is, letters to, to, to Mr. Gervais here, Mr. 
Gervais was warned and he puts Mr. Gervais on the stand, 
you get on the stand, he'll say, Mr. Gervais, didn't, 
rfese people repeatedly,, 
look, here jt is, letters to, to, to Mr. Gervais here, Mr. 
Gervais was warned and he puts Mr. Gervais on the stand, 
you get on the stand, he'll say, Mr. Gervais, didn't, 
rf

--- PAGE BREAK ---y,, 
look, here jt is, letters to, to, to Mr. Gervais here, Mr. 
Gervais was warned and he puts Mr. Gervais on the stand, 
you get on the stand, he'll say, Mr. Gervais, didn't, 
rf

--- PAGE BREAK ---

didn't they, did you receive letters, did you -receive ™ 
copies of this letter, you-havc to admit you-did, is this   
your signature on this, where they warned you and that you 
pay off at your own risk. Yes, you have to admit thatV“~ 
So, I got to have some defense. If you break, if you break 
the law, Pershing, it's not rny fault, I can’t help it. 
GERVAIS: But, you said they don’t charge me,, they charge you. 
BOASBEPvG: Yes. Yes, but I got to have some defense. They're 
not gonna charge you, gonna charge me. 
GERVAIS: I think you have to go a step further than that. Uh, 
so a guy hits five dollars on my machine, now he entitled 
to get five dollars of whiskey or beer, right? 
BOASBERG: If you paying, whiskey or beer, if you pay the FBI 
man, he can't do you a thing. 
GERVAIS: Nothing. • . 
BOASBERG: Nothing. 
GERVAIS: Course you and I know, no (( )) location’s 
going to do that. 
BOASBERG: We know that, (laughter) We know that. 
GERVAIS: Right. So they’re going to order them money. 
BOASBERG: Of course, we know that. But I don’t know it, I 
don’t know —.look, that I told the grand — I told the grand 
jury, the, the state grand-.j.ury — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. - ; ‘ 
BOASBERG: The one Voltz (phonetic) had going, I said, I said, I’m 
not going to insult your intelligence by saying that a lot of 
these locations don't pay cash, I said, look, they would pay 
•the chief of police, the district attorney, I said, they need 
the money, so, so much, but I said, I don't know it and my 
collectors don’t know it. I said, I can't swear that any one 
of my locations pay in cash, I said, lot of times, somebody 
hits some games ana they pay them double merchandise or 
cash or anything else. 
GERVAIS: Well, let me ask you this now. *How long ago did you .v 
- . send .the letters out? 
BOASBERG: Ch, I sent the letters out even before the law was 
% passed. I been sending them out. I sent 3 or k of them in 
the past year or two — 
GERVAIS: Don’t you get people calling you up and saying what the 
(( )) are you talking about? 
BOASBERG: Yes, I do, and over the phone I say, well, you, you 
better, you better, you better positively pay merchandise 
only, and so, of course, one of my men says, well, you 
know — 
GERVAIS: They go back — 
.BOASBERG: Got to protect him. •• j 
Yeah, right. They go back and pave the road, sure. • 
GERVAIS:erchandise 
only, and so, of course, one of my men says, well, you 
know — 
GERVAIS: They go back — 
.BOASBERG: Got to protect him. •• j 
Yeah, right. They go back and pave the road, sure. • 
GERVAIS:

--- PAGE BREAK ---d so, of course, one of my men says, well, you 
know — 
GERVAIS: They go back — 
.BOASBERG: Got to protect him. •• j 
Yeah, right. They go back and pave the road, sure. • 
GERVAIS:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: 
BOASBERG: 
GERVAIS: 
BOASBERG: 
GERVAIS: 
them 
In other words, you rely on your route man? 
Far as I'm concerned, I’m operating legally. 
(cough) 
» 
Nobody better say when, when, when — 
But how many route men you got? You can’t hardly trust 
all? 
BOASBERG: Four collectors. 
\ GERVAIS-: Four? Oh, V/ell — 
✓BOASBERG: I'll, I tell you what we’re doing, on the, on the four 
collectors. We give them a piece of business, we put them in 
the partnership — 
GERVAIS: Ohhhhhh — 
BOASBERG: See? 
GERVAIS: So then they got out and they can smooth — 
BOASBERG: They can get the Fifth. 
GERVAIS: They can smooth out — - ^ 
B0AS3ERG: They could take the Fifth, they couldn't take the 
Fifth,vuh, uh, uh, if they were employees, you understand — 
GERVAIS: Right, not only that though, they, they’re protected 
... they can go out to the location — 
BOASBERG: Pershing, when, when, when one of my collectors go 
to a location and the location has got ... 50 dollars, he’s 
paid off 50 dollars, ostensibly that was for merchandise, 
we reimburse them for merchandise — 
GERVAIS: Right. * 
BOASBERG: See? 
GERVAIS: Right, but I mean, you got your machines in my (( 
)) joint, and you tell me.-1 can only pay mer- 
chandise, if I get in trouble, I’m in trouble by myself, 
I’m going to tell you, next time you come here, the (( 
)) machine is going to be on the sidewalk — 
B0AS3SRG: Oh — 
GERVAIS: You know. 
BOASBERG: You tell, if I tell you, if you did pay merchandise, 
you’re taking, you taking at your own risk — you under- 
stand? 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. 
* 
BOASBERG: Now TAC’s got a sign on his machines, tokens or . 
merchandise, he’s got a sign on the top of his — 
/'GERVAIS: They have tokens, too? 
BOASBERG: They, TAC operates tokens — yeah, they operate tokens. 
GERVAIS: And they let you buy a bunch. 
BOASBERG: If you eo, you can — yeah, 
little yellovr slips that state, u 
e get slips.- We have 
so-and-so free, aoperates tokens — yeah, they operate tokens. 
GERVAIS: And they let you buy a bunch. 
BOASBERG: If you eo, you can — yeah, 
little yellovr slips that state, u 
e get slips.- We have 
so-and-so free, a

--- PAGE BREAK ---ah, they operate tokens. 
GERVAIS: And they let you buy a bunch. 
BOASBERG: If you eo, you can — yeah, 
little yellovr slips that state, u 
e get slips.- We have 
so-and-so free, a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

number of free frames, you can -- you know, on our games you 
can play 'em off later, tlie proprietor can put them back on 
the machine, see — 
GERVAIS: He can. 
BOASBERG: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: He can rig that — 
BOASBERG: I got a key to put them back on. If you go hit 50 free 
plays and you say, well, I'll come back later, and you — 
so he gives you a slip. 
•GERVAIS': Oh, oh. 
B0AS3ERG: But now where's what we're facing, we're facing the 
federal ... and of course the state ( ) — 
GERVAIS: (cough) But first you got to — * . 
BOASBERG: I'll tell you if we, but we — 
GERVAIS: (cough) But the (( )) letters are going to kill 
the business though, I mean, if you really (( )) 
toed the line with them (( )) locations, and, and don't 
give them no help at all ... (( )) — I think the 
business would just die off. 
B0AS3ERG: Most people would pay — if, if, if Garrison [District 
Attorney], Giarrusso [Superintendent of Police] and Aaron 
Kohn [Executive Director, Hew Orleans MetroDOlitan Crime Com- 
mission] walked in together, they would pay'them off. Those 
people are desperate for money, Pershing. 
GERVAIS: They going to pay regardless... 
BOASBERG: They can't exist 
GERVAIS: Ho matter what you tell them. 
BOASBERG: Do you, do realize how many places have got games in 
the city right now that are starving to death? 
GERVAIS: (cough) 
BOASBERG: There are no loans being made available — 
Toward the end of the conversation, GERVAIS was assured 
by B0AS3ERG that the latter's employee, HAR3Y S. MARKS, JR., (who 
had delivered the March S, 1971, payoff to GERVAIS) could be 
trusted: 
B0AS3ERG: Say, don't forget now, uh, uh, Har'oy anything you do, 
well, he's all right. 
GERVAIS: Oh, yeah. 
BOASBERG: Aruns — 
GERVAIS: Huh? 
BOASBERG: He's my right hand man and he's Aruns' man — 
GERVAIS: Both the then, huh? 
BOASBERG: ( •) anything he'll do — 
Prell, he's all right. 
GERVAIS: Oh, yeah. 
BOASBERG: Aruns — 
GERVAIS: Huh? 
BOASBERG: He's my right hand man and he's Aruns' man — 
GERVAIS: Both the then, huh? 
BOASBERG: ( •) anything he'll do — 
Pr

--- PAGE BREAK ---GERVAIS: Oh, yeah. 
BOASBERG: Aruns — 
GERVAIS: Huh? 
BOASBERG: He's my right hand man and he's Aruns' man — 
GERVAIS: Both the then, huh? 
BOASBERG: ( •) anything he'll do — 
Pr

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: You know I never saw that man before> heard his name 
a thousand'times — 
BOASBERG: One of the finest, most trustworthy persons that 
you’ll ever — 
GERVAIS: Yeah, 
. » 
. BOASBERG: He is. < 
GERVAIS: He came up and knocked ( ) 
BOASBERG: Well ( ) next time you see Callery, you 
ask him about Harby. 
✓ ‘ 
GERVAIS: Yeah, yeah. 
BOASBERG: You can trust him with your life. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, right, right, yeah. That's the first time I'd 
• ever laid eyes on him. Well, Freddie [SOULE] talks well 
about him, Freddie likes him. 
BOASBtRG: Oh, yeah, sure. Everybody, everybody, everybody that 
knows him talks well about him — 
GERVAIS: Yeah, I don't know the guy,- had never saw him before. 
And I asked him if I ever had and he told me no. 
BOASBERG: No, no,.he never has. 
GERVAIS: We talked a few minutes and then he left. 
BOASBERG: Uh-huh. 
GERVAIS: But, uh— 
» 
BOASBERG: I, I trust him in anything, anything at all. 
(50) On March 27, 1971, JOHN ELMS, JR., met with 
PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 860 of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel. 
During the conversation GERVAIS informed ELMS of JIM GARRISON'S 
planned approach to the governor with respect to opposing any 
anti-pinball machine legislation in the 1971 session of the legis 
.lature. They also discussed some of the State Senators and House 
members whom ELiuS thinks he or certain other persons can contact 
for the purpose of obtaining their influence in.the event that 
anti-pinball machine legislation is introduced, as well as indi- 
viduals whom ELMS has previously contacted. GERVAIS and ELMS als 
discussed payoffs for games won on the pinball machines and the 
%usc of tokens in an attempt to avoid the state gambling laws and 
federal laws. I 
4 
ELMS and GERVAIS also had some discussion about how much 
money the various pinball dealers had contributed to payoffs:f tokens in an attempt to avoid the state gambling laws and 
federal laws. I 
4 
ELMS and GERVAIS also had some discussion about how much 
money the various pinball dealers had contributed to payoffs:

--- PAGE BREAK ---pt to avoid the state gambling laws and 
federal laws. I 
4 
ELMS and GERVAIS also had some discussion about how much 
money the various pinball dealers had contributed to payoffs:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

than 
GERVAIS: He's [BOASBERG] paying— he’s paying a little more 
you are, isn’t he? 
ELKS: Yeah, but he really should be, cause — oh, man, I had some 
trouble v/ith my uncle [LAWRENCE LAGARDE of TAG Amusement Com- 
pany] a good, you know all that trouble we had? 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
ELIAS: Did, uh, you know, Louie [LOUIS BOASBERG], you know, kept 
wanting to down, down, down — 
GERVAIS.: Yeah, I know — 
ELMS: And, uh, so, uh, the first day I come back and told my 
uncle [LAWRENCE LAGARDE] ... and, uh, he said, no, (( 
y )) Boasberg — 
GERVAIS: Yeah; 
ELMS: Don’t give him anything — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
ELMS: I talked to my uncle a little more and he finally said, 
go ahead ... and then, the same day we're up here, I asked 
Louie outside I said, now how much did you say I'm supposed 
to come up with ... and he upped it from two fifty to five 
hundred pr something or six hundred — 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. 
ELMS: And I says are you sure that's what you told me the last 
time, he says, yes, that's what I told you. Okay. Cause 
I had forgotten — . • . 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
ELMS: 
And when I went to see Lawrence, 
(( * >). 
man. he called Boasberg a 
GERVAIS: (laughter) 
ELMS: And my uncle's straight as a arrow, that (( )) 
don't curse, he don't dr-, he don't do nothing — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. Uh-huh. 
ELKS: And for him to get mad like that, phew. 
GERVAIS: But, yeah, but, I, if, I, as I understood it, that 
money, before this, we made our deal, that, the deal with 
Soule, you, you're in, you know about that — what I 
understood, he didn't come up with nothing for Soule, he got 
a free ride — 
ELMS: Just for those one or two months there — 
GERVAIS: Two months. 
ELMS: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: He got a free ride, I believe you and Nims picked uo all 
the freight. i 
ELMS: Uh, Bob [ROBERT NIKS of Lucky Coin Machine Company, Inc.] 
didn't even, you know, he contributed once. 
80ah. 
GERVAIS: He got a free ride, I believe you and Nims picked uo all 
the freight. i 
ELMS: Uh, Bob [ROBERT NIKS of Lucky Coin Machine Company, Inc.] 
didn't even, you know, he contributed once. 
80

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS; Once? Well, it was two months, I believe, it was only 
 two, three months, I think — 
ELMS-: Yeah, cause Aruns said he v/as going to handle it with 
uh — 
GERVAIS: V/ith Boasberg and Boasberg never come up. 
ELMS: Never would come up. 
GERVAIS: So he owes that money then, he actually owes you the 
money. 
ELMS: Yeah, I'm never going to get it though. 
GERVAIS: Naw. 
"ELMSr We11, actually, even, even Charlie, I had to ( ) 
I ask Charlie [CHARLES PACE of Palace Amusement Company], I 
know Charlie and Frank [FRANK CARACCI, former partner with 
“CHARLES PACE in Palace Amusement Company] would come up — 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. 
ELMS: But, uh, they owe me some money, uh, they owe me about 
forty-eight hundred from a good while ago. 
GERVAIS: Charlie? 
». t 
EL!©: Yeah, but of course, the pinba’lls went out and I said, '(( 
)), you know — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
•* K**ti 
ELMS: Bob Mims — 
GERVAIS: Is he, is he back in town? Bob Mims? 
ELMS: I. think he v/as back and left. 
GERVAIS: Y/ent off again. 
ELMS: I got my uncle ( . ) 
how the (( )) you come up with all the (( )) money? 
But, (( )), what you gonna do? 
GERVAIS: All what money? Kuh. 
ELMS: You know, just — (( )) I'm out here, there (( 
)), I'm out about. I'm out about seven thousand now — 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. •' 
ELMS: Over the last year. 
GERVAIS: Picking up that freight with, uh, Callery. (coughing). 
ELMS: (( )), I can't (( )) Aruns, (( )), you can't 
squeeze blood out of a turnip, right — 
GERVAIS: No, no. , 
1 
ELMS: And Aruns tries hard — 
•GERVAIS: Forget it — J j 
ELMS: And if Aruns can’t get it., there ain’t no sense — 
# 
GERVAIS: From 3oasbcrg — 
90

--- PAGE BREAK ---, right — 
GERVAIS: No, no. , 
1 
ELMS: And Aruns tries hard — 
•GERVAIS: Forget it — J j 
ELMS: And if Aruns can’t get it., there ain’t no sense — 
# 
GERVAIS: From 3oasbcrg — 
90

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ELMS: 
anybody else tryin^.to .1 it. .think b cfore’ Arur.s — - 
GERVAIS: But all, all, all it was you maybe could "get everT--‘if 
Boasbcrg picks up moot the freight here — you know, if it, 
if we go beyond the next meeting of the legislature ... so/ 
uh, of course that's going to be uncomfortable ho says he's 
gonna be putting, handle, putting up most of the dough. Of 
course, uh ... what's the division now, a third and two- 
thirds or, wh- — 
ELMS: Uh ... I think I'm coming with five hundred (500) every two 
months — 
GERVAIS: He's coming with, he's coming with fifteen every two 
months. 
ELMS: Two months. Yeah. 
GERVAIS: You come with five hundred every tv/o months, he comes up 
with fifteen hundred every two months — 
ELMS: I been coming up v/ith six hundred, six or seven hundred — 
GERVAIS: Six or seven hundred — 
ELMS: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: Every tv/o months — 
ELMS: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: And he's picking up the rest. 
4 
ELMS: The rest. 
GERVAIS: Up to 2000 cause ... uh ... you see, I give Soule his — 
ELMS: You see we only got 60 machines out -- 
GERVAIS: Right. Right, well, I know that, of course, let me 
tell you, Soule's very pushy. 
ELKS: I never did meet Soule, I don't believe. • 
GERVAIS: Oh, man, he's pushy, always pushing, pushing, oushing 
for more dough, more dough — and, uh, of course, I*don't 
_ tell him anything, now, and he told Boasoerg he wanted me to 
handle his money too, see ... cause Boasberg's is Soule's 
boy, you know how it is, they all tight, Callery you know — 
but, uh — 
ELMS. Well, what's, what's the story with, uh, what's his name. 
GERVAIS: Prey? / 
ELMS: Frey [Sergeant ROBERT FREY, Commander of the New Orleans 
Police Department Vice Squad], yeah. 
GERVAIS: Weil, Soule's got Frey under control, see. Soule gets 
the money and he, him and Frey cutting it up. Mow Soule’s 
the only guy I know that's ever been able to turn Frey. 
ELMS: Yeah. That Frey, that Frey ain't — 
GERVAIS: I don't know nobody else that ever turned him, but 
Soule turned him — and I know that he turned him, you know 
so, uh ... but, uh, hell I thought you knew Soule --t Frey, that Frey ain't — 
GERVAIS: I don't know nobody else that ever turned him, but 
Soule turned him — and I know that he turned him, you know 
so, uh ... but, uh, hell I thought you knew Soule --

--- PAGE BREAK ---n't — 
GERVAIS: I don't know nobody else that ever turned him, but 
Soule turned him — and I know that he turned him, you know 
so, uh ... but, uh, hell I thought you knew Soule --

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ELMS: Uh — _ 
« • 
GERVAIS: You know, because of the previous deal that — 
ELMS: I thought — 
GERVAIS: With Callery. 
ELMS:- I always knew the name — this or that, you know — 
GERVAIS: You heard it a couple of times — 
ELMS: -The old man was. sick and 
GERVAIS: Because you see that wasn't — you know, when that 
was going on, they would not tell me ... that they were 
talking to Soule, Mims had talked to. me, Callery talked 
to me [MIMS and CALLERY met with GERVAIS on October 15, 
1970 regarding ELMS' claimed "connection" with an unnamed 
official (see paragraph 18 above)] everybody — they would 
leave me, they would meet you across the street over there, 
you know, and I would say, v/ell (( )), man, you guys 
talking to me but you keeping me in the dark, I don't 
know what you're talking about — you see — and later 
on down the road I found out they were talking to Soule, 
Boasberg talked to him, Calle-, and I.don't know why but 
; thought that Soule came to see you, but you said you never 
seen him so — ... . 
ELMS and GERVAIS also discussed BOASBERG'S contact with 
LAWRENCE LAGARDE and how BOASBERG attempted to increase the Jan- 
uary and February, 1971, contribution to the payoff by TAC Amuse- 
• ment Company. GERVAIS mentioned that BOASBERG has not yet paid 
his part of the payments to SOULE for September and October of 
1970. ELMS said that B0AS3ERG does not want to pay his part as 
LAGARDE and’ JOHN ARUMS CALLERY made that deal without consulting 
him. 
ELMS: And, uh, said Jesus Christ, Louis [30ASBERG], and he ,v 
[LAWRENCE LAGARDE] turned Louie dovm flat, uh, and Louie 
called me — 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. . 
ELMS: I told him the next time I came to town I'd see him, he 
said, well, look, I tell you what, you know, why don't you 
give me five hundred or whatever it was every two months 
— Jesus Christ, you know — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. • 
ELMS: Two hundred fifty a month, John — 
l 
GERVAIS: Yeah. • 
.'ELMS: So said, well, sure, well, Louie, and I asked Lawrence, 
he hit the coiling, and he come back with trying to get j 
more and they finally compromised for five or six or 
seven — ’ ' 
92ah. • 
.'ELMS: So said, well, sure, well, Louie, and I asked Lawrence, 
he hit the coiling, and he come back with trying to get j 
more and they finally compromised for five or six or 
seven — ’ ' 
92

--- PAGE BREAK ---id, well, sure, well, Louie, and I asked Lawrence, 
he hit the coiling, and he come back with trying to get j 
more and they finally compromised for five or six or 
seven — ’ ' 
92

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: Five* six* or seven hundred every month — I’m 
amazed that Boasberg knew what — came up with the rest. 
ELMS: But nov; see, Louis is close — uh, he1!!, he* 11 set a 
figure in his mind, see, he, he don't want to come up 
with only so much and he'll come up with that much — * 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
ELMS: But then, after that, you'd have to kill that (( 
)) to get any more money out of him. 
GERVAIS: Money out of him yeah ... but, but he owes you money 
from that deal with Soule. 
ELMS: Yeah, well, he said that's between Aruns ... and Lawrence, 
he said they made a deal without — 
GERVAIS: Consulting* — 
ELMS: — consulting him. 
GERVAIS: But it was for his benefit — 
(51) On April 6, 1971, JOHN J. ELMS, JR., met with 
PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 87^' of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel. 
ELMS and GERVAIS discussed some of the members of the legislature 
whom they could count on to oppose anti-pinball machine legis- 
lation in the May, 1971, session of the Louisiana state legisla- 
ture and ELMS mentioned one payoff which, was handled by JOHN ARUMS 
CALLERY. Later in the conference, ELMS‘and GERVAIS discussed 
which pinball operators had contributed to the payoffs for the 
months of September, October, November and December, 1970* 
(52) On April 28, 1971, Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., 
met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room l\kS of the Fontainebleau Motor 
Hotel in New Orleans, SOULE, who had a copy of a document 
relating to the Organized Crime Control Act of 1970 with him, read 
portions of it together with GERVAIS'. SOULE said that Sergeant 
ROBERT FREY is concerned about receiving payoffs since the enact- 
ment of the Organized Crime Control Act of 1970: "He, uh, don't 
want to get out, but he's scared to stay, is what it amounts to." 
Captain SOULE said that the federal government could send him 
(SOULE) to the penitentiary but he would still get $700, $800 
a month pension. GERVAIS told SOULE that he (GERVAIS) was selling 
some property, wanted an out of town safety deposit box, and said 
to SOULE: "You told me you had a connection out of town" (On 
February 11, 1971, GERVAIS‘was., told by SOULE about .an out of ..townsome property, wanted an out of town safety deposit box, and said 
to SOULE: "You told me you had a connection out of town" (On 
February 11, 1971, GERVAIS‘was., told by SOULE about .an out of ..town

--- PAGE BREAK ---

safety deposit box containing $75,000 that SOULE had made with 
CALLEHY and GERVAIS). SOULE replied that his deposit box with the 
$75,000 in it is at the Irvine Bank, in Irving, Texas, that it's 
in his and his wife's name, and that he uses his postal employee 
brother's Irving, Texas address. • 
(53) On May 3, 1971, HAR3Y S. MARKS, JR.,, met with 
PERSHING CERVAIS in Room 358 of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel. 
• MARKS gave CERVAIS an envelope containing $2,000, which GERVAIS 
.✓counted in the presence of MARKS, who told GERVAIS that the Vice 
Squad had recently seized a pinball machine at the Broad Inn, 131 
South Broad Street and that BOASBERG wants to know if it's routine 
or what! Immediately upon MARKS' departure from Room 358 Special 
Agents of the Internal Revenue Service entered Room 358 from 
adjoining Room 356. The money passed to GERVAIS by MARKS was re- 
trieved and retained as evidence. The Special Agents then pre- 
pared an envelope containing $1,000 in fifty dollar bills, the’ 
serial numbers of which were noted, for delivery to Captain 
FREDERICK SOULE. ' 
(5*0 On May 3, 1971, PERSHING GERVAIS talked by tele- 
phone from Room 358 of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in Hew 
Orleans, with Captain FREDERICK A. SOULE-, SR.:. 
OPERATOR: Hello. 
GERVAIS: 9*! 3-59*10. 
OPERATOR: Hold on just a minute* Gervais- 
GERVAIS : All right. 
• a 
FEMALE: 
Hello. 
* * • - * 
GERVAIS: Hello. This is 
GERVAIS], is Freddie Doctor Gray [an alias for PERSHING 
home? 
FEMALE: 
Dr. Gray? 
• • 
GERVAIS : Yeah ( 
) 
FEMALE: 
Just a minute. 
i 
GERVAIS : ( 
) Dr. Gray. 
SOULE: 
Hello. 
* 
‘ ■ ! 
GERVAIS: : Hello, there. 
■ 
f 
SOULE: Who's this, Dr. Gray? 
r<!

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Gray? 
• • 
GERVAIS : Yeah ( 
) 
FEMALE: 
Just a minute. 
i 
GERVAIS : ( 
) Dr. Gray. 
SOULE: 
Hello. 
* 
‘ ■ ! 
GERVAIS: : Hello, there. 
■ 
f 
SOULE: Who's this, Dr. Gray? 
r<!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS : This is Dr. Gray. 
SOULE: 
Uh, well, uh — 
• 
GERVAIS: 
Dr. Carter [an alias for FREDERICK SOULE]? 
SOULE: 
Yeah, yeah, I 've been a little sick there, doc. uh — 
GERVAIS: 
Well — 
SOULE: 
Got the flu. you know. 
« 
GERVAIS: : Yeah? I got some medicine here I think gonna make 
you feel pretty good. 
SOULE: Oh, yeah, (laughter) 
GERVAIS: Uh — . * 
SOULE: Uh, who you saw. Old Lyndon [an alias for LOUIS BOASBERG] 
GERVAIS: Yeah. He sent his man out. 
SOULE: Oh, good. All right, I111 see you tomorrow then. 
GERVAIS: Tomorrow? 
SOULE: I111 cone by your office and get a prescription. 
GERVAIS: You must be sick if you don't want to come get this 
medicine today. 
SOULE: (laughter) No. 
GERVAIS: (laughter) 
SOULE: I'll see you tomorrow. 
GERVAIS ( ) 
SOULE: It's all right? 
GERVAIS: Yeah, itfs okay. About what time? 
SOULE: Well, what time’ll be convenient for you, doc? 
GERVAIS: Well, let’s make it about one, 
i 
SOULE: Tomorrow afternoon, right. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, about one o'clock tomorrow, 
SOULS: At your office, huh? _ ( 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: Okay, doc. 
GERVAIS: Okay. 
SOULE: Talk to you then. 
GERVAIS: All right, bye-bye. 
(55) On May <), 1971, Caotain FREDERICK SOULS, SR., ! 
t 
met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 358 of the Fontainebleau

--- PAGE BREAK ---Okay. 
SOULE: Talk to you then. 
GERVAIS: All right, bye-bye. 
(55) On May <), 1971, Caotain FREDERICK SOULS, SR., ! 
t 
met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 358 of the Fontainebleau

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Motor Hold in ilov; Orleans, v;i:ero'■ . f .
r •.<. 
-an envelope containing one-thousand dollars ($1“,GQ0) in 
fifty dollar bills. The serial numbers on the bills p.assed_arc_  
as follows: 
h 03452203 A 
B 07836808 A 
'K 00688720 
G 03014182 A 
F 03704202 A 
L 00044644 
B 01621409 A 
F 00530253 A 
G 02972011 
F 00065105 A 
D 00134771 s 
D 00716587 
E 03756711 A 
c 03004372 A 
c 03826357 
B 04544100 A 
G 02923981 A 
G 04172841 
G 06037830 A 
B 33429876 A 
• 
SOULE counted the money in GERVAIS* presence: 
GERVAIS: Listen, check this cause I might, uh, not checked it 
too good. 
SOULE: All right [sound of rustling paper]. 
GERVAIS: Counted it three times I got — [sound of rustling 
paper]. 
SOULE: That’s it. 
GERVAIS: That’s it. 
GERVAIS asked SOULE about a pinball seizure at 131 South 
Broad Street that HARBY MARKS had complained about: 
GERVAIS: No ... this, uh, Broad Inn — 
SOULE: Broad Inn? 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: Whose that? 
GERVAIS: Boasberg, you knocked him off — 
\ m • 
SOULE: Oh, yeah, yeah, you told me. • 
GERVAIS: 131 South 3road, Friday. He asking question, what am 
I going to tell him. 
SOULE: Uh, you know, tell them, you could say ( ) I 
have to find out more facts about it, Frey told me to ask 
you something about It. 
GERVAIS: Fro-, Freto (phonetic) and-another guy. 
SOULE: What kind of case they made, did they get Daid off, did 
they — 
GERVAIS: I don’t know., I don’t know a thing about it, they asked 
me to find out about it. 
SOULE: Uh

--- PAGE BREAK ---guy. 
SOULE: What kind of case they made, did they get Daid off, did 
they — 
GERVAIS: I don’t know., I don’t know a thing about it, they asked 
me to find out about it. 
SOULE: Uh

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: Got to give them some kind of answer, cause they caught 
me cold, you know. • . 
SOULE: Yeah, I know they knocked him off Friday. 
GERVAIS: What was Friday? 
SOULE: Friday was the first. 
GERVAIS: I don’t know. 
SOULE: Saturday was the first, (sigh) 
'GERVAIS: What did, what did, uh, Frey say about it? 
SOULE: Well, he said that they accidentally knocked them off 
( ) so he said, It’s just, just some- 
thing he put them out to do just — 
GERVAIS: Yeah. He's going to get the report on them some 
(( )) ( ) 
SOULE: I'll get the reports. Yeah'. I, it's probably, they 
witness a payoff, you knov/, and under those conditions 
difficult to control,. 
GERVAIS: He didn't ask you when he told you they got them — 
you can't call him and ask him, huh? 
SOULE: You let, let me go see him and talk to him cause he's — 
GERVAIS: He afraid — to take a-phone — 
SOULE: No, no, no — 
GERVAIS: Just be good if you. could just ask him not — whether, 
you knov/, what kind of case it is. , I'd love to let them 
know. 
SOULE: He wants you to let them knov; right away? 
GERVAIS: Well, it's, he's just a little nervous, said, listen, 
this Is a funny situation, I'd like to kind of relax them. 
SOULE: Well, (( )), they didn't do anything ( 
) whole two months went by — not like-., 
they ain't had it in four months — ( • 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
SOULE: Yeah, I understand your point, right. 
GERVAIS: See, I v/ould just like to be able to go right back and 
tell them something — 
GERVAIS asked, the telephone switchboard operator for 
822-3912, identified by SOULS as a "straight line" to Sergeant 
FREY. SOULE took the phone and the following was heard by • 
GERVAIS: Yeah, Bob, how you been? 
Fine, how things going? j 
Man, you busy this morning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---"straight line" to Sergeant 
FREY. SOULE took the phone and the following was heard by • 
GERVAIS: Yeah, Bob, how you been? 
Fine, how things going? j 
Man, you busy this morning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Yc.-ah, I, I understand-. ■ - - 
Listen, you remcmtnrc*" the “other day I-spoke- to-y.ou about 
this society joint?. 
Well, they ever do anything on that?    1 
» 
The attorney called you? 
V * 
What was his name, Bob? 
V/as it {( )) ? 
GERVAIS: (( 
))? 
SOULE: 
)), that's — 
Was it (( 
(( ))? ’ . ■ 
(( )) called? 
I be damn, must be him, then — 
Okay, then, Bob, listen, I ’wanted another thing I wanted 
to ask you, remember the case you told me you made, I think 
it was one day last week — 
Was that ah, uh, did they get, get actual, did they wit- 
ness a payoff, or — 
I see, they, they, they got the payoff itself. 
Right, right. 
Okay,then, Robert — 
Okay, fine, man. 
Yeah. 
< » 
Right, very good. 
Okay, Bob, hey look, I'll see you tomorrow, I came uo to 
see you this morning, but, uh, you weren't there — 
I wanted to see you, uh, you know, I got something im- 
portant to tell you about, I wanted to see you. 
Okay? < 
! : 
All right, see you later. 
Right.* 
SOULE: They went to the place and got paid off, just an acci- 
dent, that's all, tell 'em it's just one of those things. 
. * it was an accident. 
GERVAIS: Did he say it was an accident? 
SOULE: They got, they gotta expect that cause they gonna be 
after 'em ail the time. x 
GERVAIS: Yeah, well, I mean, he didn't have no drive on. or 
nothing? 
SOULE: Oh, no, 
these kids 
no drive, no, 
at all times. 
1 
i 
j 
You know he just can't control

--- PAGE BREAK ---he time. x 
GERVAIS: Yeah, well, I mean, he didn't have no drive on. or 
nothing? 
SOULE: Oh, no, 
these kids 
no drive, no, 
at all times. 
1 
i 
j 
You know he just can't control

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SOULE said further that in addition to his safety deposit 
box in Irvine Texas, he has one in his wife’s name at the V/hitney 
Bank at Canal and Broad Streets in New Orleans, in which he has # 
about a thousand dollars, together with insurance and other 
papers. SOULE said that whenever he goes off, he leaves the keys 
to his deposit boxes with his daughter. SOULS also mentioned that 
there is a good little bank in Slidell, "right as you coming along 
the left of the highway11 * ’ * 
(56) On May 28, 1971, PERSHING GERVAIS met with SANTO DI 
FATTA in the dining room of the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in New 
Orleans. DI FATTA said he had been swindled out of $150,000 by 
some con-men from St. Louis who had promised him financing in -the 
amount of almost six million dollars and as a result he (DI FATTA) 
had put up $150,000 "good faith" money; that he wanted these 
persons extradited to "my home town" by District Attorney JIM ‘ 
GARRISON; that he was looking for his money back and not for 
revenge; that the FBI is.working up a fraud case against these 
swindlers, but that he (DI FATTA) wanted the men extradited by 
GARRISON before the federal government indicted them, since he 
felt that a federal indictment of the swindlers would lessen the 
chance of his getting his money back. 
DI FATTA: Yeah, see, so thing is, uhh, that don’t, it don’t work 
out, see. Mow, what’s bothering me is this'-. IF the FBI 
closes in on them, that I can understand, you can’t go back 
with the F3I and say okay, now, the man paid me, don't charge 
him. 
1 
GERVAIS: Oh, no, you can’t do that. 
DI FATTA: See, you can’t do that. But with the D.A.'s office, 
it can be done. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, but except for one thing, even if the D.A.’s 
. office extradites this guy — . 
DI FATTA: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: All right. That still don't stop the FBI. 
DI FATTA: No, I know it, but at least, though — as it, as . 
it is now — 
•GERVAIS: Do those people know’the government’s checking them. . 
. i 
DI FATTA: Yes, yes, yes. 
99still don't stop the FBI. 
DI FATTA: No, I know it, but at least, though — as it, as . 
it is now — 
•GERVAIS: Do those people know’the government’s checking them. . 
. i 
DI FATTA: Yes, yes, yes. 
99

--- PAGE BREAK ---FBI. 
DI FATTA: No, I know it, but at least, though — as it, as . 
it is now — 
•GERVAIS: Do those people know’the government’s checking them. . 
. i 
DI FATTA: Yes, yes, yes. 
99

--- PAGE BREAK ---

OEfiVAIS: All right, if ‘they know that, what do they care about 
another matter, another, you know this guy down here. 
DI FATTA: For this reason, if you bring them down here, they in 
my home town. 
* 
GERVAIS: Yeah, but you can only bring one guy, remember. 
DI FATTA: You can't bring the rest? 
GERVAIS: Hope. You can only bring the one guy that was here, 
in this state. 
DI FATTA: Now if he could get him down here, he don't want to go 
(( )) jail* you understand, that and what he'll do, 
he'll say okay, you (( )), we hooked, we got to give 
this man his money back, you understand? 
GERVAIS: I see. 
DI FATTA: Nov/ this is the idea of getting him down here. 
GERVAIS: All right. . ' .. 
DI FATTA: You follow rne? And if it would get him down here, 
let's say he does get parole or something ... you understand. 
Or whatever we can do, the idea we've got to get him down 
here! 
During the conversation DI FATTA said that the $150,000 
he was swindled out of was part of the $250,000 selling price TAC 
Amusement Company agreed to pay him for his pinball company (DI 
FATTA sold a coin machine route of more than 100 machines, which 
he operated from before 1962 under the name of New Orleans Coin 
Machine Company, to TAC Amusement Company on November 17, 1969). 
DI FAfTA also discussed with GERVAIS his participation in pinball 
payoffs at CALLERY'S instigation, with JOHN ELMO PIERCE as the 
"pickup man": 
GERVAIS: The old deal, the pinball deal. 
! . 
•DI FATTA: Oh, yeah, Elmo — 
GoRVAIS: When you was coming up with money every   
DI FATTA: Pierce, Pierce's was my contact. 
GERVAIS: Elmo Pierce. 
DI FATTA: Elmo Pierce. 
GERVAIS: Did he originally contact you? Didn't Callery — 
DI FAij.A. No, no, v/e had a meeting, you see, and Callery 
talked to me, you know, we, we got to do something, do 
so-and-so — • 
GERVAIS: Right, right. 
DI FATTA: All right.t you? Didn't Callery — 
DI FAij.A. No, no, v/e had a meeting, you see, and Callery 
talked to me, you know, we, we got to do something, do 
so-and-so — • 
GERVAIS: Right, right. 
DI FATTA: All right.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: Okay . And no you was irr from the beginning to the 
DI PATTA: Right to the end. ~ : 
GERVAIS: Til you got out of business. 
DI PATTA: Right. 
GERVAIS: Okay, so that's what I'll tell him now, your prorata 
was what a month? 
DI PATTA: Actually ( ) give them, uh, a 100, a week. 
GERVAIS: A hundred a week. 
DI PATTA: Yeah, ^00 a month. 
GERVAIS: 400 a month. To Elmo Pierce. 
DI PATTA: Right. 
GERVAIS: And Pierce ( ) Okay, so, 
well, Callery knows it then. 
DI FATTA: Definitely, definitely. 
GERVAIS: All right. ' ... 
DI PATTA:’ Oh, yeah. 
GERVAIS: Okay. . 
DI PATTA: ( ) 
GERVAIS: Cause they had two or three of those things going 
you see. Okay. So what you ought to do now — 
DI FATTA: In other words, I know the score. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, oh, I know you know the score. Right, okay. 
Now ... uh ... so, uh, Callery, well, you had the meeting 
with Callery personally, no bullshit in between. 
DI FATTA: No, this was all cut and dry. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, okay. 
DI PATTA: Cut and dry. 
GERVAIS: All right. Okay. 
DI FATTA: I was — 
GERVAIS: Mow — . • 
DI FATTA: I was one of the boys. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, I understand, but I mean, it was just you and 
Callery had the — • 
DI FATTA: Oh — 
GERVAIS: — understanding and then — 
DI PATTA: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: — he sent Pierce to you.

--- PAGE BREAK ---S: Yeah, I understand, but I mean, it was just you and 
Callery had the — • 
DI FATTA: Oh — 
GERVAIS: — understanding and then — 
DI PATTA: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: — he sent Pierce to you.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DI FATTA: Yeah", right.T.. . .. 
GERVAIS: Elmo" Pierce/'okay. ~ 
DI FATTA: Right. ’ ‘  
(57) On Hay 28, 1971, in Room 118 of the-Fontainebleau 
Kotor Hotel in New Orleans, Louisiana, PERSHING GERVAIS delivered 
to District Attorney JIM GARRISON, United States currency in the 
amount of $1,000 which had been furnished to him (GERVAIS) by 
Special Agents of the Intelligence Division, Internal Revenue 
Service, v/hich had been previously substituted for the one thousar. 
dollars ($1000) delivered to GERVAIS by HARBY MARKS' on May 3, 1971 
(see paragraph 53 above). The currency consisted of (20) fifty 
dollar bills with the following serial numbers: 
H 00373987 A 
L 04874107 A 
B 04625704 A 
F 00060986 A 
E 01444184 A 
G 00104035 A 
G 06135106 A 
•. K 00507463 A 
E 03263847 A 
F 00H2636H A 
K 00638805 A 
L 10974320 A 
G 02918734 A 
• . . C 07040717 A 
F 00273270 * 
B 02830944 A 
B 02567998 A 
G 03999802 A 
H 00008963 A 
’ G 03378585 A 
Part of the conversation that took place at this meeting 
was as follows: 
GERVAIS: I got a whole lot to say, not much time to say it, 
man, I been trying to get to you ever since Boasberg come 
to see me — 
GARRISON: Well, you don't know that, you don't know the trouble 
I've had, boy. ' • 
-GERVAIS: I know, you had trouble, I've had, too. 
GARRISON: ( . ) . ' 
GERVAIS: I'm so long carrying this (( )) thousand its 
driving me nuts. I'm scared to death I'm going to lose it. 
GARRISON: Huh. Well, that’s ( * ) 
* 
GERVAIS: First, now listen ... uh — 
GARRISON: You got, at least you got something started, huh? 
I 
GERVAIS: Yeah. Mow, wait, I got a couple of things I got to get 
out my mind. Nov;, let!s see, Boasberg ... np Boasberg, okay. 
GARRISON: I had a four page’letter from him about my book. 
i 
GERVAIS: From who, from Boasbe.rg? 
GARRISON: Boasberg. Send fifty bucks to the library, he did. 
Tmee, Boasberg ... np Boasberg, okay. 
GARRISON: I had a four page’letter from him about my book. 
i 
GERVAIS: From who, from Boasbe.rg? 
GARRISON: Boasberg. Send fifty bucks to the library, he did. 
Tm

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GERVAIS: Sent fifty dollars to the library? 
GARRIS OH: To the library and v/rote rne four pages about the book. 
I mean, it affected him that much. , 
GERVAIS: I be damned. ... Listen, uh, got a uttle problem 
Kith Soule, Soule wants to up the ante. 
GARRISON: Oh ( ) uh, cut that shit out, man, we — 
uh, leave well enough alone. 
GERVAIS: We11, okay, but I'll, I'll have to handle that, but 
■ he's giving rne a problem. 
GARRISON: All right, well, you tell him that — 
GERVAIS: I'll, I'll handle it. 
GARRISON: Just say a very wise head, that, uh, that you have 
a lot of confidence in, has a feel for the situation — 
GERVAIS: He says that now is not the time. 
GARRISON: You said it,.exactly! 
GERVAIS: All right. Now, let's see, not — Santi Di Fatta — 
GARRISON: The legislature's coming up -- uh, they got some * 
of the guys that keep pushing for that thing to come 
through, you know — * ,. 
GERVAIS: They do? they do? 
GARRISON: Oh, yeah, they keep pushing on it. 
GERVAIS: Listen, I know when I see Boasberg, you know Boasberg's 
due again on the first ... the first of the month — 
GARRISON: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: You know, just a few days he's got to come back again. 
GARRISON: He alone has sent me a thousand? 
GERVAIS: Oh, no, no, no. Him and, uh, Nims. 
GARRISON: Oh. • - 
GERVAIS: Uh, not Nims, him and TAC. Young TAC. 
GARRISON: Oh. 
GERVAIS: Ya see. 
GARRISON: That's good! 
GERVAIS: And don't forget it. Nov; — 
GARRISON: sut I, but I — don't get greedy, that's what always 
catches these bastards — t 
GERVAIS: I know — . 
GARRISON: Man — 
GERVAIS: Listen, let mo ask, let me, let me tell you, well, 
you making me forget some 'things —

--- PAGE BREAK ---at's what always 
catches these bastards — t 
GERVAIS: I know — . 
GARRISON: Man — 
GERVAIS: Listen, let mo ask, let me, let me tell you, well, 
you making me forget some 'things —

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GARRISON: I’m sorry, I’m, I'm bowed down on, at your feet 
and, In apology, you ass. 
GERVAIS: (laughter) 
GARRIS011: (( )) — 
GERVAIS: (laughter) Wait, wait, listen ... uh ... what about 
the legislature, are they going to do anything? 
GARRISON: No. 
GERVAIS: Then -- 
' GARRISON: Obviously they are well under control and were well 
^ taken care of last time because they can't really get 
started, but every day — 
GERVAIS: You haven't had to talk to the governor? 
GARRISON: Mo ~ 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
GARRISON: But I can tell you that every day somebody brings it 
up, but, uh, they, uh, don't get, uh, past, uh, they don't 
even get started on the vote — 
GERVAIS: Uh-huh. . 
GARRISON: So they took care of them pretty good last time, I 
mean, uh — ' • 
* ’ l' . 
• •*.*. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. 
GARRISON: You know, our boy who goes up there — 
GERVAIS: (cough) Yeah, yeah, yeah, Knickerbocker [an alias for 
JOHN ARUMS CALLERY]. 
GARRISON: He's the best. 
GERVAIS: Listen, Santo DiFatta came to see me, out of the blue 
now. He never did cone see me personally, even though he 
was in this ball game from the very beginning — 
GARRISON: Okay, I get you. * ( 
"GERVAIS: Never did, he always talked to — 
GARRISON: Remained significant. 
' GERVAIS: Well, yeah, he always talked to Callery — 
GARRISON: ( ) 
GERVAIS: — and he was always in the, he was always a con- 
tributor til he got out — all right. 
GARRISON: Right. 
» 
GERVAIS: Now, he got fleeced out a 150,000 dollars — 
•• GARRISON: What? . ’ i 
GERVAIS: I don't want, I don't want to bore you with all the 
details — 
. 10';

--- PAGE BREAK ---GARRISON: Right. 
» 
GERVAIS: Now, he got fleeced out a 150,000 dollars — 
•• GARRISON: What? . ’ i 
GERVAIS: I don't want, I don't want to bore you with all the 
details — 
. 10';

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GARRIS Oil: Okay. ‘ 
GERVAIS: It's interstate, it's out of St. Louis but the people 
came here ... and talked to him, one of the people and the 
second one came here and picked — 
$ 
GARRISON: And put a big story on him and he gave them a hundred 
fifty thousand — 
GERVAIS: A hundred fifty thousand — good faith money because 
they were going to give him a loan of a, about five or six 
million . ... Now, what he wants, he wants to know can he 
charge the ones who came here — 
GARRISON: Yeah, but I’m trying to figure out, I mean we may 
have to bullshit a little — 
GERVAIS: All right. 
GARRISON: Uh, in other words, you know what I mean — - 
GERVAIS: Yeah, well, all he wants is harrassment. 
GARRISON: Yeah. • 
GERVAIS: And get the guys — not only harrassment, but get them 
here, that way hefs got a chance of getting his money. 
GARRISON: It all depends on what he’ll say in the statement. 
GERVAIS: ‘He’ll say they was here — he’ll, let me, listen to 
the story, I don’t want to bore you with all the details 
but it’s good — 
GARRISON: After you hear his statement, draw up a rough state- 
ment for him, uh, uh, no, wait — 
GERVAIS: No, wait — 
GARRISON: Look at it — 
GERVAIS: Wait, let me say this to you — 
GARRISON: And I’ll tell you what elements are needed. 
GERVAIS: Wait, wait a minute, he’s got a file this thick by 
the Pinkerton Detective Agency and the whole layout and, 
uh, they are hot, they are absolute frauds, .and,.uh — 
"GARRISON: They came here and stole his money. 
GERVAIS: The government, the government’s about to make a 
case on the guys — 
GARRISON: Well, they stole his (( )) money then. 
GERVAIS: Yeah, oh, no, no doubt about it, a 150,000 — 
GARRISON: Well, (( )) there’s no problem — 
GERVAIS: All right, so — ‘ - . 
GARRISON: Tell him, uh — 
GERVAIS: And he said after he collects it, he will show his ' 
consid-, his happiness and consideration. i 
GARRISOM: Tell him, uh, that's cheats but even, uh, without 
Jfc, uh —ISON: Tell him, uh — 
GERVAIS: And he said after he collects it, he will show his ' 
consid-, his happiness and consideration. i 
GARRISOM: Tell him, uh, that's cheats but even, uh, without 
Jfc, uh —

--- PAGE BREAK ---GERVAIS: And he said after he collects it, he will show his ' 
consid-, his happiness and consideration. i 
GARRISOM: Tell him, uh, that's cheats but even, uh, without 
Jfc, uh —

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GSR VAIS: Yeah. .. 
GARRISON: I don11 forget! 
GERVAIS: Yeah, right. Okay. 
GARRISON: I mean, you know, I don't forget. He's helped me ’ 
or where the (( )) would I be? 
GERVAIS: And, uh, he wants to — 
GARRISON: I wouldn't be in this excellent shape I'm in now. 
GERVAIS: Yeah. Well, what should I do, tell him do see, uh 
— cause he's got to reach back for me this evening ... 
time is of the essence, he really needs — 
GARRISON: Time is of the essence, he should go — to the office 
and, uh go to Lou [LOUIS IVON, Chief Investigator in GARRI- 
SON'S office] and, uh, say I sent him. If he can't find 
Lou, find Red [STEVE BORDELON, an investigator in GARRISON'S 
office] and tell him I want a, a statement strong enough 
to -Justify extradition of two men who stole — 
GERVAIS: It'll be strong, it'll be strong. 
GARRISON: — who stole money from him. 
GERVAIS: Hundred fifty thousand. Tell them to check with you. 
GARRISON: Yeah. 
GERVAIS: Okay. 
GARRISON: But leave, uh, that activity out of it. 
GERVAIS: What activity? 
GARRISON: Uh, p, p-b, pinballs. 
(58) On June 18, 1971, STEVE BORDELON, an investi- 
gator in District Attorney JIM GARRISON'S office who is also • 
his driver, paid in cash for GARRISON'S eleven hundred dollar 
($1100) hotel bill at the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in New 
Orleans. From the money with which the above bill was paid, 
Special Agents of the Intelligence Division, Internal Revenue 
Service, retrieved thirteen ($650) of the twenty (20) fifty dollar 
bills which had been provided to PERSHING GERVAIS by Special 
Agents of the Intelligence Division and delivered to District 
Attorney JIM GARRISON by GERVAIS on May 28, 1971 (see paragraph 
(57) above). The serial numbers of the bills delivered to 
GARRISON by GERVAIS on May 28, 1971, and recovered’ from the 
Fontainebleau Motor Hotel after BORDELON paid GARRISON'S hotel 
bill, are as follows: j 
106The serial numbers of the bills delivered to 
GARRISON by GERVAIS on May 28, 1971, and recovered’ from the 
Fontainebleau Motor Hotel after BORDELON paid GARRISON'S hotel 
bill, are as follows: j 
106

--- PAGE BREAK ---f the bills delivered to 
GARRISON by GERVAIS on May 28, 1971, and recovered’ from the 
Fontainebleau Motor Hotel after BORDELON paid GARRISON'S hotel 
bill, are as follows: j 
106

--- PAGE BREAK ---

L 0487*1107 A 
G 02918734 A 
G 06135106 A 
E 03203347 A 
C 070 40717 A 
L 1097*1320 A 
K 00507^63 A 
B 02567998 A 
G 3378585 A 
B 04625704 A 
G 0 3999302 A 
G 0010*1035 A - 
B 028309*1*1 A 
The above thirteen (13) fifty dollar bills ($650) were re- 
trieved by Special Agents of the Intelligence Division, Internal 
Revenue Service, and retained as evidence. 
(59) At my direction, a Special Agent, Intelligence 
Division, Internal Revenue Service, Dallas, Texas contacted a 
Postal Inspector at Dallas, Texas, who determined from Postal 
Service records that as of June 21, 1971, the only Postal Se.rvice 
employee in Dallas, Texas, with the last name "SOULE" is Leroy 
J. Soule who resides at 303 Sharon Street, Irving, Texas. 
(60) At my further direction a Special Agent, Intelli- 
gence Division, Internal Revenue Service, has consulted the 
current telephone directory for Irving, Texas, and has determined 
that as of June 21, 1971, there are three banks in Irving, Texas: 
The Irving Bank and Trust Company, 111 East Irving Boulevard; 
First national Bank of Irving, Texas, *1*10 South Nursery Street; 
Southwest Bank and Trust Company of Irving, 2520 V?est Irving 
Boulevard. • . 
(6l) I have examined the United States Income Tax Returns 
m 
filed by FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., and his wife ELOISE L. SOULE, 
of New Orleans, Louisiana, for the calendar yea.rs 1965, 1966, 
1967, 1968 and 1969 and I can state that the only sources of 
reported income are the City of New Orleans, Uniform Allowances, 
i 
State of Louisiana, Fairgrounds Race Track and interest income. 
Based on the statements of FREDERICK A. SOULS, SR., as set forth 
in this affidavit and upon my examination of the joint federal 
income tax returns filed by FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., and ELOISE L. 
SOULE, I have determined that FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., has unlaw- 
fully, knowingly and willfully omitted income in substantial 
amounts from his United States Income Tax Returns for each of'the 
107SOULE, I have determined that FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., has unlaw- 
fully, knowingly and willfully omitted income in substantial 
amounts from his United States Income Tax Returns for each of'the 
107

--- PAGE BREAK ---mined that FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., has unlaw- 
fully, knowingly and willfully omitted income in substantial 
amounts from his United States Income Tax Returns for each of'the 
107

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lM5:196s- 1967>1968 - w». «« «hich o„itfed lnoome 
ttere 1. duo and Owing to eh. United States substantial additional 
tax, and subscribed each of theta returns undar tha penalties of 
perjury, each of which United States Income tax returns contains 
a written declaration that It Is made under penalties of perjury 
knowing the returns to be false as to a material matter, In vdo-’ ; 
,lation of Title 26, United States Code, Section 7201 - "Attempt to 
evade or defeat tax" and Section 7206(1, . "Fraud and false state- 
ar.d that tne safe deposit box rented by FREDERICK A. SOULE, 
. SR., at the Irving Bank and Trust Company, 111 East Irving Boulevard, 
Irving, Texas, contains approximately seventy-five thousand 
dollars (,75,000) which constitutes evidence and which is to be 
used as evidence of said violations. Further, based on the fore- 
going Information contained In this affidavit I have reason to 
believe and do believe that the heretofore mentioned currency was 
also used in violation of Article 90 of the Louisiana Criminal 
Code, R.S. 111,90 - "Gambling"; the Rev Orlians city Code, 1956, 
Seocon C,-a.2 "Same [Gambling generally - Defined] - Prohibited” 
and section 5-56.1(0, - "Authority of [City] Council; grounds 
for revocation or suspension [of city permits for retail sale of 
beverages of low alcoholic content ... where Illegal gambling is 
intentionally conducted on the premises); hearing"; Title 18,’ 
United States Code, Section 1511 - "Obstruction of state or ’ 
local law enforcement", Section 1955 - "Prohibition of Illegal 
gambling businesses", Section 1952 - "Interstate and foreign 
travel or transportation in aid of racketeering enterprises". 
Section 2 - "Principals", and Section 371 - "Conspiracy to commit 
offenses or to defraud United States", and that such currency 
constitutes evidence within the meaning of Title 18, United states 
Code, section 3103(a) - "Additional grounds for issuing warrant", 
and within the meaning of Warden v. Hayden. 387 U.S. 29t (1967), 
and is to be used as evidence In the trial of persons who have ’ 
violated the heretofore mentioned statutes. 
. 108ssuing warrant", 
and within the meaning of Warden v. Hayden. 387 U.S. 29t (1967), 
and is to be used as evidence In the trial of persons who have ’ 
violated the heretofore mentioned statutes. 
. 108

--- PAGE BREAK ---d within the meaning of Warden v. Hayden. 387 U.S. 29t (1967), 
and is to be used as evidence In the trial of persons who have ’ 
violated the heretofore mentioned statutes. 
. 108

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(£>2) On Tuesday, June 29, 1971, at approximately 
fl:15 p.m., HARBY S, MARKS, JR., an employee of LOUIS M. BOASBERG, 
met with PERSHING GERVAIS in Room 274 of the Fontainebleau Motor 
Hotel in New Orleans. MARKS gave GERVAIS an envelope containing 
two thousand dollars ($2000) in United States currency, a thousand 
of which was for delivery to District Attorney JIM GARRISON and 
a thousand of which was for delivery to Captain FREDERICK A. 
SOULE, SR., of the Hew Orleans Police Department. GERVAIS 
counted the money in MARKS' presence. Immediately upon MARKS' 
departure Special Agents of the Intelligence Division, Internal 
Revenue Service, who had been monitoring the conversation between 
MARKS and GERVAIS, entered Room 274 from adjoining Room 276. The 
two thousand dollars ($2000) passed to GERVAIS by MARKS was 
retrieved and retained as evidence. 
(63) On June 2<$, 1971, at approximately 8:33 p.m., 
PERSHING GERVAIS entered the front door of 4600 Owens Boulevard, 
\ , V 
.New Orleans, Louisiana, where he delivered to District Attorney 
JIM GARRISON an envelope containing United States currency in the 
amount of one thousand dollars ($1000) which had been furnished 
to him (GERVAIS) by Special Agents of the Intelligence Division, 
Internal Revenue Service, and which had been previously substi- 
tuted for GARRISON'S share of two thousand dollars ($2000) 
delivered by HARBY MARKS to GERVAIS earlier in the day (see above 
paragraph). The currency in the envelope delivered to GARRISON 
consisted of twenty (20) fifty (50) dollar bills with the following 
1 K: 
serial numbers: 
dU • v ;’j 
E 00401286 A 
B 00228906 
L 09047609 A 
‘rv* 
B 35462914 A 
H 00169547 A 
F 01636750 A 
i . ^ 
K 00555445 A 
A 03595293 A 
Q 02501629 A 
0 02992515 A 
K 01405237 A 
E 01563454 A 
C 01707737 A 
c 02751243 A » 
A 00320501 A 
H 03730080 A 
H 03512405 A 
L 03258794 A 
B 00539681 A 
L '02105915 A 
! 
10955445 A 
A 03595293 A 
Q 02501629 A 
0 02992515 A 
K 01405237 A 
E 01563454 A 
C 01707737 A 
c 02751243 A » 
A 00320501 A 
H 03730080 A 
H 03512405 A 
L 03258794 A 
B 00539681 A 
L '02105915 A 
! 
109

--- PAGE BREAK ---A 
Q 02501629 A 
0 02992515 A 
K 01405237 A 
E 01563454 A 
C 01707737 A 
c 02751243 A » 
A 00320501 A 
H 03730080 A 
H 03512405 A 
L 03258794 A 
B 00539681 A 
L '02105915 A 
! 
109

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GARRISON took the envelope from GERVAIS, unlocked 
the middle drawer of the desk in the first floor office (study) 
at his '1600 Owens Boulevard residence and put the envelope 
containing the money into the.drawer. GARRISON then closed 
the drawer and re-locked it. 
GERVAIS had been searched by Special Agents of the 
Intelligence Division, Internal Revenue Service, prior to being 
furnished with the above described envelope and money, and from 
the time GERVAIS was furnished with said envelope and money he 
was kept under constant observation by Special Agents until he 
entered GARRISON'S residence. Special Agents of the Intelligence 
Division monitored the entire conversation between GARRISON and 
GERVAIS while GERVAIS was Inside GARRISON'S residence. At 
approximately 8:^5 p.m.. Special Agents observed GERVAIS exit 
the front door of GARRISON'S residence. GERVAIS was kept under 
constant observation by Special Agents until he was again 
searched by them at which time GERVAIS no longer had on his 
person the envelope and money described above. 
The entrances and exits to Owens Boulevard where 
GARRISON'S residence is located have been under observation by 
Special Agents since GERVAIS departed the residence. The Special 
Agents have made periodic observation of the residence itself. 
A Special Agent reported to me at 1:50.a.m. on June 30, 1971 
that the residence of GARRISON is dark and that there is no 
sign of activity; that the two automobiles at the residence have 
not been moved since GERVAIS reached the residence the previous 
evening; and that no one has been observed entering or leaving 
the residence after the departure of GERVAIS.' 
(6*1) On June 29, 1971, between 11:00 p.m. and 11:15 
p.m., PERSHING GERVAIS talked by telephone from Room 21b of the 
Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in New Orleans to Captain FREDERICK A. 
SOULE, SR., New Orleans, Police Department, at the latter's home. 
110.m., PERSHING GERVAIS talked by telephone from Room 21b of the 
Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in New Orleans to Captain FREDERICK A. 
SOULE, SR., New Orleans, Police Department, at the latter's home. 
110

--- PAGE BREAK ---S talked by telephone from Room 21b of the 
Fontainebleau Motor Hotel in New Orleans to Captain FREDERICK A. 
SOULE, SR., New Orleans, Police Department, at the latter's home. 
110

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ar» advised him that HARDY S. MARKS, JR., had delivered his 
(SOULE'S) and Sergeant ROBERT M. FREY'S payoff due July 1, 1971, 
and arranged to meet SOULE the following morning, June 30, 1971, 
at 3:00 a.m. at the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel. Special Agents of 
the Internal Revenue Service had previously obtained twenty (20) 
j.Ii.ty (50) dollar bills in United States currency to be substituted 
for SOULE’S and FREY'S share of the two thousand dollars ($2000) * 
' ",‘u” i * , r , 1; 
^ delivered by HARBY S. MARKS, JR., earlier in the day (see para- 
graph (62) above). The bills to be passed to SOULE by GERVAIS 
on the morning of June 30, 1971, bear the following serial 
numbers: 
J. VSY* 
ev 
F 00023369 A 
L 05036269 A 
c 01483303 
K 00552614 A 
K 00563563 * 
C 02041051 
K 00740396 A 
K 005.40956 A 
G 00421632 A 
6 00168017 * 
E 10538276 
E 03941081 A 
08294569 A 
D 05019446 
B 05383867 
< 
A 
F 00079804 A 
B 09948788 
0 10211671 A 
B 00765324 A 
B 01338304 
'$*4 
. 
1 
■ •; 'I 
■' X 
>1 
K- 
’• •?.' 
• V 
; • 
>*8 
-V . V 
.. .4 . ' 
;h‘ >• £ ' l 
*. 
*-/*?. r. . 
(65) Your affiant has reason to believe and does believe 
that the individuals named in paragraph (3) above have been and now 
are committing offenses in violation of the laws of the United States 
of America, to wit, the.offenses set forth in paragraphs (A), (B), 
(C) and (D) below, and with respect to Captain FREDERICK A. 
SOULE, SR., the additional offenses set forth in paragraph (E) 
below: 
(A) The "Organized Crime Control Act of 1970", Title 18, 
United States Code, Section 1511 - "Obstruction of state or local 
law enforcement", in that from on and before October 15, 1970, to 
the present time, at and near New Orleans, Louisiana, in the 
Eastern Judicial District of Louisiana, JIM GARRISON, FREDERICK A. 
SOULE, SR., ROBERT N. FREY, LOUIS M. BOASBERG, HARBY S. MARKS, JR., 
^ ELMS, JR., LAWRENCE L. LAGARDE, ROBERT NIMS, JOHN ARUMS 
CALLER/, JOHN ELMO PIERCE, and other persons both known and unknown, 
did unlawfully, knowingly and willfully conspire to obstruct the 
emorcement of the criminal laws of the State of Louisiana and 
ordinances of the City of New Orleans, to wit, Article 90 of 
Louisiana Criminal Code, R.S. 1*1:90 - "Gambling”; the New 
Orleans City Code, 1956, Section 27-2.2 - "Same [Gambling 
generally - Defined] - Prohibited", and Section 5-58.1(c) - \ 
Authority of [City] Council; grounds for revocation or suspension 
n v * 
■ 
' ' • . •. I ' 
• V;\ 
1 
inction 27-2.2 - "Same [Gambling 
generally - Defined] - Prohibited", and Section 5-58.1(c) - \ 
Authority of [City] Council; grounds for revocation or suspension 
n v * 
■ 
' ' • . •. I ' 
• V;\ 
1 
in

--- PAGE BREAK ---[or city permits for r£.taii 
contmt where 1 Uegal raSblinS i*eYe™Bes of low alcoholic 
«oe premise:?]; hearing", with the^intentfc®nt^onaliy conducted on 
gambling businesses, to wit *h2%Srfc J t0 faeiHtate illegal 
Bally in-line gambling °P*ration and u«J of 
placed in public places for use bv*th^ llnes which are and were 
which payoffs are made for free unmf- general public and uoon 
one or more of the above rar Eame° accumulated bv the DIWOT* 
having ccmmitteS an 2cro?aactsP?r2??

th<?

^ Il&ST’ 
conspiracy, and one or mo£e of t£e Lth° obJecfcs of sa?d 
an official or employee elected e above named persons being 
the State of Louisia^anS a ^ofit^P?lntf£ 0r otherwise, of 
of Louisiana, namely JJGARRISON C^i S'J division of the State 
V ?£leans Parish, Louisiana, Captain*PRFnrnTov1n':rlcfc Attorney of 
V the New Orleans, Louisiana Peiif PREDERICK A.

SOULE, SR., of 
to the staff or Distrioi- *A^-°^ico ^ePartment who Is assirnpri 
tor and Sergeant ROBERT N.” FREv7 who ?^ISQ'
1 as an investiga- 
Squad of the New Orleans Louie W1°T,if Commander of the Vice 
xx&usrsiifrj JVri^rs-Tp^- 
nesses, all of which bSSLJwe?

LSiV1, a part of sald busi7 
2E?

contlni“’“a °><-a«°» reSnoJntSS*an- 
** V - 
United States CoclI^Se^ dn^o^^p1 Act of 1970", Title 18, 
gambling businesses", and Section"?

Pr°hibition of illegal 
at and near New Orleans LoS^aL 7 "Principals", ln that 
?onroUisiana’ JIM GARRISON^ PREDFRTOvnAthc Eastern Judicial District 
.

LOUIS M.

BOASBERG, HARBY S * E?

*?£ A\S0ULE> SR., ROBERT N.

FREY 
EA(^AREE > ROBERT NIMS, JOHN ARUNS°CALLERYN inin,?’ JR--* LAWRENCE ’ 
other persons, both known and 1 CALLERY, JOHN ELMO PIERCE, and 
ana willfully I fro„ SS Sd S»“nl»f»lly, knowingly 
t^me, conduct and aid and abet 2uGr 1970, to the Dresent 
gambling businesses in violation r in tile conc*uct or* illegal 
sLra°t
u;slana ana «rdiS.^sj°sh;fc“; ?a»s «<■ «>.--- PAGE BREAK ---

*?£ A\S0ULE> SR., ROBERT N. FREY 
EA(^AREE > ROBERT NIMS, JOHN ARUNS°CALLERYN inin,?’ JR--* LAWRENCE ’ 
other persons, both known and 1 CALLERY, JOHN ELMO PIERCE, and 
ana willfully I fro„ SS Sd S»“nl»f»lly, knowingly 
t^me, conduct and aid and abet 2uGr 1970, to the Dresent 
gambling businesses in violation r in tile conc*uct or* illegal 
sLra°t
u;slana ana «rdiS.^sj°sh;fc“; ?a»s «<■ «>. SS 
»hlch are placed in pStS *»■» Pinball 
and for which payoffs are madn nm r USe bbe Eeneral public 
latlon of Article 90 of Lom*?*011 Sames won by the players in vio 
’Gambling"; theLw OceansCit^eJS^L00-*18* R‘E- l‘So - 
COnTb^ns generally - Defined]*! P?ohihi?5rt« Sectlon 27-2.2 - "Same. - Authority of [City] Council- Pron3bited » and Section 5-58,1(c) 
[of city permits for retail’saieSofUb2v f°r revocatlon or susoension 
content ... where illegal gambit i 7eraees of low alcoholib 
the premises]; hearing", all of which ^?bentionally conducted on 
d/1Ve °r n,ore Persons Sho SJnduc EamblinG businesses 
h. * direct and own all or a Dart or «= > x^nance» rcanage, super- 
which businesses have been and'roma/ ?UCh buslnesses, and all or 
operation for a period lnne«e5ro
m?It
nhl
1;tJUSaytaMlall>' 
state^and foreLJ8traDeieorSJateS Code. Se'tIon 1952 - "Inter- 
enterprises \eaSd Section°2 ln a*d racketeering '' • 
before July 1, 1966, to the preset J^1S\ln that from on and 8 
Orleans, Louisiana, in the paqf time, at and near New 
ana, JIM GARRISON, FREDERICK A District of Louisi- 
BOASBERG, HAR3Y 3 MARJOK S0ULE> SR. , ROBERT N. FREY LOUT'? LAGARDE, ROBERT NIMS* JOHN“ARUNS*CA???PV* ?LMS* JR,> LAWRENCE L. fl^er.?er-sons both known and unknouiLE^ J0HN ELM0 PIERCE, and 
ana willfully use and cause to unlawfully, knowingly 
between the State of Illinois and th^drin<-lnterstate commerce 
inois and the Eastern Judicial District 
7#v:' 
• -s ,H* 
- 1. v* 
* -f- V 
i 
i m 
r V't 
. ■ • -• r r 
:4:
; 
' • V< ! ' 
■y} 
,1 
& r 
112

--- PAGE BREAK ---of Louisiana, transportation facilities of common carriers for 
the shipment of Bally in-line gambling type pinball machines.and 
parts therefor, with the intent to promote, manage, establish 
and carry on, and facilitate the promotion, management, estab- 
lishment and carrying on of an unlawful activity, to wit, the 
operation and use of Bally in-line gambling type pinball machines 
which are placed in public places for use by the general public 
and for which payoffs are made on games accumulated by the players 
in violation of Article 90 of Louisiana Criminal Code, R.S.

£i) ;9o - "Gambling", and thereafter the above named persons did 
perform and cause to be performed acts to promote, manage, 
establish, carry on, and facilitate the promotion, management, 
establishment and carrying on of said unlav/ful activity; and 
further that the above named persons did aid and abet each other 
in the above named pursuits and acts.

(D) Title 18, United States Code, Section 371 - "Conspiracy 
to commit offenses or to defraud United States", in that JIM 
GARRISON, FREDERICK A.

SOULE, SR., ROBERT N.

FREY, LOUIS M.

- 
BOASBERG, HARBY S.

MARKS, JR., JOHN J.

ELMS, JR., LAWRENCE L.MARKS, JR., JOHN J.

ELMS, JR., LAWRENCE L.

LAGARDE, ROBERT NIMS, JOHN ARUNS CALLERY, JOHN ELMO PIERCE, and 
other persons both known and unknown, did unlawfully, knowingly 
and willfully conspire to commit offenses against the United 
States, the State of Louisiana, and the City of New Orleans, to 
wit, Title 18, United States Code, Sections 1955, 1952 and 2, 
Article 90 of Louisiana Criminal Code, 1956, Section 27-2.2 
— "Same [Gambling generally - Defined] - Prohibited", and Section 
5-58.1(c) - "Authority of [City] Council; grounds for revocation 
or suspension [of city permits for retail sale of beverages of 
low alcoholic content ..• where illegal gambling Is Intentionally 
conducted on the premises]; hearing", said offenses more partic- 
ularly described in Paragraphs (.2) and (3) above, which are 
Incorporated herein, one or more of the above named persons having 
committed an act or acts to effect the objects of the conspiracy.

(E) The "Internal Revenue Code of 195*)", Title 26, United 
States Code, Section 7206(1), "Fraud and false statements', in 
that on or about February 6, 1966, January 21, 1967, February 23, 
1968, April 1, 1969, April 10, 1970, in the Eastern Judicial Dis- 
trict of Louisiana, FREDERICK A.

SOULE, SR., of Mew Orleans, 
Louisiana, did unlawfully, knowingly and willfully make and sub- 
scribe and cause to be made and subscribed documents verified by 
a written declaration that they were made under penalties of 
perjury, to wit.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(E) The "Internal Revenue Code of 195*)", Title 26, United 
States Code, Section 7206(1), "Fraud and false statements', in 
that on or about February 6, 1966, January 21, 1967, February 23, 
1968, April 1, 1969, April 10, 1970, in the Eastern Judicial Dis- 
trict of Louisiana, FREDERICK A. SOULE, SR., of Mew Orleans, 
Louisiana, did unlawfully, knowingly and willfully make and sub- 
scribe and cause to be made and subscribed documents verified by 
a written declaration that they were made under penalties of 
perjury, to wit. United States individual Income Tax Returns, 
Forms 10*10, for the calendar years 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968 and 
1969, which were filed with a proper official of the Internal 
Revenue Service, which said income tax'returns he did not believe 
to be true and correct as to every material matter in that at the 
time of the subscribing and filing of said Income tax returns, he 
then and there well knew and believed he had substantially more 
additional income for each of the said years than the amount re- 
ported on the said United States Income Tax Returns for those 
years. v . " > 
->. , **.i f 
A. J. .'WrS' 
M 
• e- 
•v 5 
$ 
• f 
:: • I 
'•jPfir 
' 
: 
; » 
• : t 
Jit
1' II 
'; ;• 1 
•?• 
'• -} V • 
".>v:1 .s: ■ 
i ' * 
Floyd D. -Moore, Ciller 
Intelligence Division 
Internal Revenue Service 
• ■ • . Subscribed and sworn before me this 30th day of June 9 1971 
, 
* . r " : l 
United States Magistrate 
- wWlfi 
• ; • ... >*• 
*; ♦; :* 
■ I 
113 
■ y ’ • ’ •*!•- '•••*• : >' *• ‘ * 
’ i '• t ;