THEBOGOMILS
OFBULGARIA
ANDBOSNIA
THE EARLY PROTESTANTS
OFTHEEAST

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BERSERKER
BOOKS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE BOGOMILS
OF
BULGARIA AND BOSNIA

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS.
SECTION I.
PAGE
Introduction.—The Armenian and other Oriental churches 13
SECTION II.
Dualism and thephantastic theory of our Lord’s advent
in the Orientalchurches.—The doctrines theyrejected.
Theyheldtobaptism...
18
SECTIONIII.
Gradual decline of the dualistic doetrine.-The holy and
exemplarylivesofthePaulicians....
22
SECTION IV.
The Oruelty and bloodthirstiness of the Empress Theo-
dora.—The free state and city of Tephricé....
25
SECTION V.
The Sclavonic development of the Catharist or Paulician
churches.—Bulgaria, Bosnia, and Servia its principal
seats..Euchites,Massalians,and Bogomils.......
27
SECTION VI.
The Bulgarian Empire and its Bogomil czars....
30
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS.
SECTION VII.
PAGE
A Bogomil congregation and its worship.—Mostar,on the
Narenta...
32
SECTION VIII.
The Bogomilian doctrines and practices.—The Credentes
and Perfecti..Werethe Credentesbaptized?.........
37
SECTION IX.
Theorthodoxyof the GreekandRomanchurchesrather
theoiogicai than practicai.—Fali of the Buigarian Em-
pire.......
43
SECTION X.
The Emperor Alexius Comnenus and the Bogomil Elder
Basil.-The Aleciad of the Princess Anna Comnena.
SECTION XI.
The martyrdom of Basii.—The Bogomil churches rein-
forcedbytheArmenianPauiiciansunder theEmperor
John Zimisces...
50
SECTION XII.
The purity of life of the Bogomiis.—Their doctrines and
practices.-Theirasceticism...
54
SECTION XIII.
The missionary spirit and iabors of the eiders and Per-
fecti.The entire absenceofanyhierarchy.............
58

--- PAGE BREAK ---s.—Their doctrines and
practices.-Theirasceticism...
54
SECTION XIII.
The missionary spirit and iabors of the eiders and Per-
fecti.The entire absenceofanyhierarchy.............
58

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS.
5
SECTION XIV.
PAGR
The Bogomil churches in Bosnia and the Herzegovina.-
Their doctrines more thoroughly scriptural than those
of the Bulgarian churches.—Bosnia as a banate and
kingdom.......
60
SECTION XV.
Bosnian history continued..The good Ban Culin........
63
SECTION XVI.
The growth of the Bogomil churches under Culin.—Their
missionary zeal and success.....
66
SECTIONXVII.
The authorities from whose testimony this narrative is
drawn.Its thorough corroboration by a cloud of wit-
nesses....
68
SECTIONXVIII.
The era of persecution.The crusades against the Bogo-
mils.—The Archbishop of Colocz...
72
SECTION XIX.
Further crusades.—The hostility of Pope Innocent IV.—
More lenient, but not more effective, measures..
76
SECTION XX.
The establishment of the Inquisition in Bosnia.—Letter
of Pope JohnXXII.—Previous testimony of enemies
to the purity of the lives of the Bogomils....
78
1*

--- PAGE BREAK ---easures..
76
SECTION XX.
The establishment of the Inquisition in Bosnia.—Letter
of Pope JohnXXII.—Previous testimony of enemies
to the purity of the lives of the Bogomils....
78
1*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
CONTENTS.
SECTION XXI.
PAGE
Further persecution.A lull in its fury during the over-
lordshipof theSerbian CzarStephen Dushan.—The
reignoftheTvart-kodynasty.....
81
SECTION XXII.
The Reformation in Bohemia and Hungary a Bogomil
movement.—Renewalofpersecution underKingsSte-
phen Thomas and Stephen Tomasevi.—The Pobra-
timtsvo....
85
SECTION XXIII.
Overtures to the sultan.—The surrender of Bosnia to
Mahomet II.under stipulations.—His base treachery
andfaithlessness.—Thecruel destructionandenslave-
mentoftheBogomils ofBosnia and,twentyyears later,
ofthoseoftheDuchyofHerzegovina.
89
SECTION XXIV.
The Bogomils not utterly extinguished.—Their influ-
ence on society,literature,and progress in the Middle
Ages.—Dante,Milton,etc.—ThePuritans.—Conclusion.92
APPENDIX I.
A liturgy of the Toulouse Publicans in (probably) the
SixteenthCentury.......
..103
APPENDIX II.
Were the Paulician and Bogomil churches Baptist
churches?......
.107
NOTES...
.119

--- PAGE BREAK ---A liturgy of the Toulouse Publicans in (probably) the
SixteenthCentury.......
..103
APPENDIX II.
Were the Paulician and Bogomil churches Baptist
churches?......
.107
NOTES...
.119

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PREFACE.
THEbelief thattherehadexisted through
all the ages since the Christianera churches
whichadhered strictlyto scriptural doctrines
andpracticechurcheswhich were the true
successorsinfaithandordinancesofthose
foundedbytheapostles,andhadneverpaid
homagetoGreekpatriarch orRomanpope
was firmlyimpresseduponthemindsof the
Baptist church-historians of thefirst fifty
years of the present century.They believed
also,that these churcheswere essentiallyBap-
tistintheir character,andsome ofthemmade
extensiveresearchesamongtheworksofsecu-
lar andecclesiastical historiansof theearly
centuries to findtangible proofs to sustain
their conviction.
They were partially, but
only partially, successful,for the historians of
thoseperiodswereecclesiasticsofeither the
Greek or Roman churches,who added,in
most cases, the bitterness of personal spite,
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---but
only partially, successful,for the historians of
thoseperiodswereecclesiasticsofeither the
Greek or Roman churches,who added,in
most cases, the bitterness of personal spite,
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
PREFACE.
from their discomfiture by the elders of these
churches, to their horror at any departure
from papal or patriarchal decrees.
For the last twenty-five or thirty years the
ranks of the Baptist ministry have been so
largely recruited from Padobaptist churches
—all of which had their origin, confessedly,
either at the Reformation or sincethat many
of our writers have been disposed to hold in
abeyance their claims to an earlier origin, and
to say that it was a matter of no consequence,
but there wasno evidenceattainable of the
existence of Baptist churches between the
fourth and the eleventh or twelfth centuries.
To the writer it has seemed to be a matter
of great consequence to be able to demonstrate
that there were churches of faithful witnesses
for Christ who had never paid their homage
or given in their allegiance to the anti-Chris-
tian churches of Constantinople or Rome.
Even in idolatrous Israel, in the reign of its
worst king, Ahab, the despairing prophet was
told by Jehovah, “Yet I have left me seven
thousand in Israel, all the knees which have
not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which
hath not kissed him." Was it possible that

--- PAGE BREAK ---et was
told by Jehovah, “Yet I have left me seven
thousand in Israel, all the knees which have
not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which
hath not kissed him." Was it possible that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PREFACE.
9
among these many millions of misguided souls
who had given themselves over to the delu-
sions of the Greek and Roman churches, there
was not at least. as large a proportion, who
had not been partakers in the sins of these
anti-Christian churches, but had washed their
robes and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb?
It was true that both the Greek and Ro-
man churches had put the brand of heresy
on every sect which had dared to deny their
dogmas; but might it not be that beneath
that brand could be discerned the linea-
ments of the Bride of Christ?
My attention was first called to the possi-
bility of discovering more than had hitherto
been known in regard to these early Protest-
ants of the Eastern lands some two years
since, while engaged in some studies for a
Work on the Eastern Question. In the Chris-
tian churches of Armenia, Bulgaria, and Bos-
nia I believed were to be found the churches
which from the ffth to the fifteenth century
were the true successors of the churches found-
ed by the apostles, in all matters of faith and
practice. The “Historical Review of Bosnia,”"

--- PAGE BREAK ---from the ffth to the fifteenth century
were the true successors of the churches found-
ed by the apostles, in all matters of faith and
practice. The “Historical Review of Bosnia,”"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
PREFACE.
contained in the second edition of Mr. Arthur
J. Evans' work on Bosnia in 1876, first opened
my eyes to the wealth of the new historical
discoveries thus brought to light in Bosnia
and Bulgaria. Mr. Evans is a member of the
Church of England, an eminent scholar, thor-
oughly devoted to archaological investigations,
and had made very patient and successful re-
searches on this very subject. While he had
explored the libraries of Mostar and Serajevo,
as well as of the Greek and Roman Catholic
convents throughout Bosnia and the Herze-
govina, I found that a considerable portion
of his facts were gleaned from two recent his-
torical works—Herr Jirecek's Geschichte der
Bulgaren (Berlin, 1876), and M. Hilferding's
Serben und Bulgaren, originally published in
the Sclavonic language, but translated into
German in 1874. Jirecek is a Bohemian, and,
I believe, a Roman Catholic, but a man of
great fairness. Hilferding is a Russian, and
attached to the Greek Church.1
Bothtreat
largely (as they are under the necessity of
doing) of the Bogomils, as these early Chris-
tians were called, since their history is very
largely the history of the two nations for five

--- PAGE BREAK ---ely (as they are under the necessity of
doing) of the Bogomils, as these early Chris-
tians were called, since their history is very
largely the history of the two nations for five

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PREFACE.
11
or six centuries. Both writers give very mi-
nute descriptionsof the faith and life of these
people, and most of the historical facts given
in the following pages are derived from them.
But wherever Mr. Evans could find anything
in theearly secular or ecclesiasticalwritersof
the Dark Ages or medieval times bearing on
this subject hehascarefullygleaned it,even
though itwerebutasinglesentence.
This
has been done, on his part, solely from a loye
ofarchaological research,forhe hasevident-
ly no special sympathy with thepeople about
whom he writes;but he is entitled to the
praiseofmanifestingajudicialfairnessas
betweenthemandtheirpersecutors.
Myownlaboronthesubjecthasnotbeen
confinedtotheverificationofMr.Evans
quotations and references,but has extended
in certaindirections whichhe had leftun-
touched, such as a careful study of all those
affiliatedsectswhoseconnectionwiththeBo-
gomils he had demonstrated, and the tracing
up, so far as possible, all hints in regard to
theirspecialtenets.
.AmongtheseI have
found,often in unexpected quarters,the most
conclusive evidence that these sects were all,

--- PAGE BREAK ---cing
up, so far as possible, all hints in regard to
theirspecialtenets.
.AmongtheseI have
found,often in unexpected quarters,the most
conclusive evidence that these sects were all,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
PREFACE.
during their earlier history, Baptists, not only
in their views on the subjects of baptism and
the Lord's Supper, but in their opposition to
Pedobaptism, to a church hierarchy, and to
any worship of the Virgin Mary or the saints,
and in their adherence to church independ-
ency and freedom of conscience in religious
worship. In short, the conclusion has forced
itself upon me that in these “Christians " of
Bosnia, Bulgaria, and Armenia we have an
apostolic succession of Christian churches, New
Testament churches, and Baptist churches, and
that as early as the twelfth
hcenturythese
churches numbered a converted, believing
membershipas
large as that of the Baptists
throughout the world to-day. I have chosen
in the narrative to present only the facts ascer-
tained, without making any deductions from
them. They are so plain that the wayfaring
man can comprehend their significance.
In
the Appendix (II.) I have endeavored to
summarize these facts and to show their sig-
nificance to Baptists. I now offer the whole
as a humble contribution to Baptist church-
history.
L. P. B.
BR00KLYN, N. Y., February 1, 1879.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ize these facts and to show their sig-
nificance to Baptists. I now offer the whole
as a humble contribution to Baptist church-
history.
L. P. B.
BR00KLYN, N. Y., February 1, 1879.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE BOGOMILS
OF
BULGARIA ANDBOSNIA.
SECTIONI.
THE ARMENIAN AND OTHER ORIENTAL CHURCHES.
THEwarswhichfrom timeimmemorialhave
devastated thefairlandsofEasternEuropeand
WesternAsiahave had inmost casesareligious
basis. At first,in pagan times, the worshippers
ofthegodsof thehills attacked the adherents
of the gods of the valleys or of the plains;later,
thedevotees.ofBelorBaalmadewarupon the
worshippers of theonelivingand trueGod.
WhenChristianitybecame thereligion of the
state,its emperors and generals turned their
arms against the pagan Avars and Bulgarians,
or,full as oft,upon those Christian sectswhich
fromtheirpurerworshipweredenominatedher-
eticsbytheorthodox.Thisconditionofwar-
fare on religious grounds has continued through-
2
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---or,full as oft,upon those Christian sectswhich
fromtheirpurerworshipweredenominatedher-
eticsbytheorthodox.Thisconditionofwar-
fare on religious grounds has continued through-
2
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
EARLY PROTESTANTS OF THE EAST.
out all the centuries of the Christian era, even
down to our own time, sometimes assuming the
form of a fierce and bloody persecution against
the protesting churches who refused obedience
to the Roman or the Greek Church,and some-
times raging
gin terrible confict against the
Turk. Even in the war recently in progress,
the cross of the Greek Church was arrayed
against the Mohammedan crescent.
It is, however, only one division of this series
of religious conflicts which specially concerns
us—that which relates to the power claimed
by the self-styledorthodox Greek and Roman
churches to put down, by force and bloodshed,
every form of faith which they were pleased to
denounce as heresy.
No sooner was the Christian church, by the
conversion of Constantine, relieved from the
pressure of persecution, than its bishops and
leaders began to magnify what it had previously
regarded as trifing errors into heretical dog-
mas which threatened not only the peace,
but the very existence, of Christianity. The
Bishop of Rome, the Bishop of Alexandria,
the Bishop of Carthage, and the Bishop of
Nicomedia were ranged against each other in

--- PAGE BREAK ---peace,
but the very existence, of Christianity. The
Bishop of Rome, the Bishop of Alexandria,
the Bishop of Carthage, and the Bishop of
Nicomedia were ranged against each other in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EARLY PROTESTANTS OF THE EAST. 15
hostile array; council succeeded council; the
emperor sided now with Arius and now with
Athanasius—first with the iconoclasts and
next with the makers and worshippers of
images; and in a few years the followers of
the Prince of peace were wielding the weapons
of a carnal warfare against each other. These
hostilities and conflicts continued through the
following centuries, until they culminated in
the separation of the two bodies in the East
and in the West, since known as the orthodox
Greek and the Roman Catholic churches.
But these two churches, differ as they might,
had yet many points in common. Their great-
est differences were that the Greek Church ad-
hered somewhat more strictly to the early
forms of the primitive and apostolic church in
its ordinances and ritual, and that it did not
recognize the primacy of the Bishop of Rome.
Both paid divine honors to the Virgin Mary;
both addressed their prayers and homage
tosaintsand
angels; both used
pictures,
icons, statues, and crucifixes in their worship;
and both denounced as heretics all who dif-
fered from them in belief. By both, also, the
churches of the remote East were regarded as

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns, statues, and crucifixes in their worship;
and both denounced as heretics all who dif-
fered from them in belief. By both, also, the
churches of the remote East were regarded as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
EARLY PROTESTANTS OF THEEAST.
fountains of heresy.The Roman Church con-
sidered them asguiltyofall thesevenmortal
sins,and the Greek Church proclaimed,that
for those who continued in these heretical
doctrines there was no forgiveness in this
world nor in the world to come.
Andwhatwere these fearful heresies?The
positive doctrines of their belief arehard to
trace, since they are only recorded in the ac-
cusations of their bitterest enemies. They
probably differed considerably in different
periods. There had come down to most of
these churches fromthe old Aryan inhabit-
antsofPersiasomeofthedogmaswhichhad
distinguished them, surrounded as they were
byidolaters,in theirmaintenance for more
than three thousandyears of a purely theis-
ticworship.
These Aryans,like their de-
scendants, the Parsees of the present day,
held to two principleswhichgoverned this
world and all worlds—the good principle,
called also Ormuzd,and the evil principle
or spirit,which they named Ahriman.Both
theybelieved tobe subordinate to theGreat
First Cause,who dwelt in the light unap-
proachable and had delegated nearly equal

--- PAGE BREAK ---evil principle
or spirit,which they named Ahriman.Both
theybelieved tobe subordinate to theGreat
First Cause,who dwelt in the light unap-
proachable and had delegated nearly equal

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EARLY PROTESTANTS OF THE EAST. 17
power to these two spirits. There is room
for admiration that these thoughtful sages,
without the light of revelation,should have
approached so close to the truth as they did,
and yet the great problem of the entrance of
sin into the world, and the self-evident fact of
its continued existence and its terrible effects,
might well, in the absence of purer light, have
led them to this belief in dual divinities.
When the religion of Jesus Christ was re-
vealed to these Orientals by the preaching of
the apostles and their followers and the dif-
fusion of a few manuscript copies of the Gos-
pels, and, later, of the other books of the New
Testament, it is not surprising that they should
have recognized in Jesus the Ormuzd of their old
faith, and in Satan their evil spirit, Ahriman,
and, for want of better instruction, should have
attributed to them the qualities, powers, and
functions which their reformers and prophets
had assigned to the two prineiples; nor that
some of the other fictions of their older faith,
so dear to Oriental minds, should have clung
to their new doctrines, through the slow-moving
centuries, till they were displaced by the clearer
light of Revelation.
2*
B

--- PAGE BREAK ---der faith,
so dear to Oriental minds, should have clung
to their new doctrines, through the slow-moving
centuries, till they were displaced by the clearer
light of Revelation.
2*
B

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18
EARLY PROTESTANTSOFTHEEAST.
SECTION II.
DUALISM AND THE PHANTASTIC THEORY OF OUR
LORD'S ADVENT IN THE ORIENTAL CHURCHES.-
THE DOCTRINES THEY REJECTED.—THEY HELD
TOBAPTISM.
As a matter of history, we find that most
of the Oriental churches, and indeed some of
those of Asia Minor which had been founded
by the apostles, were permeated with these
dualistic doctrines, though in different de-
grees. It would not be far from the truth
were we to say that there have been traces of
it among the most evangelical churches of all
the ages since, even down to our own time.
As to thedoctrines which theydid not be-
lieve, the evidence is more satisfactory. They
honored the Virgin Mary as the mother of our
Lord according to the fesh—though there were
different opinions even on this point—-but they
refused any worship to her as a divine or super-
human being.
True to their old Aryan train-
ing, they repudiated alike picture and icon,
statue and image, crucifix and crosier. They
recognized no bishop or high priest; their el-
ders served them in their simple ritual, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng, they repudiated alike picture and icon,
statue and image, crucifix and crosier. They
recognized no bishop or high priest; their el-
ders served them in their simple ritual, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EARLYPROTESTANTSOFTHE EAST.
19
expounded tothemthe word of God.The
initiatory rite of theirfaithhasbeen to some
extent a matter of dispute; with nearly all
there is ample evidence that it was, as in the
Greek Church, an immersion in water, though
probably not a trine immersion, and without
the anointing and other ceremonies.
But many of their enemies, overlooking the
fact that all their members received baptism
on their admission into the church, because it
was not attended vith the ceremonials and ad-
juncts of the Greek Church, have spoken of
their ceremony of ordaining and setting apart
their elders and “perfect ones " as a spiritual
baptism, called by them consolanentum, and ad-
ministered by the simple imposition of hands.
The denial of their practice of water-baptism
is due solely to this misapprehension. T
The
strictness and ascetic character of their doc-
trines led them to prohibit all architectural
display. Their churches were simple, plain,
barn-like buildings, without tower, steeple, or
bell. They knew nothing of nave, transept,
chancel, or altar.
The bare walls of the room
had no ornaments; rude seats accommodated
the worshippers; a table covered vith a white

--- PAGE BREAK ---or
bell. They knew nothing of nave, transept,
chancel, or altar.
The bare walls of the room
had no ornaments; rude seats accommodated
the worshippers; a table covered vith a white

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
EARLY PROTESTANTS OFTHE EAST.
cloth, on which lay a copy of the New Testa-
ment, or, if they were unable to obtain this,
the Gospel of St. John, sufficed instead of
pulpit for their elder.?
At frst, with but limited instruction, and
with only a small portion of the New Testa-
ment in their hands, there is no reason to
doubt that their doctrinal views, whether
measured by the standard of the Christi-
anity of those times or of our own, were in
some respects heretical.
.Theleadersofthe
Paulicians in the ffth and sixth centuries
are reputed to have held these opinions:
that God had two sons; that the elder, whom
they called Satanael, had been at frst en-
dowed with all the attributes of deity and
was chief among the hosts of heaven; that by
him, through the power bestowed upon him
by the Father, the material bodies of the
universe—suns, moons, and stars—were cre-
ated, but, in consequence of his ambition and
rebellion, he was driven from heaven, and
took with him the third part of the heavenly
host. Then, they said, God bestowed the
power on his younger son, Jesus, whom he
made the heir of all worlds, and gave him

--- PAGE BREAK ---heaven, and
took with him the third part of the heavenly
host. Then, they said, God bestowed the
power on his younger son, Jesus, whom he
made the heir of all worlds, and gave him

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EARLY PROTESTANTS OF THE EAST. 21
the power over all spiritual intelligences.
Satanael had created our earth, but Jesus
breathed into man the breath of life, and he
became a living soul. Thenceforth there was
a constant confict between Satanael and Jesus.
The former compassed the death of thelatter
after his assumption of the human form and
nature, but by this very act Satanael secured
his own defeat, for Jesus rose from the dead.
the conqueror over his great enemy and all
his foes, and was received into heaven in
triumph, having redeemed by his death all
who should trust in him. We see in this
system of doctrinewhich it is only right to
say comes to us through their enemies—many
traces of the old dualistic theory of the good
and the evil spirits, but the whole is illumined
by a brighter and better hope—that of the
speedy triumph of the right and the good—
than ever cheered the heart of Zartusht or
gleamed from the pages of the Zendavesta.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s illumined
by a brighter and better hope—that of the
speedy triumph of the right and the good—
than ever cheered the heart of Zartusht or
gleamed from the pages of the Zendavesta.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
EARLY PROTESTANTSOFTHE EAST.
SECTIONIII.
GRADUAL DECLINE OF THE DUALISTIC DOCTRINE.—
THE HOLY AND EXEMPLARY LIVES OF THE PAUL-
ICIANS.
As the years gathered into decades and the
decades into centuries, and the number of 
copies of the Scriptures was multiplied and
carefully studied by these diligent and simple-
minded inquirers after truth, their views of
the divine revelation became clearer,their
doctrines more scriptural, while their lives
were as pure as ever. Well might they as-
sume the title of Cathari—" the pure "—from
that beatitude of our Lord which they had
from the first made their motto and their rule
of life:“Blessed are the pure in heart; for
they shall see God." Even their bitterest
enemies and persecutors could not deny their
exemplary character, however strongly they
might denounce their want of reverence for
images and icons, and their abhorrence of
Mariolatry. More than once their foes, even
in the act of persecution, were, like St. Paul,
converted to their faith and became their
leaders. and martyrs. But their pure and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce of
Mariolatry. More than once their foes, even
in the act of persecution, were, like St. Paul,
converted to their faith and became their
leaders. and martyrs. But their pure and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EARLY PROTESTANTS OF THE EAST. 23
blameless lives did not in the least degree
protect them from cruel persecutions. They
had become very numerous among the Ar-
menians and the inhabitants of the Caucasus
region, and as early as the beginning of the
sixth century a considerable number of their
leading menhad sealed their testimony at
the stake, victims of weak or dissolute em-
perors goaded to persecution by the persua-
sions or threats of ambitious and unscrupu-
lous bishops.
Occasionally, when the emperor happened
to be himself an iconoclast, or destroyer of
the statues, images, icons, sculptures, and bas-
reliefs which aboundedinall the churches
which had sanctioned the Eastern or Greek
ritual, there would be a temporary lull in the
persecution, as was the case when Constantine
V. ("Copronymos,” as the monks derisively
called him) ascended the throne in 741, and
signalized his acceptance by  a general  on-
slaught upon the statues and pictures of the
Greek churches; but even he so far sympa-
thized with the general hostility to the “ Paul-
icians "—the name which their enemies then
gave them—that he transplanted a large col-