Mr Harold Weisberg,
Dear Friend:
Please note the condition of the envelope in which
you in exactly the torn open condition in which it reached me.
The book fell free of the envelope when I merely held it up by its
twoleftcorners.
I wonder at the sloppiness of those g.d.PoD Inspectors who do this
tectablejobofit。
I wonder ifx their shrunken peanut minds think
they accomplish anything by such clumsy snooping.
This is my first
several such incidents in the Joe McCarthy days was derived from just
such an incident - or rather several of them -over a period of six
months or so。
This sort of thing only confirms me in the belief the encdosed Ram-
parts editorial was right.
As our_own Barry_Goldwater Says in ef-
John HLatta
Copies mailed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

UTE 8,FREDERICK, MD. 21701
pprassad over 10 years..Here for the first lme:
WHITEWASHIZ
assassination
UFK
transcript
8238E.hs s Or.
Scettsdnle,Ari3
CRET
85251
ASSASSINATIONOF
sidentJohnF.Kennedy
by Harold Weisberg
LEaAL AALYss sw JIm'Lesar
ECIAL FOURTH CLASS RATE · BOOK
ETURNPOSTAGEGUARANTEED

--- PAGE BREAK ---ipt
8238E.hs s Or.
Scettsdnle,Ari3
CRET
85251
ASSASSINATIONOF
sidentJohnF.Kennedy
by Harold Weisberg
LEaAL AALYss sw JIm'Lesar
ECIAL FOURTH CLASS RATE · BOOK
ETURNPOSTAGEGUARANTEED

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WHERE ANGELS_FEAR TO TREAD!
scared"（as did PresidentTohnson before him)with appointment of
his hand-picked "yellow Ribbon Rockefeller-Reagan Cover Up Com-
(CIA)ofworli-wide ill fame.
Winiy Rocky modestly proclaims he has exactly the "ripht ex-
perience"toaskall the "rirht questions"of CIA officials and/or
employees wno have always been under instructions to_deliberately
lie-even under oath -to investigatcrs when they.deemedit neces-
sary to prevent identification of CIA employees or prevent the dis-
closure of CIA activities.
This，of course,_is wonderful-for
CIA - since if the Rockefeller claim to inteiligence expertise is
true, it proves windy Rocky is exactly the right man who will co-
questions" which officials of the CIA.might not wish to answer,but
which the American public should know.
Perhaps Windy Rocky does have secret knowledre of the CIa's.in-
ner workinrsthat he is not tellinkl why else his own glorifi-
cation of his selection for this iuicy "cover up"assifnment ?
Has President Ford's prior experience as a proud member of the
former "Yellow Ribbon Warren-ford Cover Up Commission" charged by
President Johnson with_investiration of the assassination of Presi-
dent John F Kennedy,alerted him to the political danpers of such
investirations by_impartial and independent-minded persons not di-
rectly under the President's thumb ?
CovER UP the Assassination of a President!
COvER UP the Crim-
inal Conspiracy of a President and others in the Watrrrate episode!
CovER UP OIA's indicated conspiracy in both the forepoing,as well
office arainst foreirn xovernments_and against the American people
directly!
ALL WIOH WHITE HOUSE BLESSING!
Presumably President Gerala R Fore, posinf as a proud and well-
informed former member of the Yellow Ribbon Warren-ford Cover Up
Commission,knows full well that in the "top secret"meetings of
that commission, no effort was ever made to critically review and
examine the evidence available to it，but instead concerned itself
only with concoctinr a plausable but fictitious theory of the assas-
the American people and discourage further investifation by others.
desperation and imitative personnl rush (a la Johnson)to "cover
up" intrigues_（both foreign and 6omestic）by the CIA,with his newly
appointed Yellow Ribbon Rockefeller-Reagan Cover Up Commission ?
Will all the nation's Plutocrats Assembled of our Know Bull Fourth
Estate,who not so long aro subsidized the condensed version of the
Official Report of the Yellow Ribbon Warren-ford Cover Up Commission
paper offices throuphout the country,once again delupe the Ameri-
mined findinrs of President Pord's Yellow Ribbon Rockefeller-Reagan
Cover Up Commission ?
Aremarkable analysis of our times and prophecy based thereon,
appeared on the_editorial page of Ramparts marazine in i97o.
It
concluded as follows:
"The system cannot be revitalized; it must be overthrown.As
humanely as possible, but by any means necessary."
Is
-Jonn H Latta，C.P.A.（Ret.)page of Ramparts marazine in i97o.
It
concluded as follows:
"The system cannot be revitalized; it must be overthrown.As
humanely as possible, but by any means necessary."
Is
-Jonn H Latta，C.P.A.（Ret.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---azine in i97o.
It
concluded as follows:
"The system cannot be revitalized; it must be overthrown.As
humanely as possible, but by any means necessary."
Is
-Jonn H Latta，C.P.A.（Ret.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONSPIRACY-IN OPEN DEFIANCE OF_THE LAW!
May 6，1974
Rep Morris Udall,
119 Cannon Office Bldg.,
The Capitol,
Washington,D.C.-20515
Sir: The purpose of this_memorandum is to directly_call toyour
attention,the unsavory_legal implications of the Billy Graham
Crusade of May 5-12,1974; now being unlawfully held on Fovern-
ment （state owned) property utilizing the Sun Devil Stadium con-
nected with Arizona State University in Tempe,_Arizona.
This has been _promoted and staged by a DFLIBFRATE CRIMINAL
CONSPIRAOY TO SUBvERT THE LAw IN ARIZONA, on the part of at least
the following identified conspirators and their supoorters:
ARIZONA BOARD OF_RFGENTS: who despite prior legal aevice and
knowledre that their subseauent aotion was illeral,completely
reversed their oririnal and leral decision upon openly exerted
al Gary Nelson, and others unknown; to OPENLY SUBvrR THP LAW in
ities.
GOvERNOR JAOK WILLIAMS: who publiely attacked the lawful decis-
of permissive use of public property for relipious activities.
ATTORNEy OENERAL DARy NaLSON: who ostensibly "researehed" the
lew to arrive at a conclusion based only upon a sinrle decisicn
in Florida which upheld the unlawful course the Governor was de-
termined to pursue, completely disrerardinr.leral decisions in
numerous other states and in the federal courts_to the contrary.
but excused the specific infraction because the surrounding circun-
stances were limited and unimportant,a situation which hardly par-
allels the widely publicized Billy Graham Crusade in Tempe.
THE CRIMINAL ORTHODOX CLERGY OF ARIZONA: who Openly incited hys-
terical mob support and pressure upon the state's highest elected
officials to approve of and permit their DELIBERATE SUBvERSION OF
IAVT EHI
THE_BILLY GRAHAM ORUSADF COMMITrEE: whieh actively suborned
public officials to SUBVERR THE LAW IN ARIZONA!
THE ARIZONA SUPREME OOURT: which,under obvious political pres-
sure from Governor Jack williams and his criminal co-conspirators,
unanimously joined in a "decision"obviously intended_to supnort
the proposed SUBVERSION OF THE LAW -NOT_TO ENFORCE IT- merely to
appease the relieious mobsters incited and led by the CRIMiNAL
oRTHODOX CLERGY OF ARIzONA; possibly to avoid the outbreak of in-
cited mob violence.
UNITED SrATFS_ATrORNEY: a fentleman, presumably a Fannin or Cola-
water appointee, who has convenienientiy "looked the other way"
while this and other patently visible violations of feieral law
wicespread in Arizona were occurring under his very nose, and
which the present Attorney General has publicly boasted were know-
past.
This is "law enforcement" in Barry Goldwater's_own Arizona.
With such brazen examples of DELIBERAPF NON-ENFOROFMRN2,what
respectcanthe averare oitizen have for those elected offioials
who have campairned upon platforms pledgins "law enforcenent"
situation ?a.
With such brazen examples of DELIBERAPF NON-ENFOROFMRN2,what
respectcanthe averare oitizen have for those elected offioials
who have campairned upon platforms pledgins "law enforcenent"
situation ?

--- PAGE BREAK ---Arizona,_as the forefoing shows,i
is ruled by foree and un-
Since it is evident that under_sueh leadership the Laws op
NPIS
NATION WILL NOT AND CANNOS BE LBVALIY ENFOROED,
the only possible
defense and response possible is CouNTrR VIoLENCE,as much asmost
ofus would wish it otherwise.

How much all this also apolies to
the nation as a whole is still somewhat uncertain,but waterrate in
tern except only that the Clerky does not appear equally involved.

This appears to be pretty much the classic riadle of the
chicken and the eee -wnich came first, i.e., the_tyrant before the
priest, or the priest before the tyrant.

The only thinr certain
is that both are immediately involved.

Will all those who have been the most insistent upon "law en-
forcement" in the abstract, be the first to make it impossiblc in
areas where they disapprove ?

-John H Latta,O.P.A.（Ret.)
Member, Society of Separationists
cc: Sen Barry Goldwater
Rep John J Rhodes
Other Americans United
Arizona OLU
Arizonans for Peace,
and others.

IN GAWD WE TRUST!

"There is in every village a lighted torch,
the schoolmaster;and a mouth to blow it out.

the parson."-Victor Hugo.

ONLY THE BIBLEWASHED, BILLY, WHO CANNOT THINK FOR THEMSELVES
Everyone needs leader, Graham says
A.R-sh.PeA1y
THE LONG TAIL OFTHE ONE-EYED JACKASS
By GENELUPTAK
andJesusisfheman we Ato thebasic tenets of Biblicalcrowd.

Republic Religion Editor
are all looking for."
faith,"he added.

Crusade officials estimated
TEMPE-When Americans
Gov.Williams ippeared onabout 1,000 persons respond-
electapresident of
the
teda sinDr.

Graham said.

the platformwithDr.ed to Dr.Grahams invita-
United States “we want him
“He
never
to be a god,” someone who
said
swear
Graham
and receiveda.tion to make“a decision for
word,
never
had lnstful
has all the answers to life's
thought,the perfect man.the
standing
ovationfromtheJesus Christ.”
complex problems,evangelist
manwe
are all looking for."
Billy Graham said Monday
night.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Graham said. the platformwithDr.ed to Dr.Grahams invita-
United States “we want him
“He
never
to be a god,” someone who
said
swear
Graham
and receiveda.tion to make“a decision for
word,
never
had lnstful
has all the answers to life's
thought,the perfect man.the
standing
ovationfromtheJesus Christ.”
complex problems,evangelist
manwe
are all looking for."
Billy Graham said Monday
night. He said
that
during the
BUG SPECIAL
last
five
years there
has
“Everyone needs a leader,
beena widespread religious
everyone needs someone to
preoccupation among milions
fallon,”Dr.Graham told
of American youth. about20.000
persons assem-
“The main thrust of this
bled in Sum
Devil
Stadium. The evangelist is conducting
new movement among young
Nixon ? people appears to be occur-
WHAT THINKERS THINK! an eight-day crusade here. "The problem with Ameri-
ring largely unnoticed in col
leges and universities with
IN GAWD WE TRUST!? ca is that rather than face
reality we are looking fora
thousands of  students Te
ht Cees Gad mean Io ge? Not o cam
nouncing a secuiar life-style
 thing!Religion is all hunk.”Thomas A
godtocrawloutof
the
foradisciplinedadherence
F n,
Graham said. "As men’s prayers are a disease of the will. so are their crceds u discase of the intrlleet. Jesus Christ was the per
--Ralph Waldo Emerson. fect man, Dr. Graham said,
"] cannot imegine a god who rewards and
pumishes the ohjects of his own creation.”
TE
LHRIST WEE
Albert Einstein.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rist was the per
--Ralph Waldo Emerson. fect man, Dr. Graham said,
"] cannot imegine a god who rewards and
pumishes the ohjects of his own creation.”
TE
LHRIST WEE
Albert Einstein.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THEPULLIAMPARTY!!!
After viewing and listening_to the contemptibly cheap and naus-
eating assault on viewer intellirence by those who rifged the
puerile charade by President Ford at the "Pulliam_party"of the
SPJ-SDx* Convention in Phoenix on November14,1974 （broadcast
conference"of sticky sweetness and tired platitudes,I am impelled
to endorse the sentiments expressed by the editorial in Ranparts
magazine in 197o （see following pake).
This is no reflection on the intelligence of the great majority
of the seate delefates to the SPJ-SDx Convention,however,since
it was quite obvious,even to the V viewer,that the only audible
applause for President Ford's remarks came from avery small
Rhodes political supporters, prominently seated in a small center
section of the auditorium directly in front of the rostrum （and
the speaker's microphones),while the vast majority of the visible
seated delegates did not applaud.
waste his time and lend himself to such tawdry exhibitions as the
one held in Phoenix,in order to secure afavorable captive audi-
ence for his inane remarks, he only furnishes visihle proof of the
"low degree of intelligence by which the United States is governea"
(as Lord Bryce once wisely observed); and of the frowinf public
cated.
The obviously rikged "news conference" of sweetly phrased plati-
tudes did its sponsors and the local CBS-TV outlet nocredit.
In
protection of its national and international news-coverape pres-
tife,the Columbia Broadcasting_System (CBS) could enhance its lo-
cal imare enormously among intelligent viewers by dispensing. with
its present Phoenix affiliate dedicated_to relifious propaganda
IN OPEN CONTEMPT OF_THF LAW, and whose local news iockeys played a
prominent part in the ersatz"news conference"described above.
-John H Latta，C.P.A.（Ret.)
*SPJ-SDx:Society of Professional Journalists / Sifma Delta Chi
Copies mailed.
Joseph Alsop
the countrv is all but certain
to receive some feariul shocks in the
next vear. Everything in Congress will
then dependupon how thecountry
responds to these shocks.
Where will our inept Gerald be next year when the shocks strike,
flying away to the koon ?shocks in the
next vear. Everything in Congress will
then dependupon how thecountry
responds to these shocks.
Where will our inept Gerald be next year when the shocks strike,
flying away to the koon ?

--- PAGE BREAK ---"THE SYSTEM CANNOT BE REVITALIZED;
:IT MUST BE OVERTHROWN."
[EDITORIAL]
A Tract for Our Time
N THIS ISSUE OF RAMPARTS we have taken the un.

aries and to a book which we feelis one of the most impor
usual step of devoting the entire issue to a single work
tant literary and political events of our time.

-Tom Hayden's forthcoming book on the Chicago
A founder of Students for a Democratic Socicty.an caly
Trial and the tasks of the new American Revolution.

civil rights activist in Misssippia community organier n
As we go to press in mid-May, America is in a state of crisis.

Newark's black ghetto during the bloody insurreetior in the
U.S.

troops have invaded Cambodia, exposing Washington's
summer of 1966,a victim of the police riot in Chicago in
determination to stay in Vietnam and increasing the likeli-
1968and interred in Judge Julius Hoffman’s ncon ven 3.

hood of war with China and the use of nuclear weapons.

year later, Tom llayden has been an important memher of 3
National Guardsmen still occupy rebellious communities
generation which has moved from the stony silencc of the
throughout the country; the four white students thev mur-
50s to the militant protest of the60s and the resistancef
dered at Kent State University have become martvrs.but
the present.In Te Trial,Hayden describes the forees that
the six blacks thev_shot in the back in Augusta are already
caused this transition.He also gives insights into the process
that calminated in confrontation with Mayor Daley's pulice
racist it docs not understand that race war,initiated by the
state.Hayden's is the first complete account by a iefendant
guardians of its law, has already begun.hood of war with China and the use of nuclear weapons.

year later, Tom llayden has been an important memher of 3
National Guardsmen still occupy rebellious communities
generation which has moved from the stony silencc of the
throughout the country; the four white students thev mur-
50s to the militant protest of the60s and the resistancef
dered at Kent State University have become martvrs.but
the present.In Te Trial,Hayden describes the forees that
the six blacks thev_shot in the back in Augusta are already
caused this transition.He also gives insights into the process
that calminated in confrontation with Mayor Daley's pulice
racist it docs not understand that race war,initiated by the
state.Hayden's is the first complete account by a iefendant
guardians of its law, has already begun.

ofwhat took place inside Hoffman’s courtroom: how the
Yet out of this fragmented kaleidoscope of rebellion and
“conspirators”differed but were able to come together to
repression,the political opposition of America's young
people has in one stroke achieved rcsults at the national
neys;how they reacted to the horrific spectacle of Bobby
level significantly affecting the Administration's ability to
Seale being bound and gagged.

extend the war in Asia.

For the first time young people
But this book is more than an anecdotal account of one
have glimpsed the potential strength of their united out-
of America's most historic courtroom dramas.For Ilayden
rage.Naturally a move has already been made to diffuse
feels that the trial was the turning point for an entire gen-
their energies by inviting them to fall in line behind estab-
eration, and his work thus becomes a common-sense indict-
lished liberal leaders, many of whom architected the war.

ment of a system which reveals itself to be not only bunk-
they now profess to deplore.However, the students,realiz-
rupt but lethal.For the first time young people
But this book is more than an anecdotal account of one
have glimpsed the potential strength of their united out-
of America's most historic courtroom dramas.For Ilayden
rage.Naturally a move has already been made to diffuse
feels that the trial was the turning point for an entire gen-
their energies by inviting them to fall in line behind estab-
eration, and his work thus becomes a common-sense indict-
lished liberal leaders, many of whom architected the war.

ment of a system which reveals itself to be not only bunk-
they now profess to deplore.However, the students,realiz-
rupt but lethal.

It is a primer for revolution addressed to
ing the magnitude of their power,have taken their own
those who see themselves as revolutionaries, those who have
course of action,shutting down their universities,colleges
workedunflaggingly--andunsuccessfully--forreforin
and even high schools behind their own demands.

These de-
through “legitimate”channels, and those only now moving
mands,ratified by one student body after another,have
from the sidelines of history to active,outraged opposition.

been largely ignored by the mass media.

They are:
E FEEL THAT the coming months can only in-
That the U.S.

government cnd its systematic repression
crease the relevance of this docunent.The
of political dissidents and release all political prisoners, such
Nixon era, so clearly the fulfillment of every.

as Bobby Seale and others in the Black Panther Party.

thing latent in the American nightmare,will
That the U.S.government cease its expansion of the
inevitably shatter the illusions of the ecology activists.civil
Vietnam war into Laos and Cambodia and that it uni
libertarians and liberals who think that the evils of the
laterally and immediately withdraw all forces fron South-
system can becured after one or two ora do/cn MCarthy
east Asia.

campaigns.Over thc coming months thev toowill dliscovcr
That universitics end their complicity with the U.S.thing latent in the American nightmare,will
That the U.S.government cease its expansion of the
inevitably shatter the illusions of the ecology activists.civil
Vietnam war into Laos and Cambodia and that it uni
libertarians and liberals who think that the evils of the
laterally and immediately withdraw all forces fron South-
system can becured after one or two ora do/cn MCarthy
east Asia.

campaigns.Over thc coming months thev toowill dliscovcr
That universitics end their complicity with the U.S.

War
what Hlavden and those who made theNew L.efi discovered
Machine by an immediate end to defense and counter-
during a decade:that America’s“democratic institutions”
insurgency researchROTC,andallther such programs.

are both undemocratic and corrupt beyond redemption;
In making these demands on a racist, war-bent society，
that clections in the_present framework are only a way of
the students have proved themselves to be far ahead of the
manipulating despair: and that we.like our land.exist for
liberal politicians now seeking to channel youthfulrebellion
the benefit of those who have the money to buy us.

into the cul-de-sac of Establishment politics.

lt is essential
We have come a long way in our understanding of Ameri-
that the students recognize in thremseives the force that can
ca.and the message at the end of the road allows for no
lead the struggle for the future.

more sclf-deception.lnsteadof hoping for a revivalof the
EARE NOw FACING a whole range of criscs,
liberal polities that failed in theSixties or for a political sav.

any one of which could permanently and pro-
our.” Tom Iayden writes in the following pages.“we see in
founlly alter the course of American history
ourprotestmovement the sceds fromwhich tocreate our
and threaten our individual lives and liberties.

own future institutions of government.--- PAGE BREAK ---

any one of which could permanently and pro-
our.” Tom Iayden writes in the following pages.“we see in
founlly alter the course of American history
ourprotestmovement the sceds fromwhich tocreate our
and threaten our individual lives and liberties. own future institutions of government. T'his is what the ag
Together they constitute a social crisis so pervasive and pro-
onizing,bloody and disillusioning decade just past has
found as to lift the prospect of revolution from therealm
taught. It is a lesson that will only be reinforced by the
of utopian speculation and raise it as a real political alterna-
Nixon era's attempt to return us to the fear and trembling
tive.We believe such a revolution to be necessary.For this
of the SOs. The system camnot be revitalized: it smust be
reason,we have opencd the pages of the magazine to the
overthrown. As humanely as possible, but by _any means
thoughts of one of the country's most serious revolution-
necessary. 6RAMPARTS
Copyright: Ranparts Magazine, Inc. 1970
By Permission of the Editors。

--- PAGE BREAK ---as possible, but by _any means
thoughts of one of the country's most serious revolution-
necessary. 6RAMPARTS
Copyright: Ranparts Magazine, Inc. 1970
By Permission of the Editors。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Minority Leader of the Wnterrate Party in Congress, Rep. John J.
Rhodes!
What great anyelic winrs thou must be presumed to
wear beneath thy coat，oh Minority Leader John J Rhodes!
JESUS SAVES
DRIVE
8525
mailed
8238 EAST ANGUS
SCOTTSDALE, ARIZ
JOHN H.
opies
find these congressional prayer breckfasts
very beneficial..
1 don't feelhoifosguibsy
obout al those election promiseslmade
"I've only been in the position (Minority Leader) a year so
election."
This statement implies the prior incumbent Hinority Leader
should be suspect of sharins_the blame for Waterrate,either by
cooperative silence or actual collusion in the Watergate matter
and the ensuing"cover up".
Thus Minority Leader John J Rhodes
points the finger of suspicion at his former prayer-meetin'
crony,President Gerald Ford·!
Thus sayeth Minority Leader.
John Judas Rhodes!
Could this be the hidden reason for President Ford's precip-
itous "pardon"of ex-President Richard M.Nixon ?
"Rhodes *** called on public' schools and colleges to teach
the free enterprise system and the republic form of government."
Thus John Judas Rhodes seeks to prostitute the nation's edu-
cational system by transforming, it into a public supported pro-
paganda mill for private commercial interests, to "brainwash"
our children on the glories of our alleged "free enterprise sys-
tem" of the nation'strusts and monopolies under our extra-leg-
al and monopolistic "two party system" which in earlieryears,
the very trusts and monopolies which have plundered and raped
the nation for'so.long, and continue to do so.
Thus John Judas Rhodes seeksto perpetuate the influence of
the extra-legal and commercialized "two party system"alwavs
total corruption and rottenness of our government, only partially
exposed by Watergate,has sprung.
3
"the founding fathers explicitly Fave the U. S. president
the power to pardon."
Thus Minority Leader John Judas Rhodes
evades the issue: what is the legal definition of the word "par-
don"as used in the Constitution ?
It is_ouestionableif the historical meaning of the word
"pardon" is the same as that Riven it by President jerald Ford
(acting without leral advice)and his political supporters.in the Constitution ?
It is_ouestionableif the historical meaning of the word
"pardon" is the same as that Riven it by President jerald Ford
(acting without leral advice)and his political supporters.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Rhodes says he expects
。
Arn Repbl,/u,A.

Southern Arizona Eurcau
TUCSON -Rep.

John Rhodes,R- many don't understand the U.S.

Ariz., said Sunday night he docsn't
Constitution.

believe young liberals in Congress will
He said wide publicity is given to the
succeed in ousting him as House minor-
oil companies.for example.which in-
ity leader.

creased thcir profits last year by about
"Id be surpriscd if there is a serious
100 per cent.

move to unseat me,” Rhodes said
"For ycars the oil companies didn’t
during a question and answer session
make enough money.

When you earn
only 2per cent profit and it goes up
at the Sunday Evening Forum at the
100 per cent, that still only means 4
University of Arizona.Ive oniy becn
per cent.which isn't enough equity for
DRIVE
85257
in the position a vear so Iwon't be
investment into oilrefincrics after the
blamed for Watergate or the losses in
stockholders are paid.We had a gaso-
last week's election."
line shortage last vear partially
ARIZ.

because there wasn't enough refinery
Rhodes was elected leader without
capacity to refine the oil we did have.

opposition to fill the job left vacant
Rhodes said his officc received many
JOHN
when former President Richard Nixon
letters saying Ford exceeded his consti-
picked Gerald Ford as his vice
tutional powers by pardoning Nixon.

president.

“But the founding fathers explicitly
Rep.

Peter Peyser, R-N.Y..

last week
gave the U.S.president power to
called on Rhodes to resign.Peyser,a
pardon.adding that Ford exercised
third-term congressman from the sub-
this right “because the country would
urbs of New York City.

said’Rhodes
have become mesmerized during the
failed tosupport urban legislative
trial of a former president." He said
needs, particularly mass transit, educa-
finding an impartial jury would have
tion and housing.

been nearly impossible.said’Rhodes
have become mesmerized during the
failed tosupport urban legislative
trial of a former president." He said
needs, particularly mass transit, educa-
finding an impartial jury would have
tion and housing.

been nearly impossible.

Earlier Rhodes, in a speech, called
You would need to choose people
on public schools and colleges to teach
who've been asleeplike Rip‘Van
thefreeenterprisesystemandthe
republic form of government.

Winkle."
Rhodes said he thinks the nomination
The congressman, clected to his 12th
of Nelson Rockefeller as vice president
term Tuesday，said the word profit has
will
besettledbefore Congress
adjourns.

the Constitution is up to the Courts to determine,not by polit-
ically motivated and unsupported claims of Minority LeaderJohn
dent Gerald Ford acting hastily and without seeking proper leg-
al advice.

Words and phrases have ways of chanring in accepted meaning
over extended perioas of time,and specific woris or phrases
written into old laws'or in the Constitution may not have the
same meaning legally that current usaze xives to them.

On num-
erous past_occasions the U S Supreme (ourt has exhaustively and
meticulously traced the orixinal meanings attached to specific
framers of the Constitution many years before,in their effort
to determine the exact meaning and intent of those who wrote the
law in guestion.

There_is today serious question if the term "pardon" was ever
previously used or intended in the sense of forxiveness of al-
leked crimes prior to any determination_of puilt by "due process
oflay"through the Courts.

Whatever the exact meaning tobe
the Constitution orisinally,NoT upon ex post facto interpreta-
porters.

This obviously political interpretation by the Ford Clan in
the Congress intended to dangerously extend the powers of the
Presidency,obviously intrudes upon the Judicial Function of our
pre-judge-withor without evidence_or proof-who shallbe
tried or not tried for his alleged crimes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Whatever the exact meaning tobe
the Constitution orisinally,NoT upon ex post facto interpreta-
porters. This obviously political interpretation by the Ford Clan in
the Congress intended to dangerously extend the powers of the
Presidency,obviously intrudes upon the Judicial Function of our
pre-judge-withor without evidence_or proof-who shallbe
tried or not tried for his alleged crimes. fo accept the interpretations of President Ford and his form-
er crony,Minority Leaier John Judas Rhodes,would bedarrer
struck to the very heart of all efforts at uniform law enforce-
ment and "eoualiustice" in our Courts and ieopardize if not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HITLER TOO
WAS A KNOBLE
KATHOLICK!
A.Roman Katholick postal employee in
OklahomaCityhas declared it is com-
monplace forregular postalemployees
toopen and examine the contents of
FirstClass mail without authority and in
openviolation ofpostal laws andregula-
tions!Is 5c postage nowrequired topay
for this extraKatholick inspection ofpri-
vatecommunications?
The local Chief of Police by historical
Katholick Gestapo methods harrasses,in-
timidates,arrests andholds withouthond
many innocent citizens guilty of no
chargeable crime,and publiclysneers at
efforts to stop this open denialof Civil
Rights!
ALLHEIL to
OKL.AHOMA CITY, U.S.A.!!
CityofAmericanFreedom,or Cityofthe
KATHOLICK GESTAPO???
By Order of John XxllI ???
or the Jesuit CIA???