1/1S/70 
Mr.

Joson R.

Neiman 
16055 Venture Blvd, Suite 900 
Ehcine, Calif.

91316 
Dear Mr.

Hainan, 
Hein hea been so scare any suggestion of it ssras me, Prospects of 
it have been so slim, I've never thought out what to any.

two 
If you have read two of ay hooka, there are/raoro printed you haven't 
read and four more done end in limited (xerox) editions only, end a number already 
started, two completely researched.

This give you en idea of tho magnitude of whet 
I ht?ve undertaken and what i think x have, to a large degree, already done.

And if you or» shocked, as most thinking people are, by whet you have 
already seen, that i <?

nothing to what i now hove and is unknown, Thia rannpe from 
really dishonest staff memos ebowing the Lawyers knew better (on the most basic 
evidence, the importance of which was not lost upon thorn) to irrefutable proof 
of the destruction of evidence (together with tue replacement in some cases and 
secret memos describing it in others), including avan receipts for this destruction.

Shore it was done, how, by whom, the whole package, l have the moat vital evidence 
that was withheld from toe warren OoanisBion l hoi it not been they could never 
have issued this rooort)« x have irrefutable proof that tar ’’resident was shot 
other than as officially claimed, other than where officially alleged - and who 
knew and recorded it and remained silent, denying the evidence to the Commission.

And this is not all.

It is some of tho more dramatic.

It is all official.

Ch, it is worse then even this, x (}eve now caught the government filtering the 
existing evidence when they caught on that I correctly understood whet it shows.

I now bsve official pictures proving this - b fore and after.

Is there on y freedom, 
integrity or future la a country wnare tnia can happen?

is anyone eefe?

Pe.rha-'s if 1 explain ay circumstances and wle re I am in my work, you 
can then decide for yourself what, if anything, you would care to do.is anyone eefe? Pe.rha-'s if 1 explain ay circumstances and wle re I am in my work, you 
can then decide for yourself what, if anything, you would care to do. I wish, how- 
ever, that if you and/or others ere deeply interested <nd willing to end in s 
position to help, you could come nere and see tnat 1 am not exaggerating, not 
mi arepresenting what i tell you x have. Sou would tnen also see ho.; I got it. I am now in tue seventh year in wnicn X nave done nothing else but 
try as best X can to do want the government uia not, really investigate the assas- 
sination. in this time I hwve had no income or subsidy, hat return there was from 
my books fell far short of tho actual cost. Auis and the cost of this continuing 
work have put me about ; 40,000 in debt, it is for this reason I cannot continue 
to print the books 1 continue to research aau '■rite. Just find!a-* the money to pay 
the interest is a major problem quarterly. I con no longer afford even the usual 
aupplies. Ahls typewriter, forxexemple, is beyond decent repair. :‘y wife, oho baa 
done on enormous lebor, has taken four months of outside employment a year on which 
we try and moke out. This also reduces our output. If you rend ny first bo~2c, you may recall that I early siezed

--- PAGE BREAK ---upon the autopsy as cne of the key things, hat hove in thst book is definitive 
as of the information available at that time.

As I could, resurrect the suppressed 
evidence from its official oblivion, 1 used it where appropriate, as in the second 
pert of the second book, .HITE'VASii II.

Then 1 got enough in addition to do 8 book 
on t.ce autopsy and wnst I believe is relevant (in some esses not directly dealing 
with the autopsy).

Although I completed it in the late summer of 1965, it Is Btill 
new and fresh materiel.

But I couldn’t get it published.

So, 1 continued my work 
in this aros also.

-L hove completed the third of o three-part study of the autopsy 
tinder the general title TOST MOETEM and have researched the second port.

I cannot 
begin to summarize what this includes, but.

it is mor- th«n total disproof of the 
official fairy-tele, more than overwhelming proof of monolithic, deliberate dis- 
honesty.

It is proof of law-violation, including perjury and the subornation of 
perjury, proof of s conspiracy within the government to hide and misrepresent what 
really heposned.

I ha-e done two books on the three major assassinations, the first 
’-■art dealing with ell three as a coup d'etat (and bringing to light a great 
amount o* material officially suppressed, including ’mown threats to JFK and 
King by the meat extreme of the rightist extremists, protected by the FBI and 
tiJi3 rest of the government) end tne second with tne Kinf murder alone, n.ere also 
the official account is fiction, but I also have the proof that this was contrived, 
how it was contrived ond by whom.

There ares a conspiracy, Ray wss part of it, but 
tho evidence proves he was not the shooter -and the PEI and •‘Memphis authorities 
knew this, here l nave enough, according to a reputable ond competent lawyer, to 
justify waat we cannot expect, the disbarrment of all the lawyers involved on 
both sides.I ha-e done two books on the three major assassinations, the first 
’-■art dealing with ell three as a coup d'etat (and bringing to light a great 
amount o* material officially suppressed, including ’mown threats to JFK and 
King by the meat extreme of the rightist extremists, protected by the FBI and 
tiJi3 rest of the government) end tne second with tne Kinf murder alone, n.ere also 
the official account is fiction, but I also have the proof that this was contrived, 
how it was contrived ond by whom.

There ares a conspiracy, Ray wss part of it, but 
tho evidence proves he was not the shooter -and the PEI and •‘Memphis authorities 
knew this, here l nave enough, according to a reputable ond competent lawyer, to 
justify waat we cannot expect, the disbarrment of all the lawyers involved on 
both sides.

It is simply inc-edible but it is also beyond ouestion, my documents- 
ti m is that thorough.

Im.ong the proofs 1 have are Ray contracts with his lawyers, 
the official form of the •’evidence” before the minitrial and the false representa- 
tion of it in court, where there was no opposition.

Together, this is ore very 
large bock.

1 am adding a few notes now, but without them it is almost 600 pages, 
80 of which are a^endix - photocopies of suppressed evidence.

Than you consider 
thst in the form in which x prepare for those "underground" books l have brought 
out by offset reproduction of the typescript there are 500 or more words re r page, 
you can see the size of this work.

When I complete tne autopsy writing, 1 will resume a book titled 
AGENT OSWALD.

I believe there is a prison facie Case he was r.nd A have much of 
what was hidden on this.

Also part of what was destroyed.

There is more, but I fear wearying you with details.

1 hop3 this Is 
enough to Indicate the scope snd success of my work.

From the two books you hove 
read, 1 hope you believe ife is both complete ond solid.--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 hop3 this Is 
enough to Indicate the scope snd success of my work. From the two books you hove 
read, 1 hope you believe ife is both complete ond solid. Aside from our personal needs (and we have learned to live with tbs 
worries snd restrictions this work imposes), the area in which 1 wou!d most 
v/elcome help is in being able to bring these books out - to be able to print 
them. There is no prospect of commercial printing, "'hero now isn't for any 
honest, responsible work. 'Vhile private printing severely restricts the sales 
possibilities. It d^es make information available, it is possible to sell it, 
and my first book, in this form. Is the first or. the subject. believe it and 
the attention I woe able to get for it really opened the subject. If you could but see vvnot A now have, 1 tnink you would agree there is 
nothing like it la the history of representative government and you would went it 
to be made available, for the present and as s record for the future. 1 nope you 
will find it possible to help, nni 1 do thank you for the willingness to consider 
it. If you have any questions, please ask them. Sincerely, 
Harold Teisberg