Mr. Bclaont
3/6/64
A. Roscn
ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT
JOIIN F.KENNEDY
11/22/63
DALLA'S, TEXAS
PUPPOSE:-
To rccoancnd the 'attached lettcr be scnt to the
Prcsidcnt's Couaission to furthcr clarify information in
Its lcttcr dated 2/24/64.
DETAILSS
Hr: Rankin, President's Conalssion,by Ietter
2/24/64 advised Mr. Jones Harris of New York City sppeared
at the Counisslon and brought with him scvcral photographic
enlaryerents of a scction of one photograph depicting the
Presidential motorcadc passing the Texas School Book
Depository Buildinz. Hr. llarris belicved thc figurc of an
individual standing in thc doorwoy of this building was
Identical with Lee Harvcy Oswald. The pictures wcre brought
to our ottention for whatcver action wc deemed appropriate
and will bc rctaincd.
The second item in Mr.Rankin's lettcr related to
8 previously resolvcd ollegation that Lce Harvcy Oswald's
name appearcd on a gucst register of the "Fox ond Hounds"
restaurcnt, Hubcrtus, Wisconsin. Harris states upon
learning of this rumor (cpparently through the press) he
corresponded with onc Robcrt L. Dishon. a rcporter for the
"Milwoukce Journal' cnd Dishon fclt thcrc vas "sonething
to the rumor"
1o5-82s557
Enclosure
UNREC.
62-109060
- 62-109090:(Prcsidcnt'@Comnission)
1-Mr.I.W.Conrad
1 - Hr. C. D. DcLoach
DEFTURATE YELLOM J
RDR:vhm:Jsk
(01)
68 MAR1619CEA
Sectm14

--- PAGE BREAK ---the rumor"
1o5-82s557
Enclosure
UNREC.
62-109060
- 62-109090:(Prcsidcnt'@Comnission)
1-Mr.I.W.Conrad
1 - Hr. C. D. DcLoach
DEFTURATE YELLOM J
RDR:vhm:Jsk
(01)
68 MAR1619CEA
Sectm14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mlenorendun_tolir,
olnont
R:'ASSASSINATION UF PRCSIDENT
JOIW F.AUNE!Y
Mr. Runk in stated hc was furnishing this to us for
our lnfornation and for use in conducting an intcrview of:
poonpuoo oq pinous ouo oate nof gi. uoysia
BACKGROUMD:
No information idcntifioble with Mr. Jones Harris
or Robcrt L. Dishon could be locatcd in Burcau files.
The photograph identified by Mr. Harris as resembling
Oswald was investigated previously and was in thc process of
being rcported by Dallas. Although Connission'. did not make a
specific regucst,.Dallas as instructcd to furnish a lettcrlcad
mcmorandun for thc Comnission,establishing this individual
is Billy Nolan Lovclady, an cmploycc of thc Texas School Book
Deposltory Building..
Thc Commission is being furnishcd
enlargeacnts of Lovelady's photogroph which shors his reseablance
Nith rcgard to the allcged signaturc of 0swald on
the register of fox and Hlounds, the Connission, in addition
to our mcmorandum dated 12/13/63 cntitled "Hoaxcs. Falsc Reports
and Irresponsible Reporting was fumished the rcport of
S Richard C. Thompson dated 12/2/63 at Milwaukecwhich fully
sets out our thorough invcstigation of this matter. Our
investigation,clearly discloscd the signature was not written
by 0swald; and that on 11/30/63 we rcccived an anonymous
telephonc call indicating that onc man of a party oP 3 couples
had inscribcd thc namc of Lcc Oswald on the registcr.
Although thc Counisslon did not moke a spccific
rcquest,Milwaukee was instructed to intcrvicw Dishon.to insure
cvcry logical aspect of this matter is run out.Dishon was
merely suspiclous of the uenagcr who was rot cooperating wlth
him in his unofficial inquiries and Dishon felt this lack of
coopcration was an indicotion the manager was hiding soncthing
ACTION:
That thc attached letter bc sent to thc Prcsiccnt's.
Coanission furnishing it with thc results of our inquirics.