Norris E. Amundson
1926 River Rd. #17
Missoula , Montana 59801

Mr. Harold 7/eisberg
Route 12

Fredrick, Maryland 21701 January 14, 1S80


Dear Mr. 7/eisberg:

Since the shooting of Larry Flynt and the subsequent pub-
lication of his L.A. Free Press Special Report ("JFK Murder Solved")
early in 1978, I have joined the ranks of the V/arren Commission
critics; another "hot-eyed assassination buff" in the words of
Tom Wicker of the New York Times (IE was convinced there was no
conspiricy within one hour of the arrest of Lee Harvey Oswald) .

I had not read any material critical of the Warren Report
prior to reading the Flynt paper (nor had I read the report).

Since reading that paper, I have read everything I could get my
hands on in Missoula, Montana (I think, by far, that your first
book has historically been the most important and definitive one.

I have not read the others) .

As a result of this exercise, I became convinced that Os-
wald indeed was innocent and framed, there was more than one
assassin, and the government covered up the truth (as they con-
tinue to do) . I made several inquiries about some specific ques-
tions I had, and the result was typical.

I have been lied to by the Director of the FBI, recieved
angry and impolite correspondence from Prof. G. Robert Blakey, and
Ambassador Mike Mansfield told me he did not know where I could
turn for help. I wrote to the White House, and all this got me
was a visit by the Secret Service. A.gent Lynn Meredith of the
Great Falls office came twice, but his purpose was not to find
out what specific evidence I had discovered, but to discourage
me, get angry with me about what I had concluded, and to find
out if I had any weapons in my house. Then he told me that the
7/hite House wanted a photograph of me. I consented out of curiosity,
and he took seven pictures with a Poloroid camera with a flash
attachment. Strangely, his visit took place two days after
someone attempted to photograph me through a window at night.

Mr. Meredith was at the White House when the President was shot.

He was the agent in charge of the security of the Kennedy children,
the "kiddie detail" as he put it. He had no comment about the
automobile chase involving Caroline and the agent on the day of
the assassination. (See "The Death of a President" pp. 61,579)

At the outset of my belated "revalation" that things were
not as I had been led to believe about the assassination, I began
an intensive study of what evidence there was available to me,
and as a result, I discovered some surprising and disturbing things
which have never been brought out before, at least not in print
(In "Whitewash" you were on the right track concerning the ques-
tion as to why the right-hand portion of the Altgens photo had


lage 2


not been included in the 7.R. Even the Archives print has the right-
hand portion cropped off. Cn Dec. 19, 1979, Clarence F. Lyons, Jr.,
Chief of the Judicial and Fiscal Branch, Civil Archives Div. wrote
and told me, "The records of the 'Jarre n Commission do not contain
. . . a complete border-to-border print of the Altgens photograph")
Some of the discoveries have to do with data in the Altgens photo,
and you were correct. There IS important information in the right-
hand portion of the picture that the government does not want people
to look at and understand. It is fortunate that the complete pic-
ture was printed by the A.F. and yourself before the government
could do anything about it. As I am sure you know, the print of
this picture I recieved from the Archives was cropped (at least
now I understand why). The right one-fourth of the picture contains
some of the most important information in the picture, information
critical to a full understanding of the conspiracy to assassinate
President Kennedy.

I won't go into detail at this time, but I believe I have
found strong and corraberated evidence that signal mirrors were
used during the shooting by at least two different persons in at
least two seperate locations at the same time (what I have found,

I an convinced, is beyond the realm of mere speculation). I have
found what I believe is indicative of not two gunmen, not three,
but perhaps as many as seven, though not all did any shooting
(this may sound far-fetched, but actually it makes sense, and is
supported by the evidence) . I also have strong reason to believe
that the reason the President's guards did not react (which they
did not do. They froze.), was because it was communicated to them
that there were in fact other guns trained on them during the
shooting (any one of the agents should have been able to sprint
100 yards in the time span of the shots - and as you have pointed
out, L.B.J. 's guards reacted quite quickly - perhaps too quickly).

In any case, I conveyed this material to Prof. Blakey during the^
House investigation. There is no comment, and what I presented is
not in the report. There was not even an attempt to refute what
I had suggested.

Because of all this, and because I was not allowed to pre-
sent any of this to anyone (through "stonewalling")', out of frus-
tration, I began the task of preparing a manuscript. I have never
written a book before, so I am gratified that I have about 100,000
words prepared, and am about two-thirds finished. I don't know
whether I'll get it published or not, but I sincerely hope so.

I have carefully studied the House Select Committee on
Assassinations Report, and it is clear that the precedent set by
the Warren Commission has been continued in the report. The truth
is still being covered up (enough cannot be said about that) . . At
the very least, it is a small consolation that Prof. Blakey, in
his introduction, had the courage to state that the report was
"understated", and that "• . • there would be an opportunity for
others to fill in the details". And at least he made it clear ^ i

that it could not and must not be the "Final Report" as was asserted
by Bantam Books and Tom 7/icker (a totally unethical attempt at
deception through the use of "misinformation") . It is interesting


that Mr. Blakey stated, ". . . some members of the committee were
not willing to carry the conclusions out to the full force of the
evidence”. 'Jhat kind of a Congressional investigation was it that
would be so compromised? And what kind of influences caused the
members of the committee to be so afraid?

According to the data in the committee’s own report, had the
first shot actually exited the President’s throat, the shot could
not have come from*’ the sixth floor window as they claim, but would
have to have come from the second or third floor of the Dal-Tex
Building behind the fire escape. The single bullet theory is still
untenable, and so is the "neuro-spasm theory” (the back shot dis-
placed and fractured the first thoracic vertebra. Such a blow to
the spinal cord at that point most assuredly, would have caused in-
stant paralysis from that point on down the spine. The legs and
trunk could not have functioned at all - even if the brain sent
a jolted message downward at the instant of the head shot).

Perhaps the most incredible claim of the report is that Oswald
fired the first two shots within 1.66 seconds. That, of a cer-
tainty, is impossible.

But this purpose in my writing is not to write you a book,
or try tp point out anything of which I am sure you are already
fully aware. I admire your work, I found your address, so I
wanted to write to let you know that others are joining in the
ongoing conflict.

I have read only your first book, and have just found a
copy of "Oswald in New Orleans” (paperback) . Your other books'
are not available in Missoula . I understand that the others are
available directly from you. Could you possibly send me the prices?
Are all of your books available in hard cover?

I don’t know if you can help me or not, but I am still trying
to obtain a full, clear print of the lames Altgens photo. Is there
a possible way you could help me obtain a full print? The A.?. , .
thus far have refused to sell me a copy. I fully intend to publish
my book, and I would appreciate any advice you could give me. If
I do, I’ll send you a copy. If not, I’ll send you a manuscript
copy if I am able. Thank you for your time, and thank you for
your most important contributions to the cause of truth and justice.

Two thousand years ago, a man called Jesus said, "For there
is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; neither hid, that
shall not be known". His words are the reason for my hope, and the
reason for my assurance that they will be fulfilled.
