DCMS 
Dallas County Medical Society Presents 
An Evening at The Science Place 
FAIR PARK, DALLAS 
WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 27, 1999 
Ronald C. Jones, MD, was Parkland's chief resident on 
November 22, 1963, the day President John F. Kennedy was 
shot. He will relive his experience that day from the moment 
he answered the stat page and heard the hospital operator say: 
"The President's Been Shot and They're Bringing Him to the Emergency Room 
Sponsored in part by Texas Medical Liability Trust 
,-r,-nS3TW<n 
t * .'flu :i«T ;y

--- PAGE BREAK ---Reflections || 
Assassination of a president 
RONALD C.

JONES, MD • Chief of Surgery, BUMC 
November 22, 1998, marked the 35th anniversary of the assassina- 
tion of President John F.

Kennedy in Dallas, Texas.

Dr.

Ron Jones, 
a surgery resident at Parkland Memorial Hospital at that time, was 
among the first group of physicians in the emergency room with the 
President.

Dr.

Jones was asked to recount his recollections of that time.

—Michael A.

E.

Ramsay, MD 
On November 22, 1963, as a 
young chief surgery resident 
at Parkland Memorial Hospi- 
tal having lunch in the hospital cafete- 
ria with Dr.

Malcolm Perry, 1 suddenly 
heard several stat pages for various de- 
partment chairmen over the loud- 
speaker.

This was before the age of 
beepers, and messages were obtained 
by prominently displayed lighted signs 
or by overhead speaker pages.

Most 
current chief residents had not been 
bom.

1 went to the telephone in the cafeteria, called the opera- 
tor, and asked why she was paging so many chairmen stat.

She 
replied, ‘The President has been shot and they are bringing him 
to the emergency room and need physicians.” 1 experienced a tre- 
mendous rush of adrenaline and a flushed feeling throughout my 
body.

As 1 turned around, I immediately saw the chairman of the 
Department of Anesthesiology and the operating room nurse 
supervisor and informed them.

Dr.

Marion Jenkins said, “1 will 
go to the operating room and bring down an anesthesia machine," 
and Ms.

Bell said she would get the operating room ready.

At that 
point 1 assumed that the President had probably been shot in a 
crowd and would undergo emergency surgery.

Dr.

Malcolm Perry and I, along with Dr.

James “Red" Duke, 
one of the junior residents, took the back steps down one flight 
to the emergency room.

Dr.

Perry and I went to Trauma Room 1 
and Dr.

Duke to Trauma Room 2.

As we entered the room, the 
President was already on a cart, motionless, his eyes open with a 
stare.

Mrs.As we entered the room, the 
President was already on a cart, motionless, his eyes open with a 
stare.

Mrs.

Kennedy was standing in the comer near the door- 
way.

Dr.

James Carrico, a second-year resident, was attempting 
to intubate the President, and 2 junior residents were attempt- 
ing to start an intravenous line.

It was obvious that the Presi- 
dent was not breathing, although Dr.

Carrico had thought he had 
seen agonal respirations.

There was a small wound in the mid- 
line of the lower neck, < 1 cm, and a posterior head injury on the 
right.

Dr.

Perry immediately started performing a tracheostomy, 
and 1 performed a cutdown on the cephalic vein in the left arm.

The room filled quickly with physicians from various specialties, 
as well as attending staff.

1 obtained intravenous access in <1 
minute.

As the tracheostomy was performed, air was thought to 
come from the neck incision, and the possibility of a pneumotho- 
rax or tracheal injury was entertained.

1 inserted a left anterior 
chest tube in the second interspace in the midclavicular line.

Not 
knowing whether it was a right or left pneumothorax, Dr.

Paul 
Peters, chairman of urology, and Dr.

Charles Baxter, who up to 
this point was assisting Dr.

Perry with the tracheostomy—with 
some assistance from me—inserted a right chest tube.

A portable 
electrocardiogram machine was moved into the room, and a trac- 
ing obtained on the President revealed a straight line.

All of this 
occurred during a 10- to lSmiinute interval.

1 remembered a lecture in medical school given by one of 
the professors who said, “Be sure of your diagnoses and treatment 
because someday you may be treating the president of the bank." 
I grew up in Harrison, Arkansas, and by some astronomical odds 
found myself treating the President of the United States.

The head wound was extensive, and within 10 minutes, with 
closer evaluation of the head wound, it became obvious that the 
President could not be resuscitated.

Mrs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The head wound was extensive, and within 10 minutes, with 
closer evaluation of the head wound, it became obvious that the 
President could not be resuscitated. Mrs. Kennedy was in the 
room, and the President was not turned over for examination of 
his back. A priest was called, and as 1 left the room it was my 
impression, without any history of how the President had been 
shot, that the neck wound was an entrance wound and the pos- 
terior head wound was a large exit wound. It was not until the 
next day after the President’s body had been taken to Bethesda, 
Maryland, for autopsy that the question arose as to whether the 
neck wound was an entrance wound or an exit wound, since a 
posterior upper trunk wound had been identified at autopsy. The impact of the event did not hit home until I left the 
room and was quickly greeted by a Secret Service agent who ap- 
proached me and asked, “What is the condition of the President? I need to phone Joseph Kennedy and tell him the condition of 
his son." Until this time, everything had been a routine auto- 
matic resuscitation of a gunshot wound to the neck and head. Within a few steps, I was also greeted by someone from the Fed- 
eral Bureau of Investigation who asked the same question and 
Ronald C. Jones, MD 
BUMC PROCEEDINGS 1999;12:97-99 
97

--- PAGE BREAK ---98 
BAYLOR UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER PROCEEDINGS 
VOLUME 12, NUMBER 2 
Figure 1.

Parkland's Trauma Room 1, where physicians and staff tried 
to resuscitate President Kennedy after the shooting.

stated, “I have to call J.

Edgar Hoover and inform him of the 
condition of the President." At that moment no announcement 
of the President’s condition had been made.

The agents were 
unable to get an outside telephone line, since all phones were 
blocked with incoming calls, which would soon be coming from 
all over the world.

I took them to the telephone switchboard 
operator in an attempt for her to obtain an outside line.

I went 
to the operating room, and it was then that I learned that Gov- 
emor John Connally was being brought to the operating room 
for surgery by Dr.

Robert Shaw, chairman of the Division of 
Thoracic/Cardiac Surgery.

Governor Connally had been shot in 
the arm and thigh and had a sucking chest wound.

I wanted to call my wife, Jane, who was a dietitian at the 
Veterans Administration Hospital, and inform her of what had 
happened, but I could not get an outside line.

I realized that if I 
went to a pay phone 1 could make an outside call.

By then most 
people in the United States had already heard of the tragedy.

That evening as she picked me up and we went home, there were 
police cars extending in all directions from Parkland Hospital as 
far as the eye could see, and police were on the roof of Parkland 
Hospital with rifles.

It was not until the next day that questions 
would be asked as to whether the President was shot from the 
front or behind, whether there was more than one assassin, and 
who was responsible for the assassination.

Just as there have been 
questions about the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln, 
questions remain after 35 years about the assassination of Presi- 
dent John F.

Kennedy.Just as there have been 
questions about the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln, 
questions remain after 35 years about the assassination of Presi- 
dent John F.

Kennedy.

k $ 
That evening in The Dallas Times Herald newspaper headlines 
in large print read, “President Dead.” And in The Dallas Morning 
News, “Kennedy Slain On Dallas Street." In the Chicago Tribune 
2 days later the headlines read, “Monday A Mourning Day." Many 
stores across the United States, as well as professional sports games 
and other events, were either closed or canceled.

President Lyndon Johnson established the Warren Commis- 
sion on November 29,1963.1 was not contacted by the Warren 
Commission until the following spring—on Friday, March 20, 
1964—although in the interim the Federal Bureau of Investiga- 
tion did stop by at least once to interview me.

My testimony for 
the Warren Commission was taken in Dallas by counsel Arlen 
Specter, now a US senator.

Questions were asked as to why I 
initially thought the neck wound was an entrance wound, 
whether 1 was a ballistics expert, and whether I had any notes 
other than those written the day following the assassination.

It 
is interesting that I have seen my handwritten statement given 
to the commission stamped “top secret." 
I stated for the Warren Commission that the neck injury was 
very small and relatively clean, as you would see from a bullet 
that is entering rather than exiting a patient.

If this were an exit 
wound, you would think that it exited at a very low velocity to 
produce no more damage than this had done, and if it was a 
missile of high velocity, I would expect more of an explosive type 
of exit wound, with more tissue destruction than appeared on 
examination.It 
is interesting that I have seen my handwritten statement given 
to the commission stamped “top secret." 
I stated for the Warren Commission that the neck injury was 
very small and relatively clean, as you would see from a bullet 
that is entering rather than exiting a patient.

If this were an exit 
wound, you would think that it exited at a very low velocity to 
produce no more damage than this had done, and if it was a 
missile of high velocity, I would expect more of an explosive type 
of exit wound, with more tissue destruction than appeared on 
examination.

I had stated that I thought such a small throat 
wound could have been caused by a whole bullet only if it was 
traveling at an extremely low velocity, “to the point that you 
might think that his bullet hardly made it through soft tissues.” 
However, ballistics studies performed subsequently would indi- 
cate that if a bullet never tumbles, never strikes bone, and never 
fragments, the exit wound can be the same size as the entrance 
wound.

My initial impression that Friday afternoon was that the 
neck wound was an entrance wound.

However, assuming that the 
information obtained at the autopsy is correct, I can accept the 
commission’s determination that it was an exit wound.

If in the 
future more than one assassin is implicated, then the question 
remains.

Several of us have recently been interviewed by the 
Assassination Review Board, established by President Bush and 
appointed approximately 5 years ago by President Clinton.

That 
board concluded its investigation in September 1998.

Some good can come from such an event and lessons can 
be learned, although everything functioned like clockwork dur- 
ing the attempted resuscitation.

One of the first things identi- 
fied was the need for better communication throughout the 
hospital, specifically, with one-way phone lines to the outside and 
direct lines to the blood bank, x-ray, operating room, and other 
strategic areas in the hospital.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some good can come from such an event and lessons can 
be learned, although everything functioned like clockwork dur- 
ing the attempted resuscitation. One of the first things identi- 
fied was the need for better communication throughout the 
hospital, specifically, with one-way phone lines to the outside and 
direct lines to the blood bank, x-ray, operating room, and other 
strategic areas in the hospital. As a result, red phones were in- 
stalled as hot lines. Better communication was established with 
neighboring hospitals. A large room was identified in which to 
place the press for such disasters, as well as a room for families. Figure 2. Headlines like this one in The Dallas Times Herald delivered 
the news of President Kennedy’s death to a stunned nation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---APRIL 1999 
ASSASSINATION OF A PRESIDENT 
99 
Figure 3.

Parkland Memorial Hospital as it looked in 1964.

(Photo by 
Ronald C.

Jones, MD.) 
Routine emergency room disaster drills were implemented.

When appearing before the press following a disaster, one should 
state only what is known and not speculate.

If you did not see it, 
do not repeat it.

In retrospect, a very thorough examination of 
injuries should be documented at the time of the event rather 
than relying on memory and estimations.

However, none of us 
had ever been involved with an assassination of a president, nor 
had one occurred previously in our lifetime.

Shortly after, Parkland became better known as a trauma 
hospital, and Care of the Trauma Patient was written by the De- 
partment of Surgery at The University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical School—the first book to address the overall care of the 
trauma patient rather than just care of the orthopaedic trauma 
patient.

In that book, an x-ray of a sucking chest wound appears, 
which is the x-ray of Governor Connally.

The Secret Service seemed to become much more active in 
identifying hospitals capable of managing severely injured pa- 
tients.

Prior to dignitaries arriving in cities, these plans were put 
in place.

They knew during President Kennedy’s visit to Dallas 
which hospital he would be taken to in the event of illness or 
injury, but that information is now publicized to the staff and 
hospital in advance.Prior to dignitaries arriving in cities, these plans were put 
in place.

They knew during President Kennedy’s visit to Dallas 
which hospital he would be taken to in the event of illness or 
injury, but that information is now publicized to the staff and 
hospital in advance.

I continue to receive letters asking the same questions about 
whether the neck wound was an entrance or an exit wound, 
whether there was a lone assassin, whether there was more than 
one bullet striking the President and Governor Connally, what 
my thoughts are about the assassination, what type of trache- 
otomy tube was inserted, what the length of the tracheotomy 
incision was, whether the President was alive or dead when he 
arrived in the emergency room, whether the President was re- 
suscitated and left in a vegetative state, and whether anything 
else could have been done to save his life.

I’m also asked for my 
autograph.

If I knew the answers to some questions I have been 
asked, there would no longer be the need for any speculation 
surrounding the assassination.

The official response from the physicians who took care of 
the President can be found in the Warren Commission report.

After 35 years, recollections begin to fade, and it would be in- 
appropriate to make statements at variance with the Warren 
Commission report without new information.

The physicians 
involved agreed within the first few months following the assas- 
sination that books and detailed articles would not be written 
with the idea of financial reward.

Some physicians have been 
interviewed by authors, but others have refused any interviews 
and refused to make any comment since their testimony before 
the Warren Commission.

It is obvious that the government con- 
tinues to follow this episode, as evidenced by the appointment 
of the Assassination Review Panel.

There has been considerable 
speculation by various individuals based on interviews with a 
multitude of people.It is obvious that the government con- 
tinues to follow this episode, as evidenced by the appointment 
of the Assassination Review Panel.

There has been considerable 
speculation by various individuals based on interviews with a 
multitude of people.

Not much new information has come forth.

The only direct firsthand information that the physicians have 
is during the 20 minutes or more that we were present in Trauma 
Room 1.

Although most comments in letters obtained have been 
supportive, gracious, and thankful for what the physicians at- 
tempted to do, there have been those that were critical and ver- 
bally abusive.

During the first few years, not many books were written 
about the assassination, but in time dozens of books have been 
written.

It is interesting to enter a book store, open a book con- 
cerning the assassination of President Kennedy, see your name 
listed in the references, and then turn to see how you have been 
quoted.

Some quotes are out of context, some are accurate, and 
others are wrong.

Just as the questions remain about President Lincoln, they 
will also remain about President John F.

Kennedy.

There are some 
interesting comparisons.

Booth shot Lincoln in a theater and hid 
in a warehouse.

Oswald shot Kennedy from a warehouse and hid 
in a theater.

“John Wilkes Booth” and “Lee Harvey Oswald” each 
contain 15 letters.

Booth and Oswald were murdered before a 
trial could be arranged.

Lincoln’s secretary, named Kennedy, 
advised him not to go to the theater, and Kennedy’s secretary, 
named Lincoln, advised him not to go to Dallas.

Lincoln and 
Kennedy were carried in death on the same caisson.

Both were 
slain on Friday and in the presence of their wives.

Lincoln was 
elected in 1860.

Kennedy was elected in 1960.

I was on trauma call every other day.

President Kennedy was 
assassinated on Friday, and I was on call again the following 
Sunday.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I was on trauma call every other day. President Kennedy was 
assassinated on Friday, and I was on call again the following 
Sunday. As I sat in the operating room lounge on Sunday morn- 
ing just finishing surgical treatment of a stab wound to the neck, 
the telephone rang and I was informed that Oswald had been 
shot and they were bringing him to the emergency room. Dr. Perry was in the operating room as well and we went to the emer- 
gency room. I listened this time for a heartbeat, which was 
present, but Oswald was not moving. I again inserted a left chest 
tube and did a cutdown on the cephalic vein. Drs. Tom Shires, 
Malcolm Perry, Robert McClelland, and I operated on him sev- 
eral minutes, but he had too many major vessel injuries, and the 
saga started over. REPRINTED WITH PERMISSION. TO RECIEVE A FREE COPY OF BUMC PROCEEDINGS, CALL 214-820-2815.