hhhh 10


tJLBA

2V November 1963


The Inconceivable and inexplicable Impunity with which an Individual with a previously
known criminal background killed Oswald, the main suspect in Kennedy's murder, in the
very presence of the police and in the basement of the prison, shows in a scandalous and
Indisputable way that powerful political and reactionary forces within the United States
are using every means and influence to cover up the masterminds and the real motives
of Kennedy's assassination. World public opinion demands full punishment for the deeds.
It Is absurd that the Dallas police and the district attorney have declared the case closed
when scarcely forty-eight hours have passed aince an event of such Importance as the as-
sassination of the President of the United States.


COURT SENTENCES CANADIAN TO 30 YEARS

Havana Domestic Service in Spanish 1643 GMT 23 November 1963--F

(Text) The Havana Revolutionary Court tried and condemned to 30 years' deprivation
of freedom Canadian Citizen Ronald Patrick Lippert for the crime of espionage in the service
of the Central intelligence Agency, CIA. The court absolved the accused William David
Milne because his participation in the espionage activities of Lippert in Cuba was not proved.

Lippert and Milne arrived at Rancho Boyeroa airport on 24 October in a small plane from
Miami, attempting to pass large quantities of explosives, magnetic mines, grenades, detaonators,
and bullets In baggage labeled as candles. During the trial It was demonstrated that Lippert
began to work with the CIA In 1962, receiving training courses at that time from a member
of the Yankee agency known as Charlie (Farron — phonetic), who showed him how to work
with codes, secret writings, and other means of communication.

The Canadian citizen, Ronald Patrick Lippert, whc was condemned to 30 years' imprison-
ment in Havana, has residence In Miami and received training from the CIA which paid
him 400 dollars per month. According to his own confession, Lippert received instructions
from CIA agent Charlie (Farron) to bring and introduce into Cuba various sabotage materials
and explosives, under the guise of alleged commercial trips. He was discovered on 24
October when he arrived at Rancho Boyeroa airport from Miami with 18 cans liabeled as
candy and preserves but which contained explosives to be turned over to criminal elements
which were to use It for terroristic acts and sabotage against the revolution. A customs
official opened the cans An front of Lippert himself, uncovering the explosives which the
CIA frequently sends to Cuba by aH means.


U.S. PROGRESSIVES VOICE SOLIDARITY

Havana PRENSA LATINA In Spanish 0130 GMT 23 November 1963— B (OFFICIAL USE ONLY)

(Summary) Havana—The Young Communist Union received a letter from the coordinating
committee of the Progressive Youth of the United States (PYOC) expressing deep fellow
feelings for Cuba's youth and people. It says the PYOC has issued an appeal to all U.S.
national youth organizations to (demonstrate?) solidarity with Cuba by organizing collections
of medical supplies, clothes, and food. The PYOC says that it is working to change the inter-
ventionist policy pursued by the UoS* Government. It says relations based on mutual respect
between Cuba and the United State* are good for both countries.

%
