Qu030.1914
Chapter Eleven
The Cuban Question:
Coincidence or Conspiracy?
Despite knowledge of Oswald's apparent
interest in pro-Castro and anti-Castro
activities and top-level awareness of
certain CIA assassination plots, the FBI
made no special investigative effort into
questions of possible Cuban government
or Cuban exile involvement in the assassi-
nation independent of the Oswald investi-
gation....(This) failure to follow signifi-
cant leads in the Cuba area is surprising.
These leads raise significant questions.
--The Schweiker Report
"Kennedy was trying to get Castro, but
Castro got him first....It will all
come out someday."
--President Lyndon B.Johnson
I.Castro and Camelot
On its surface, one of the most compelling tra-

--- PAGE BREAK ---s trying to get Castro, but
Castro got him first....It will all
come out someday."
--President Lyndon B.Johnson
I.Castro and Camelot
On its surface, one of the most compelling tra-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuba/2
ditional theories about President Kennedy's assassination
boils down to this: The Kennedy administration was engaged
in a massive secret war to topple the government of Fidel
7j
Castro. rhis effort included the active, determinedparti-
cipation of the Presidentand his brother, Attorney General
Robert F. Kennedy. In addition, there were numerous ex-
traordinary. ridiculously inept attempts by government
officials to assassinate.the Cuban premier--efforts that
7
surely were sanctioned in some subtle form by the Kennedys.
From a practical standpoint, none of this activity was a
secret to those who needed to know--including, the evidence
shows, Fidel Castro. The Cuban Premier's knowledge of the
schemes seems to have been in such intimate detail that he
and his government managed to survive them all.Indeed, two
decades later,it is clear that Castro has survived,in a
political as well as a personal sense, all the sponsors of
those schemes. He has managed to maintain his power as well
as his life。
Was a key element in Castro's successful survival the
PIMKD
elimination of John F. Kennedy? Did he envision Kennedy's
assassination as a final, desperate effort to save his own
M1l
skin? From the moment of President Kennedy's death, there
was an almost studied indifference to these questions by
those empowered to investigate the assassination. While
these chilling efforts to kill Castro were known to the CIA
and the FBI--and even more fully and specifically known by

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns by
those empowered to investigate the assassination. While
these chilling efforts to kill Castro were known to the CIA
and the FBI--and even more fully and specifically known by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuba/3
Warren Commissioner Allen Dulles--all such information was
Comrnewno
t
excluded from the investigation andthe public record.
八
In the immediate wake of the assassination,it is now
known that those who were privy.to the secret operations
against Castro wondered if retribution were not a logical
possibility. One of those who wondered was Kennedy's suc-
cessor, Lyndon B. Johnson. Another was Robert Kennedy, the
President's brother.Even Chief Justice Earl Warren referred
privately to Cuba as "one of the principal suspects." In
m
classic terms, Castro possessed the motive, means and
opportunity。 The latter two elements were abundantly present
in Castro's network of agents secretedamong the thousands
of Cubans who were operatives for U.S. intelligence in the
effort to destroy the Cuban government。
fatuous, if not preposterous, to suggest that Castro would
risk retribution that could amount to his annihilation.
Moreover, it is argued, Castro would have surely preferred
the liberal and diplomacy-minded Kennedy as President over
the alternative--a pragmatic Texan believed tobe short on
ideology and long cn getting the job done。 Johnson, that
argument goes, represented a far greater potential threat to
Castro。
It is true that, on the surface, Kennedy was gesturing
toward some sort of accommodation with Cuba in 1963. Today,
his admirersclaim that President Kennedy had taken the

--- PAGE BREAK ---to
Castro。
It is true that, on the surface, Kennedy was gesturing
toward some sort of accommodation with Cuba in 1963. Today,
his admirersclaim that President Kennedy had taken the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WlmotmuWhhnnee
WhedeMuamanicanUaMeahheenl
Cuba/4
ioFin-whinMdud/m
initial steps toward the basic repair of the dangerous chasn
between the United States and Castro. In evident reaction to
the nightmare of the Cuban Missile Crisis some months earlier;
Kennedy initiated and consummated a Test Ban Treaty with the
Soviet Union. But this laudable accomplishment really signi-
fied no substantive change in the President's actual posi-
tion towards Cuba and Castro. The argument that Castro would
have preferred Kennedy over Johnson also offers as evidence
an agreement Kennedy made not to invade Cuba, in return for
apromise from the Soviets that they would remove their nuc
lear missiles from the island. That agreement, however;
che
e terms and allow an on-site inspection by the United
States.
The argument that Kennedy was making conciliatory
gestures toward Cuba must be considered alongside the fact
well established today. that President Kennedy's plans
overthrow Castro-fand hisefforts to assassinate the Cuban
Leader-
>continued with ominous and increasing intensity long
fter 0ctober 1962。Gestures aside, the important consicer-

Indeed, they were going full-blast in November 1963, even as
John F. Kennedy passed through Dealey Plaza in Dallas.
If it is true that Castro would rot have wanted Presi-

--- PAGE BREAK ---onsicer-

Indeed, they were going full-blast in November 1963, even as
John F. Kennedy passed through Dealey Plaza in Dallas.
If it is true that Castro would rot have wanted Presi-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuba/5
larly grim historical irony in what came to pass. With
Kennedy's death and Johnson's succession, the efforts a-
gainst Castro and Cuba began at once to wind down, even
Mthough they continued in relatively'gentle′fashion for
another year or so. President Johnson's interest in fighting
communism focussed almost immediately on a troubled land on
the other side of the world, Vietnam.There, Johnson took
his first steps toward the massive military and political
disaster that ultimately drove him from office.'7
Phereisno
evidence that President Johnson ever encouraged a single)
initiative against Castro or his country. Whether or not
argument can be made that he was Served supremely well by
the change in administrations. In every practical sense, the
events of Dealey Plaza eliminated the deadly difficulties
Castro faced with the the U.S.Government.
But would a leader as shrewd as Castro have risked the
potent threat of an all-out invasion that might have been
hwAo:
precipitated by his killing of Kennedy? That question is
eguctu
But in any consideration of this point, one must ask whether
Castro could reasonably expect to survive the continuing
barrage of Kennedy efforts to destroy him. It is hard
to
imagine that, sooner or later, Castro's good fortune would
not forsake him. Inevitably. one of the countless official
tu

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Khou bo?nilhmg lutu Otumy Wvedun lNle
hdluenArentechdnu
efforts to overthrow his government would have succeeded,
despite the humiliating failures that had become a hallmark
foolishness and ineptitude during the Sixties. If Castro
took such a calculated risk as is suggested here, he once again
demonstrated his uncanny shrewdness and ability to survive.

--- PAGE BREAK ---foolishness and ineptitude during the Sixties. If Castro
took such a calculated risk as is suggested here, he once again
demonstrated his uncanny shrewdness and ability to survive.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuba/7
There are many popular variations on the thesis that
Castro had sonething to do with the death of Kennedy either
through active plotting or through passive influence. One
thieory holds that Lee Harvey Oswald, a Castro admirer, was
a
inflamed by press accounts in September, 1963 that Castro was
1
threatening retaliation if the Kennedys did not cease their
efforts to kill him.-Supposedly motivated by a sense of prg-
tectiveness toward Castro, Oswald launched himself on_a series
of actions that culminated at Dealey Plaza. Another theory holds
(#1#
tiat some of the(Kennedy agents sent to kill Castro were turned
around by the Cuban premier and sent back on a successful mission
AnNhisvl
to murder Kennedy. Or, one argument goes, Kennedy used the mob
against Castro, and they turned against him of their own volition.
N
Other proposed possibilities are that Castro knew of Oswald's
supposed plans and did nothing to stop them, or that he sent his
own agents to infiltrate the ClA-dominated exile groups in a
successful plot against Kennedy. There are also variations on
each of these theories.
Another( possibility in the hypothetical considerations is
that Castro actively plotted the President's murder himself.
p "uebro araqou xoneuas Xq pasropue Iiaeiy st uotatsod aui
member of the Senate Intelligence Committee that investigated
these possibilities. "There is no doubt in my mind," states
Senator Morgan, "that John F. Kennedy was assassinated by Fidel
Castro or someone under his influence in retaliation for our
cfforts to kill him." However, Senator lorgan's committee did

--- PAGE BREAK ---r Morgan, "that John F. Kennedy was assassinated by Fidel
Castro or someone under his influence in retaliation for our
cfforts to kill him." However, Senator lorgan's committee did

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuba/8
not reach such firm conclusions.
On the other hand, it is possible that Castro had nothing
at all to do with the Kennedy assassination,that he was the
passive beneficiary of a change in the course of history that
yielded him enormously favorable results--immediately.
(One-lineSpace)
Plans to destroy Castro and his regime began nearly a year
before John F. Kennedy took office. rhe earliest'discussion of
murdering the Cuban premier took place in the spring of 1960,
according to the subsequent Congressional testimony of officials
m
who were involved. It was in August_of 1960_that theu.s)
Government first approached the Mafia with a lucrative offer to
murder Castro. Thus, it is clear that the most extreme of the
administration, as it attempted to wrench Cuba from the grasp of
conmunisn. "chese carly cfforts vere somewhat tentative, certainly
lacking the high priority that characterized subsequent attempts,
Eisenhower that the basic plans vere conccived to secretly sponsor
an invasion by Cuban exiles vho would topple the Castro regime
and restore Cuba as a country with interests compatible vith the
UritedStates。
Invasion plans were in place and their sponsors were vildly
enthusiastic to go ahead with the invasion when Kennedy was sworn

--- PAGE BREAK ---

/doutnineennrmhnAalinntbuthmhNeediy
apnnl MeChBry
'dumetMuyhhh
@iba/9
wWm
in as President on January 20, 196l. Although the ncw President
had been briefed about the plans by CIA Director Allen
Dulles seven weeks prior to the inauguration,Kennedy had
not offered specific approval.He had accepted the fact the
plans were in place and,according to sympathetic biographers,by CIA Director Allen
Dulles seven weeks prior to the inauguration,Kennedy had
not offered specific approval.He had accepted the fact the
plans were in place and,according to sympathetic biographers,

later. The CIA Director, however, seems to have had a different
impression, or at least acted as though he did。 He expedited
theproject.
In retrospect,it was virtually inevitable that the
invasion plans would go forvard that spring. Fourteen hundred
zealous Cuban refugees were in training at a CIA camp in
Guatamala. Meanwhile,in Cuba, Castro awaited delivery of
new aircraft and arms from the Soviets. Cuban pilots were
being trained in Czechoslovakia. In a few more nonths, such
an invasion would be rendered impossible by even the most
optimistic assessment. To call off the plans vould mean
unleasning the hundreds of trained Cuban exiles toCact on
their ownj-totally out of control. Even worse, it would
spread the angry word throughout Latin Anerica that the will
of the new administration was weak and even indifferent to
the entrenchment of Soviet power in the West,just off the
U.S. coast.)No realistic alternative existed to the planned
invasion.
In this endeavor, President Kennedy set some very
special, if naive, goals. While he wanted to orchestrate a
b
luelt
nteiudewolwnbtauneu.imbraenm

--- PAGE BREAK ---e existed to the planned
invasion.
In this endeavor, President Kennedy set some very
special, if naive, goals. While he wanted to orchestrate a
b
luelt
nteiudewolwnbtauneu.imbraenm

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ntliwmnwtt
cabarzo dat Mu UHal pubishel day
by/t
victory. he felt it crucial that his hand not be seen behind
the victory.While Kennedy did want to be rid of the Castro
regime, he did not want to be caught bringing about its
overthrow. Such heavy-handed, unilateral military action was
inimical to the world image he wished to create.Kennedy's
dilemma was a blueprint for disaster.
To this day there is disagreement about just what
happened.However,it does seem clear that,after agreeing
to the plan, Kennedy initiated a series of steps that virtually
assured failure, although it could not be blamed entirely
uO
Kennedy. There is little question that the President was
handicapped by misleading advice from the CIA as well as
from his military advisors. The biggest problem,however:
was that Kennedy continued to hope that he could achieve hf
goal without any notable sacrifice. Thomas Powers, in his
analysis of this venture, writes:
W
"...Kennedy hoped to scale down the invasion sufficienfly
(so) that it might pass relatively unnoticed. He was more
alarmed, in short, by the possibility of noisy success than
he was by the prospect of quiet failure, failing to see tha
failure is the noisiest thing of all."
Indeed, the invasion at the Bay of Pigs on April 17,
196l, was one of the most humiliating events in American
history. No simple answers present themselves to explain why
there was such an abysmal failure. It seems fairly clear
that the disaster was born of mixed signals, poor analysis,
bad advice and an absence of any firm resolve about what was
henunlkmlahatil，iita
nitia
aelwaannltirnelmniste.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rly clear
that the disaster was born of mixed signals, poor analysis,
bad advice and an absence of any firm resolve about what was
henunlkmlahatil，iita
nitia
aelwaannltirnelmniste.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuba/11
needed to reach the ultimate goal. Castro's intelligence
operation was so well oiled that, just before the invasion,
he rounded up one hundred thousand potential counter-revo-
lutionaries, including all CIA sources. However the blame
should be placed, the Bay of Pigs calamity was without
question the grcatest debacle of the Kennedy administration.
In addition, it was the seedbed for problems that would
haunt President Kennedy for all of his remaining days and
his surviving faiily for years to come.
The Kennedy brothers may have been somewhat ambivalent
about Castro before the Bay of Pigs, but that lack of resolve
was hardened into an absolute determination as the stark
humiliation Settled over the White House. Thomas Powers has
written a cogent description:
"rhe Bay of Pigs marked the beginning of Kennedy's
determination to get rid of Castro, the moment when Castro
ceased to be an enemy inherited from Fisenhower, and became
one ofhisown."6
The entire administration and its supporters were
stained vith shame and failure. Setting aside the squabbles
about winat went wrong,officials had to face the fact that
Castro's jails. Castro's reputation as a giant-slayer soared
in the world community. President Kennedy was lectured on
morality by Soviet Premier Khrushchev. At the Same time,
elements of Kennedy's own constituency denounced him not for
IaeWhtonnhn人uemuAonnthls
Gmuetbbretiterrble

--- PAGE BREAK ---dy was lectured on
morality by Soviet Premier Khrushchev. At the Same time,
elements of Kennedy's own constituency denounced him not for
IaeWhtonnhn人uemuAonnthls
Gmuetbbretiterrble

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Oi
cuba/12.Nh
4h
mdlbw
cA Pm.
what he failed to do, but for what he tried to do. Concurrently.
those who despised the New Frontier added a new ingredient
to their repertoire of criticism--ridicule.
The House Select Committee on Assassinations summed it
up this way
"While anti-Castro Cuban exiles in the United States
of being a weak leader who was soft on communism, the adminis-
tration wascriticized from the left for a reactionary
return to barbarism."
President Kennedy responded as subtly and as quietly
and as strongly as he could. First, he accepted full blame
for what had happened. Then he placed the Cuban account in
the hands of his brother, the Attorney-General, with stated
orders to examine the entire debacle and to determine what
went wrong. It is clear today that, actually. the assignment
went much further than simply to find out what happened. The
assignment was to avenge the humiliation, to correct the
awesome failure--in short, to get rid of Fidel Castro.
Dmhn mhateLuulutyFrdl lell
Thtb
rublenaulddonh whttnle 
ogefaweyadbuaiueeantlalnit et momtin.
Dunp whowueatiJfkLu

--- PAGE BREAK ---correct the
awesome failure--in short, to get rid of Fidel Castro.
Dmhn mhateLuulutyFrdl lell
Thtb
rublenaulddonh whttnle 
ogefaweyadbuaiueeantlalnit et momtin.
Dunp whowueatiJfkLu

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ymwauyntHetusaule ueutlnouneJEtsam
aprmet
Cuba/15
files before the Kennedy administration settled down to its
Subseruentplanswere
Mih
serious effortsto eliminate Castro
hardly better. In the wake of the Bay of Pigs disaster, the
Kennedy people--including the President himself--allowed the
seething exiles to believe thata new invasion was in the
Pigs. It is certain that administration officials promoted
this feeling, but(convincing evidence also indicates that
the President himself assured a top exile leader in liay of
196l that he could be certain of another invasion, this one
with enough military support to be successful. Throughout
the summer of l96l, raids against Cuba by exile groups
continued, and specific assassination plots were put into
motion against Castro. The premier, while suffering some
losses, managed to survive each of the exile assaults made
usually under the sponsorship of the CIA. As for the schemes
to kill him, Castro handily thwarted them all.
charged with "doing something about Cuba"could sense the
impatience from the White liouse. In carly fall, Richard
Bissell, the CIA officer in charge of resolving the Cuba
problen, came face to face with wrath from the highest
authority. According to later testimony before a Senate
mtCItp.
committee, Bissell was "chewed out in the Cabinet room of
Ecetion
General for, as (Bissell) put it, sitting on his ass and not

--- PAGE BREAK ---According to later testimony before a Senate
mtCItp.
committee, Bissell was "chewed out in the Cabinet room of
Ecetion
General for, as (Bissell) put it, sitting on his ass and not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuba/16
doing anything about getting rid of Castro and the Castro
regime." rhis urgency from on high was filtered down, and
the natural result was the development of yet more plots and
invasion plans. While there is continuing debate over whether
tho Kennedys subtly authorized the murder plots, there is no
question about the brothers' zeal for ridding the Western
Hemisphere of the Castro regime.
A few months later, in November of 196l, Operation
Mongoose was launched. It set sail vith the highest blessings
G
of the Kennedy aaninistration.At a meeting in Robert
Kennedy's office, the assembled leaders of liongoose were
told by the Attorney-General that the overthrow of Castro
"carried thne top priority in (the) U.s. Covernrent. No time;
money, effort or nanpower is to be spared." A memo of the
meeting indicates that the assemblage was informed that
President Kennedy, referring to Cuba, indicated "that the
final chapter had not been written--it's got to be done and
will be done."
There could have been no more powerful official encouragement.
The extraordinary array of activities thus set into motion
had little regard for the laws of this country or the natural
confines of morality. In their book, he Fish Is Red,
Warren iinckle and William Turner describe the situation:
"mhe CIn's Cuba Project adventure violated, in addition
to the Agency's own enabling legislation, the Meutrality
Act, the Fircarms Act,...the Munitions Act, IRs, FAA, Customs
and Irumigration regulations and laws in lalf a dozen states."

--- PAGE BREAK ---o the Agency's own enabling legislation, the Meutrality
Act, the Fircarms Act,...the Munitions Act, IRs, FAA, Customs
and Irumigration regulations and laws in lalf a dozen states."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuba/17
.And this list of violations does not cite the normal
guidelines of morality, which Kennedy defenders insist the
brothers held sacred.
Hlot debate still exists over whether the Kennedys, in
C.
addition to authorizing all the other attempts to wreck Cuba
and destroy Castro's government, also sanctioned the efforts
to kill the Cuban premier. To a distant observer, the only
issue seems to be one of semantics. Several of the defense
and intelligence officers who were accustomed to dealing
regularly with the White House believed that the orders were
meant to include assassination. The counter argument is
that, of course, these officers would claim to have understood
the orders in that fashion in.order to cover themselves.
Partisans loyal to the Kennedys argue that the Kennedys
However,all sides seem to agree that under no protocol
would it be acceptable for the subject of assassination to
be broached at the highest levels. "Nobody wants to embarrass
a President of the United States by discussing the assassination
of a foreign leader in his presence," Richard lielms told a
SenateConmittce.
On the other hand, what is certain is that most of the
men in charge of operations interpreted their orders to mean
assassination. Given the enormity of the question--and the
fact that "getting rid of Castro" (and many variations on
that language) was discussed at the highest levels--it seems

--- PAGE BREAK ---an
assassination. Given the enormity of the question--and the
fact that "getting rid of Castro" (and many variations on
that language) was discussed at the highest levels--it seems

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MemoHboasemnonuffBrbhmw ldit
cuba/18wow I IAbMnm /hwn
sure that if assassination was not what the Kennedys had in
mind, they obviously failed to make clear their position.
The point is best illustrated by citing a graphic
exchange President Kennedy once had in a private conversation
with a reporter from the New York Times. Kennedy first asked
the reporter how he personally would feel about the prospect
of assassinating Castro. The reporter expressed a negative
reaction as a matter of principle. President Kennedy agrced
with the reporter, explaining that he had brought it up only
because he was curious to see what the reporter would say.
Then President Kennedy told the reporter that he "was under
terrific pressure...to okay a Castro murder."
rhis exchange, usually pointed to as evidence of Kennedy's
disapproval of such measures, actually shows that the President
r
understood absolutely that his subordinates wanted to kill
Castro.In light of such certainty,it would seem,if the
aei
President really did oppose such an extreme measure,he
them in ambiguities to be debated later on semantic points.
In view of this, it is significant that there is no
Liha
whadhehinMn-f
"auratlwes"
were anxious to murder Castro. Instead of telling them not
of Castro and his regime the "top priority of the U.S.
Government."

--- PAGE BREAK ---icant that there is no
Liha
whadhehinMn-f
"auratlwes"
were anxious to murder Castro. Instead of telling them not
of Castro and his regime the "top priority of the U.S.
Government."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuba/20
of Cuban exiles.A prime function was to corral the dozens
of small bands of exiles--each of them, in most cases,
ferociously loyal to its own leader--and bring them under
one umbrella. (In the earliest days after the Bay of Pigs;
there were 7oo anti-Castro groups。) Missions of varying
descriptions were carried out almost constantly.including
gunboat harassment, sabotage, and the dropping of propaganda
leaflets in addition to planting insurgents on the Cuban
mainland.All of this was done under the cover of commercial
enterprises--more than fifty of them--making the entire
operation a significant`influence on Hiami.Such size,
however, inevitably had its dravbacks. One Army captain, on
assignment to JM/WAVE, later wrote:
"I had envisioned it as a highly responsive, uncluttered
organization. But it... appeared to be a sprawling,bureaucratic
monster."
With such a bureaucracy---and, no doubt, for many other
reasons--the efforts to destroy Castro were not going vell.
A high proportion of the missions failed. While there were a
X
fewpassing
Successes to pacifythe Kennedy brothers,both
liungry for news that Castro was weakening, they still were
exceedingly unhappy about the failures. fo remedy the matter,
the President placed Attorney General Robert Kennedy personally
in charge of the effort in early 1962. During that time, the
Attorney-General spent three weekends in Florida, cstensibly
to visit with members of his family. llowever, Robert Kennedy's

--- PAGE BREAK ---arge of the effort in early 1962. During that time, the
Attorney-General spent three weekends in Florida, cstensibly
to visit with members of his family. llowever, Robert Kennedy's

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuba/21
presence in Florida at that time coincides with several
unofficial reports that the Attorney-General personally
inspected the facilities at JM/WAvE and even engaged in
strategy sessions。Indeed,the "secret war" against Castro
was in full swing. To all concerned with the operation, the
lines of authority clearly ran to the highest level--the
President.
During the early months of Operation Mongoose,no
evidence suggests a resurrection of the old idea to engage
the Mafia to murder Castro. That scheme had been pursued
much earlier without results. In April of 1962,with paltry
success in the secret war against Castro, the CIA reactivated
its plan to have the mob kiil the Cuban premier. Key CIA
officers met with top U.s. mob figures. Soon enough, the
Agency had placed one of its exotic murder weapons--in this
case piils--into the hands of mobster John Roselli to be
used to murder Castro. It seems certain that the revival of
this particular scheme was done without the Kennedys'
specific knowledge, since the Attorney-General was then
leading the Justice Department in its all-out fight to
destroy the Mafia.
IWhen Robert Kennedy heard that the CIA had recruited
the mob to kill Castro, he was furious and stated that he
using the mob. However, despite Robert Kennedy's anger, it
appears that the mob connection continued under specific
Duo,pamhnnfoutpeceit,wu+alenhmmnBg
phrdaedneweolAKipfMmheadmmnhm

--- PAGE BREAK ---using the mob. However, despite Robert Kennedy's anger, it
appears that the mob connection continued under specific
Duo,pamhnnfoutpeceit,wu+alenhmmnBg
phrdaedneweolAKipfMmheadmmnhm

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
Cuba/22
instructions from the CIA. It also is clear that the mob
effort was highly ineffective. Castro was as skiiled at
directly by the CIA.*
*(FN: There is interesting speculation that perhaps the
mob never tried to carry out any attempts to murder Castro--
that it simply went through the motions. Such reasoning
holds that the mob had made a secret agreement with Castro
to use Cuba as a staging area for the importation of narcotics
into the United States. In this'oaoe, the mob pretended to
20
go along with the plots for two reasons: To curry favor with
Castro by keeping him informed of the latest United States
efforts to kill him through the mob and, second, to curry
favor with U.S. officials in hopes of turning down the heat
the mob was feeling from the Justice Department.)
By the fa1l of 1962, the secret war against Castro was
still getting nowhere.Operation Mongoose was a continuing
failure, and the Kennedys were exasperated as well as frustrated.
On October 4th, Robert Kennedy told the Mongoose sponsors
that the President “feels that more priority should be given
to trying to mount sabotage operations." On October l6th, at
the height of the Cuban lissile Crisis, the Attorney-General
assured the Cuba project group that he planned to cevote
That same day. according to papers released in November,
1983, there was a meeting in the President's office to
wy
七
mp
discuss the Missile Crisis. There, Robert Kennedy made it
fm
clear that he sensed possibilities that could solve the Cuba

--- PAGE BREAK ---, there was a meeting in the President's office to
wy
七
mp
discuss the Missile Crisis. There, Robert Kennedy made it
fm
clear that he sensed possibilities that could solve the Cuba

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mht iotetaeMPigDni-ammor conet?/ dnlft
ydmmomyn ul ues, lut
dpelohuteelitihfhat
problem once and for all. He urged that, rather than considering
just taking the missiles out of Cuba, it might be better "if
you're going to get into it at all...whether we should just
get into it and get it over with...." A few minutes later,
the Attorney-General asked the President and his advisors
"whether there is some other way we can get involved in
this...or whether there's some ship that, you know, 3ink the
houw
Maine again, or something."
fnuie
Robert Kennedy's comments leave no question about the
urgency that he,at least,‘felt over the continuing failure
of Mongoose. While others at this Oval Office meeting were
focussed on the Soviets, Robert Kennedy was looking squarely
at the Missile Crisis as an opportunity to do something
labout the Castro regime. As events came to pass, it is clear
whtdoelin
the country out of the political quagmire so brilliantly
exploited by Fidel Castro.
The Cuban Missile Crisis, it is now rather clear, was a
watershed in the Kennedys' official view of Castro. Operation
Mongoose was officially disbanded. An agreement was reached
between Washington and lioscow that in return for tlie removal
of nuclear missiles from Cuba, the United States would
.proinise never to invade the island. (Castro never permitted
US。inspection of the missile sites,a condition of the
agreement. Thus, the agreement never became operative.)
amiMaulhibutin

--- PAGE BREAK ---ise never to invade the island. (Castro never permitted
US。inspection of the missile sites,a condition of the
agreement. Thus, the agreement never became operative.)
amiMaulhibutin

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuba/24
There was a reshuffling of authority pertaining to Cuba, and
at certain levels there appear to have been genuine efforts
toward establishing some normalcy in relations between
Washington and Havana.
By the fall of 1963, William Attwood, then an advisor
to the U.S. delegation to the United Nations, had developed
a line of communication with Castro's regime that,at least
on the surface, appeared to hold promisc for better relations.
Evidence shows that the President was directly involved in
sponsoring this channel. Ambassador Attwood and others
involved in the overtures felt strongly optimistic. Enormous
doubt lingers as to Castro's reaction. Hie accepted the
overtures on the surface as genuine, and many years later
insisted to the House Select Conmittee on Assassinations
mhm
that he regarded them as genuine.
小
Logic points another way. Castro had every reason to
doubt the sincerity of any gesture by the United States,
iw
particularly in view of the events happening simultaneously
with the overtures. It is difficult to grasp why Castro
should have vieved these initiatives as anything more than
八
the President's @ichotomouspolicy. it had already shown up
W
plainly in/nis ambivalence over the Bay of Pigs, He also had
nduw)
urged a halt to the exile raids against Cuban facilities,
while at the same time stepping up sabotage operations. It
JKW a
is hard to imagine that Castro, as a wiley skeptic, took a

--- PAGE BREAK ---rged a halt to the exile raids against Cuban facilities,
while at the same time stepping up sabotage operations. It
JKW a
is hard to imagine that Castro, as a wiley skeptic, took a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuba/25
CennnstigeeulluntilMechw ameniluun
benevolent>view toward any overtures from the Kennedy ad-
ministration. At the same time, as a shrewd manipulator,
that might eventually permit him an advantage.over the Americans--
or over the Soviets, his economic and political sponsors whom
he clearly was beginning to resent.
(One-line Space)
These possible signs of a budding rapprochement were
first felt in some circles in the fall of 1962。The no-
nennh
invasion agreement was believed to be in place and Soviet
missiles
supposedly)had been removed. With this whiff of
accommodation in the air, an agreement was made for the
widio
hadmaliu
return of the inen captured at the Bay of Pigs. The released
nium
prisoners were greeted in Miami by President Kennedy. He
Nestlingu
welcomed them not on a note of reconciliation toward Cuba
W
but with a ringing denunciation of Castro. The returning
u
soldiers presented Kennedy with the flag of their fallen
brigade, and at the end of his rousing address, Kennedy
promised the exiles that the "flag will be returned to this
brigade in a free lavana."
President Kennedy also told the world in his speech: "I
can assure you that it is the strongest wish of the people
of this country...that Cuba shall one day be free again."
To anyone who was listening in Havana, particularly the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ech: "I
can assure you that it is the strongest wish of the people
of this country...that Cuba shall one day be free again."
To anyone who was listening in Havana, particularly the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

onl
102Nlonodnamnyconfutny
urhthiheniwent
 premier, sucn strong language could only be interpreted as a
call for the overthrow of the Castro regime. That absolutcly
was the interpretation made by the freed Cuban prisoners wno
were as determined as ever to regain their homeland.
Wrio
Meanwhile, the CIA-trained exile groups were increasingly
ahxious to get down to the business of toppling Castro.
gu/vAvE,the CIA station in Niami,was surging with activity

maximum operation.CIA assassination plots against Castro
entered a new phase,which included finally aropping the
lafia after its notable lack of successWhile historians
Are able to quibble over distinctions in Anerican policy
change in policy following the Missile Crisis(Throughout
HowdwoThebim"Amuriconb liu?
There were attacks on Soviet ships.Cuban exiles openly took
credit for the attacks,but in viev of all that had gone
before,it certainly could not be assumed that their actions
M
vere purely of their own volition/here were strident
Genials from Wasnington that any exilc activities had the
official sanction of the U.S. government.
In all of this, it seems unlikely that Castro rcally
believed that 1363 brought anything from the Lnited States.
Lut more double talk and cuplicity.
In April, with stern warnings from Moscow, President
Kennedy seemed genuinely to call for an end to the exile

--- PAGE BREAK ---t anything from the Lnited States.
Lut more double talk and cuplicity.
In April, with stern warnings from Moscow, President
Kennedy seemed genuinely to call for an end to the exile

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuba/27
forays against Cuba and the Soviets. In a speech, Kennedy
said，"QUOTE TO COME)
By this time, Castro had amassed 17,0o0 Soviet troops
in Cuba, backed up by 5o0 anti-aircraft missiles. However
         r 
Qf the highly trained exiles were paying any attention to
Him.They continued to be encouraged by their CiA leaders,
and it is feasible that, in many cases, exile leaders were
told that Kennedy's statements were only window dressing to
make it appear that he was trying to stop them. Those who
phose to believe this could hark to the President's rousing
promise in Miami a few months earlier that he hoped to See a
free Havana. Others had only to recall the double-talk of
the earlier Sixties when Washington denied any hand in the
exile raids while at the same tine actually sponsoring them.
President Kennedy's(familiar ambivalence-in this area
was seen most vividly at a press conference in liay of 1963,
when he was asked if his government was aiding the exile
activity against Castro. Stated JFK: "We may well be...well,
none that I am familiar with....I don't think as of today we
are. Eut I wouldn't want to go into details, if we were."
Stirring the confusion, Kennedy had said in a speech a few
weeks earlier: "mime will see Cuba free again, and...when
UeantutimgSacuingmneAupfgf
wlu
mnd
Wy
anIUmnuc
These words certainly had an ominous ring--far from any

--- PAGE BREAK ---d in a speech a few
weeks earlier: "mime will see Cuba free again, and...when
UeantutimgSacuingmneAupfgf
wlu
mnd
Wy
anIUmnuc
These words certainly had an ominous ring--far from any

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuba/28
sense of rapprochiement.
On the other hand, those exiles who for some reason did
believe that Kennedy had abandoned their cause must have
felt a double betrayal from the man they already blamed for
the humiliation at the Bay of Pigs.
Even if, somehow, Kennedy was sincere in warning exile
groups to cease their activities against Cuba in the spring
of 1963, the retreat in the secret war was short-lived. In
June, a decision was made by the National Security Council
"to increase covert activities against Cuba." President
Kennedy approved a sabotage program directed at “four major
segments of the Cuban economy," including electric power,
petroleum refineries, railroads and highways. As late as
October, 1963, specific approval was given to more than a
dozen major sabotage operations in Cuba.
Whatever President Kennedy was saying publicly, pri-
vately it is clear that he wanted full efforts to destroy
the Castro regime. Given Castro's impressive record in per-
ceiving wliat the United States was really up to, the premier
almost surely understood Kennedy's real intentions.
In spite of this evidence, there is today the wide
belief that President Kennedy was trying to stop the exile
raids against Castro, and was trying to seek a genuine
accommodation with Castro. Even if this is correct, it
wny
apparently was of little practical use. By this time, the
exileswere
e too well trained and organized and committed to
minm
W