~~¥ ■ 
. I 
Saturday night the prime minister of the Revolutionary Government and 
first Secretary of PURSC, commander Fidel Castro, gave a comparison by tele- 
vision and radio orientated to the public of the happening where the Pres- 
dent of the United States, John F. Kennedy, lost his life and, the infamous 
campaign of hysterics brought by reactionary elements, warfare* in rela- 
tion with this happening* 
Continuing, we offer the version of the pronouncements of tha 
maximum leader of our Revolution. 
Department of Versions of the Revolutionary Government 
Luis Gomez Wanguemert-Good evening ladies and gentlemen: 
The Commander Fidel Castro, prime minister of the Revolutionary Govern- 
ment and first general Secretary of the United Party of the Socialistic 
Revolution of Cuba, is going to talk to the country through radio and tele- 
vision of actual happenings. 
Dr. Fidel Castro Ruz: Always whenever anything transcendental has occurred 
nationally and internationally, we have esteemed the convenience of talking 
to the country to express our opinions, and in each of these circumstances 
express also the orientation of the Government, the orientation of our Party, 
and for each one of us to know what attitude we must adopt in front of each 
of these situations. 
It is true that we are somewhat accustomed to some unforseen incident, 
important incidents, serious incidents, because since the triumph of the 
Revolution our country has had to confront a series of problems, a series 
of situations, that have unnerved the countryt: to b e able to go on with the 
Revolution

--- PAGE BREAK ---triumph of the 
Revolution our country has had to confront a series of problems, a series 
of situations, that have unnerved the countryt: to b e able to go on with the 
Revolution

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 
Analysis: Objective and Serene 
That is why, having the assassination of the President of the United 
States, which took place yesterday, in mind, for the effects that this may 
have, and for the paper, the role that the Northamerican nation plays in the 
problems of international politics, that is why we think that we should make 
an analysis, especially objective and serene, of the possible consecuences. 
The Government of the United States , in Eisenhower*s Administration 
as 
as well in Kennedy*s, didn’t pratice a policy of friendlyness towards us. 
The policy of both Administrations was characterized by their aggressive 
spirit, hostile and implacable towards our country. 
Our country was a victim of economical aggression, tendencies to pro- 
voke the ruin of our economy and the hunger of our country; it was a victim 
of all sorts of attacks, attacks that cost blood; hundreds of our comrades 
have lost their lives defending us from the attacks of the imperialistic 
Yankee, And not only that, their hostility and their aggression towards our 
country brought us almost to the brink of war, which,fortunately we were able 
to avoid; they brought the world almost to a nuclear war. And still when 
they didn*t contemplate that alternative like the crisis of October, whith 
the invasion of Giron, we are all perfectly conscience that had they finished 
the plans that they planned against our country, that is to say, if the im- 
perialism had been able to establish a part of the beach on our coast, that 
fight would have costed dozens of thousands until-maybe-hundreds of thousands 
of our countrymen’s lives.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rialism had been able to establish a part of the beach on our coast, that 
fight would have costed dozens of thousands until-maybe-hundreds of thousands 
of our countrymen’s lives.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3 
The Assassination Serious and Bad News 
We have been a victim of constant hostility brought on by the United 
States. And between the government and the diligent men of the U.8., it 
fell on Kennedy an important responsibility of these acts. 
Still, the news of the assassination of the President of the United 
States is very serious and bad news. We must analyze it well in order to 
comprehend it; above all, analyze it serenly, without feelings, it is like 
the revolutionary that we must analyze these things. 
Bad news, leaving to one side the human problem, where always the sense- 
bility of man, of any man, he feels afected in front of an act of that kind, 
in front of a crime or assassination; X mean, laying aside the questions, 1 
always react-and I am sure that that is the reaction of the majority of the 
people in this world. We always react with repulsion in front of assassina- 
tions and in front of crime. 
We cannot consider it as a correct weapon with which to fight with, we 
must not. And above all, in the conditions that are produced, because*like 
everything else-we have to circumscribe the environment, the scene, the 
circumstance. 
An Unjustifiable Act 
It sometimes happens, in the middle of a civil war, in the middle of a 
vicious represion, where the revolutionaries are obliged to defend themselves, 
where they are obliged to kill to defend themselves. And another environment, 
another circumstance, in a normal situation, of peace, itfs always an act of 
this kind that is not justifiable. 
With the circumstances that surround the assassination of the President 
of the United States , we feel that there is no justification.

--- PAGE BREAK ---act of 
this kind that is not justifiable. 
With the circumstances that surround the assassination of the President 
of the United States , we feel that there is no justification.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 
But analyzing the question from the political standpoint, objective* I 
was saying that it was a serious and bad new*. 
And some will ask: why?, why exactly the Cubans, who have received so 
much trouble from the Americans from the Administration of Kennedy, how can 
they say that it is bad news, how can they have such an attitude with this 
news. 
We Don't Hate Men; We Hate The Establishments 
It is that the Cubans, in the first place, must act like revdutionaries• 
In the second place, the Cubans as conscientious revolutionaries must not 
confuse the establish^mpts with the men. And we have to start by consider- 
ing that we do not hate men, we hate the systems. 
We hate the imperialistic system, the capitalistic system. But that does- 
n't mean we hate men ;as such, like individuals that are a part of a machine, 
that are a part, more or less, of a system. 
For that reason, we must not confuse the hate towards the system with 
the sentiment that we must have towards man, which is a distinct sentiment, 
it is not a feeling of hate, and much less a feeling of hate that in this 
case would be a feeling of bad taste. 
As marxists-leninists we know that the part of men is a part related 
to each historic age in each society, in each determined moment. And we 
must know the part men play in each society. And above all, one question 
of elementary principle: we don't hate men, we hate the systems. 
We would become happy by the end of one system; the disappearance of a 
system will always be a cause for jubilee. The triumph of a revolution will 
always be a cause for jubilee. 
The death of a man, although this man is our enemy, shouldn*t-.cause 
us any jubilee. In the first . place, for a question of principle,that 
should b* our atfitude. And furthermore, another thing which is veryof a man, although this man is our enemy, shouldn*t-.cause 
us any jubilee. In the first . place, for a question of principle,that 
should b* our atfitude. And furthermore, another thing which is very

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5 
characteristic of us the Cubans, the Latins, the Spanishamericans—whatever 
we are, which is a mixed race with a. determined idiosyncrasy-, always in 
front of death we cease our beligerance, we are inclined to respect eventhough 
it is our enemy, 
I was saying an act of this kind can have negative aspects for the in- 
t 
terests of our country. It is not about the interests of this country , but 
about the interests of the whole world. We must know how to put the interests 
of humanity above the interests of our country. 
We consider that the intents ts of humanity is a negative act* I am going 
to explain why. 
Undefendable the Politics of the United States 
In certain internation political situations, at a given time, there can 
ba bad situations and worse situations. The death of Kennedy has all the 
perspectives that are derived from a bad situation, a worse situation; it 
has the possibility that from a determined situation unfolds another situa- 
stion that could be highly prejudiced for the interests of the peace,, for 
the interests of humanity. 
Why? Maybe because we think that the United States maintains in the 
in ter national order £i;;ur politically defcndable? No. The International 
politics of the United States cannot defend itself.. .Its policy of aggresion, 
imperialism, violation of the rights of other nations, intervention of the 
internal affairs of other countries, domination, represion, blood, aliance 
with the most reactionary sections of the world, participation of bloody 
wars against countries fighting for their liberation, like in South Viet 
Nam, its attitude towards Latin America, its attitude towards us,finally, 
its international politics >ls not in any way defendable in any normal way.

--- PAGE BREAK ---beration, like in South Viet 
Nam, its attitude towards Latin America, its attitude towards us,finally, 
its international politics >ls not in any way defendable in any normal way.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6 
In American society and inside the politics of the United States there 
are elements of a politic much more reactionary, of a politic much more aggre- 
sive, of a politic much more warlike. That is to say, inside a certain si- 
tuation you have classes, and inside one bad politic;you have classes: from 
bad, to worse, to worst. 
And still in bad politics you can have more negative aspects and aspects 
less negative, and inclusive there can exist positive aspects that in its 
place can be bad. 
And all the circumstances of the internal politics of the U.S. , of the 
internal fists for the power in the U.S., the assassination of President 
Kennedy tends to convert the policy of the United States in a yorse^politic 
and add the bad things of the politic of the United States. 
We can say; that there are elements inside the U.S. that defends a poltic 
ultra-reactionary in all fields, so much in the internal politics as in the 
internaltional. And those are the only benefits of what happened yesterday 
in the United States. 
Why? In the United States there has unrolled a series of forces, a 
series of organizations that are very powerful in the Northamerican society 
they are influenced by the big interests of the United States, and there 
is no doubt that a President with the maximum authority in this situation. 
A President is a political man, that should take into account numerous 
factors, advice, opinions, influences of opinion, in general an attitude 
from those that are not politicians by proffesiom.-we could say- if he has 
another proffesion, other interests, and who has political reactions that 
are always the worst reactions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---om those that are not politicians by proffesiom.-we could say- if he has 
another proffesion, other interests, and who has political reactions that 
are always the worst reactions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7 
Collision of the Politics and Military 
In the^ United States there is a series of powerful forces: economical, 
political, and military. Many of these forces have a certain policy; and 
we have talked about this problem, of the collision, for example, the current 
politicians of the State Department with the current militarists of the Pen- 
tagon; many times we have seen the manifestation of that fight in Latin Amri- 
ca, like there are some in the United States that the politicians 
from the military9s hits, above all current militarists; and since there are 
current politicians that defend other types of politics-it is not a good po- 
licy-much less-it is a reactionary politics, pro-imperialistic, 
Kennedy Had Authority Within the United States 
Unquestionably when there is an authority in the United States, strong 
authority, the dangers that are derived from a series of current reactionaries 
in the powerful organizations of the U.S., are much less than when there does- 
not exist that authority. And without a doubt of any kind, Kennedy had that 
authority in the United States. 
And suddenly a new situation is created, from a. President that from cir- 
cumstances occupies the power, that is to say, being Vice President of the 
country and by an unforseen circumstance is President, independent of what- 
ever his character- because here it is not a question of his personal character, 
but of the circumstances- he doesn't come into power with the same authority 
as did President Kennedy. 
In the United Stales there are people who are reactionaries, racists, 
that is to say contraries of the^ civil and social rights of the black popu- 
lation, people of the Ku-Klux-Kan, people who hang, who use dogs, who hate 
the black citizens of the United States, who feel a hate, people 
who are, naturally ultra-reactionaries.f the black popu- 
lation, people of the Ku-Klux-Kan, people who hang, who use dogs, who hate 
the black citizens of the United States, who feel a hate, people 
who are, naturally ultra-reactionaries.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8 
There are in the United States economical forces, powerful economical 
forces, equally ulta-reactionary, who have in all the international positions 
a situation completely reactionary*: there is in the United States forces 
of a major intervention of the U.S. on the international problems; of a major 
employment of the military force of the United States in the international 
problems; there are forces for exapmle, in the U.S. of direct invasion against 
our country. 
Thare is in the United States forces with the application of drastic 
measures against any government that assumes the slightest degree of a na- 
tionalistic character,of economic character in benefit of the countries. 
And, finally, there is a series of sectors that can think of only one 
conception: the ultra-right of the United States, the ultra-reaction of the 
United States, and that this ultra-reaction, in each and every one of the 
problems-i#nternal and external-of the United States, is of the 
worst , of the most aggressive politics, the most dangerous 
for the peace, and the most adventerous. 
in the United States there are also liberal more liberal, 
more advanced, less advanced; there are men who are more radical, others more 
moderate; there are certain intellectual sectors who are not constantly think- 
ing about force, who are thinking of diplomacy,instead of force, which has 
a policy less aggressive, which has a policy more moderate. 
That is to say that in the United States there is a of the political 
thoughtt that go to the men on the extreme right, the men on the extreme 
left, the men who are situated more on the left in political thinking.

--- PAGE BREAK ---States there is a of the political 
thoughtt that go to the men on the extreme right, the men on the extreme 
left, the men who are situated more on the left in political thinking.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9 
And in this situation, a variety of opinions, of more or less moderate 
actions; there are liberal people, the intellectual sections of the United 
States, who understand the errors of American politics, who do not agree 
with many of the things the United States has done in international politics. 
And what happened yesterday can only benefit the extreme Tightest and 
the ultra-reactionists, in which President Kennedy is not included, and the 
men who colaborated with him. You could not place him as an exrteme reactionist 
or extreme Tightest. 
And still in the situation in the United States, in politics, which to- 
gether is undefendable, Kennedy was strongly attacked by the reactionists, 
and by people who wanted war. 
You will remember on the eve of the crisis of October, there was a campaign 
including laws and resolutions of Congress, pushing the Kennedy Administra- 
tion to go to war. 
All the world will remember that we, in* other occasions, have said that one 
of the errors of the Kennedy Administration about Cuba, was to play with its 
enemy* For example, take the plans of invasion against us which the Republi- 
can Administration had organized. 
Politics of 
All this gave place to what in the United States produced politics of 
by the Republicans. That is to say that Kennedy put Cuba in the 
hands of the Republicans. How? By following the aggresive policies of the 
Republicans, and utilizing it as a political weapon against him. 
But in powerful campaigns of force, powerful movements inside of Congress 
pressing the Administration for a more powerful policy against us. And 
finally all of these factors and all of these forces who were the extremes 
of the most radical of the rightests of the United States, they fought Ken-

--- PAGE BREAK ---rful policy against us. And 
finally all of these factors and all of these forces who were the extremes 
of the most radical of the rightests of the United States, they fought Ken-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10 
nedy precisely in those things that did not coincide with the aggressive 
policy that these sectores wanted. 
Now we have a series of things that were motives of constant critics 
of the ultra-rightests• For example, the problem of Cuba, the compromise, 
of not invading Cuba, was one of Kennedy's political points that was constant- 
ly being attacked by the ultra-reactionists. The agreement about the ceasing 
of nuclear testing was another point much attacked in the United States, which 
the ultra-reactionists strongly opposed. They didn't want any agreement to 
be made of this point. 
All the world knows what our position was in this problem, all the world 
knows also for what reasons we obeyed our position, for how much we considered 
a step of advancement that we could-if we kept on going-that is to say, that 
could mark the initiative of a policy in favor of the real peace, in favor 
of real disarmament; but with respect to us, this policy was never applied. 
Because meanwhile they subscribed this Agreement of the ceasing of nuclear 
testing, they accentuated the aggressive policy towards us. 
But we are not analyzing now the problem of what happened to us^>but what 
would happen to the world, and above all, of what one would do, and what 
another would think in the United States. That is to say in the United 
States there would be many sectores, many ultra-reactionary elements that 
would start a strong campaign against the Agreement of the ceasing of nuclear 
testing. 
Opposition of the Anti-Racial Policy of Kennedy 
There are other elements, sectores in the United States that, for example, 
that oppose strongly against legislation for civil rights that Kennedy pro- 
posed about the negro problem in the United States.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, sectores in the United States that, for example, 
that oppose strongly against legislation for civil rights that Kennedy pro- 
posed about the negro problem in the United States.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11 
Not that it would be a revolutionary legislation, not that it would be 
a big strain, because it has not happened in the United States in favor of 
equality and in favor of civil rights, and above all in favor of the rights 
of the negros of the United States; but however you want it, it was a legis- 
lation that had a series of measures that, from thqdegal standpoint protected 
the negro*s rights. 
And above all a series of points of the international policy. There 
is in the United States certain elements that are parts of the prevention 
of nuclear war; that is to say, 
the nuclear war, because they think that that is the policy that they must 
have in the United States, reactionary elements, neofacists, without any 
consideration towards the countries or human interest. 
And this is a rigorous objective; there are types of capitalists, types 
of reactionists. And there is no doubt, for example, that the worst type 
of capitalism was the Nazi, the worst type of imperialism was the Nazi, and 
the most criminal mentality, was the mentality of the imperialism in the 
form of Nazism. There are series of classes in this question. 
Analyzing everything objectively, from the moment a stroigyfeuthority falters, 
an authority personally attacked, in the situations, in the forms.and in the 
conditions where the policies of the U.S. elaborate, all these reactionary 
forces can find a magnificent opportunity- 
This is analyzing automatically the results of that act. Independantly 
another aspect of the question: What is behind the assassination of Kennedy? 
What were the real motives of the assassination of Kennedy? What forces, 
factors, circumstances, were behind the unexpected act, insolant, happening 
of yesterday? A news that surprised absolutely everybody in the world; some-of the assassination of Kennedy? What forces, 
factors, circumstances, were behind the unexpected act, insolant, happening 
of yesterday? A news that surprised absolutely everybody in the world; some-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12 
thing, possibly, that had never passed through anybody's mind* 
At this moment, this is not absolutely clear, at the moment there are 
many things in the dark and many things that are confused, about what happened 
to Kennedy* 
And there are some things that are evidentely symptoms of what I was 
saying before: that the reactionary forces are erupting inside the United 
S ta tes * 
Hysterics Against the URSS and Cuba 
For example, the worst symptom is the advantage they are taking of it, 
to bring in the United States a state* of hysterics anti-soviet and anti-Cuban; 
that in the first place* I mean that the new Administration that is taking 
possession, cou).d find themselves in a situation of hysterics in the U.S. 
precisely by the sectors that are the most reactionary of the country, by 
the most reactionary newspaper in the country*. 
They are already combining to from public opinion in the United States, 
and the worst character it has, is that they are campaigning of the spirit 
of ’’McCarthyism" of the spirit of anti-comunism* 
When President Kennedy was assassinated, what passed through most people's 
mind-and surely through the minds of the majority of the North American citizens, 
and it was logical that it should happen-was that the assassination was the 
work of some unconformists with his international policy; with his policy 
of the Nuclear Pact, with his policy with respect to Cuba,-that they didn't 
consider it sufficiently aggressive, and they considered it weak-, with his 
internal civil problems' policy* Not too many days ago the representative 
of the United States, Stevenson, was attacked by ultra-conservative elements 
of the "John Birch" Association* This was brought to the attention to the 
whole worldo many days ago the representative 
of the United States, Stevenson, was attacked by ultra-conservative elements 
of the "John Birch" Association* This was brought to the attention to the 
whole world

--- PAGE BREAK ---representative 
of the United States, Stevenson, was attacked by ultra-conservative elements 
of the "John Birch" Association* This was brought to the attention to the 
whole world

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13 
They also thought: To what degree of reaction will these people come 
to, that consider that Stevenson deserves to be attacked for international 
policy* 
As reactionary as the international policy of the United States has been, 
there are elements that attach physically to Stevenson, for considering that 
this policy is weak, that it is a bad policy, that it is not sufficiently 
reactionary. 
This passed through the minds of the whole world. Did it pass through 
any leftist's mind? No, that didn't pas3 through anyone's mind. Why? Be- 
cause the polemic today, in theU.S., the furious polemic is liberating it- 
self between the most ultra-reactionary elements, the most rightest elements, 
and the most moderate elements in the policy of the United States. 
You don't characterize the internal polemic for the of the com- 
munists of the United States with the Government of the United States, This 
doesn't mean that the left elements helped the policy of Kennedy; but the 
fight, the battle, was liberating itslef in the U.S. between the extreme right, 
the extreme reaction, and the most moderate elements, in Parliament, in the 
newspaper, in the streets, everywhere. 
The international tension had gone down considerably in the last months. 
They weren't the months of the crisis of October, nor the posterior months 
of the crisis of October, nor were they the months when the cold war was 
more intently called the cold war-that many times it came close to the hot 
war-. No., there wasn't in the United States the time of "McCartyism" which 
was characterized by the persecution of the most progressive elements of the 
United States. 
That is why there was no logic, no feeling, that nobody would feel it 
was a fanatic of the left; if any a fanatic of the right, if any fanatic atthe most progressive elements of the 
United States. 
That is why there was no logic, no feeling, that nobody would feel it 
was a fanatic of the left; if any a fanatic of the right, if any fanatic at

--- PAGE BREAK ---elements of the 
United States. 
That is why there was no logic, no feeling, that nobody would feel it 
was a fanatic of the left; if any a fanatic of the right, if any fanatic at

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14 
all. 
But it was very difficult that after such an indolent incident, such 
unscrupulous people-like many North American politicians are-,such inmoral 
people, so dishonest and so unashamed, like many of these elements that re- 
present the reactionary sectores are, cynics of the United States, warriors; 
irreconcilable enemies of Cuba, participants of the invasion of Cuba, although 
this costs a nuclear war, it was difficult for them not to take this opportunity 
to show their hate, all their propaganda, and all their campaign against 
Cuba. That is not strange, I was saying before that we are a little acustomed 
to;these things. The fight, the life,to our country has made our country 
a nerve of steel and a serene country. We have passed the cyclone, and we 
have fronted the test with dignity and honorably; we have fronted many tests 
with dignity and honorably. Over the assassinated President’s blood, there 
are enough people without scrupuls to start to elaborate immidiately an ag- 
gressive policy against Cuba, There is no doubt that this policy is erupting 
while the blood of their own assassinated President is still warm. 
They are people who do not have any morals, who do not have any scrupuls, 
nor who are ashamed; maybe they think that they can take us unexpectedly, 
unmorilized, weak,this is what the imperialists erroneously think. 
The Lying Campaign of the UPI 
And effectively, yesterday at two in the afternoon, first cable: 
November 22, UPI...M 
Why observs this: of the telegraph agencies, there is one that has been 
more moderate, more objective- the AP-, and there is one that has lied unasham- 
edly of a policy against Cuba, which is the UPI, But it is not only that; 
there has been before a series of information of the UPI, very interesting, 
and a series of campaigns against President Kennedy, that puts it with theuba, which is the UPI, But it is not only that; 
there has been before a series of information of the UPI, very interesting, 
and a series of campaigns against President Kennedy, that puts it with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15 
current ultra-reactionaries, interested in getting the party out of this 
situation for their political adventure, or because they are responsible 
for the assassination of President Kennedy. 
And here we can see it very clearly in these cables: 
"Dallas, November 22, DPI,- The police held today Lee H. Oswald, identi- 
fied as President of the "Committee of Fair Play with Cuba" as first suspect 
of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.” 
Immediately Cuba, and immediately the Soviet.Union. They have started 
a campaign anti-soviet and anti-cuban. 
Cable: "The American Embassy confirmed today that Lee H. Oswald was 
in Russia. A Representative said that Oswald visited the Embassy on November 
of 1959 and according to information left the Soviet Union in 1962. He 
added that he ignored it when the suspect of the assassination of President 
Kennedy had visited Russia, what was the purpose of the visit, and how long 
his viait lasted. There was information without any conformation that Oswald 
solicited the Soviet citizenship, but did not obtain it." 
From the first cablesrthey are trying to insinuate a responsiblity for 
the Soviet Union and a responsibility for the Cubans, if they want to believe 
us, let them, it is the least they can do; maybe they think that we are exalted, 
maybe they think that they have done us much harm. But insinuate that the 
Soviet Union could have had some responsibility for this incident, can any- 
body believe it? Insinuate that we can have it, can you believe anybody? 
It was the first thing they tried to insinuate. Take heed to this cable: 
"they didn't know the purpose of his visit and for how long he was in Russia." 
That was the first insinuation, and this is what made it look suspicious 
stoft .h*‘nsinuate. Take heed to this cable: 
"they didn't know the purpose of his visit and for how long he was in Russia." 
That was the first insinuation, and this is what made it look suspicious 
stoft .h*‘

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16 
the roost unexpected thing happened, as unexpected as the assassination it- 
self- which was that a suspect was found right away- by chance- he had gone 
to Russia; and -by chance- he was related with a Committee for Fair Treatment 
for Cuba. This is what they started to say. 
Immediately there appeared a guilty person; a person who had been in 
the Soviet Union, a person who sympathized with Cuba. 
They Persist in a Campaign of Hysterics 
Although it is extremely hard to fabricate a package of this nature, 
it is possible that at the moment they are^persuing this objective, they are 
persuing another objective. They are persuing a campaign of hysterics, anti- 
comunist hysterics, antiprogressive, anti-liberal, anti-soviet,anti-cuban. 
An adventurous hysterics, reactionary, in the United States; because if they 
had any responsibility any of seriousness or of good faith, they wouldn't 
have a campaign of this kin|i like the one they have. 
We are going to read this: "November 22, UPI.-The assassin of President 
Kennedy is a marxist, he confessed that he passed three years in Russia try- 
ing to denounce His American citizenship, but later he changed his mind and 
returned to the United States with his passage paid for by the United States. 
Already an insinuation towards the Soviet Union. 
"He was identified as Lee H. Oswald, 24 years old, ex-Marine and President 
of a "Committee of Fair Play with Cuba." 
Immediately after the imputation against Cuba. And that is how all the 
cables are headlined, All of UPI's, all the informations; behind the infor- 
mation they have repeated twenty times the same ideas the same things, using 
a very well known technique where they are able to insinuate what they want

--- PAGE BREAK ---ations; behind the infor- 
mation they have repeated twenty times the same ideas the same things, using 
a very well known technique where they are able to insinuate what they want

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17 
to insinuate, to difame the Cuban Revolution, to difame the Soviet Union, 
to create hysterics against our country. 
It say#: "Oswald was captured when he tried to hold a battle by gun 
when he hid in a movie house..." 
There were a thousand information about this, many of them contradictory. 
"...The police said that Oswald worked in the store of school books for 
Texas.•.After the crime the police found in the building a "raauser" gun, etc... 
It says where he was born, it says that on the 30th of October he appeared 
in the American Embassy in Moscow, the 30th of October of 1959,telling them 
that he wanted to denounce his citizenship. 
"According he informed, he told the American Embassy: " I am a Marxist." 
The FBI confirmed that Oswald went to Russia and solicited a Soviet citizen- 
ship. 
"Oswald told the Embassy that he proposed to communicate with the Russian 
authorities " all that he knew of the three years that he was in the Marines." 
The Embassy said that Russia never gave Oswald the citizenship that he 
had asked for. 
Because they have on their hands a suspect, real or false, they have 
fabricated their suspect. You will see the course that will follow this 
campaign. 
"He told the people at the Embassy that he proposed to reveal all the 
secrets that he knew." Well, I shall be referring to this. 
In February of 1962 Oswald apparently changed his mind and returned to 
the United States. In the meantime he had married a Russian, Marina Nicholaevna, 
employed at the Hospital at Minsk, where she had her baby. This man, whom 
they accuse of more than just deserting, spying, of confessing that he is 
going to give military secrets away, returns tranquily to the United States-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ad her baby. This man, whom 
they accuse of more than just deserting, spying, of confessing that he is 
going to give military secrets away, returns tranquily to the United States-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18 
According to they themselves. 
It says<: "The Embassy revised his case and since he did not get the 
Soviet citizenship they gave him a passport for the United States. 
One returns easily to the United States who has said that he is going 
to give military secrets away, without imprisoning him, without judgeing him? 
It says: "The Government shows that he left Moscow with $485 for spend- 
ing money which he gave to the U.S. Government. 
"This year Oswald solicited another passport. He told the State Depart- 
ment that he wanted to visit England, France, Germany, Holland, Finland, 
Italy, and the Soviet Union; he was planning to take the trip in October of 
1963 or December, or January of 1964. The passport we®, ven dn New Orleans 
the 25th of June; but they don't know whether Oswald paid back the money for 
his first trip to return to the States. 
"If he hadn't paid, they shouldn't have given ihim a new passport"- 
that is what they say. We are going to use their own information. 
"Dallas, November 22- another cable-. The President of the United States, 
John F. Kennedy, died today from an assessirfs bullets. The police held for 
being the principle suspect, a Northamerican "castrista" (one who favors 
Castro)... 
Now it turns out that the man who killed Kennedy is a "castrista." We 
know that there very few "castristas,f-what they call "castristas"- in the 
United States. They call "castristas" everything which is convenient for 
their propaganda. 
Now we find out that yesterday he was a Fair Treatment- in the first 
cable-, he was a Northamerican "castrista" that on one occassion had tried 
to become a Soviet cfitizen. These are how all the cables are, you will see. 
"...Kennedy was 46 years old...he was mortally wounded..." At last that

--- PAGE BREAK ---at on one occassion had tried 
to become a Soviet cfitizen. These are how all the cables are, you will see. 
"...Kennedy was 46 years old...he was mortally wounded..." At last that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19 
ia what the cable was for* 
Another cable: •Dallas, November 22, UPI:- The police jailed Lee H. 
Oswald today, a marxist a party of the Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro.’• 
There is not one cable where they do not associate the incident, the 
name of the individual whom they are sure is the assassin, with the Cuban 
Revolution, with the Soviet Union, with Fidel Castro; "castristas", a party 
of the Prime Minister, admirer of the Prime Minister. 
Lies About the Committee "Pro-Fair Treatment*’ 
It says: f,A party of the Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro, who tried 
to obtain the Soviet Union citizenship- where he lived for several years-, 
rejected all knowledge of the incident. Oswald killed a policeman..." etc. 
And in the same cable: "...Although Oswald who presided over the "Com- 
mittee of Fair Play for Cuba," a "castrista" organization in this city, was 
found to be owner of the revolver with which he died...” They repeat this 
everywhere. 
This then follows. The first thing that appears here is the lie, that 
this man was President of a "Committee Pro-Fair Treatment* A lie. We would 
dedicate ourselves to finding information that might appear, declarations, 
publicity, to see if that in this zone of Texas or New Orleans, there was a 
"Committee Pro-Fair Treatment for Cuba. They affirm that this man, where 
did they get this?...they affirm that he presents himself as a Secretary 
of a Section of the Committee Pro-Fair Treatment for Cuba in New Orleans or 
in Dallas. In some cables it says in the month of August, on other cables 
it says last week. This is what they affirm. It is the origen of "pro-cas- 
trista to this man. And that he defended the Cuban Revolution in a station. 
This is all strange. We had no declaration of this kind. But we look 
for information: cities where there were Committees Pro-Fair Treatment fornd that he defended the Cuban Revolution in a station. 
This is all strange. We had no declaration of this kind. But we look 
for information: cities where there were Committees Pro-Fair Treatment for

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Cuban Revolution in a station. 
This is all strange. We had no declaration of this kind. But we look 
for information: cities where there were Committees Pro-Fair Treatment for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20 
Cuba from where we did have news were: "New York, Los Angeles, Cleveland, 
Baltimore, Chicago, Tampa, Yougstown, Washington, San Francisco, Minneapolis, 
Philadelphia, Detroit, and from nowhere did there appear a Committee Pro-Fair 
Treatment for Cuab in Dallas or in New Orleans. 
Immediately here: "The National Director of the Committee of "Fair 
Play for Cuba,"- Fair Treatment for Cuba- affirmed today, that Lee Harvey 
Oswald, principle suspect of the assassination of President Kennedy, did 
not have any regular representation of this organization. 
"It added that it did remember that Oswald had been President of any 
representation of the Committee. 
"In Miami, the Student's Revolutionary Directors (DRE), made up of anti- 
castritas Cuban students, affirmed that Oswald had been President of the Com- 
mittee of "Fair Play" in the city of New Orleans and he had debated about 
the communist conquest of Cuba with a representative of the DRE in a radical 
program. Oswald tried to infiltrate this organization. 
Other strange things are being to appear, they are saying that it was 
an American bastrista who wanted to infiltrate a castrista organization. 
And why would a sympathizer with the Cuban Revolution want to do anything 
with an "anti-castrista" organization, of pirates, of those kind of elements; 
without having any contact with us, without knowing anybody? How strange, 
because they are infiltrated with Americans, and agents of the CIA and FBI! 
But it also says here: -the President of the National Coranittee said- 
"The Committee Pro-Fair Treatment for Cuba has never had arrangements of any 
kind for a chapter in any city, in Texas or in Louisiana. I can say that 
Lee Harvey Oswald was never Secretary nor President of any Committee Prow.?air 
Treatment in any city of the United States. 
The whole world started talking from the moment that it was about a Com-t 
Lee Harvey Oswald was never Secretary nor President of any Committee Prow.?air 
Treatment in any city of the United States. 
The whole world started talking from the moment that it was about a Com-

--- PAGE BREAK ---was never Secretary nor President of any Committee Prow.?air 
Treatment in any city of the United States. 
The whole world started talking from the moment that it was about a Com-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21 
mittee Pro-Fair Treatment for Cuba. Later other things appear, because later 
we are going to try to analyze who the suspect is, is he real or false. 
Well, that was the 22nd. UPI, "November 23.-Dallas. The communist Lee 
Harvey Oswald was accused today of having assassinated President Kennedy. 
The police said that the paraffin test made on the hands of Oswald had pos- 
itive results, there was some samples of dust, etc." 
Dallas 23, UPI.-They don't know the results of the tests made on Oswald. 
In the first paragraph they put "communits", in the second paragraph 
they are talking about something else; third paragraphc "Oswald, marxist 
and sympathizer of the communist regime of Cuba, had breakfast.•." that 
is to say, to talk about what he had for breakfast, they repeat that he was 
a marxist and a sympathizer of the communist Cuba regime of Fidel Castro. 
Understand? It^almost clear, we know well these people, we are almost experts 
in knowing these unashamed people. 
"Dallas, November 23, UPI. The local police has proof that President 
John F. Kennedy was assassinated by the castro-communist Lee Harvey Oswald, 
it was announced officially today." So he was assassinated by the "castro- 
communist." He is no longer American, he is no longer an ex-Marine, that 
which taught him to shoot and kill; he is no longer an ex-Marine where he 
became an expert shot and where the imperialists kept him. No! He is not 
an American, he is a castro-communist,although we have never heard talk of 
his exsitence. 
See how the propaganda and everything is. An American, a legitimate 
American, born there, educated in the American society and in American schools, 
watching American films, in the American Armed Forces, and with everything 
American. And now, he is not even that in the cables, they now say "castro- 
communist."n society and in American schools, 
watching American films, in the American Armed Forces, and with everything 
American. And now, he is not even that in the cables, they now say "castro- 
communist."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22 
Captin Will Fritz said that now they were sure. etc. "That was yester- 
day, no, it was today in the afternoon. "The Chief of Police of Dallas, Jesge 
Curry said today, that Lee Harvey Oswald admitted that he was communist." 
He admitted it today. Yesterday he admitted nothing and today he appears ad- 
mitting that he is communist. "Curry added that Oswald admitted before the 
police officials who interrogated him last night, that he was a member of 
the Communist Party." Now the man is a member of the Communist Party, as 
the hours pass they find more and more titles for this man. Is he the real 
man or not, we don*t know. Who could know? 
One thing that is obvious in connection with the assassination, is a 
campaign to bring a bad name to the Soviet Union and Cuba. 
These people are planning something very strange and nobody knows what 
sinister plans they may have behind their backs. 
On the other side there was an official declaration made by the Depart- 
ment of State published today that said: "Authorities of the State Depart- 
ment said today that they have no evidence that indicates that the Soviet 
Union or any other potential is involved in the Assassination of President 
Kennedy." 
"Lee Harvey Oswald, ex-Marine, who passed three years in Russia, was 
accused of the crime. When Oswald, who is 24 years old went to Russia, he 
announced his intention of denouncing his American citizenship, he told the 
American Embassy in Moscow that he was a marxist. Later he changed his mind 
and returned the following year to the United States, sympathizing with the 
Cuban Prime Minister, Fidel Castro." The cables that announce where they 
are lying repeat. It 9ays: "The authorities of the State Department say.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed States, sympathizing with the 
Cuban Prime Minister, Fidel Castro." The cables that announce where they 
are lying repeat. It 9ays: "The authorities of the State Department say.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23 
that they also don't have any evidence that Cuba is mixed up with Oswald. 
But why does the Department of State have to come out today, to make 
this declaration? What does this reveal? It reveals to the proper North 
American authorities, for some people of the United States, the danger of 
the anti-soviet and anti-cuban campaign which the more reactionary and war 
people are doing. The State Department understands the danger of such a 
policy to the United States. 
This reveals that there are some people in the States that know that 
they should leave while they can* What is behind the assassination of Ken- 
nedy at the moment nobody knows. This declaration not for the danger of the 
packages that can be fabricated there, but it indicates that there are some 
people in the States that understand the risk and danger of such a campaign 
and it possibly indicates that there some people who do not agree with 
the campaign. 
The State Department has seen the need to declare this, because this 
policy, this campaign, who knows where it will lead to? 
This is all Mysterious 
Other things have appeared, because this is all very mysterious. Another 
cable, Lhis one from the AP* It says: "A letter of 1961...the UPI didn't 
talk about this, because the UPI, its campaign, has gone in only one direction, 
but not only the UPI, yesterday we were listening to the North Xmerican .. 
transmissions and in the radio there was the same campaign, the name of Castro 
almost appeared more times than that of the accused assassin. 
It says: "A letter of 1961, found in the Pentagon Archives, brings 
doubts as to whether Governor John Connally of Texas, instead of President 
Kennedy was the principle vie tom of the assassin.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tter of 1961, found in the Pentagon Archives, brings 
doubts as to whether Governor John Connally of Texas, instead of President 
Kennedy was the principle vie tom of the assassin.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24 
The letter dated January 31, 1961, was written by hand from Mins*, Russia, 
by Lee Harvey Oswald, an ex-Marine, whom they accuse of assassinating Ken- 
nedy and wounding Connally. Oswald returned a year later after having pas- 
sed three years in the Soviet Union* 
"The letter was addressed to Connally who was then Secretary of the Ma- 
rine, asking him to revoke the lower (?) as undesirable for Oswald; but he 
didn't grant it, and if he is the one who did fire against Kennedy and Con- 
nally, the question could come up as to which one did he have more motive 
to kill. 
"A copy of the letter from Oswald was sent to the Secretary, Connally, 
who left this position December 20, 1961. He wrote to Oswald a short note 
February 23, 1962, where he informed him that he no longer belonged to. the 
Marines and that he had referred his letter to the new Secretary. 
A copy of Connally*s letter was sent to Fred Korth, the new Secretary, 
who referred it to the Marine Infantry Corp; they passed it on to a Court 
of Appeals of the Marine Infantry, who confirmed that lowering undesirable. 
The letter of Oswald sustained that that kind of lowering was a big error 
and unjust." 
Now they have taken charge of finding another possible version. 
There is information here that says; "The of the District, Henry 
Wade said today that he was sure that he would be able to obtain the death 
penalty for Lee Harvey Oswald, the ex-Mar ine who has fromaly been accused 
as the assassin of President Kennedy, informed the news agencies of that 
country. 
"it adds that Wade has intervened as in 24 cases of assassinations 
and has obtained 23 times the death penalty for the accused, and in the other 
case it was for perpetual chains.

--- PAGE BREAK ---"it adds that Wade has intervened as in 24 cases of assassinations 
and has obtained 23 times the death penalty for the accused, and in the other 
case it was for perpetual chains.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

25 
"Wade said that he has material proof against Oswald, but he refused 
to say what they were. He added that it has not yet been established that 
the "mauser" found was the weapon used for the crime. 
"Oswald has denied during the interrogation to have participated in the 
attempt.etc. 
"Captain Willi Fries, Chief of the Department of Homocide of the Police 
of Dallas, affirmed that according to his criterian Oswald killed President 
Kennedy; and the case to him was finished." 
We must now try/to find some fact about whom this man they are accusing 
is. But we want to talk about the campaign of UPI, the agencies of the cables- 
really UPI-... That by chance precisely this act happens at the time when 
Kennedy is being strongly attacked by those who think his policy with Cuba 
is weak; it couldn't be us, but precisely the enemy/of the Revolution, and 
the enemy in general of a moderate policyta policy less in favor of war, 
the enemies of a policy of this type, the only ones who could have been in- 
i 
teres ted in the death of President Kennedy and the only ones who could have 
gotten any satisfaction by news of Kennedy's death. 
Why was it that a few days ago an incident was brought to my attention 
and while the Conferance of the SIP was going on, that was scandalous, be- 
cause a series of Governments were strongly attached, crudely attacked, like 
the Government of Brazil who said horrors about the President of Brazil, 
where they also made other declarations against other Presidents, other Govern- 
ments of Latinamerica, there in the United States; and it called my attention 
that the cables...and they published a series of opinions against the discourse 
of Kennedy in Florida. Because the discourse that Kennedy proposed in Florida 
deceived the aggressive policy towards Cuba, it deceived the counter-revo- 
lutionaries of the United States.discourse 
of Kennedy in Florida. Because the discourse that Kennedy proposed in Florida 
deceived the aggressive policy towards Cuba, it deceived the counter-revo- 
lutionaries of the United States.

--- PAGE BREAK ---dy in Florida. Because the discourse that Kennedy proposed in Florida 
deceived the aggressive policy towards Cuba, it deceived the counter-revo- 
lutionaries of the United States.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26 
And here a series of cables. Here: "Miami, Florida.- The exiled Cubans 
waited tonight, in vain, for a promise from President Kennedy, that he will 
take energetic measures against the communist regime of Fidel Castro." 
It says: "they waited, in vain, for a promise." 
’'Many of them united in the offices of the Revolutionary organizations, 
and in homes, to listen by radio Kennedy's speech,\the Spanish transalation 
was transmitted by the radio stations of the exiles. They heard the Pres- 
ident say "we in the hemishhere must use all methods in our possession to 
stop the establishment of another Cuba in this hemisphere" -they did not 
accept "stop the establishment of another Cuba," 
"Many exiles had hoped of a course more vigorous to free Cuba from com- 
munism. Some confided that the United States Government was acting against 
Cuba in a secret war of infiltration that cannot be divulged." 
"Jose^Ignacio Rivero, Director of the "Daily Marine" in exile now, the 
oldest newspaper in La Habana, and Emilio Nunez Portuondo, ex-President of 
the Security Council of the United Nations, asked for more positive action 
from the United States. 
"Rivero, member of the Interamerican Society of the Press, to which 
Kennedy came to talk, expressed doubts about the sinister intrigue between 
the international policiesM-an intrigue because they wanted to co-exslst 
with us. 
It says: "He also said in his manifestation that the weak policy of 
the United States towards Cuba and other American nations is an international 
shame-Ignacio Rivera said this, whom you know as an ultra-ultra, and who has 
to be connected with ultra-ultras in the United States. Those elements there 
openly said "that the weak policy of the United States towards Cuba and 
other American nations is an international shame." You see how irritatedtra-ultras in the United States. Those elements there 
openly said "that the weak policy of the United States towards Cuba and 
other American nations is an international shame." You see how irritated

--- PAGE BREAK ---

27 
they had come with respect towards the United States Government, with Ken- 
nedy's policy. 
The Policy Towards Cuba is Weak 
"Miami Beach.- The latinamerican editors and directors in general applauded 
the speech of President Kennedy, but many thought that he had not assumed a 
sufficiently strong position against the communist regime of Fidel Castro. 
Where the representatives of the press united, the more reactionaries inside 
and out of the UniLed States, according to the cables of the UPI and the AP 
they say that "many thought that he had not assumed a sufficiently strong 
position against the communist regime of Fidel Castro." 
"Agustin Navarro, of "El Espejo" (The Mirror) of Mexico, thought that 
the speech was too weak and that his observations of Cuba were not enough." 
It is not only the guerillas of the United States, but also their peers the 
guerillas of Latin America, who protest and & criticize the policies of 
the United States, even when they *are in the United States, you would sup- 
pose that the least they could do is shut their mouths;but no: they feel as 
if they have the right to assume the position of ultra-rightests and guerillas 
of the United States. 
’Other Cuban newspaper proprietors in exile proposed similar terms." 
A series of cables began to arrive. Here: "The President of the Medical 
School of Cuba in exile, Enrique Huertas, said that the speech did not clear 
any fundamental questions of Cuba's problems," he wanted a unanimous attack, 
a unanimous criticism against Kennedy. 
It wasn't only Latin Americans, there were also North American editors. 
Here we have: "New York, November 20, UPI.-The Daily News says in today's 
editorial that President John F^ Kennedy seem preoccupied among other things.icans, there were also North American editors. 
Here we have: "New York, November 20, UPI.-The Daily News says in today's 
editorial that President John F^ Kennedy seem preoccupied among other things.

--- PAGE BREAK ---so North American editors. 
Here we have: "New York, November 20, UPI.-The Daily News says in today's 
editorial that President John F^ Kennedy seem preoccupied among other things.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28 
by the presence of a Communist Cuba and by the fact that dozens of millions 
of Americans are still mad or alarmed by the existance of this power from 
the Kremlin in the American continent. 
"deferring to the President's speech at the reunion of the Interamerican 
Society of the Press Monday night, the editorial remembers that Kennedy told 
the Cuban people to throw out Fidel Castro and once this happened, the North 
American people would gladly help whichever regime took over* 
"The newspaper keeps on saying that the problem is that the weak policy 
of Kennedy'a Government with respect to Castro, as it was with the Eisenhower 
Administration, made it possible for Castro and Kruschov to convert Cuba 
into a political State where the country has practically no hope of rebeling 
without the aide from the exterior. 
"The newspaper says: Kennedy now refuses to let the exiled Cubans lanch 
attacks at Cuba from United States territory-says the newspaper-, and to use 
air power and naval of the nation to keep Castro in power. 
Now you see what some guerillas think, now you see what some ultra- 
rightest think, and is there any difference in their thinking and any differ- 
ence in assassinating their President, and assassinate a President* 
Cables and more cables, because they had never written so many cables. 
It is curious how the cablegram agencies made so much ado of all the criticism 
of Kennedy'8 policy towards Cuba. 
Julio Mesquita, Ciro, wa3 the reactionary who talked against the Presi- 
dent of Brazil, who started a campaign against Brazil, and to start a reac- 
tionary and fascist state in Brazil. Listen to how he talks: "Julio Mes- 
quito Ciro, Director of the state of Sao Pablo," who told the editors of the 
SIP with his analysis of the economical and political situation of his count- 
ry, said that it was an error of the United States not to have known in timeof Sao Pablo," who told the editors of the 
SIP with his analysis of the economical and political situation of his count- 
ry, said that it was an error of the United States not to have known in time

--- PAGE BREAK ---told the editors of the 
SIP with his analysis of the economical and political situation of his count- 
ry, said that it was an error of the United States not to have known in time

--- PAGE BREAK ---

29 
of the danger for the whole continent of the presence of Cuba. Mesquita 
showed himself to be of the collective action, of the collective action force 
of the hemisphere in Cuba, because I am a defender of the free will of the 
coun try. 
The Suspicious Announcement of Sergio Carbo 
And here the man goes on proclaiming his anti-Brazilian policy. And 
finally something very interesting and very curious, which came to my atten- 
^ read it, Xt says: "The third editor to give his opinion was 
Sergio Carbo, who referring to President Kennedy's speech said: "It was a 
speech that had no category conclusion." It made Carbo, who is Executive 
Counsel of the Interamerican Society of the Press, mad because it was not 
in favor of the liberation of Cuba. 
But most important of all, look how this important man in the intellec- 
tual circle* of the reaction in the United States and outside as Executive 
Counsel Director of the Interamerican Society of the Press ends his declara- 
tion. He ended by saying, "I think that a near and very grave incident is 
going to obligate Washington to modify its policy of peaceful coexistance." 
What does this mean? What did he mean to say by this? Three days before 
the assassination of President Kennedy, wha t did a man who occupies a very 
important job in the intellectual circles of the ultra-righest in the United 
States and out meant to say? 
What does this mean three days before the assassination of Kennedy? 
Was there some understanding? Some kind of thought? Some kind of plot? 
How strang all of this is. 
And this man who is the suspect, who is he? Is he really guilty? Is 
he mentally sick? Or is he an instrument of one of the most reactionary 
circles of the United States? Who is that man? Why at precisely the timeho is the suspect, who is he? Is he really guilty? Is 
he mentally sick? Or is he an instrument of one of the most reactionary 
circles of the United States? Who is that man? Why at precisely the time

--- PAGE BREAK ---ho is he? Is he really guilty? Is 
he mentally sick? Or is he an instrument of one of the most reactionary 
circles of the United States? Who is that man? Why at precisely the time

--- PAGE BREAK ---

30 
when a leftist fanatic would least want to kill him? 
Is Oswald an Instrument? 
Here there appears information form the "New York Times:" the "New York 
Times" says, "during the month of July of last year he (Oswald) made ges- 
tures to belong to the stalled Director-A student of Cuba was trying to par- 
ticipate in the plans to overthrow the revolutionary regime of Fidel Castro 
in Cuba." It was not a "castrista" plot. It goes on saying, "Oswald 
returned to the United States 18 months before, after having been in the 
Soviet Union for two and a half years, where he trie d to get a Soviet citi- 
zenship. Oswald was able to return by borrowing $435.71 from the American 
Government* This he was able to get after asking the Senator of Texas, John 
G. Tower." That is to say that he was able to return from the Soviet Union 
by borrowing money from the American Government thanks to the help of a Rep- 
ublican Senator from Texas. 
"Actually, Oswald had an Americnn passport on the basis that he was a 
photographer and that he wanted to travel to different countries during the 
months of October, November, and December:*this year to visit the Soviet Union, 
England Holland, France, and Italy." How Strang! Ever since he was arrested 
in Dallas, the American television and radio have keen trying to say that 
Oswald is President of the chapter in Dallas of the Committee of Fair Treat- 
ment for Cuba. 
"Executive Secretary of the Committee Pro-Fair Treatment for Cuba, denied 
that Oswald was anything of that sort, and said that there exsisted no such 
chapter of that organization in Texas." 
"The New SOrk Times explaining the contact eftablished by Oswald with 
the counter-revolutionaries of Cuba, says that J-se*Antonio Lanuza, of the 
so called Student Director of Cuba, declared in Miami that Oswald approachedlaining the contact eftablished by Oswald with 
the counter-revolutionaries of Cuba, says that J-se*Antonio Lanuza, of the 
so called Student Director of Cuba, declared in Miami that Oswald approached

--- PAGE BREAK ---eftablished by Oswald with 
the counter-revolutionaries of Cuba, says that J-se*Antonio Lanuza, of the 
so called Student Director of Cuba, declared in Miami that Oswald approached

--- PAGE BREAK ---

31 
the delegation that anti-castrista group in New Orleans last July." 
"Lanuza- according to the "Times*'- said that "Oswald wanted to help the 
Cubans with their fight against communism, and offered them $10 contribution 
and his help in military matters for an invasion," The delegate of the men- 
tioned organization, Carlos Bringuier, said that "at first I suspected Os- 
wald as being an agent for the FBI or the CIA that was trying to find out 
t 
what we were doing," 
And that is what they publish, that the castristas, the castristas, the 
communist admirers of Fidel Castro, sympathizers of Fidel Castro; and here 
it seem like he tried to get in an organization and that they would not let 
him in becasue they thought that he was from the FBI of the CIA- they should know 
who agents of the FBI and the CIA are, because they deal with them a lot. 
For the time being, without us affirming anything, because we cannot 
affirm anything, because the same thing can be guilty or innocent; that it 
can be an agent of the FBI or of the CIA as these people thought, that he 
could be an instrument of the more reactionary sectors, that have been plan- 
ning this sinister assassination of President Kennedy, by not conforming with 
his international policy, that a sick person is being utilized by the reaction- 
ary sectors of the United States, 
At first they say that Oswald tried to get into this anti-castrista 
organization then later he appeared on television repeating propaganda pro- 
castriata. How strange? In North American the televisions don't pick cut 
of the street to talk, especially do they call people of the "Fair Treat- 
ment for Cuba'1 to campaign for Cuba, The radio, television, and newspapers 
close their doors on them. They say that Texas is the head of the reactions- 
ary spirit 
They don't condemn him, they don't judge him, they give him money toa, The radio, television, and newspapers 
close their doors on them. They say that Texas is the head of the reactions- 
ary spirit 
They don't condemn him, they don't judge him, they give him money to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32 
return, and then they give him another passport to leave. How strange! 
What is behind all this? What sinister plan is behind all this? Who can 
be the assassinators of Kennedy? Who are the only ones who would profit 
by this? the party of the invasion of Cuba, a group whose policy is on the 
edge of war, the enemies of peace, the enemies of disarmament, the worst 
enemies of the rights of the negroes of the United States, the worst enemies 
of the progressive elements and the liberal thinking of the United States. 
Who could benefit from this incident, from this assassination, if not 
the worst reaction, the worst elements- of the North American Society. Who 
would be the only ones interested in the assassination, by chance someone 
from the left, a fanatic of the left, at the time when tension between the 
right and left has gone down, at the time when McCarthyism is a thing of 
the past? 
"Dallas, Texas, 23(AP) Lee Harvey Oswald during his whole life was a 
loner and an introvert, with commumistic ideasf At an early age his inverted 
personality became fixed with the ideas of Karl Marx. 
This is the description that is given to Lee Harvey Oswald, 24 years 
old, whom they accuse of the infamous crime of assassinating President Ken- 
nedy. 
"The Chief of Police in Dallas, Jesse Curry, 1ms said that Oswald admitted 
to being a Communist. 
What contradictions, he didn't admit to the assassination-you would think 
that a fanatic who commits an assassination of that kind, would tell every 
one- a strange case where the fanatic denies that he commited the assassina- 
tion, and on the other hand admits that he is a comnusnist-according to the 
cables. 
These are all new things, they didn't appear yesterday, they are of to-

--- PAGE BREAK ---mmited the assassina- 
tion, and on the other hand admits that he is a comnusnist-according to the 
cables. 
These are all new things, they didn't appear yesterday, they are of to-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

33 
day.. ..Although he is accused of the assassination, Harvey Oswald has resist- 
ed all the efforts of the authorities to make him confess, and he has told 
the newspaper men: "I didn't kill President Kennedy, I didn't kill anybody." 
What kind of a person was Oswald before they arrested him? He was born 
October 18, 1939, in New Orleans; "my father died before I was born"-he said- 
his mother, a widow, took her family to Fort Worth. A police of Fort Worth 
who does not want his name revealed, said that he knew Oswald since they 
were both in the fifth .grade until he went to High School in Fort Worth. 
This policeman remembered the following; 
"He was always opposed to any kind of discipline, he seemed to have some- 
thing against the people there, against all authority, he was not like other 
boys, he never associated with the rest, in High School he talked a lot of 
how things should be; Oswald said that he became interested in communism at 
the age of 15, when a marxist pamphlet came into his hands, later he read 
The Capital, of Karl Marx, which is the "Communist Bible;" when he was 17 
years old Oswald left school where he soon joined the Marines;:his military 
career was a disaster, on two occasions he was taken to War Counsel because 
he had infrineged on the rules, his specialized occupation was operator of 
electronics* He fought in Japan, but he was only a soldier first class. 
"iiis career ended September 11, 1959, when they 1 is censed him to contri- 
bute to support his mother; they put him in the un-Active Military Reserve, 
but later he was expelled dishonorably. 
"A month later Oswald arrived in Moscow. October 20, 1959 he went to 
the American Embassy and announced his intention of denouncing his citizen- 
ship. He told the officials: "I am a marxist." 
The Government Lent Money to Lee Oswald 
"In February of 1962, after having studied his case, they came to thehis intention of denouncing his citizen- 
ship. He told the officials: "I am a marxist." 
The Government Lent Money to Lee Oswald 
"In February of 1962, after having studied his case, they came to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ouncing his citizen- 
ship. He told the officials: "I am a marxist." 
The Government Lent Money to Lee Oswald 
"In February of 1962, after having studied his case, they came to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

34 
conclusion that Oswald had not obtained a Russian citizenship; by his request 
they gave him a passport and lent him money to return to the country. When 
he arrived in the United States, Oswald went to his native New Orleans; the 
following June he asked for another passport to return to the Soviet Union; 
in the meantime, he was wrapped up in a dispute with an anti-castrista, Carlos 
Bringuier, 
There are now new ingredients. It is a series, a chain of propaganda; 
Lhat first he is of the CooBuittee Pro-Fair Treatment for Guba"-which is false-; 
then he was in the Soviet Union; then a series of insinuations in a series 
of cables; and now not only that, but he is also a communist, a good com- 
munist which he confirms. Finally, this is all very strange. 
It seems like he was just made for the worst policy of the United States, 
the reactionaries. He seems to be the individual who was made to create 
hysterics, to have a campaign anti-soviet, anti-cuban, anti-ccmmunist, anti- 
progressive, anti-liberal, in the United States. 
What could the motives of the assassination of President Kennedy have 
been? What could be behind all this? We cannot affirm anything, because we 
cannot count on the other elements of justice; the personality of the indi- 
vidual is suspicious, just like the propaganda is suspicious, everything is 
suspicious. 
Because the same thing can happen to an innocent person,in a well pre- 
pared plan, by people who know how to prepare these plans, it could be a 
sick person, in which case the only honest thing to do is put him at the 
disposition of doctors; or else it is a very well chosen instrument and very 
well prepared by the extreme right, by the ultra-conservative reactions in 
the United States, with the purpose of eliminating a President that-according 
to them-, isn’t following the policy which they think he should do, in otherght, by the ultra-conservative reactions in 
the United States, with the purpose of eliminating a President that-according 
to them-, isn’t following the policy which they think he should do, in other

--- PAGE BREAK ---nservative reactions in 
the United States, with the purpose of eliminating a President that-according 
to them-, isn’t following the policy which they think he should do, in other

--- PAGE BREAK ---

35 
words a policy more for war, more aggressive, more adventerous. 
And it is necessary that all the countries- not only Cuba, but every- 
where, and the North American country itself-, cleats up what is behind the 
assassination of President Kennedy. 
It is to our interest, to the interest of all the other countries and 
of the country of North America, that we must do this. And we understand 
that the intellectuals, the lovers of peace, understand the seriousness that 
a policy of this kind implies, a campaign of this kind and the peace of the 
world can signify that an incident like this, a machiavelli policy of this 
kind can come to. 
And these are the analysis, and the considerations that we wish to make: 
orientate the country; tell you objectively how things stand; tell you which 
things were strongly antagonistic between the United States and us, and to 
tell you which of their policies were more moderate, less war like, less 
aggressive. So that we, as revolutionaries, as conscientious men and women, 
are able to analyze problems of this sort, difficult problems, delicate pro- 
blems, complex problems. 
Because the policy in a country like the United States is very complex; 
in the elaboration of a policy of this country a number of factors intervene, 
many times contradictory factors. But there is no doubt that these things 
which we have been showing you of the campaign are some means-and the most 
inmoral for sure-, means by which a policy elaborates. 
What do these circles mean? Force a new policy on the new Administra- 
tion What do they mean these circles? Put the new Administration in a fact- 
ual situation, give them a strong hate towards the Soviet Union, towards Cuba, 
towards the progressive ideas, even towards the liberal ideas.ean these circles? Put the new Administration in a fact- 
ual situation, give them a strong hate towards the Soviet Union, towards Cuba, 
towards the progressive ideas, even towards the liberal ideas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36 
This campaing propoese to put the United States in the worst international 
position. And this, certainly, is serious and grave for the peace. 
We are not worried for ourselves. We are not worried for ourselves; 
we are worried for humanity's sake. 
We also know that the luck of this country depends also on the luck of 
humanity; and for us we do not tremble; for us we are and will always be 
tranquil. We worry about the peace, and we worry about bringing this atten- 
tion to everybody. 
Warning about the dangers of these acts is another thing which we worry 
about, and furthermore, that the country is orientated, orientated and serene 
like always, firm like always, and ready like always to defend the Revolution! 
Ready like always to defend the country, with your moral as high as always.. 
To be always ready, in front of danger, whatever they may be. 
Be they big or little, be they more of less infamous these campaigns, 
be they more or less criminals these campaigns, the enemies will always 
find us firm, alert, and our heads up high, ready to do our duty to our country 
or Die, We Shall Win; 
Luis Gomez Wanguemert: Having finished, the Commander Castro, the analysis 
of the tragic event of yesterday and the campaign of anti—soviet and 
anti-cuban by the newspapersoof the United States, we bring this 
program to a close. 
Godd evening.