January 24^ 1963


[,y^h /f^-


TO;

FROM;


JIM GARRISON, District Attorney
MARK LAKE,


RE: INTERVIS’J AT MEXICAN CONSULATE IN NEV.’ ORLE.ANS

***’k’k-k'kici:'ki:'hi:'kic'k'kic'k'k’k-k’kic-k'k-^ic'kic‘ki(ic


•’■ Todliy I vent to -the Mexican Consulate ' together v;ith Gary '■
e-anders and v;e interviewed RUBEN GAXTOLA the Consul General

and TERESA JARUREGUI who is employed as a clerk. According to MRS.
FARRINGTON the "OSV7ALD" visit took place at the Mexican Consulate
located in the Whitney Bank Building. During 1963 the Consulate
was in fact located at the Whitney Bank at St. Charles and Gravier.
Tov/ard the middle of 1965, according to the Consul General, the
office was moved to the Trade Hart where it is presently located.
The Consul General during 1963 was REYES SPINDOLA. During 1963 in
order to secure a tourist visa the applicant was required to submit
proof of citizenship and pay a $3.00 charge. Proof of citizenship
is considered to be a birth certificate, army discharge , or even
a notarized stateraant allegi.ng that you are in fact a citizen. No
picture is required.


In order to .-lacure a permit to bring a rifle into the countr/
for hunt jr_;, cne r..ust pay $]G.00, submit photogvaph a.nd submit a
letter frc^. th-3 local police dapartt.ant stating that you have no
record. The hunting season in Mexico is from October 15th to
March 31st. The tourist visa v.-as valid for a period of six months.
According to MISS JARUREGUI, "OSWALD" entered the office during
September and she is quite certain that it was before lunch. He •
approached MRS. GUADALUPE ORTEGA and stated that he wished to secure
s tourist's visa. MRS. ORTEGA asked him for proof of citizenship
and a record of smallpox vaccination. The man offered his birth
certificate as proof of citizenship. This was accepted by MRS.
ORTEGA v:ho then handacl the application to iiISS JARUi^EGUI . MI.SS
JARUREiUI told the applicant to sign a form which he did and the
tourist sr.-;‘ issued. MRS. OR.TE1'. Ls presently in .’isxLco Citv

olo-/.': r.:iu M i c i s i' iW' of Feteiv;-. .Affairs. .Acuordi.ng tc ill.;..?

was quite sv.rc that this man who .tada t.he

.^1 0 V.' A L 0 b r. s d u pc' : i r: i c t u r c £ c h. ?. t £i h i-. ^ v,'

of OSVr.AL.O after the assassinatioa . One or two weeks after the
asstssi.'iation, FSI agents visited the Mexican Consulate. They
requested, permission tc take the original tourist application v.’ith
them but such permission was denied. According to those presently
employed at the Consulate, even the Consul General docs not have
perraissic.n to make such docu.ments available and that an official
ruling ’..-ould have been required frc.-.; the Mexican cjovsrn.T. 3 .-.t . Per-


lef t


let the original apolication ne-a:


the office


but that a cepy of it v/as made by FBI agents. This
is significant, of course, in that handv/r iting analysis of a photo-

an cn analysis of the original docurLent


copy is iviUCh less
Sone experts even


-nat an analysis or a photocopy is invalid.


I


During August of 1955 all docu-.sr.ts .-ore than cne
w^re -burned by the Mexican Consulate prior

office- fro.-n the v;hitney Bank to the Trade Maru. Evrdenuly wh
ofiginal application has been burned. The attached documents aie

(a) Present application issu'ed by the Mexican govern.aent
i-n aoDlicants for tourist visas;


(b)


an information sheet made available to those interested
in securing a hunting permit; and,


the application filled out by those v;ho v/ish to secure
a hunting -permit i,’ . /. • ' - •.' ■V . '•
