Lyman Mrkpa trick Bay Pigs HW 12/29/72 
In one of the parts of COUP that had to bo cut out of F-U, I refer to ids book, "The 
ALoal Cia", saying at long last we -Jiew the real purposes of the CIA, to reorganise itself.

And how fortunate it was that each successding director was more brilliant tlian those who 
proceeded liiu in effective more magnii'icent reorganization.

There is nothing else "the 
^eal CIA" ever did, according to K.

1 found myself wondering in reading it is ho were rational, and before the end I had 
the sane question a out his editor and publisher.

Unless they considered anything pro- 
CIA save and anything on it would sell enough to pay its cost.

Or were subsidized.

The 
USIA alono could nake it break oven.

The whole speech at the Newport R.l.

Naval War College was rubbish, a3 reported by 
Jeremiah Q,Leary via the
4 *imeo service, i3—I 12/13/72 O'L.

is a Btor staffer and the 
story carries a Washington dateline, not Newport.

Becausseoof the late hour.

I'll quote and make feu com onts (for me, anyway!) 
"...2iser to have trained tho invasion force inside the United States to preserve the 
security of the anti-Castro operation." absolute nonsense, liade no diffei-ence where if the 
recruits were Cubans.

All their families ould have known, none could keep secrets, and 
Castro had all the anti-Casrro groups well penetrated.

I tliink ho used then regularly to 
plant what he wanted believed in the USgovernment.

The problem had nothing to do with tlxe 
fact of the operation being known in advance.

The CIA was worst of all in tills.

K con- 
veniently forgets those B25s that landed in Florida with an untenable cover story, well 
pointed, and that seems to have been an indiapensible part of the CIA plan.

**unt et al.

K:"If the President (sic) make the policy to get rid of Castro.• .Of course, I am 
being critical of the President (Kennedy)..." Parens, caps in original.**unt et al.

K:"If the President (sic) make the policy to get rid of Castro.• .Of course, I am 
being critical of the President (Kennedy)..." Parens, caps in original.

Now if there is 
one thing that crooked bastard knows it is that this was NOT Kennedy's decision, that it 
was well within the Lisenhower administration, ana nobody ever told JFKf the whole truth.

"3ahould be at a much lower level of government than the president s office"0'Leary's 
words.

The only time it got there is when the CIA took it upon itself to get the UB armed 
forces openly involved \fithout ever taiJLng it up with tho President, and what the hell was 
he to do, let the CIA be President?

Blame belongs on the CIA# not the military, where he says JFK placed it.

I think JFK 
took tho blano rather dramatically and personally.

However, the military was given a choice 
of two plana and did not disapprove either.

I tliink they gave sort of approval to both, 
and both were Insane.

Blame for more than tho failure belongs on the CIA.

Blame for desi/mng 
a failure belongs to both th-.; CIA and tho military.

They both wanted to use that failure to 
get us involved in an invasion to throw Castro out.

There is whore JFK bridled.

The astounding 
think is that K spalls thi3 out and nobody caught it:"...

the President never roallyuXdeiw 
stood that this proposal entailed a military operation in the true sense of the word." 
No aasualt force, even if a good one, of a mere 1,500 fits thi3 description, ijid thero 
never was any concept tiiat they'd all be infiltrators.

What tho holl did they set up the 
CRC for?

The \/H knew all about tiiat.

it was to lxi the government inexile, then do facto.Not 
by infiltration!

Recruiting was under goldfishbowl conditions in Miami and uantral America.

Any other 
possible way.

Thatj"not even helms wa3 involved is beyond belief, unless hunt was really 
chief of operations instead of Helms.Any other 
possible way. Thatj"not even helms wa3 involved is beyond belief, unless hunt was really 
chief of operations instead of Helms. If onJy two documents in op osition were written, the CIA succeeded, ^ts purpose was 
to keep it secret from the UB and the government, -^f more had known, there’would have been 
more op .position for failure wa3 built-in 
How 1500 men could be recruited from the loudest and longest and freest talking people 
in the hemisphere only a K can understand, 30 there is childishness in his saying it should 
have been done on a UB base for security. With defections to be supressed, US soldiers to 
know, aJU those arounut.io camp to see or the brigade to be prisoners? Rubbish, lovdrade 
In today's world such tilings remain vital! And not nor to do stupid things or reprehensible < 
or anti-U^mucratic ones is not "the most vital lesson". That is "the failure to secure 
accurate intelligence." Protty good for the world's top (ask it!) intelligence agency! AIMS alone they failed. Not bio-degradable! How CIA survived him or how he survived hio own career provoke wonder. Almost as 
much as the quality of reporting.