6 February 1969


Mr. Gary Schoener
Box 392 Mayo Hospital
Minneapolis 55455

Dear Gary,

Paris Plammonde telephoned me in May last year and introduced himself, 1
He asked me for a citation relating to some statement or other by Karina
Osvala , I forget what it was, and he colled me two or three times in
subsequent months to ask for similar references in the 26 volumes * usually
information that I had in my head. He also drew heavily on Accessories
in the preparation of his manuscript, which I did not realize until much
later was devoted entirely to Garrison,

Since I gave Flammonde only occasional and incidental help, in the
form of supplying references or similar points of information by phone
when he* called from time to time, the acknowledgment s eems o ve r-gener ou s *
However, it is clear that he had no intent to misrepresent my position
on Garrison , since he says explicitly (near the end of the book) that
I am opposed to Garrison, quoting almost the whole passage from Accessori es
on this quest ion^ and a few pages later, he refers to me as a KR critic
who is hostile to Garrison,

I can assure you that Flammonde l s generosity towards my work has in no
way j-iuluenced my opinion of his book. It is deplorably inaccurate, very
poorly researched and reasoned at times, and hopelessly bereft of objectivity.
Hy review of the book will appear before too long in The Coirniomreal (a weekly
periodical very much like The Nation in its appearance).

Since I feel certain that there was no devious or sinister motive
behind Flammonde's acknowledgement of my assistance, I have no ground
for accusing him of misusing my name. I trust that this information
clarifies the situation for you.


P*S, I agree with you that any linking of the WR and UFOs


Sincerely,


(over)


I had earlier stumbled into the fact that James Cadig&n, the questioned-
documents expert who was so helpful to the barren Commission, had been
a prosecution witness in the Alger Hiss case, in which his testimony was
considered rather dubious according to Fred Cook#

At that time, it occurred to me that it would be a very useful and
illuminating exercise to look into the background of each of the
experts used by the ttC, to see if there was a consistent pattern
of assistance to the prosecution in cases with political rather than
criminal character. X suggested this to a number of would-be
researchers and helpers but no one picked it up from there.

What *do you think of the possibility and value of attempting this kind
of check-up?


FPS, Still another link between the Wft or the assassination and UFOs
is Fred Lee Crisman, recently implicated in the !1 plot TI by Garrison.
Criszxian was a principal in the famous Kaury Island UFO case of the
late 1940’s , and is considered by many students of the subject as
having staged this hoax, which led indirectly to the death of two
Air Force men.
