COMMENTS ON THE HOUSE ASSASSINATIONS COMMITTEE HEARINGS
PaulL.Hoch
0ct.-Nov.1978
[NOTE:This is a first draft of a commentary on the HSC which was prepared for
Inquiry magazine.Revised excerpts are expected to be published in December.

i      a
and incomplete.I am circulating it in this form because I am interested in
the opinions of other people about the HSc hearings,and about the future of the case.]
For 17 days in September,nearly 15 years after the assassination of President
Kennedy, the House Select Committee on Assassinations presented the first public
hearings on the case as a whole.

In September 1976, the House mandated a special
surrounding" the deaths of Kennedy and Martin Luther King, and to present a report
of its findings.

The Committee was controversial from its inception; its existence and funding
were provided grudgingly.

The public controversy peaked in March 1977,when
Chairman Henry Gonzalez, followed quickly by Chief Counse Richard Sprague,left
the Committee.The new chief counsel,Cornell law professor Robert Blakey,quite
deliberately pulled the Committee's work back from publicview.Although Rep.

Christopher Dodd had written eloquently in December 1966of theneed for an
"ndependent, thorough and open" investigation, very little about the direction
of Blakey's investigation was publicly known before the hearings opened.The
Committee has issued only a very brief interim report under Blakey, and no additional
release of substantive information is expected before the final report,due at
theendoftheyear.

In the long run,it may turn out that the most important thing about the
hearings is that they were held at all.They validated the long-standing claim of
assassination than the Warren Report told us.

version of a final report,nor a coherent presentation of all areas of the inves-
tigation.Clearly the hearings were directed at a public audience,while the
investigation, as it has progressed,was not.In the long run,it may turn out that the most important thing about the
hearings is that they were held at all.They validated the long-standing claim of
assassination than the Warren Report told us.

version of a final report,nor a coherent presentation of all areas of the inves-
tigation.Clearly the hearings were directed at a public audience,while the
investigation, as it has progressed,was not.

Chairman Louis Stokes repeatedly
read disclaimers, pointing out the conflicting nature of some of the testimony,
which would have toberesolved by the Committee for its final report.References
in the public sessions to previous executive-session testimony, and to additional
wi.tnesses, plus discussions with Committee sources,made it clear that there was
more to the investigation than was presented.

The hearings have certainly been very useful in allowing us to anticipate the
report, and to set standards for evaluating it.

Pending last minute developments,
ways to carry out a proper investigation,and that the possibility of a conspiracy
involving Lee Harvey Oswald or Jack Ruby with anti-Castro Cubans and/or Mafia
figures can not be ruled out.

We now know, in a general way, what evidence the HSC
can bring to bear on each of these points.

The hearings allow us to narrow in on
the crucial remaining issues -those where the Hsc's new technical evidence is not
definitive, and those which were conspicuously not discussed - in advance of the report.

Most important, the hearings demonstrated tensions within the Committee's
work which will have to be resolved (or ignored) in the final report.These
problem of what will happen to the issue when the HSC closes up shop.The hearings allow us to narrow in on
the crucial remaining issues -those where the Hsc's new technical evidence is not
definitive, and those which were conspicuously not discussed - in advance of the report. Most important, the hearings demonstrated tensions within the Committee's
work which will have to be resolved (or ignored) in the final report.These
problem of what will happen to the issue when the HSC closes up shop. The strongest
unresolved tension seems to be between those who hope that the issue will go away
orice and for all, and those who either believe that there was an (as yet unestablished)
conspiracy,or at least recognize that any attempt to force a lid on the issue
(for example, by failing to release all the HSc's evidence) will make them look
like a second Warren Commission. Although the hearings were theater, a critique on those grounds is not likely
to be productive. However, there is certainly no point in making excuses for the
things that were done badly.The Hsc did choose to have the hearings (perhaps in

--- PAGE BREAK ---ounds is not likely
to be productive. However, there is certainly no point in making excuses for the
things that were done badly.The Hsc did choose to have the hearings (perhaps in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HSC
一2一
PLH11/11/78
deference to theold committment to openness);they did choose the witnesses;
and they did try to get the stories they wanted into the newspapers. Certainly
many questions were not asked,and more were not answered.On such.matters as
Oswald in Russia and the possible relevance of the CIA's plots to kill Castro,
While this may have been an inevitable consequence of the hearings format,it was
still the Hsc's choice to present the information in that limited fashion.
For a fundamentally theatrical production, the hearings had striking flaws.
The pace was at times overwhelming; the technical witnesses, in particular, often
left the daily press bemused by their own confusion. The press was often frustrated
Yet, as theater, the hearings did give a good impressionistic picture of the
complex forces and individuals involved in the case, and had moments of real drama.
The HSC heard John Connally, who rode in the car with Kennedy; the widow of.the
man who allegedly fired the shots; Earl Ruby, the brother of the man who killed
Oswald (who was questioned at disproportionate length about a telegram he may have
sent to Cuba in 1962).Those witnesses showed the HSC working outwards from Dealey
Plaza; looking at the biggest web of conspiratorial intrigue that has surrounded
the case without reaching in to the central facts, the Committee heard from Fidel
Castro (on tape),who denied that he had retaliated against Kennedy for the CIA-Mafia
into one of those plots (who, testifying under immunity, implausibly described his
role as little more than an interpreter);Richard Helms, who as the CIA's DDP was
deeply involved in some of the plots (and who was roundly, and somewhat unfairly,
criticized for not telling the Warren Commission about them); Gerald Ford,who
vigorously defended the Commission on which he had served; and Burt Griffin (the
Commission's Ruby expert),who, in a thoughtful and candid statement, listed nine
areas in which the Warren Commission had failed tomeet its goals.
Griffin pointed out that "the Select Committee ...shouid consider the possible
reality that,under the American system of civil liberties and the requirement of
proof beyond a reasonable doubt,it is virtually impossible to prosecute or uncover
a well-conceived and well-executed conspiracy." A key test of the Hsc's report willliberties and the requirement of
proof beyond a reasonable doubt,it is virtually impossible to prosecute or uncover
a well-conceived and well-executed conspiracy." A key test of the Hsc's report will

notdoallthatcouldbedone.
Another kind of critique which seems inappropriate now, while we are waiting for
Committee.Certainly some aspects of the show they put on can raise doubts.There
was,for example,an occasional tendency to set up straw men by presenting, as the
work of the critics,certain exotic theories - theories which,in the critical
coimmunity, range from controversial to discredited.On the other hand,the critics
who were brought out presented their work effectively,and (with a few exceptions)
exception, of course,was Mickey Goldsmith's questioning of Jack White,an amateur
photo analyst.）Also in defense of theHSC,the exotic theories which they spent
so much time debunking include those which have gotten extensive public attention
over the years,and a degree of acceptance (even in Congress) totally unwarranted
by the evidence.(E.g., the statistics on the "mysterious deaths.")
All in all, it seems adequate to assume for now that everyone involved in the
the Hsc - has had a dual goal:to find the truth and....
Thesecondarygoalsseem
secrets,exposing (possibly unrelated) plots,pinning it on Castro,getting the
Mafia, advancing one's career or social life, and - certainly not to be ignored -
covering your ass.To the degree that anyone's various goals may turn out to be
in conflict, there is always room for an allegation of bad faith with respect to
the primary goal, the search for the truth about the Kennedy assassination. There
not been acting in good faith,but I'm not confident I can pick them all out;any

--- PAGE BREAK ---th with respect to
the primary goal, the search for the truth about the Kennedy assassination. There
not been acting in good faith,but I'm not confident I can pick them all out;any

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HSC
一3-
PLH
effort to analyze motive as a guide to what is happening, and what should happen
to the case after the HsC, seems premature at best. While I have long felt that
there are powerful covert forces which would come into play if provoked by an
investigation that went too far,I have not seen evidence to convince me that
thieHsc's work has been sidetracked by such forces.
The situation with the Warren Commission,for example,has recently been
on. the undeniable coverup of issues we considered important.Griffin noted that
President Johnson indicated to Earl Warren that the Commission should establish
the truth, and communicate it to the public,"in a manner that would not unncessarily
disrupt the stability of the national government and its conduct of international
affairs....If the suspicions [of conspiratorial intrigue] were unfounded but
unabated, the suspicions could provide strong weapons in the hands of politically
power for unjustified ends." [Griffin statement, Pp. l-2] As I recall, Griffin
added a comment when he read the statement,to the effect that he wonders if
Johnson specificallyhad the CIA plots against Castro in mind.
As a corollary to my reluctance to argue about motive, I am reluctant to spend
time berating the HSC for not asking specific questions. While it is good to point
out what was not pursued, the staff seems aware of the problems; in general, I'm
willing to wait to see how they were pursued in executive session, and how they
are handled in the.final report.Granted,the report would have to be massive to
deal with the hundreds of questions which should have been asked even of the
selected witnesses who did testify in public, to say nothing of additional witnesses.
as good as thatof theSchweiker-Hart Committee.
Like the Warren Commission, the HSC was created with an ambiguous dual purpose -
to solve the case,and to settle doubts.The immediate cause of the HSc's creation
reportedly under the influence of Coretta King and Mark Lane.While the AIB and
other critics had been pushing for years for a reopening of the JFK case,we had
met with little success.Some of the renewed interest in the JFK case was fallout
from Watergate;much came from repeated showings of the Zapruder film.While it
could be argued that the backward motion of Kennedy'shead did not prove a shot from
that film,or to explain how the Warren Commission could have completely ignored
thebackwardmotion.der film.While it
could be argued that the backward motion of Kennedy'shead did not prove a shot from
that film,or to explain how the Warren Commission could have completely ignored
thebackwardmotion.

those who thought the case could be cracked,and those who felt that the primary need
was to restore faith in the integrity of government institutions.The former
included some Congressmen who seemed quite ready to blame the assassination on Castro-
which, many critics feared, was the "fall-back cover story" which "they" had waiting
in the wings.
Under Sprague, the HSC seemed to be going in all directions at once. The
December 1976 report alleged that "as a result" of recent disclosures of"agency
misconduct, foreign assassination attempts," and the like, "there has been a growing
national concern about the adequacy and integrity of the original [assassination]
investigations." That is true enough as far as public opinion is concerned, but the
difficult political reality is that the growing concern is, fundamentally, the
result of the actual inadequacy and lack of integrity of the original investigations.
In fact, the Sprague committee seemed to be pursuing a wide range of conspiracy
theories, with little sign of a systematic approach, or of an awareness of which
"new" leads were in fact old and discredited.
Under Blakey, the HSC seems to have avoided going off on really bad tangents.
We willhave toawait release of their much-heraldedinvestigative plan to analyze
wh:ichpossible conspiracies could have escaped their attention.Judging from the

--- PAGE BREAK ---HSC
-4-
PLH
public hearings, the HSC has developed a more sophisticated approach to their
dual basic purpose.

By various accounts, the HSC intends to spell out areas it
could not or did not pursue, and which questions it concluded were unanswerable.

At best, the HsC may try to restore faith in our institutions by trying to demon-
strate how an investigation should be done, and by discussing guidelines for future
investigations of political murders (which Griffin spelled out, again more skill-
fully than any other witness or any member),rather than by trying to salvage the
umsalvageable old investigations.

The text of the Hsc's report will certainly be the first place to look to see
how the HSC resolves this basic contradiction (assuming they fail to break the case
wide open).That is,will the emphasis be on the questions they failed to resolve
and the new evidence and leads they came up with,or will it be on how hard they
tried, and how unresolvable the remaining questions are (with an implication that
we: should stop worrying and forget about the case)?

In the long run,however,a more important test will be how the committee
makes available its evidence, and the internal record of the scope of its work.

Al.though the HSC has made.various committments to public disclosure of the evidence,
executive hearings, depositions, field interviews and file reviews that will be
analyzed and made public in our final report," at this time there is little reason
to assume that this committment will be met in a timely fashion.

At present,it appears that the HSC will initially publish four volumes: the
report itself,a summary of the staff investigation, the technical panel reports,
to publish some 20 volumes of evidence.Al.though the HSC has made.various committments to public disclosure of the evidence,
executive hearings, depositions, field interviews and file reviews that will be
analyzed and made public in our final report," at this time there is little reason
to assume that this committment will be met in a timely fashion.

At present,it appears that the HSC will initially publish four volumes: the
report itself,a summary of the staff investigation, the technical panel reports,
to publish some 20 volumes of evidence.

The executive session transcripts, it
seems, are not likely to be released at the time of the report, although they will
probably form the basis of much of the analysis.Although some staff members
indicated that they have been putting the internal papers together with the goal of
eventual release, others have indicated that the internal papers may remain under
wraps for years,for various reasons including the lack of money and time,privacy
considerations, and the problem of releasing unsubstantiated or discredited charges.

The Committee must realize that the long-term suppression of any large part
of its files would negate much of its achievement,especially in the attempt to
persuade the public that the truth has been found.The executive session transcripts, it
seems, are not likely to be released at the time of the report, although they will
probably form the basis of much of the analysis.Although some staff members
indicated that they have been putting the internal papers together with the goal of
eventual release, others have indicated that the internal papers may remain under
wraps for years,for various reasons including the lack of money and time,privacy
considerations, and the problem of releasing unsubstantiated or discredited charges.

The Committee must realize that the long-term suppression of any large part
of its files would negate much of its achievement,especially in the attempt to
persuade the public that the truth has been found.

On the other hand, the HSC
certainly realizes that the greatest interest in their files will be shown by those
who are already convinced that the HSc investigation is a coverup, and they are
undoubtedly not eager to spend the next few years defending their judgment on every
point on which reasonable men may differ.(To say nothing of points on which
unreasonable men certainly will differ!)
The Committee's problem is aggravated by the fact that Blakey must also deal
with the disposition of the work done under Sprague.Supporters of one counsel
will be looking for the failures of the other.(Mark Lane and others have already
implied that Sprague was, in effect, forced out because he was doing too good a job,
to those agencies.) Also, members and staffers who worked with Sprague as well as
Willem 0ltmans.(I suspect that Preyer would like to forget about his early public
interest in the babushka lady.)
Most early critiques of the Warren Report came from its own evidence,published
in the 26 volumes and released over the years at the Archives.Commissioner Allen
Dulles predicted that only a few people would pay attention to the evidence in the
vollumes.The HSC willnot make that mistake!--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Committee must realize that the long-term suppression of any large part
of its files would negate much of its achievement,especially in the attempt to
persuade the public that the truth has been found. On the other hand, the HSC
certainly realizes that the greatest interest in their files will be shown by those
who are already convinced that the HSc investigation is a coverup, and they are
undoubtedly not eager to spend the next few years defending their judgment on every
point on which reasonable men may differ.(To say nothing of points on which
unreasonable men certainly will differ!)
The Committee's problem is aggravated by the fact that Blakey must also deal
with the disposition of the work done under Sprague.Supporters of one counsel
will be looking for the failures of the other.(Mark Lane and others have already
implied that Sprague was, in effect, forced out because he was doing too good a job,
to those agencies.) Also, members and staffers who worked with Sprague as well as
Willem 0ltmans.(I suspect that Preyer would like to forget about his early public
interest in the babushka lady.)
Most early critiques of the Warren Report came from its own evidence,published
in the 26 volumes and released over the years at the Archives.Commissioner Allen
Dulles predicted that only a few people would pay attention to the evidence in the
vollumes.The HSC willnot make that mistake! Certainly there is material in the HSC's files which should not be made public
right now (such as active leads), and even more which could properly be released
at the Archives but not published.But there is no doubt that the bulk of this
material should be released promptly. Griffin said that "all materials should be
declassified except those whose publication-is inconsistent with human decency."

--- PAGE BREAK ---HSC
-5
PLH
It remains to be seen whether the'HSC will retreat behind the shield of
Congressional privilege to keep its evidence under wraps.

The files of the
Warren Commission, the FBI, and the CIA are subject to citizens' requests and
judicial review under the Freedom of Information Act, but Congressional records
arenotcovered.

Ironically,there may be more relevant evidence now being withheld than
was ever suppressed by the much-criticized Warren Commission: the files of the,
Rockefeller Commission and the Church, Schweiker,Edwards and Abzug committee
investigations are essentially unavailable.

If the HSC adds its records to this
list, the impression of a "independent,thorough,and open" investigation will
have difficulty surviving.

Related to the question of access to the files is that of provisions for
future investigation.Richardson Preyer,chairman of the JFK subcommittee,made
it clear on "Face the Nation" that he hoped to answer as many questions as possible
so that "the rest will be for history, and not for any more investigations." He
indicated that the HSC had a good chance of convincing most of the public that
put it behind us now." Again, the contrary view was forcefully expressed by Burt
Griffin; he said that the Warren Commission had been "short-sighted" in "closing
the door on further investigation" by not setting up an appropriate mechanism.

With, I think, a better grasp of the political realities than Preyer, he said that
"the public concern about the assassination of President Kennedy will not end in:
the lifetime of anyone in this room." He recommended that the Committee establish,
perhaps at the Kennedy library,a federally funded repository for public and private
material:on the case,to be a center for continuing serious scholarly inquiry.Related to the question of access to the files is that of provisions for
future investigation.Richardson Preyer,chairman of the JFK subcommittee,made
it clear on "Face the Nation" that he hoped to answer as many questions as possible
so that "the rest will be for history, and not for any more investigations." He
indicated that the HSC had a good chance of convincing most of the public that
put it behind us now." Again, the contrary view was forcefully expressed by Burt
Griffin; he said that the Warren Commission had been "short-sighted" in "closing
the door on further investigation" by not setting up an appropriate mechanism.

With, I think, a better grasp of the political realities than Preyer, he said that
"the public concern about the assassination of President Kennedy will not end in:
the lifetime of anyone in this room." He recommended that the Committee establish,
perhaps at the Kennedy library,a federally funded repository for public and private
material:on the case,to be a center for continuing serious scholarly inquiry.

He also suggested that a Justice Department official be given the responsibility
for evaluating new information.This proposal puts the concern about the integrity
of government institutions where it most justifiably belongs, in the future:
"While this will undoubtedly have some consequence of encouraging spurious conspi-
racy claims, it will have the beneficial result of affirming the Federal government's
continuing desire to ascertain the truth." [P.

17] In other words, if the HSc is
to meet its goal of reducing public skepticism, it will have to provide for some
ongoing institutional changes.

If, as expected, the HSC report attempts to discourage future investigation,
its arguments must be carefully scrutinized.17] In other words, if the HSc is
to meet its goal of reducing public skepticism, it will have to provide for some
ongoing institutional changes.

If, as expected, the HSC report attempts to discourage future investigation,
its arguments must be carefully scrutinized.

The HSC is certainly aware of Griffin's
statement that certain kinds of conspiracies may be undetectable,and staff members
sympathetic to the critics have indicated that the report will set forth the
limitations of the investigation in some detail.The thing to watch for is which
limitations are intrinsic, and which result from a lack of time, money, or.insight.

involving the Mafia or certain Cuban groups, with no firm ties to Oswald shown.

However, the HSC reinforced the wall that the Warren Commission unconvincingly built
around Oswald the loner,and around the events of Dealey Plaza.I wonder if the
HSC looked critically enough at the central evidence to detect signs of even the
kind of conspiracy they consider plausible.

The HSC is obligated to discuss not
only whether various plots could have been detected at their source,but what traces
wouldhavebeenleftinDealeyPlaza.

The public hearings did deal with the question of whether a Mafia plot (either
authorized by the national commission,or by a renegade leader) would have been
picked up by electronic surveillance.

There were hints that the failure of the USSR
to turn over allegedly extensive surveillance reports on Oswalds stay there,and
plot - an arguable proposition, since the closer you look at Oswald and the events
of November 22, the more implausible such a plot seems.

In the context of a possible
Mafia plot,the HsCs failure to focus on the Dallas Police was striking; even the
charts of the expert witness on organized crime, Ralph Salerno, noted that Mafia
influence can operate through corrupt policemen.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There were hints that the failure of the USSR
to turn over allegedly extensive surveillance reports on Oswalds stay there,and
plot - an arguable proposition, since the closer you look at Oswald and the events
of November 22, the more implausible such a plot seems. In the context of a possible
Mafia plot,the HsCs failure to focus on the Dallas Police was striking; even the
charts of the expert witness on organized crime, Ralph Salerno, noted that Mafia
influence can operate through corrupt policemen. Seth Kantor, whose own book suggests
conspiratorial behavior by specific police officers in connection with Jack Ruby's
murder of Oswald, has reported that Blakey told him that the HSC was mandated to
look at federal agencies,not the Dallas Police,.and that the HSC had decided that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HSC
-6一
PLH
there was no reason to investigate the DPD in connection with the assassination
itself.
With these broad considerations in mind, we can turn to a brief summary of
the hearings, and what their results might mean. There were three overlapping
phases: what happened in Dealey Plaza (and certain matters relating to Oswald),
the performance of the federal agencies, and conspiracy allegations.
In the first phase,the HSC set the scene with testimony from Gov.Connally
and his wife, and from critic/consultant Robert Groden,who indicated the scope of
the questions arising from photographic evidence alone.For the next four days,
the HSC heard from panels of experts who had studied the physical evidence.Thet Robert Groden,who indicated the scope of
the questions arising from photographic evidence alone.For the next four days,
the HSC heard from panels of experts who had studied the physical evidence.The

establishing,with about 90% certainty,that the small bullet fragmentsallegedly
of the autopsy photos and motorcade photos, indicating that both hits came from
the general direction of the "sniper's nest"window of the TSBD,and that a straight
line trajectory through Kennedy and Connally（the single bullet theory） is not
only possible but almost inevitable; (c) acoustical analysis of a noisy sound
recording of the DPD radio while a mike was stuck open, which actually captured
the sound of the shots [discussed below]. Other expert evidence generally supported
the conclusions of the Warren Commission.
The technical experts provided a great deal of information, synthesis of which
should await the publication of their reports in full.The subsequent testimony
the critics in attendance.It seemed that except for the technical experts and
Griffin,hardly anyone really wanted to tell the Committee anything relevant to the
Kennedyassassination.
Marina Oswald reluctantly said that she thought her husband was "capable of"
the assassination (an admission of little probative value).The HSC got little
from Marina,but did leave an impression of what a difficult witness she is,how
what her questioners want to hear.(She admittedly lied in 1964; now,when it was
unclear whether the HSC believed that a handwritten inscription on a photo of Oswaldwhat a difficult witness she is,how
what her questioners want to hear.(She admittedly lied in 1964; now,when it was
unclear whether the HSC believed that a handwritten inscription on a photo of Oswald

The HSc's experts established - quite persuasively, in my opinion, but not in
everyone's- that these "backyard photos"were genuine,and the evidence left open
the possibility of a conspiratorial connection between Oswald and George DeMohren-
schildt in connection with the shot fired at General Edwin Walker.(The handwriting
experts said that the inscription"to my friend George,"with a date preceding the
Walker shooting, was Oswald's, but I still suspect it was a careful forgery.)
Two of the key conspiracy theories were presented next, in the context of
possible links to the loner Oswald.In an extraordinary show of cooperation, the
threatened to kill Kennedy on his visit to the Cuban consulate in Mexico City six
weeks before the assassination,and Castro himself denied that he had retaliated
against CIA plots on his own life.The questions raised by Oswald's defection to
Russia were dominated by testimony about Yuri Nosenko,a 1964 Soviet defector who
response to Daniel Schorr's NY Review piece on the Castro connection,and to the
review of Epstein's book in Inquiry,26 June 1978.]
The witnesses from the Secret Service, FBI,CIA and Warren Commission provided
little that was new to those familiar with the massive documentation already available;
they generally took a hard line against admitting any flaws which would have changed
what happened in Dallas, or the results of the Warren Commission investigation.
Non-CIA witnesses tended to agree that the CIA should have told the Commission about
the plots against Castro;Richard Helms understandably took umbrage at being made
to shoulder the bulk of theblame himself.
During "conspiracy week," technical experts rebutted many of the most popular
(but not necessarily the strongest) conspiracy theories. The HSC then focused on
a fleshed-out version of one of the most persistent theories, that of organized crimerebutted many of the most popular
(but not necessarily the strongest) conspiracy theories. The HSC then focused on
a fleshed-out version of one of the most persistent theories, that of organized crime

--- PAGE BREAK ---HSC
7-
PLH
involvement.Jack Ruby's mysterious phone calls and odd trips to Cuba were
explored (using, in part, new documents obtained from the Cubans, which
contradicted the testimony of gambler Lewis McWillie,:who had invited Ruby there).

The HSC closed by raising the possibility of Mafia involvement not just in Oswald's
death,but in Kennedy's.Obviously frightened,Jose Aleman told of hearing Santo
to clear this up.

Organized crime expert Ralph Salerno testified,in effect, that
the Mafia had motive, means,and opportunity to perform such a political killing.

No brief summary of the testimony can convey the richness of the information
provided (about the HSC as well as about the assassination).

It is difficult to
predict what will turn out to be important in the report,much less what be be
significant years from now,when it has been digested.As the hearings were
impressionistic by design,so are the following ideas about where the HSc's
investigation will leave us.

The technical evidence should allow for a substantial narrowing of the issues.

No witness was asked all the questions a critic would want answered, and some
seemed evasive,too ready to offer unsubstantiated opinions,or otherwise unper-
suasive on details.However,there seems little doubt that if the Warren Commission
had dealt with the technical matters this thoroughly, we would not now be arguing
about most of them.The situation has been qualitatively changed.The Commission's
handling of technical matters (the autopsy, ballistics, etc.) was so bad - and so
that some fundamental physical fact proving a conspiracy had been missed or even
deliberately suppressed.Given any non-Warren Commission reconstruction of the
shooting, it was hard to find any single fact which contradicted it and was above
suspicion.That is,I think, no longer the case; it would seem very difficult to
sustain any reconstruction other than two hits from the rear without positing
massive fraud.The technical evidence should allow for a substantial narrowing of the issues.

No witness was asked all the questions a critic would want answered, and some
seemed evasive,too ready to offer unsubstantiated opinions,or otherwise unper-
suasive on details.However,there seems little doubt that if the Warren Commission
had dealt with the technical matters this thoroughly, we would not now be arguing
about most of them.The situation has been qualitatively changed.The Commission's
handling of technical matters (the autopsy, ballistics, etc.) was so bad - and so
that some fundamental physical fact proving a conspiracy had been missed or even
deliberately suppressed.Given any non-Warren Commission reconstruction of the
shooting, it was hard to find any single fact which contradicted it and was above
suspicion.That is,I think, no longer the case; it would seem very difficult to
sustain any reconstruction other than two hits from the rear without positing
massive fraud.

Fraud by the Hsc's witnesses en masse is, I think, out of the question.

These
witnesses knew that their work would be released, available for scrutiny by their
professional colleagues, and accepted skeptically by much of the public.

The
question of a massive fraud perpetrated by tampering with the evidence in 1963-64
is somewhat more open.For example,Vincent Guinn's NAA work established (with
reasonable certainty) that the Connally wrist fragments matched the stretcher bullet.

is far from clear.

In fact, the original Connally wrist fragments were cut up for
1964 tests, and some of the pieces are apparently missing; while this could be quite
base an allegation of fraud simply on circumstances, plus a belief that the tests
came out with the "wrong" answer.

Pending a demonstration of fraud, the HSc's
evidence will become the standard against which any alternative reconstruction
will have to be tested.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In fact, the original Connally wrist fragments were cut up for
1964 tests, and some of the pieces are apparently missing; while this could be quite
base an allegation of fraud simply on circumstances, plus a belief that the tests
came out with the "wrong" answer. Pending a demonstration of fraud, the HSc's
evidence will become the standard against which any alternative reconstruction
will have to be tested. This positive appraisal of the HSc's evidence supports only two hits from the
rear,not the stronger conclusions of （a) no shots from the front,(b) only one
gunman in the rear, and of course (c) Oswald himself in the sixth-floor window. Nor does recognition of the strength of theHsc's expert evidence imply that it was
without flaws or handled without bias. Most notably, the acoustics tests found
evidence of four shots - firm evidence of a conspiracy, if correct. The third shot
was just half a second before the fourth one （too close tohave been from the same
Mannlicher-Carcano rifle), and was apparently from the grassy knoll (in front of the
car); the first two shots were only 1.6 seconds apart. Departing from the habit of
not immediately challenging expert testimony, the HSC quickly reported its own tests
showing that the rifle could be fired (using the iron sights, not the scope) in l.65
seconds. (Sources indicate that other tests had previously given results under the
2.25 to 2.5 seconds given in the Warren Report, so it is not the HSc's result which
is suspect so much as their eagerness to obtain it, an eagerness which was not in
evidence when testimony supported the Warren Commission's conclusions.)  The
acoustics expert, James Barger, was questioned extensively about the possibility that
the third apparent shot was a "false alarm;" he resisted giving a flat opinion,
but left the odds at about 50-50.(Again, it should be emphasized that there is
no comparably strong evidence of a hit from thefront.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---HSC
-8~
HTd
Conflicting impressions given during the hearings show how difficult it is
to evaluate such testimony, and the Hsc's reaction to it.

To many observers, the
HSC was trying very hard to make the fourth shot go away, but HSC sources insisted
that it was Barger who was weakening, and that the HSC would have been delighted
byhardevidence of afourth shot.As one of the few people there with enough
technical training to follow his testimony,I got the impression that he had not
softened his position (as much of the press thought he had),but that the apparent
softening came from repeated attempts to explain, to a non-scientific audience,
the nature of the conclusions one can draw from experiments like his.

The Committee clearly would have preferred Barger to play the role of an
expert witness -i.e., to give his own opinion, which would have been admissible in
court.Barger refused to play that game.(Other technical witnesses,notably wound
ballistics expert Larry Sturdivan, were all too willing to offer opinions,which
were not challenged as they should have been.）[I am preparing a separate memo on
the acoustics tests.]
It also appeared that the HSC did not understand the concept of probability
(as applied to.experimental results) in the same way as the witnesses did.

For
example,when the trajectories were traced back to the TSBD,the members acted as if
the exact size and location of the indicated circle of error were what mattered -
that is, as if the results implied that there was a zero probability that the shot
came from outside the circle; in fact,the probability is small but not negligible.

The Committee has the difficult task of sorting out the scientific evidence.For
example,when the trajectories were traced back to the TSBD,the members acted as if
the exact size and location of the indicated circle of error were what mattered -
that is, as if the results implied that there was a zero probability that the shot
came from outside the circle; in fact,the probability is small but not negligible.

The Committee has the difficult task of sorting out the scientific evidence.

There might be problems if they treat expert opinions as if they are evidence
as the same level as the actual scientific facts.Perhaps the HSC will make proper
use of the technical experts in the final drafting of the report.When it comes
out,we should findout if the people whodid thetests feel that they were
misinterpreted.

assassin" is a crucial one.The jump from the scientific witnesses to Marina Oswald
producing a computer-enhanced photo of Oswald in the window.They did no such thing;
in fact, they added practically nothing to the Warren Commission's circumstantial
case that Oswald was the gunman.The report will tell us whether they tried.

I am concerned that the HSC,thinking like lawyers,will simply bring the
overall apparent weight of the case to bear against the many questions (some small,
some large) raised over the years by the critics.Most critics would, I think, admit
that the circumstantial case exists, and that there are only two possibilities:
either Oswald was shooting from the sixth floor,or there was a massive and careful
conspiracy to frame him.The latter possibility is a real one; certainly the
Warren Commissionfailedto consider it.

Suspicions of a frameup naturally focus on individuals from the Dallas Police
or others agencies on the scene,since the DPD zeroed in on Oswald as the lone
assassin with remarkable speed (and he was, of course, shot while in their custody).--- PAGE BREAK ---

I am concerned that the HSC,thinking like lawyers,will simply bring the
overall apparent weight of the case to bear against the many questions (some small,
some large) raised over the years by the critics.Most critics would, I think, admit
that the circumstantial case exists, and that there are only two possibilities:
either Oswald was shooting from the sixth floor,or there was a massive and careful
conspiracy to frame him.The latter possibility is a real one; certainly the
Warren Commissionfailedto consider it. Suspicions of a frameup naturally focus on individuals from the Dallas Police
or others agencies on the scene,since the DPD zeroed in on Oswald as the lone
assassin with remarkable speed (and he was, of course, shot while in their custody). As noted earlier, the public hearings dealt only with Federal agencies.HSC sources
did express disappointment that there had been insufficient focus during the inves-
tigation on the many questions raised by critics about the performance of the DPD and
other authorities on November 22. One source pointed to the fact that many HSC
investigators were ex-policemen who were not inclined to be suspicious of the police. ask: never mind the circumstantial case against Oswald, or testimony that he was
"capable" of the crime - if there had been a "well conceived and well executed
conspiracy' [Griffin,p.12] to frame Oswald,what is the probability that the
House Committee would have uncovered it? The Hsc's hearings on the agencies certainly showed how hard it is to get
tapes, and other hard evidence).There is a consensus that information was covered
have been benign.Peter Scott had suggested that the HSC might be able to crack the

--- PAGE BREAK ---HSC
-9
PLH
whoknew only part of the whole picture - following the model of the Watergate
investigation, in effect.

The report should reveal if this approach was tried;
it evidently did not lead the HSC to crack the case.Hopefully the records of
the executive sessions and the agency file reviews will give a more complete
picture of the HSC's successes and failures than the hearings did.The HSC should
at least identify the points of resistance it encountered when dealing with the
agencies, so that we can suggest our own interpretations.

The interim report of January 1978 indicated that there had been some such
problems, but the Hsc has chosen not to confront the agencies - at least not in
public.

For initially going along with the usual access rules - e.g.,letting
Blakey has been roundly criticized,by former (and maybe even current) staff members,
as well as by some of the buffs.On the other hand,HSC sources working with agency
files seem quite pleasedwith the access theyhave had;it is by no means clear that
a hard-line approach to the agencies would have been more productive,and it could
have threatened theHsc'spoliticalsurvival.

On one sensitive issue, the HSC was willing to defer to the CIA's sensitivity
about public discussion of its sources.There has been a long controversy about
photos of an unidentifiedman taken byor for the CIA at the Soviet and Cuban
Embassies in Mexico City; the description of this man was wrongly attached to Oswald
before the assassination.While the Cuban witnesses could refer to these as CIA
surveillance photos, the HSC seemed to go to unusual lengths to avoid those words.For initially going along with the usual access rules - e.g.,letting
Blakey has been roundly criticized,by former (and maybe even current) staff members,
as well as by some of the buffs.On the other hand,HSC sources working with agency
files seem quite pleasedwith the access theyhave had;it is by no means clear that
a hard-line approach to the agencies would have been more productive,and it could
have threatened theHsc'spoliticalsurvival.

On one sensitive issue, the HSC was willing to defer to the CIA's sensitivity
about public discussion of its sources.There has been a long controversy about
photos of an unidentifiedman taken byor for the CIA at the Soviet and Cuban
Embassies in Mexico City; the description of this man was wrongly attached to Oswald
before the assassination.While the Cuban witnesses could refer to these as CIA
surveillance photos, the HSC seemed to go to unusual lengths to avoid those words.

(Blakey's prepared narration, for example, said that the photos were "thought by
cr:itics to have been taken by a surveillance camera." [9/i8,p.5])
Ihave long felt that there isat least a plausibleexplanation for what may
actually be an innocent mixup,but there are related questions about tapes and
transcripts of what Oswald (or an impostor) said, and the record provides clear
evidence that the CIA was withholding information from the Warren Commission.This
was not dealt with in public,and the attention given to it in the report will be a
good test of the Hsc's willingness to deal with relevant issues which have
"national security" overtones.

A related sensitive issue raises the specter of manipulation of part of the
investigation.The handling of the Nosenko matter suggests behind-the-scenes
efforts by both sides in an ongoing controversy to air their views through the HSC.(Blakey's prepared narration, for example, said that the photos were "thought by
cr:itics to have been taken by a surveillance camera." [9/i8,p.5])
Ihave long felt that there isat least a plausibleexplanation for what may
actually be an innocent mixup,but there are related questions about tapes and
transcripts of what Oswald (or an impostor) said, and the record provides clear
evidence that the CIA was withholding information from the Warren Commission.This
was not dealt with in public,and the attention given to it in the report will be a
good test of the Hsc's willingness to deal with relevant issues which have
"national security" overtones.

A related sensitive issue raises the specter of manipulation of part of the
investigation.The handling of the Nosenko matter suggests behind-the-scenes
efforts by both sides in an ongoing controversy to air their views through the HSC.

(In brief,there is a serious split between the Angleton faction （who not only
questioned Nosenko's bona fides and subjected him to extremely "spartan" conditions,
but: ultimately concluded that the CIA has been penetrated at a high level by the KGB)
brand of analysis as counterproductive at best).)The HsC was distracted by matters
such as Nosenko's treatment while in custody and his ongoing relationship with the
CIA (important in their own right, but less relevant to the assassination than the
tine spent on them would suggest).

To his credit, Rep.

Dodd showed some displeasure
at the situation - because of a reluctance,I hope, to being used as a vehicle in
this ongoing dispute.

The Angletonian case on the assassination - that Oswald had been a Russian
agent, at least before he came back to the U.s.

- was presented with great fanfare
would present evidence that theKGB had kept Oswald under close surveillance in
Russia.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Angletonian case on the assassination - that Oswald had been a Russian
agent, at least before he came back to the U.s. - was presented with great fanfare
would present evidence that theKGB had kept Oswald under close surveillance in
Russia. I heard that Angleton would be a witness on just this point, which left
open the possibility that he would not be questioned about (e.g.) his apparent
interception of Oswald's mail before the assassination, and the possible suppression
of that information from his colleagues inside the CIA.Such testimony by Angleton
would have given him a vehicle for his theories which,I feared,the HSC might not
be skillful enough to deal with. Fortunately, this did not occur. The HSC brought up the issue of KGB surveill-
ance,and Soviet non-cooperation with their investigation,but I don't recall
Angleton ever being mentioned by name!A staff report on Nosenko (given to the press)
reached no explicit conclusions,but subjected Nosenko's statements to close scrutiny。

--- PAGE BREAK ---'t recall
Angleton ever being mentioned by name!A staff report on Nosenko (given to the press)
reached no explicit conclusions,but subjected Nosenko's statements to close scrutiny。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HSC
+10-
PLH
That is, the staff assumed that Nosenko's comments were by and large valid as
indicators of his authenticity, and noted some contradictions (of the kind which
led Angleton to conclude he was a planted defector).The CIA sent John Hart to
testify that the conditions of Nosenko's detention were outrageous, that the
interrogations had not been correctly translated, that Nosenko had a drinking
problem, and that Angleton's belief in a KGB "mole" inside the CIA derived from
a certifiably paranoid earlier defector.For several hours,the HSC was the
vehicle for the airing of some of the CIA's dirtiest linen,in language carefully
and effectively calculated to get the attention of the members and the press.
(A few days later,Helms complained,with some basis, to the effect that the purpose
of Hart's testimony was not so much to shed light on the Kennedy assassination
as to excoriate his former colleagues.)
If the Hsc's report can avoid getting caught up in an internal CIA battle
which the members were unable to comprehend in full (and which was outside the
mandate),I will be impressed. A key thing to watch for will be an assessment
of evidence (if any) of KGB involvement with Oswald,other than the Nosenko story.
Sending a fake defector, even with a fake story, does not implicate the KGB in
the assassination, any more than the FBI's withholding of the Hosty notebook entry,
or the destruction of Oswald's note to that agent,implicates the FBI in the crime.
The handling of the allegations of Cuban involvement will be an even more sensitive
test of the Committee. After reporting Castro's denials, Blakey referred to very
sensitive information which supposedly contradicted part of Castro's story,prompting
much press interest; the next day, a disclaimer about the reliability of this
information was added. Certain parts of Castro's story are questionable - e.g.,
the claim that the Cubans did not learn that AMLASH had been plotting with the CIA
to kill Castro; the historical role that has been played by the Castro-did-it
theories is even more questionable.So far, we do not know how the HSC will
handletheseproblems.
In dealing with some of the more exotic conspiracy theories (e.g., Hunt and
Sturgis on the grassy knoll), the Hsc's report may provide a real service - even
for the critics,who can welcome a focusing of public attention on the strongest
elements of their analysis.We will be watching to see how well the report deals
with (for example) the "20 key anti-Castro Cuban groups which had the motivation,g of public attention on the strongest
elements of their analysis.We will be watching to see how well the report deals
with (for example) the "20 key anti-Castro Cuban groups which had the motivation,

The Hsc's presentation of the Mafia plot theory suggests that the major
effect of the Hsc's work,in terms of institutional changes like those suggested by
Griffin, might be not to solve the JFK case but to revive the Kennedy adminis-
tration war on organized crime.Blakey himself worked against organized crime in
the Kennedy justice department,and there were signs of nostalgia during the
testimony of Ralph Salernoabout those goodold days.
The Committee may or may not come out believing in a conspiracy to kill Kennedy,
but Blakey certainly believes that there is an ongoing organized crime conspiracy
which deserves public exposure and Justice Department attention.The link to the
JFK case, as presented, was circumstantial, and preceded by a warning from Chairman
Stokes against guilt by association.I got the impression that his caveat was
directed towards the evidence being presented by his own chief counsel,and Stokes
more or less confirmed that interpretation for me.If these is really tension
between Stokes and Blakey on this matter, it will bear watching in the final report.
In fact,there is a chain of associations between Oswald and the Mafia which
was mentioned in the narration, but not developed through witnesses: Oswald may
witnesses from the Garrison probe); Ferrie was an investigator for Carlos Marcello,
alleged Mafia boss of New Orleans, who (like Trafficante) had reportedly threatened
recent books by Bud Fensterwald and Dan Moldea) will be focussed on in the report.
The HSC appears to have spent little time in linking a possible "big" conspiracy
to Dealey Plaza - or at least it has not had much evident success in doing so.
Iwill be curious to see if the evidence does in fact reflect the kind of disinterest
in a Dealey Plaza.conspiracy which can be explained if Blakey's most clearly seen
enemy is the Mafia,rather than the (possible) killers of Kennedy.As noted above,fact reflect the kind of disinterest
in a Dealey Plaza.conspiracy which can be explained if Blakey's most clearly seen
enemy is the Mafia,rather than the (possible) killers of Kennedy.As noted above,

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd of disinterest
in a Dealey Plaza.conspiracy which can be explained if Blakey's most clearly seen
enemy is the Mafia,rather than the (possible) killers of Kennedy.As noted above,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HSC
一11-
HTd
a key issue is the attention paid to individuals on the Dallas Police force,
which can hardly be assumed to have been totally free of corruption.Griffin,
in fact, did suggest that linkages between the Dallas Police, the Mafia,
intelligence agencies, and other groups should have been investigated by
knowledgable experts on the Warren Commission.
In the context of a Mafia plot, the idea - hard for many to accept - of a
massive conspiracy to frame Oswald (using planted evidence) gains added plausibility.
When this was raised with a Committee staffer,he showed little interest,
suggesting that a Mafiaplot operating through the police wouldbe complex and
therefore unlikely.The possibility that certain Dallas Police officers knew who
Oswald was -despite the official absence of a file on him,althoughhe was a
returned defector-evidently does not intrigue the Committee as it does me.
Here, the Hsc's apparent failure to break through the image of Oswald as a loner -
even on something like his intelligence connections, which might be completely
to close the door on mischievous or manipulative conspiracy-mongering in the future,
it must emphasize the importance of the centralDealey Plazaevidence.
If the report, like the hearings, ends on a note of possible conspiracy, then
the Warren Report critics will have been vindicated on our central belief. - that
there was, and is, serious reason to suspect that there were conspirators who have
not been brought to justice. In any case, the very existence of these hearings
proved that the critics had been right in claiming that important questions had not
been answered. The Assassination Information Bureau, which monitored the hearings,
noted at their close that "the technical thickness of the case built up [by the HSC]
...is already akind of indication that the critics'objections to the official
theory were important and difficult and that they were not posed idly. The Committee
has acknowledged that the autopsy was mishandled,that the medical evidence is
contradictory and confusing, the performance of the investigative agencies dismal,
the initiative and sophistication of the Warren Commission inconsiderable,and the
suggestion of ties of some kind between Oswald and the world of intelligence oper-
ations and Jack Ruby and the world of organized crime profound."
The Committee was generally pretty good about explicitly recognizing the work
of the critics （despite a few ritual attacks on those who allegedly have been making
money by writing books on the case; in fact,I don't know of any critic who would
not be delighted to be getting the inflated salaries of the HSC staff lawyers).
Even on the technical evidence,which generally went against the critics' expectations,
it was their work which pointed the HSC in the right direction. For example, Guinn's
NAA work could be done rather easilybecause he had alreadybecome an expert on
Mannlicher-Carcano ammunition through his contacts with John Nicols,a critic whothe right direction. For example, Guinn's
NAA work could be done rather easilybecause he had alreadybecome an expert on
Mannlicher-Carcano ammunition through his contacts with John Nicols,a critic who

learning of the DPD radio tape from Mary Ferrell.Sometimes the critics' contri-
Dallas Police had made a print of one of the backyard photos from a negative which
later disappeared.Kirk looked at this photo on his own initiative,having gotten
interested in it after reading about the peculiar interrogation of Oswald in a
critical book which he had picked up on his own.(This was one of the few times that
Dallas Police misbehavior came up in the hearings.)
been of value, several of those critics (besides myself) remained skeptical that
the key areas they had suggested had been properly pursued. In fact, the HSC had
provided essentially no feedback at the conference,and subsequent contacts with
the critics ranged, as far as I know, from nonexistent to limited. Mary Ferrell
was reportedly displeased that the Committee was using her files, and her personal
knowledge, without providing much feedback in return. Larry Harris urged the HSC
to consider the possibility of Oswald's innocence,which doesn't seem to have been
done.I don't know if the HsC has done what I considered essential: gather and
examine all available government files on Oswald.Peter Dale Scott has noted that
the Committee shares his interest in Ruby's organized crime connections,but not
much attention was paid to his intelligence connections.At the conference, Jim
Kostman of the AIB pushed for a sophisticated analysis of the 1967 disclosures

--- PAGE BREAK ---HSC
-12-
PLH
of the CIA's anti-Castro plots and the "backfire" theory, a topic which seems
to have been too sensitive for the Schweiker Report,and which was not dealt with
in the HSC's hearings.

To the critics in attendance,there were several striking omissions from the
HSC's public case.(In fairness, some of the staff were quite candid in admitting
such omissions,and the critics recognized that no claim to completeness had been
made.) Two of these omissionsare worth detailed examination, because the wa the
Committee deals with them in their final report will provide a good basis for
judging whatever claims are made about the Hsc's achievements.Specifically,the
treatment of the evidence surrounding the autopsy, and the possible connections
between Oswald and military intelligence agencies,will tell us whether the HSC
intends to avoid the problems it could not resolve,or to focus on what the
failure to resolve them might mean。
On the Kennedy medical evidence,the hearings relied almost exclusively on the
conclusions of a panel of forensic pathologists who examined the autopsy X-rays and
photos.

In legal terms, that material would be considered the best evidence, more
reliable than the testimony of doctors who saw Kennedy only briefly while trying
to save his life (at Parkland), or at greater length (at the autopsy) but under
pressure.

To a non-lawyer critic, it is hard to accept the consequent supposition
that the problems with the less-than-best evidence can be explained away.Before
the hearings began, an AIB press release noted that "the HSCA should not just present
to the public the evidence which they have decided is the best.It is their
responsibility to boldly confront the conflicts within the evidence."
One of these conflicts came up in the testimony of Dr.

James J.

Humes, who led
the team of military doctors performing the autopsy.

Dr.Humes, who led
the team of military doctors performing the autopsy.

Dr.

Michael Baden, head of
the medical panel, testified that the entry wound in the back of the head could be
seen in the photos,high above the hairline.Indeed,one of the photos (a carefully
drawn copy of which was released) shows gloved hands moving Kennedy's hair away from
that spot, with a ruler in place, evidently to pinpoint the location.

A smaller
spot on the photo,several inches lower, was identified by Baden as an artifact,
probably dried tissue.The problem is that the original autopsy report located the
wound "slightly above" the external occipital protruberance, while later observations
from the photos put it about 4 inches up.The really strange thing is not that
the autopsy doctors were wrong, but that Baden believe, when he testified, that
they still believed (having seen the photos) that the lower point was the entry
wound,and that the higher one was an artifact。
Dr.

Humes testified on short notice, and the Committee said that he would be
asked specifically about this matter.He was led reluctantly to admit the the
there was only one wound,implying that the conflict was relatively unimportant.

It remains odd that neither Humes nor (apparently) the other two doctors had been
previously willing to simply admit an error.

Humes was asked about one action of his which has been controversial for years.

On November 24,1963, Humes certified that he had "destroyed by burning certain
preliminary draft notes" relating to the autopsy; that certificate was "accepted and
approved" by Adm.

George Burkley, Kennedy's personal physician.

Humes told the HSC
thatwhat he had destroyed werebloodstained notes that hadbeen made in the autopsy
room,which he copied word for word and then destroyed for reasons of taste.But,
he testified to the Warren Commission that all he had destroyed was a preliminary
draft which he had written, in his home, early on the morning of the 24th, and
Warren Commission.--- PAGE BREAK ---

George Burkley, Kennedy's personal physician. Humes told the HSC
thatwhat he had destroyed werebloodstained notes that hadbeen made in the autopsy
room,which he copied word for word and then destroyed for reasons of taste.But,
he testified to the Warren Commission that all he had destroyed was a preliminary
draft which he had written, in his home, early on the morning of the 24th, and
Warren Commission. Incredibly, the HSc failed to ask him about his prior testimony,
or to identify the copy of his notes, which should be available. Whatever evidence
the HSC may have on this point, the failure to clarify it in public seems inexplicable. (They may have wanted not to embarrass Humes,but the whole point of the testimony
was to force a retraction on the location of the head wound.)
The bottom line is whether these contradictions, and others like them, mean
that there is something basically wrong with the conclusions of the panel. Unless
the Hsc has managed to explain the contradictions away other than just by assuming
that a lot of people made a lot of mistakes,the critics will remain justifiably

--- PAGE BREAK ---HSC
一13一
PLH
skeptical.The report will presumably indicate the depth of the closed-door
investigation.

Dr.

Humes told me that he had in fact not been questioned in
great detail by the staff, or taken through the autopsy report in detail (although
a HSC source indicated this had been done).Humes shared my surprise that he
had not been asked more questions.(In fact, the members asked none - a rare
occurence with any witness.）He sounded like a man whowould have more to say,
if he were asked the right questions: "They sort of had a golden opportunity...

but they didn't choose to [ask questions],and it didn'tbother me one way or
the other; whatever pleased them, pleased me." Humes denied to me that he had
anything specific he wanted to add,but he clearly wasn't asked in public every-
thing that should have been asked.We will have to wait and see if the HSc leaves
the record incomplete in this respect.

One should not get the idea that the failure to follow up with Humes was
exceptional.

In another discussion of the autopsy evidence, there was no challenge
to a most peculiar application of the best evidence concept.The Committee asked
J.Lee Rankin, the Warren Commission's chief counsel, why he had not insisted on
using the autopsy X-rays and photos.He said that since they had the testimony of
the autopsy doctors, the photos and X-rays would have been only additional and
cumulative evidence - a remarkable claim, turning the concept of best evidence on
its head, and one that (to my knowledge) has never been made before.

Rankin also
said that they did not insist on getting this material because Warren had made a
since Warren had said that public release might not come in our lifetimes,some
Commission records are still withheld on national security grounds, and deletions
her husband's wounds to photos of Jack Ruby's strippers.

As David Lifton put it,the net effect of the medical testimony was to give
us the same old structure on a new foundation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rankin also
said that they did not insist on getting this material because Warren had made a
since Warren had said that public release might not come in our lifetimes,some
Commission records are still withheld on national security grounds, and deletions
her husband's wounds to photos of Jack Ruby's strippers. As David Lifton put it,the net effect of the medical testimony was to give
us the same old structure on a new foundation. For years, the critics were told
that the autopsy report, and the testimony of the doctors, were the basis for the
Commission's conclusions; now we are told that the autopsy was botched, the doctors
were wrong, and we must rely on the photos and X-rays.The Hsc should realize that
situation,and their report should reflect that realization. Rankin was not the only witness during "agency week" whose implausible testimony
was allowed to stand.The HSC's most notable public failure was with Helms;more
than half his time was spent on Nosenko.Even though documents about the CIA and
Oswald were introduced into evidence,he was not asked about them(apparently because
the members preferred to talk about Nosenko).For example,Helms was never asked to
explain why his Warren Commission testimony that the CIA had never even contemplated
using Oswald as a source was contradicted by a CIA memo describing in detail such
contemplated contacts.Helms might still be too much of a team player to reveal this,
but it is quite possible that the memo in question was withheld inside the CIA; in
any case,he should have explained the story in public. One part of Helms’testimony drew the attention of critics to the incompleteness
of the list of federal agencies dealt with in the hearings. When asked why the CIA
had not debriefed Oswald upon his return from Russia in i962, he indicated that theyof critics to the incompleteness
of the list of federal agencies dealt with in the hearings. When asked why the CIA
had not debriefed Oswald upon his return from Russia in i962, he indicated that they

is, as far as I know, a new part of the official CIA explanation; Helms made this
point a couple of times,so it wasn't a slip of the tongue.（In the past,CIA sources
didn't need to talk to every returning defector, especially hostile ones.)
Critics have raised the possibility that Oswald went to Russia in 1959 on a
mission for Naval or Marine Corps intelligence. A researcher has told me that the
responsibility for infiltrating agents into the UssR was taken from military intell-
igence and given to the CIA rather late,i.e.in the late fifties.Helms was not
asked about this in public, even though the HSC is aware of the role of the military
in planting defectors - which suggests not only that Oswald may have been on an ONI
mission, but that it had not been properly authorized by or explained to the CIA.

--- PAGE BREAK ---HSC
-14一
PLH
Other questions have been raised about Oswald's Marine career, and even the
Warren Commission was suspicious about the problems it encountered in getting all
files about Oswald.(For example: no 'damage assessment' after Oswald's defection
failed to send his photo to CIA promptly when requested before the assassination.)
The public hearings covered only the Secret Service,FBI,CIA,the Justice Department
and the Warren Commission; essentially nothing was said about the pre-assassination
performance of Naval Intelligence, which is clearly within the HsC's mandate.

there is nothing left to be scrutinized!

FBI documents released last year revealed,
for the first time, that Army intelligence had pre-assassination files on Oswald
(containing at least newspaper clippings and FBI reports) in at least three southern
cities.When I requested these files under the Freedom of Information Act,I was
time after the assassination.Although the Warren Commission specifically asked
for relevant Army Intelligence records, they did not get these files.

The reasons for interest in the Army files on Oswald are not idle ones.The
FBI documents showed that within two hours of Oswald's arrest, Army Intelligence in
San Antonio had learned that Oswald had a draft card with the alias A.J.Hidell,
a fact which seems to have provoked no response from any other agency for 24 hours.

(The exception is the FBI's discovery of the card later on November 22, which we
now know was a direct'response to the tip from the Army.)The Hidell alias linked
Oswald to the alleged murder weapon, which was ordered in that name; also, it raised
the specter of a co-conspirator, if Hidell was a real person.The reasons for interest in the Army files on Oswald are not idle ones.The
FBI documents showed that within two hours of Oswald's arrest, Army Intelligence in
San Antonio had learned that Oswald had a draft card with the alias A.J.Hidell,
a fact which seems to have provoked no response from any other agency for 24 hours.

(The exception is the FBI's discovery of the card later on November 22, which we
now know was a direct'response to the tip from the Army.)The Hidell alias linked
Oswald to the alleged murder weapon, which was ordered in that name; also, it raised
the specter of a co-conspirator, if Hidell was a real person.

Thus, the immediate
intervention by Army people on just this point has raised suspicions.There are
other reasons for checking out the Army's role,both pre- and post-assassination,
as thoroughly as that of the FBI, CIA,and Secret Service.The head of a local
crucial first interview; Army Inteiligence agent James Powell was inside the TSBD
when the rifle was found;various DPD officers were Army Intelligence reservists,
Army's ll2th Intelligence Group that Oswald was a card-carrying Communist who had
defected to Cuba; this false information was included in a mysterious cable from
the Army to the U.S.

Strike Command on the tense evening of November 22.

Evidently the HSC had no more luck than I did in getting the files and related
information from Army Intelligence.I heard that one staffer did consider a conspiracy
involving individuals with Army Intelligence links to be a possibility (not surprising,
given HSC suspicions of a Mafia plot,which could have had wide-ranging connections).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Strike Command on the tense evening of November 22. Evidently the HSC had no more luck than I did in getting the files and related
information from Army Intelligence.I heard that one staffer did consider a conspiracy
involving individuals with Army Intelligence links to be a possibility (not surprising,
given HSC suspicions of a Mafia plot,which could have had wide-ranging connections). However,when I asked about the omission of Army Intelligence from the hearings,the
most I could get from any staff member was a cautious admission that "we are aware
of the existence of the Department of Defense."The audience at the public hearings
HSC defenders asked me what I expected them to do, if they had been unable to
pursue this matter any further.My answer,of course, is to lay it all out in public,
and spell out the problems encountered.As Peter Scott told the HsC last September,
push hard on them. Again, the question can be phrased in terms of probabilites:
if the Army or Navy files hold (or held) evidence pointing to some sort of "well
conceived and well executed’ conspiracy,what is the probability that the House
investigation would have umconvered it? If the final report can deal with that
question properly (still avoiding unjustified speculation, of course),I will be
impressed。
Even though it has publicly dealt with the critics' case against the Warren
Commission Report only imperfectly, the HSc's work has established that the basic
critique was neither kooky nor unjustified. Conversely, the fact that the Hsc's
work so far can be discussed like this, and given a balanced appraisal, says something
positive about them.(In contrast, for example, it was hard to take the work of
the Rockefeller Commission on the JFK case seriously.Even the Schweiker Committee,
which came up with a quite good, albeit limited, report, did not subject,itself to

--- PAGE BREAK ---ke the work of
the Rockefeller Commission on the JFK case seriously.Even the Schweiker Committee,
which came up with a quite good, albeit limited, report, did not subject,itself to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HSC
-15-
PLH
this kind of public scrutiny.
Regardless of the ultimate conclusions of the House Select Committee,or of
history, on the question of who killed Kennedy, the controversy has certainly
had its productive aspects.Much has been learned about the operation of powerful
forces which are rarely scrutinized.Matters like the CIA-Mafia plots against
Castro and the Nosenko affair are extremely important,whether or not they are
related to the Kennedy assassination.
The Kennedy assassination is older now than the once-controversial Hiss and
Rosenberg cases were on November 22, 1963, when they had become practically
dead issues; things have certainly changed. We are learning more from, and about,
the JFK case than the Watergate and Korean CIA scandals; the latter remain largely
unsolved mysteries, with little public and Congressional interest in solving them.
The House has been pressed into a commitment to resolve the Kennedy case; the
forthcoming report (and the decisions being made about accesss to the evidence)
will test the fragility of that commitment.
[END]