Copy  I if  of  36


NEW  ZEALAND  DEFENCE  FORCE

UNIDENTIFIED  FLYING  OBJECTS  (UFO)  FILES
COPIES  FOR  RELEASE  TO  THE  PUBLIC


File  Number:  AIR  1080  / 6 / 897  Volume  1


File  Title:  Investigations  of  Unidentified  & Radar  Sightings
East  Coast  South  Island  - December  1978


File  Timespan:  Opened:  1978  - Closed  1981


File  Declassified:  December  2010


Location  of  Original  File:  Held  at  Headquarters  NZDF


Access  to  Original  File:  Restricted  until  2051


File  Contains:  Interviews  with  people  involved  in  the  1978
Kaikoura  sightings  conducted  by  the  RNZAF  preparatory  to
the  preparation  of  a formal  report  into  these  sightings.  File
also  contains  technical  reports  from  DSIR  and  other  scientific
experts  and  an  independent  report  of  the  Kaikoura  sightings
by  the  NZ  UFO  Studies  Centre.


NEW  ZEALAND  DEFENCE  FORCE


PUBLIC  RELEASE  OF  UNIDENTIFIED  FLYING  OBJECTS
(UFO)  FILES


These  copied  and  redacted  files  of  correspondence  on  Unidentified  Flying
Objects  dating  from  1952  to  2009  have  been  Declassified  and  released  to  the
public  by  the  New  Zealand  Defence  Force  under  the  Official  Information  Act.

Access  to  the  original  files  held  by  Archives  New  Zealand  is  restricted  up  until
the  year  2080  for  Personal  Privacy  reasons.  These  copied  files  have  had  the
personal  details  of  members  of  the  public  making  UFO  reports  removed  to
preserve  their  privacy.  Personal  details  of  service  personnel  and  civilians
employed  by  the  New  Zealand  Defence  Force  and  other  Government
Departments  and  Agencies  have  not  been  removed.  No  other  information
has  been  removed  or  omitted  from  these  files.

GENERAL  DESCRIPTION  OF  FILES

Correspondence  on  Flying  Saucers  began  in  New  Zealand  Defence  Force
files  in  1952  and  continued  under  different  names,  Unidentified  Flying  Objects
(UFO)  and  Unidentified  Aerial  Sightings  (UAS)  until  the  present.  The  files
contain  reports  of  sightings  by  private  individuals  and  military  personnel,
Investigations  by  Defence  and  other  Government  Departments  and  agencies
into  these  reports,  newspaper  clippings  on  UFOs  and  letters  from  individuals
who  claim  to  be  in  touch  with  alien  beings  and  craft.

While  the  files  are  in  general  date  order  from  1 952  until  the  present  some  file
periods  overlap  with  one  another  and  the  documents  within  each  file  are  not
necessarily  in  strict  date  order.  There  can  be  duplicate  documents  within
each  file  and  copies  of  the  same  documents  (particularly  media  releases  and
reports)  can  appear  in  different  files.

ACCESS  TO  UFO  FILES

These  redacted  files  are  available  in  hard  copy  from  the  Defence  Library  c/o
Headquarters  New  Zealand  Defence  Force  Aitken  St  Wellington.  They  are
not  available  in  electronic  format.


DISPOSAL  CATEGORY:


SUBJICT  (or  NAME):  oouets^  of  ^

XMlJliTIFIED  A

EAST  COAST  SOUa?H  ISIAND  DECEMBM'  19?^.;


File  Opened ....
Previous  File:

.ID..ec,. I7.S

, ...  File  Closed :

...  Subsequent  File: ;.rr;

OTHER

RELEVANT  FILES

Subject:

..iffiEOETS...

..QF....n...Z.,.0.'..s.,

File  No.  ’


VETTING  RECORD  SHEET


PLEASE  COMPLETE  ONLY  ONE  PAGE  PER  RECORD
NZDF  STORAGE  NO

*HQ  NZDE/ARM-Y/NAVY/AIR  FORCE/JSe^  FILE  ^Delete  as  appropriate
FILE  NO  LOCATION

PARTNO_/ TYPE  RFS7


(File  or  Non  File  Material)

Series

Sub-Series_


Subject  /Af.</glT7M7>Z?ALl  /f:  HMt


Date  of  first  document  !13JWJS3^


Please  Tick  the  Appropriate  Boxes:
No  NZ  Documents  on  File
No  Classified  Documents  on  File


-U3JJ3gl


NZ  Documents  Cleared  for  Access
No  Classified  NZ  Documents  on  File


No  Foreign  Source  Classified  Documents  on  File

Some  Foreign  or  Special-Source  Documents
placed  on  restricted  Parallel  File
Some  NZ  (Non-NZDF)  Documents  placed  on
Restricted  Parallel  File

Some  All  Classified  Foreign  Source

or  Documents  Cleared  for  Access


OR


Release  on  1 in  the  Year

Review  again  before  the  Year


20^/


20


VETTING  COMMENTS  IF  NECESSARY


t


igyauiaAecEss  to  this  file


m wmmmm  UNTE^:^.s,t


yfQjS^-V etting  Commenced  ^ D'JL!  iO
//^-Vetting  Completed  IVX^I  iP


m wrrti  wvacv
pRovisioNi  OF  siertON  ^ Of  im
OFFICIAL  INFORMATION  ACT  1982.


SIGNED


STAMP  (place  relevant  NpI^Scision  STAW^r^^^r^


File  Number


VolNo


/


FILE  RELEASE  STATEMENT
VETTING  COMPLETED  AND:

/'■iSroTlassified  documents  on  file.

^-'d''7ZbF  documents  have  been  declassified

Qdici  NZ  Govt  DcplxlHssi'fled  docuittculs  have  been  cleared  for  access- —
\EQreisn  Sourrp  rlnwified  documents  have  been  dcaicd  foracucss


. ^fime_fnrf>ign  nr-sfienial  <;nnrr,e  dr>onment&  plnoRrl  nn-a- —

. rpistnV.tp^d  pars:|]lpl  filp  (cpf  nh^^t^  lirr-vrith  rr^'^riiuc  tmnsfrr)


Other  comments:


NB:  Classified  documents  of  other  New  Zealand
Departments  where  there  is  some  concern  about
declassifying  them  should  be  referred  to  the  relevant
department.


)N  COMPLETE  ON  RECORDS  BELOW  THIS

PAPER

Personnel  other  than  Registry  staff  are

NOT

to  place  documents  below  this  paper.

Docuiiieiits  may  be  placed  above  this  paper  for  action/filing.
Enclosure  numbers  are  not  to  be  issued.


NOTE:

1.  The  position  of  this  sheet  in  file  MUST  NOT  be

changed  except  by  Registry  staff.

2’  File  mainteiiaiiee  remains  a Registry  responsibility  and

users  are  reminded  that  papers  are  to  be  filed/remdved  by
Registry  staff  only.


I

44/5/4


2 3uly  19‘-1

Mr  Quantin, Fogarty
11  flatuDg'  St
U ictorjia  3103
AUSTRALIA


Dear  Quantin,

Thank  you  for  your  letter  seeking  a copy  of  the
report  of  Captain  Randle  cuncei'ning  ttis  ligfit  sightings  off
the  Kaikoura  coast  in  197J.

I have  this  day  dispatched  tuo  copies  of  the  report
to  Captain  Randle,  along  uith  a copy  of  this  Isctar.  Presumably,
as  he  has  indicated  his  willingness  to  let  you  have  a copy  of
his  report,  he  will  foruiard  a copy  to  you  in  due  courso.

Kind  regards,


Yours  faithfully,


lifting  Coniraander

/Director  of  Public  Relations


MINUTE  SHEET


Department:


Subject:  File  No,


Department:


5*519—68  D


11  Metung  St
Balwyn

Victoria  3^03
. Australia
June  10,  1981


Dear  Geoff,  ,

I hope  this  letter  reaches  you,  as  I have  no  way  of

knowing  whether  or  not  yon  are  still  with  the  Ministry  of  Defence.

If  you  have  moved  on,  and  this  letter  is  opened  by  someone  in  the

public  relations  section,  then  I hope  they  can  act  on  my  request.

I have  written  a book  on  the  UFO  sightings  off  the

Kaikoura  Coast  in  December  1978  and  it  it  has  been  accepted  for

publication.  My  publisher  is  keen  for  me  to  expand  the  section

dealing  with  the  December  2,  incidents  and  I have  ^

iumber  of  the  witnesses  for  additional  informa  ion.

contacted  was  Captain  John  Randle  who  told  me  he  had

go  over  the .whole  thing  again,  so  much  later.  However,  he  did  e

me  that  he  supplied  the  EHZAF  with  a written  summary  of  the  inci  an  s

Ind  he  said  tZt  if  I was  able  to  obtain  that  summary,  or  a copy,  then

I could  use  the  information.

• He  told  me  that  the  RNZAF  had  indicated  they  would  return

1.1  i-v,.+  Vice:  nnt  been  done.  I would  appreciate

the  summary,  but  apparently  that  has  not  been  aon

1.1.  i + c;pif  If  you  would  like  to

a copy  of  the  summary  , or  the  summary  i sue^e-

verify  Capt.  Randle's  approval  for  me  to  use  the  summary,  may  I sugge.

V ouL  cori"t»3iC'b  tiini  ^ ^ ^


NEW  ZEALAND  UFO  STUDIES  CENTRE  (NUSC)


Dr . J.F.deBock
5 Ngahue  Crescent,
ELS DON.


5 June,  1979


Ministry  of  Defence,  A

REFERRiE

Private  Bag , ^

7 ‘

B

•p~n  'T  —

1 — —

WELLINGTON.  p

\ -»Cf

i

^ y

F—

j i

M

j

Dear  Sir,


Please  find  enclosed  a copy  of  the  provisional  report  malle
by  Dr. Bruce  Maccabee  on  the  Kaikoura  UFO  case.  Through
our  contacts  with  CUFOS  (Centre  for  UFO  studies)  and  MUFON
(Mutual  UFO  Network) in  the  USA,  the  report  was  forwarded  to
us.  In  a personal  letter.  Dr. Maccabee  requested  us  to  send
copies  to  those  who  have  been  involved  in  the  investigation.
Copies  are  being  sent  to  DSIR,  Met. Off ice.  Civil  Aviation,
Ministry  of  Defence,  Carter  Observatory  and  Wellington  Air
Traffic  Control.


Although  Dr. Maccabee  has  released  the  copyright  for  some  parts
of  the  report,  we  still  havei  to  emphasise  its  confidential
character.  MUFON  will  publish  the  complete  report,  while  the
magazine  "Nature"  will  issue  a more  technical  article  on  the
New  Zealand  case.


I would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  inform  you  of  the  frequent
sightings  reported  to  us.  Most  of  which  can  easily  be  explained
after  an  initial  investigation  with  the  limited  aids  in  our  hands.
However,  some  sightings  have  to  remain  unexplained  since  we  are
unable  to  obtain  sufficient  background  information  from  such
institutions  as  yours.  With  this  problem  in  view  we  would  be
very  grateful  if  you  could  advise  us  in  future  on  those  limited
unexplained  cases.  In  several  overseas  countries  this  assistance
has  led  to  the  setting  up  of  an  advisory  committee,  with  speciaiisuo
in  various  fields.  The  aim  of  the  committee,  which  only  meets
when  necessary  (perhaps  twice  a year)  is  to  come  to  a natural
explanation  of  the  more  complicated  sightings,  to  avoid  the  public
phoning  your  institutions,  and  to  reduce  speculation  that  reported
sightings  are  Flying  Saucers,  space-ships  and  other  types  of  so
called  extraterrestrial  manifestations.

We  already  have  the  promise  of  a representative  from  a few
institutions,  and  we  would  be  grateful  if  you  could  consider  your
participation  as  well  in  the  advisory  committee.


you  wish  to  have  additional  information  on  similar  set  ups
in  overseas  countries,  please  do  not  hesitate  to  contact  us.

I thank  you  in  advance,  and  hope  the  report  enclosed  shows  the
serious  approach  into  this  field  of  unidentified  aerial  phenomena.

Yours  sincerely.


-rBe  Bock .


with  the  compliments  of  the

New  Zealand  UFO  Studies  Centre  ' (NUSC)


WHAT  REALLY  HAPPENED
IN  NEW  ZEAIAND

by

Dr.  Bruce  S.  Maccabee


(copyright,  Bruce  Maccabee,  1979)


CONTENTS


i

Introduction  1
The  Investigation  3
Sources  of  Information  . 7
SvuTtmary  of  Events  9
Event  Descriptions  and  Map  Legend  15
Analysis  of  Events

Technical  Details  for  the  Plight  South  30
Technical  Details  for  the  Flight  North  33
Natural  and  Artificial  Sources  of  Light  34
Analysis  of  the  Wellington  Radar  Sightings  35
Analysis  of  Radar-Visual  Sightings  46


Analysis  of  the  Film  Obtained  : South  Flight  —
Analysis  of  the  Film  Obtained  : near  Christchurch  —
Analysis  of  the  Film  Obtained  :last  sequence—

Appendices  (where  available)

A,  Transcript  of  the  Wellington  Control  Tower  Tape

B, .  Transcript  of  Quentin  Fogarty's  Tape


7


f

**  ■ '•  • >.  • . . i 4-

Sources  of  Information  - ‘

The  primary  sources  of  information  are  the  memories  of
the  eight  witnesses  who  were  involved.  These  memories  contain
a wealth  of  information  which,  nevertheless,  is  "soft  information".
However  ,,  this  case  is  unique  for  the  amount  of  hard  information
which  was'  available  after  the  events  were  over.  The  hard
information  includes  a ..  tape  recording  of  the  conversations
between  the  Wellington  ATC  Center  and  the  aircraft.  This  recording
establishes  an  irrefutable  time  line  for  the  events.  Then
there  is  the  tape  made  on  the  aircraft  by  Quentin  Fogarty
(how  many  UFO  sightings  have  information  recorded  ^ situ  ?).
Although  this  tape  cannot  be  exactly  synchronized  with  the
Wellington  tape,  the  approximate  times  of  Fogarty's  statements
can  be  determined  from  the  content  (he  occasionally  repeated
what  Wellington  had  told  the  plane) . Then  there  are  scribbled
pencil  notes  by  Dennis  Grant,  the  Christchurch  N,Z,  reporter.

^e  took  the  place  of  the  cameraman's  wife,  Kgaire  Crockett,
on  the  trip  northi)  He  was  apparently  the  only  one  who  actually
wrote  anything  down  during  the  sightings.  And  finally,  there
is  the  film,  which  is  a veritable  tour  de  force  of  UFO  images.

The  film  contains  pictures  of  aiirport  lights  (landings  and
takeoffs) , pictures  of  the  airplane  cockpit,  pictures  of
Quentin  Fogarty  at  Christchurch  Airport,  and  pictures  of. .....

UFOs,  The  landing  light  sequences  and  the  cockpit  sequences
serve  to  establish  that  the  film  was  taken  from  inside  the
aircraft,  A study  of  the  edge  numbers  of  the  original  film
(edge  numbers  are  put  on  by  the  manufacturer)  shows  that  they
are  continuous,  except  for  a change  in  film  at  Christchurch
(they  needed  a new  roll  for  the  iourney  north).  Thus  the  film
is  not  a hoax.  The  landing  light  sequences  provide  color  and
brightness  information  which  can  be  used  to  calibrate  the
film  and  the  optical  quality  of  the  airplane  window.  All  of
this  hard  information  (acoustic  and  optical)  is  supplemented
by  the  memories  of  five  witnesses  on  the  aircraft  at  any  time  .
and  one  or  two  witnesses  at  the  Wellington  ATC(  two  witnesses
for  part  of  the  trip  south/  one  witness  at  all  other  times) .

As  the  interviews  proceeded  I found  that  the  statements  of  the
various  witnesses  tended  to  complement  rather  than  contradict
one  another.  There  were  some  variations  in  descriptions  of
events,  etc. , as  might  be  expected  from  different  observers
after  a time  lapse  of  over  a month,  but  I found  no  outright
contradictions.  To  my  surprise  (and  delight)  almost  every  new
*'l>it  " of  information  I learned  supported  rather  than  contradicted


8


the  previous  "bits".  From  this  vealth  of  information  I have
abstracted  a summary  of  the  events  which,  when  read  in
conjunction  with  the  "Event  Descriptions  and  Map  Legend;'
will  give  the  reader  an  overview  of  the  N.Z.  Radar-Visual
UFO  case.  The  associated  maps.  Figures  1 and  2,  show  the
overall  path  of  the  aircraft  as  a dashed  line.  The  T shaped
symbols  represent  the  aircraft  at  various  points  along  the
path  and  the  numbers  refer  to  events  in  the  "Event"  sheet.

The  events  are  primarily  those  associated  with  radar
targets  referred  to  by  Wellington  ATC.  Specifically,  the
^®®®bion  of  the  airplane  each  time  Wellington  referred  to
a target {or  targets) is  shown  on  the  map.  The  locations
are  believed  to  be  accurate  to  within  1 or  2 miles.  The
specific  radar  target.(s)  associated  with  a specific  position
of  the  airplane  is  (are)  connected  to  the  airplane  symbol
by  a line (s).  The  events  that  occurred  as  the  plane  flew
away  from  Christchurch(#21— 27)  are  reconstructed  from  the
witness  statements  about  what  they  saw  and  what  the  airplane
radar  screen  showed.  The  path  of  the  plane  from  Event  # 25
to  Event  #27  is  approximate  and  is  subject  to  further
revision.  The  path  of  the  object  was  estimated  from  witness
statements,  airplane  radar  data,  and  from  the  image  sizes
on  the  film.  The  film  image  sizes  (except  when  defocussed)
are  never  larger  then  several  milliradians  in  angular  size.
Assuming  that  the  object  was  of  a fixed  size  , this  means  that
it  never  was  closer  than  some  minimum  distance,  probably  about
10  miles,  during  the  time  it  was  being  filmed  . On  the  other
hand  Fogarty  remembers  looking  almost  straight  down  on  the  object
out  the  right  window  .(his  last  view  of  it)  , and  the  captain  is
quite  certain  that  the  plane  passed  over  it.  At  these  times  the
cameraman  was  not  able  to  film  it  because  it  was  moving  rapidly
with  respect  to  the  plane  and  because  the  film  magazine  and  the
overall  size  of  his  camera  made  it  difficult  to  shoot  at  large
downward  angles  (for  example,  the  top  of  the  film  magazine  could
have  btimped  some  of  the  overhead  switches  in  the  cockpit).

The  remainder  of  the  airplane  path  (everything  except  25-27)
is  reconstructed  from  the  standard  flight  plans  and  from  the
memory  of  the  Wellington  Air  Traffic  Controller,  Geoffrey  Causer.

To  obtain  a good  impression  of  the  bewildering  number  of
unusual  occurrences  during  those  early  morning  flights  I
suggest  that  the  reader  read  the  s\imroary  first  and  then  read

the  "Event"  sheet,  paying  rather  careful  attention  to  the  details
of  the  events.


9


Copyright , B ,S .Maccabee
1979


; ' Stanmary  of  Events  j

1

{HOTSi  all  miles  are  nautical  and  times  are  local  D.S.T.  )

. J PLIGHT  SOUTH

At  11:46  pm  on  December  30,  1978,  a four-engine  turbo  prop  Argosy

freighter  left  Wellington,  N.Z.,  on  a standard  Saturday  evening-Sunday
morning  newspaper  delivery  run,  from  Blenheim,  N.Z.,  to  Wellington  to
Christchurch,  and  then  back  to  Blenheim,  Aboard  the  aircraft  were  the

pilot.  Captain  Bill  Startup,  the  co-pilot,  Robert  Guard,  the
Australian  news  reporter,  Quentin  Fogarty,  and  a film  crew  which
consisted  of  the  cameraman,  David  Crockett,  and  his  wife,  Ngaire,
who..  Operated  the  tape  recorder,

tha.ireporter  and  film  crew  had  been  commissioned  by  a Melbourne  TV  station  "

'to  fly  to  Christchurch  to  obtain  film  footage  for  use  in  a hews  story  about

a previous  UFO  sighting  that  had  been  made  by  pilots  on  a similar  aircraft

flight.  During  the  flight  south  the  pilot  and  co-pilot  observed  lights

that  were  first  seen  in  the  direction  of  Kaikoura,  from  a point  just

southeast  of  Cape  Campbell  (s^^map^f*'td'uvc^^entally,  Wellington  radar

picked  up  and  reported  targets  v/hich  were  in  the  vicinity  of  the  plane.

It  appears  that  at  least  two,  and  perhaps  several,  of  these  anomalous

radar  targets  v/ere  observed  by  the  passengers  on  the  plane,

.color  film/

'The  cameraman  obtained  16  mm /Rootage  of  the  inside  of  the  plane,  the
lights  of  Kaikoura,  and  of  anomalous  bright  objects  that  were  seen  occasion-
ally in  the  12:00  to  3:00  ffront  to  rightside)  quadrant  with  respect  to
the  direction  of  travel.  The  reporter  recorded  on-the-spot  comments  and
descriptions  and  occasionally  referred  to  statements  made  by  Wellington  Air  Traffi
Control  (ATC).The  anomalous  lights  seen  on  the  trip  south  were  observed
to  be.  mainly  in  the  direction  of  Kaikoura  or  ahead  of  the  plane,  except
for  one,  which  was  seen  off  the  right  wing  after  the  plane  was  south  of
Kaikoura,

kadar  targets  that  were  reported  to  the  plane  by  the  Wellington  - ' =

ATC  ‘ Within  about  20  miles  of  the  plane  as  it  travelled  from  a point  just
south  of  Cape  Campbell  to  a point  about  57  miles  northeast  of  Christchurch.

The  airplane  radar  was  not  used  on  the  flight  south.

One  particularly  interesting  sequence  of  events  involving


10

i

Wellington  ATC  occurred  just  after  the  plane  had  turned  toward
. Christchurch  at  a non-geographic  reporting  point  called  ”Kaikoura
East"  (see  map).  The  plane  had  shifted  to  the  Christchurch
communication  frequency  when  Wellington  saw  a target  appear
behind  the  plane  about  one  or  two  miles  (Event  Sheet  # 12  )

Wellington  told  the  Christchurch  controller,  who  asked  the  plane
to  shift^bjick  to  the  Wellington  frequency.  Wellington  then  told
the  plane^the  target  was  about  four  miles  behind  them.  About  half
a minute  later  Wellington  said  there  was  a further  target  about
four  miles  to  the  right  of  the  plane.  About  45  seconds  after  that
Wellington  told  the  plane  that  something  was  flying  in  formation
with  it.  . The  plane  and  the  unidentified  target  flew  side  by
side  for  at  least  half  a minute,  after  which  the  radar  target  reduced
to  that  of  the  plane  alone  (Event  Sheet  #15  and  16)  . About  a
minute  later  the  plane  contacted  Wellington  and  reported
a"target",  which  was  a flashing  light,  at  the  right  of  and
falling, behind  the  airplane . (Event  Sheet  # 17).  Wellington
agreed  that  there  was  a target  at  the  right  of  the  plane  that
was  drifting  behind  as  the  plane  moved  forward.

The  plane  landed  at  Christchurch,  N.Z.,  at  1:01  AM,December  31.  While
newspapers  were  being  unloaded  the  crew  discussed  the  sightings  with  the
Christchurch  radar  operator,  who  described  to  the  crew  an  anomalous  target
that  vras  not  particularly  impressive  to  him.  In  order  to  obtain  more  film

footage,  Crockett  and  Fogarty,  decided  to  fly  back  to  Blenheim.  One  of
the  passengers,  the  wife  of  the  cameraman,  decided  not  to  make  the  return
flight  and  her  place  was  taken  by  a reporter  from  Christchurch /Dennis , Grant,  a
personal  friend  of  the  Australian  reporter  (the  only  person  involved  that  the
Australian  reporter  had  known  before  the  flight).

FLIGHT  NORTH

The  plane  left  Christchurch  on  its  flight  north  to  Blenheim  at  2:16am.

About  3 minutes  later,  as  the  plane  climbed  through  a low  cloud  cover,  the
pilot,  co-pilot,  and  cameraman,  who  were  all  in  the  cockpit  at  the  time,
observed  a bright  yellow/white/orange  light  apparently  at  about  their  level,
which  would  appear  and  disappear  through  the  tops  of  the  clouds.  It  was
between  10  and  30  degrees  to  the  right  of  the  aircraft,  which  was  flying
northeast.  This  light  was  pointed  out  to  the  two  reporters  who  arrived  in


11


th>.  jockpit  several  minutes  after  the  takeoff.  The  captain  obtained  a
strong  return  from  his  radar  which  was  operated  in  its  "mapping  mode."

‘The  size  of  the  radar  "blip"  was  estimated  by  the  flight  crew  to  have  been
3 to  5 times  larger  than  the  blip  from  a large  fishing  boat.'  The  flight  crew
and  the  Christchurch  reporter,  who  had  a good  view  of  the  radar  display  and  of
the  object,  repeatedly  compared  the  direction  of  the  bright  light  with  that‘s
of  the  target  as  indicated  by  the  azimuth  markers  on  the  radar  screen.  They
assured  themselves  that  the  radar  target  and  the  bright  light  were  in  the
same  direction.  The  radar  distance  was  initially  18-20  miles.  As  the  plane
proceeded  along  a straight  northeasterly  path  and  climbed  to  its  cruising
altitude,  the  distance  to  the  bright  light  gradually  decreased,  as  indicated
by  the  radar,  and  the  sighting  line  tended  to  move  around  to  the  right.  By
the  time  the  plane  was  about  11  minutes  (32  miles)  out  of  Christchu^^

11,500  ft  the  bright  light  was  about  70  to  90  degrees  to  the  right  of  the
aircraft  (southeast  of  the  aircraft)  and  about  12  miles  away  and  no  lonner
on  the  plane  radar.  All  observers  agreed  that  the  object  appeared  to  be  at
a lower  altitude  than  the  aircraft,  with  depression  angles  below  horizontal
estimated  to  be  between  5 degrees  and  30  degrees.  The  radarin  the  map  mode
could  only  pick  up  targets  with  depression  angles  between  about  3**  and  IS*^
below  the  centerline  of  the  aircraft.

The  cameraman  obtained  several  minutes  of  film  out  the  far  right-hand
cockpit  window  during  this  period.  Images  on  the  film  range  from  yellowish
white  elliptical  shapes  with  reddish  fringes  to  overexposed,  nearly  triangular
'and  circular  shapes.  Typical  angular  sizes  were  on  the  order  of  1-2  milli-
radiansf  He  also  obtained  several  feet  of  film  showing  a cockpit  meter  just
below  the  image  of  the  bright  light.  At  about  12.-13  minutes  (35-38  miles)
out  of  Christchurch  the  plane  reached  13  thousand  feet  and  a speed  of  215  knots.
At  this  time  the  flight  crew  decided  to  turn  to  the  right  toward  the  bright
light.  As  the  plane  turned,  the  sighting  line  to  the  object  moved  toward  the
front  of  the  aircraft,  but  even  after  a turn  of  about  90  degrees,  the  object


♦ Divide  the  distance  to  the  object  by  1000  and  multiply  by  the
number  of  milliradians  to  find  the  size.  For  example,  an  angular
size  of  1 milliradian  corresponds  to  an  object  size  of  1 foot  at
1000  feet:  ( 1000  feet/1000 )x(l  millirad.)  » 1 ft.


12


was  not  directly  ahead  of  the  aircraft,  as  if  the  object  had  moved  to  the  right.

The  captain  proceeded  in  a straight  line  along  a southeast  heading  and  again
the  sighting  line  to  the  object  moved  from  nearly  directly  ahead  toward  90
degrees  to  the  right  as  the  plane  flew.  The  depression  angle  below  horizontal
was  apparently  very  noticable  at  this  time.  The  object  was  not  picked  up  on
radar  after  the  turn,  even  though  the  object  was  nearly  ahead  of  the  aircraft
immediately  after  the  turn,  which  suggests  that  the  depression  angle  was
greater  than  15  degrees.  After  travelling  on  this  new  heading  for  1 or  I.  min-
utes, the  captain  began  a turn  to  the  left  back  tov/ard  his  original  flight  _
path,  at  which  time  the  light  was  observed  to  move  quickly  to  the  left-front  and
above  the  aircraft  and  then  to  the  left  and  dovjn  and  apparently  below  the  air-
craft, The  object  was  not  seen  again  after  the  plane  .completed  its  left  turn.

During  the  time  that  this  object  was  seen  by  the  plane  passengers,  it  was
not  seen  on  the  Christchurch  or  Wellington  radars.  This  may  have  been  because

I 4.  4-

it  was  too  low  to  be  picked  up  by  either^^and/or  because  it  vras  a weak  target
for  50  cm  radar.

After  the  aircraft  gained  its  original  course  and  approached  a point  south-
east of  Kaikoura,  Wellington  control  tov^r  again  began  to  call  the  attention  of
the  flight  crew  to  anomalous  targets  which  were  within  20  miles  of  the

plane  as  it  travelled  toward  Cape  Campbell,  Occasionally,  unusual
were  visible  in  the  directions  indicated  by  the  Wellington  control,  and  in,,one
instance  the  plane  radar  picked  up  a target  that  appeared  to  the  captain  to  be
in  the  same  position  as  that  indicated  by  Wellington  control.  There  v/ere  al so
apparently  tempov'al  coincidences  between  appearances  and  disappearances  of  visual
and  radar  objects.

One  particularly  bright  object  that  vas  seen  as  the  plane
approached  Cape  Campbell  was  photographed  by  the  cameraman.  The
film  shows  a bright  light  which  alternates  in  a regular, cyclic
manner  from  bright  white  to  dim  red  and  orange.  It  apparently,
travelled  in  a series  of  loops,  described  as  "rolling  and  tumbling"
by.  the  reporter  { see  Event  #33  ).

The  plane  landed  at  Blenheim  airfield  at  about  3:10  A.M,


HEI50N

* FIGURE  2
FLIGHT  NORTH


PICTON  /


WELLINGTON


BLENHEIM,


COOK

STRAIT


CAPE


CAMPBELL

. tji!


CLARENCE

RIVER


-•


KAIKOURA

PENINSULA


KAIKOURA


Approximate  path  of  plane


(Estimated  path  of  object^
Tbased  on  plane  radar  data
[^nd  witness  statements.


CHRISTCHURCH


2,  BANKS
f!  PEKINSniA


50  N.M,


0257

0256

0255

0254

0253

0252

0251

0248:30

0247

0246

0245

0241


@

0231

0229

@)

.0227

@

0221:30

@

0218:40

@

0216

(copyright ,
B.S.Maccabee,  1979)


15


Event  Descriptions  and  Map  Legend

Times  are  in  local  Daylight  Savings  Time  and  are  accurate  to
within  one  minute.  Distances  are  in  nautical  miles  (6076  ft
or  1,852  Ton),  At  the  cruising  altitude  the  plane  travelled
at  an  air  speed  of  about  3.6  miles/minute.

During  the  trip  south  the  people  aboard  the  plane  were  Captain
William  Startup  (S) , First  Officer  Robert  Guard  (G) , cameraman
David  Crockett  (DC)  , sound  recordist  Ngaire  Crockett  (NC)  and
reporter  Quentin  Fogarty  (F).  The  Islington  Air  Traffic  Controller
was  Geoffrey  Causer  (GC),  For  part  of  the  time  the  radar
technician,  Bryan  Chalmers  (BC)  was  also  present.  GC  used  a
radar  scope  which  presented  an  KTI  (moving  target  indicator)
processed  radar  picture;  BC  operated  a non-MTI  display  for  part
of  the  time.  The  plane  (P)  is  treated  as  an  "entity"  when  com-
municating with  Wellington  radar  (W) , Christchurch  is  noted  as  CH.
During  the  trip  north  NC  was  replaced  by  a Christchurch  reporter,
Dennis  Grant  (DG) ,

This  event  listing  is  to  be  used  with  the  especially  marked  maps
(Figures  3 and  4) .


TRIP  SOUTH


event  description

NUMBER


1 about  2354  (11:54  P,M,),  Dec,  30,  1978  j the  plane  has
taken  off  and  circled  to  head  soutljand  was  at  this  time  passing
over  Wellington.

2 about  0010  ( 10  min,  after  midnight),  Dec.  31,  1978  (all
succeeding  times  are  on  this  date)  : the  plane  was  passing  or
had  passed  Cape  Campbell.  F,DC,  and  NC  were  in  the  loading
bay  working  on  a "standup"  for  the  news  story  on  the  previous
UFO  sightings  when  S and  G first  spotted  lights  in  the  direction
of  Kaikoura.  The  plane  had  passed  10,000  feet  in. altitude  and
was  travelling  at  about  170  knots  air  speed  (the  ground  speed
might  have  been  about  180  knots  since  there  was  a slight  wind).

Jr.

3 about  0012  : the  plane  (P)  contacted  Wellington  (W)  and

asked  "Do  you  have  any  targets  in  the  direction  of  the  Kaikoura
peninsula  on  your  radar  at  about  that  range?"  (approximately


16


correct?  the  radio  communications  from  the  plane  are  difficult
to  understand).  W replied  *'  There  are  targets  in  your  one
o'clocTc  (1:00)  position  (i.e..  about  20-40°  to  the  right  of

straight  ahead)  at,  uh,  13  miles appearing  and  disappearing.

......At  the  present  moment  they're  not  showing but  were

showing  about  a minute  ago."  GC  had  been  noticing  "weird"
targets  east  of  the  Clarence  River  area  and  the  Kaikoura  Coast
for  as  long  as  half  an  hour  before  the  plane  reported  anything.

S  and  G reported  seeing  lights  that  would  appear  and  then
disappear  in  an  apparently  random  manner,  which  is  consistent
vith  the  appearance  and  disappearance  of  targets  on  the  W
radar.  By  this  time  the  plane  was  at  14,000  ft.  and  travelling
at  215  knots  air  speed  (3.58  miles/min.)

4 about  0015  : W reported  a target  in  the  3:00  position

on  the  coastline.  This  may  have  been  seen,  but  no  mention  of  it
• was  made  on  the  W tape.  By  this  time  F,DC,  and  NC  had  joined
S and  G on  the  flight  deck.

5 about  0016  : W reported  a target  at  12:00  at  10  miles

which  was  probably  only  seen  for  one  sweep  of  the  scope  (12  sec.
per  sweep) , This  may  have  been  seen  by  the  passengers  since
they  reported  seeing  lights  that  occasionally  appeared  ahead

of  them.

6 about  0016:30:  W reported  a strong  target  at  11:00  at  3

miles  from  the  plane  which  apparently  appeared  for  one  sweep.

P responded  with  "no  contact  yet".

7 about  0017:30:  W reported  a target  just  left  of  9:00

at  2 miles  (the  spacing  between  the  edges  of  the  radar  blips;

the  actual  spacing  of  target  could  have  been  more  like
4 miles,  assuming  that  they  were  at  the  same  height;  W had
no  way  of  knowing  what  heights  the  targets  were  at) . There  was
no  visual  confirmation.

8 about  0019  : W reported  a strong  target  at  10:00  at

12  miles.  This  may  have  been  seen,  but  there  is  no  specific
confirmation.

9 about  0022  : W reported  a target  at  the  left  of  the

plane  at  about  1 mile  (between  blip  edges)  which  remained
stationary  while  the  plane  did  a left  hand  orbit  to  see  if
the  passengers  could  see  anything.  About  this  time  F,  who
had  been  watching  the  lights,  recorded  his  first  "on-the-
spot"  commentaiYs  "It's  kind  of  hard  to  describe  my  feelings
right  at  the  moment,  but,  uh,  we've  seen  probably  6 or  7 or


17


even  more  bright  lights  over  Kaikoura.  A number  of  these
have  been  picked  up  by  Wellington  radar.  **  The  plane  did
an  orbit  (hexagon  on  the  map)  which  lasted  about  2 minutes.
Nothing  to  the  left  of  the  plane  was  seen.  Before  the  orbit
started  there  were  lights  (other  than  city  lights)  in  the
direction  of  Kaikoura.

10  about  0024  t just  after  the  orbit  was  completed  W

reported  a target  at  12:00  at  3 miles.  The  plane  responded
"Thank  you.... we  pick  it  up.  It’s  got  a flashing  light."

F recorded,  as  the  plane  came  out  of  the  orbit,  "At  the
moment  there  is  no  activity.  When  we  first  made  the  run
(i.e.,  started  the  orbit)  the  lights  were  so  bright  they
appeared  to  be  lighting  up  the  sky  of  the  town  (Kaikoura) ....
.....Now  we  have  a couple  right  in  front  of  us  I Very, very
bright. " These  lights  flashed  on  and  off.  P recorded
."We  have  a firm  convert  here  at  this  moment."  One  of  these
lights  may  have  been  filmed.  DC  obtained  about  12  seconds  of
footage  showing  sort  of  oval , blue -white  images  which  were
quite  bright  (considerable  film  exposure  of  stationary,
focused  images) . DC  also  obtained  about  5 seconds  of
film  showing  several  lights  at  once  in  a horizontal  row  that
randomly  (?)  flashed  on  and  off.  He  also  obtained  film  of
the  town  of  Kaikoura,  but  the  town  lights  appear  to  have  been
much  less  intense  .

11  about  0028  i P passed  the  "turning  point"  at  Kaikoura

East.  W reported  that  the  only  targets  were  12-15  miles  behind
them.  At  this  point  the  plane  switched. to  the  Christchurch
(CH)  air  traffic  control  on  another  radio  freouency.

12  abo'it  0029  s W called  CH  by  telephone  and  said  that  there

was  a target  about  1 mile  (between  blip  edges?  blips  would

have  been  about  1 mile  "thick"  in  a radial  direction  out  from
Wellington  at  the  distance  of  the  plane)  behind  the  plane.  CH
said  it  would  inform  the  plane  and  have  the  plane  switch  back  to
the  W freqfuency.

13  about  0029:30  : P contacted  W and  was  told  that  the  target

was  now  at  6:00  at  4 miles.  Apparently  the  target  had  remained
stationary  behind  the  plane  for  6 or  7 sweeps  of  the  radar
(72-84  seconds).  F recorded  ; "We've  just  heard  from
Wellington  radar  that  we  got  an  object  about  a mile  behind  us  -f.
and  it’s  following  us".  Actually  W did  not  say  the  target  was
following  the  plane.


18


I


x4  about  0030  : W contacted  P and  said  there  was  a “further"

target  at  3:00  at  4 miles,  GC  did  not  specify  whether  or  not
the  previous  target  behind  the  plane  was  still  there.  This
new  target  appeared  for  two  or  three  sweeps.  F recorded
"There's  a whole  formation  of  unidentified  flying  objects  behind
us, "

I

15  about  0030:45  : W contacted  P and  said  “There's  a strong
target  right  in  formation  with  you  know. ,,  .Could  be  left  or
right.  Your  target  has  doubled  in  size.  " The  previous
target  at  3:00  at  4 miles  had  disappeared,  so  this  may  have
moved  closer  to  the  plane.  The  distance  from  W to  the  plane
was  now  about  90  miles,  so  on  the  radar  scope  the  airplane

"blip"  would  have  been  a small  arc  about  3 miles "long"  from
left  to  right  and  about  1 mile  "thick"  from  front  to  back
(the  blip  size  is  always  much  larger  than  the  target  would
. be  on  the  scale  of  the  radar  scope)  because  of  the  2.1®

azimuthal  resolution  (angular  resolution  in  a horizontal  plane)
and  the  better  than  radial  resolution  (accuracy  of  measuring
distance  from  Wellington) . Because  of  the  blip  size  the
unusual  target  could  have  been  as  much  as  3 miles  from  the
plane  ( farther  than  3 miles  if  it  was  not  at  the  same
altitude) , BC  was  in  the  control  room  at  this  time  and  witnessed
the  unusually  large  blip  on  the  scope,

16  about  0031:30  : W contacted  the  plane  and  stated  that  the
target  had"reduced  to  normal  size".  The  plane  blip  had  been
unusually  large  for  at  least  three  sweeps  (36  seconds)  and
perhaps  for  as  long  as  45  sec.  or  so.  GC  and  BC  agreed  that  the
large  blip  was  like  two  aircraft  flying  side-by-side  at  the

same  speed the  whole  arc  shaped  blip  moved  down  the

radar  scope  as  a unit.  There  was  no  bending  of  the  blip  as
might  be  expected  if  one  portion  (i.e.,  the  unusual  target)
were  stationary  while  the  other  portion  (plane)  moved  by  it.

The  plane  would  have  moved  about  2 miles  during  this  time,

a distance  which  would  have  exceeded  the  differential  radial
resolution  of  the  scope  ( i.e.,  exceeded  the  minimum
difference  in  distance  between  two  targets  that  could  be
measured  on  the  scope) , Shortly  after  this  occurrence  BC
went  to  another  radar  scope  and  turned  off  the  MTI  processing.

He  then  saw  the  normal  amount  of  land  and  sea  clutter  within
20  to  30  miles  from  Wellington,  but  he  saw  no  indications  of
anomalous  propagation.  Also,  the  "weird"  targets  which  had  ^

appeared  on  the  MTI  display  did  not  appear  on  the  "uncancelled"
display,  suggesting  that  the  anomalous  targets  were  actually


19


veaTc  reflectors  of  the  50  cm  wavelength  radar.

About  this  time  the  copilot  spotted  a flashing  light
that  was  apparently  travelling  along  at  the  right  of  the
aircraft.  S turned  off  the  wingtip  running  light (steady  green)
to  mahe  sure  that  there  was  no  problem  with  unusual  reflections.

17  about  0032:30  s p contacted  W and  stated;"  Got  a

target  at  3:00  just  behind  us."  W responded: "Yes,  and  going
around  now  at  4:00  at  4 miles."  F recorded  " I’m  looking
over  towards  the  right  of  the  aircraft  and  we  have  an  object
confirmed  by  Wellington  radar.  It’s  been  following  us  for
cfulte  a while.  It's  about  4 miles  away  and  it  looks  like  a
very  faint  star  but  then  it  emits  a very  bright  white  and
green  light."  Unfortunately  this  object  was  too  far  to  the
right  and  behind  the  plane  for  the  cameraman  to  be  able  to
get  a picture  (he  would  have  had  to  sit  in  the  copilot's
seat) .

Shortly  after  this  W contacted  CH.  CH  had  nothing  on

radar,  but  W referred  to  a target  at  5:00  to  the  plane  at
10  miles,  which  could  have  been  the  previous  target  if  it  had
remained  stationary  as  the  plane  moved  along.

18  about  0035  ; W contacted  P and  asked  if  they  had  seen

the  previous  target  at  4:00  at  4 miles.  P responded  "We
think  we  saw  that  one.  It  came  up  at  4:00.. ..around  4 miles
away • " (The  distance  estimate  was  based  on  what  W radar  had

the,  plane;  the  people  on  the  plane  had  no  way  of  measuring
distances  behind  them. ) W then  continued  "Roger.  That  target
is  still  stationary.  It's  now  6:00  to  you  at  about  15  miles
and  .its  been  joined  by  two  other  targets,"  P referred  to  this

as  follows:"  that  other  target  that  has  been  following

us  has  now  been  joined  by  two  others,  so  we  now  at  this  stage
have  three  unidentified  flying  objects  just  off  our  right
wing,  and  one  of  them  has  been  following  us  now  for  probably
about  10  minutes."  Actually  the  time  was  more  like  7 to  7 1/2
minutes  and  the  targets  were  stationary  behind  the  plane.

P did  not  have  airplane  earphones  on,  so  he  couldn’t  hear
the  communications  from  the  W or  CH  radar  controllers.  His
information  came  from  S,G,  or  DC  , all  of  whom  had  on  earphones
and  who  yelled  information  to  F over  the  noise  of  the  airplane  .

About  this  time  F also  reported  the  CH  radar  had  picked  -f.
up  something"67  or  68  miles  north  of  the  city".  That  distance
would  have  been  about  6 or  7 miles  behind  the  plane,  no  more  than
7 miles  from  the  location  the  W gave  for  the  three  unusual
targets,  assuming  that  CH  really  said  "northeast  of  the  city"
and  not  due  north  of  the  city,  as  P recorded.


20


19  about  0036:30  : W contacted  P and  said  that  the  three

targets  behind  the  plane  had  been  replaced  by  a single  one
that  produced  a blip  larger  than  the  blip  from  the  aircraft.

At  this  point  S decided  to  do  another  orbit  to  see  what  was
behind  him.  F recorded  "We've  just  heard  from  Wellington  tradar
that  there's  a strong . target  straight  behind  us. so  we're
turning,...".  The  plane  was  cleared  W for  a left  hand

two  minute  orbit#  but  again  nothing  was  seen.

20  about  0101  :.  the  plane  landed  at  CH  , It  was  a

"straight-in"  landing  since  there  was  negligible  wind.

F recorded  a statement  that  CH  radar  had  said  there  were
six  UFOs  headed  for  the  aircraft  just  before  it  landed,  but
no  one  else  remembers  such  a statement  and  no  lights  were
seen  heading  for  the  aircraft.  However,  G and  S do  remember
the  CH  controller  referring  to  a target  at  the  right  of  the
aircraft  that  seemed  to  pace  the  aircraft  in  toward  the
landing.  G looked  out  the  right  window  and  saw  at  a lower
altitude  a flashing  light  moving  along.  He  at  first  attributed
it  to  a car  headlight  that  was  passing  behind  trees  along  a
road  that  ran  along  the  shoreline.  Then  he  realized  that
the  flashing  was  too  regular.  He  also  observed  that  the  light
apparently  crossed  a river  at  the  speed  of  the  aircraft.

However,  he  was  too  busy  with  his  copilot  duties  during  landing
to  watch  the  object  closely.  S remembers  saying  to  the  CH
controller  that  perhaps  the  object  was  cleared  to  land  in
the  grass  at  the  side  of  the  runway.

After  the  plane  landed  S and  G talked  to  the  Ch
controller  while  the  airplane  was  being  unloaded.  G remembers
being  told  about  a target  which  was  at  the  right  of  the
aircraft  until  just  before  landing  , when  it  curved  and
travelled  inland.  He  also  remembers  being  told  that  someone
at  the  control  tower  (close-in  radar  controller?)  had  looked
out  a window  and  seen  a light  heading  inland  at  about  the
same  time  as  when  the  plane  landed.  The  CH  controller  attributed
the  anomalous  target  to  a "side-lobe"  problem,  which  might)^^^een
a satisfactory  solution  if  the  "side  lobe "^disappeared  at  the
same  time  that  the  plane  landed,  rather  than  travelling  inland.
In  an  interview  about  6 weeks  later  the  CH  controller  would
neither  confirm  nor  deny  picking  up  a target,  but  whatever  he
might  have  seen  was  unimpressive  to  him.  Unfortunately  the
CH  control  tower  tape  was  erased  and  reused, according  to  a
standard  30  day  retention  rule, before  it  was  copied  (in  spite  of


21


a specific  recruest  by  S that  the  tape  be  iretained  until  he
could  copy  it)  so  any  information  that  vas  recorded  on  the
tape  is  no  longer  available.  i


TRIP  NORTH


21  about  0216  s P took  off  from  CH  toward  the  northeast

along  the  "MOTO"  track  toward  Kaikoura  East.  The  heading

is  033  magnetic  or  054®  tjrue  (i.e. , 54®  clockwise  from  true
north  ) . DG  had  replaced  NC.  The  climb  rate  was  somewhat
greater  than  1000  ft /min.  a number  which  decreased  as  the
altitude  Increased,  and  the  air  speed  was  about  155  knots,
a number  \diich  increased  with  altitude.  There  was  a southwest
wind  of  about  15  knots  which  added  to  the  air  speed  of  the
aircraft.

22  about  0218:40  : the  plane  had  travelled  about  7 miles  from
CH  and  was  not  yet  over  the  ocean.  It  was  at  an  altitude  of
about  2800  ft,  and  was  just  breaking  through  a low  cloud
cover  that  was  over  the  land.  S.D,  and  DC,  who  were  in  the
cockpit,  observed  a bright  light  through  the  cloud  tops.

The  light  was  about  10-30®  to  the  right  of  the  airplane
heading.  The  light  was  apparently  about  at  the  height  of  the
plane.  S*s  first  impression  was  that  he  was  looking  at  the
full  moon  without  seeing  any  features.  . (The  moon  had  set  in  the
west  many  hours  before.)  G described  it  as  a "squashed
orange".  S turned  on  the  airplane  radar  and  placed  it  in  the
"mapping  mode"  . About  the  time  that  the  light  was  first  seen
DG  and  P,  who  had  been  sitting  in  seats  in  the  loading  bay
during  takeoff,  arrived  on  the  flight  deck  and  G pointed
out  the  light  to  them.  This  was  at  about  2:18  A.M,  according  to
a note  written  down  by  DG.  DG  described  the  light  (not
necessarily  his  first  impression)  as  looking  like  a ping-pong
ball  (white)  that  was  in  a dark  room  and  illuminated  by
a spotlight  . DG  also  recalled  a light  below  the  object  wiich
he  attributed  to  a reflection  on  the  ocean.  (It  might  have  been
a reflection  on  clouds.)  DC  had  filmed  the  takeoff  from  CH
so  he  was  ready  to  film  and  probably  was  filming  at  .the  time
the  F and  DG  arrived  on  the  flight  deck.  P was  now  operating
the  recorder.  H recorded:  "We  are  now  about  3 minutes  out  of
Christchurch  airport  and  on  our  starboard  side  we  can  see  two
very  bright  lights, .... .one  much  brighter  than  the  other.  The
only  way  to  describe  it..,,. it's  like  a very  very  bright  star


)


22  • 1

i

and  just  below  it  is  another  light  not  quite  so  bright."

^3  about  0221:30  : the  plane  radar  wanned  up  and  S switched
■'  from  the  50  to  the  20  mile  range.  He  picked  up  a target  about
30®  to  the  right  of  straight  ahead  just  inside  the  20  mile
range  ring.  By  this  time  DG  had  moved  so  that  he  was  standing
b^ind  S on  the  left  of  the  plane  where  he  could  see  the
radar  scope.  DG  repeatedly  compared  the  direction  to  the
bright  object  with  the^zimuth  (angular  direction)  of  the
target  on  the  scope  and  assured  himself  that  both  directions
were  the  same.  S and  G were  also  sure  that  the  radar  target
was  in  the  same  direction  as  the  visual  target.  S and  G
estimated  that  the  size  of  the  radar  blip  was  3 to  5 times
that  of  a blip  from  a large  fishing  boat.  The  altitude  of  the
■ plane  at  this  time  was  about  6000  feet  and  it  was  about  15
miles  out  of  CH.  About  this  time  F recorded  "....those  two

lights  appear  to  be  travelling  with  us the  brighter

light  is  still  up  above  the  other  and  has  moved  a little

further  ahead how  it's  just  dimmed!  Ifs  gone!  i . .Back

again.  It  appears,  to  be  going  behind  a cloud.  I can't  ouite
make  out  whether  in  fact  it  is  going  behind  a cloud  or  whether
in  fact  the  light  is  just  dimming. .....  it ' s lighting  up  the

clouds  around  it " DC  filmed  a light  which  did  fade  in

and  out.  DG  described  the  object  as  if  it  were  a light
connected  to  a dimmer  switch  so  the  brightness  could  increase  and
decrease  continuously  rather  than  going  off  and  on  abruptly  as  when
a light  is  switched  off  and  on.

Since  the  target  was  about  18-20  miles  awayjtrom  the  plane
at  about  30®  to  the  right,  and  since  the  plane  was  about  15
miles  from  CH,  the  target  was  32-35  miles  from  CH.  Since  the
CH  radar  has  a "cone  of  silence"  that  extends  upward  from
ground 'level  as  the  distance  from  the  airfield  increases  at
a rate  of  100  feet/mile,  an  object  below  3000  ft.  at  30  miles
would  not  (normally)  be  seen.  A weak  target  for  50  cm  radar
might  not  be  detected  even  at  altitudes  soewhat  greater  than
3000  ft.  at  30  miles.  Since  the  object  was  not  detected  by
Ch  radar  it  was  probably  at  an  altitude  of  around  3000  ft
or  lower.  Since  the  airplane  radar  was  operated  in  the
mapping  mode  the  3 cm  airplane  radar  beam  could  have  picked
up  a target  at  a lower  altitude.

Sometime  during  the  time  interval  from  0222-  0225  DG
scribbled  a note  " close  as  10  miles?  170  knots?  pace  aircraft".
At  about  0225-0225:30  the  target  went  off  radar  because  the


23


azimuth  angle  to  the  target  had  increased  from  30®  to  beyond
about  50°,  which  was  the  maximum  angle  that  the  scope  would
display.  Before  it  went  off  the  scope  it  may  have  come  as
close  as  8-10  miles,  according  to  S,  who  had  the  best  view
of  the  scope.  G remembers  it  being  at  least  as  close  as  12
miles.  P recorded  ”We  must  now  be  about  30  miles  out  of
Christchurch  and  that  bright  light  is  still  with  us.  According
to  Captain  Bill  Startup  it  came  as  close  as  10  miles  to  us,..."

24  jOsout  0227  ; P contacted  W and  said  that  the  plane  was

32  miles  out  of  CH  at  an  altitude  of  11,500  feet  and  that

there  was  a "great  big  target  sitting  at,  xih,  3:00  to  us

at  about  12  miles".  P then  asked  W if  W had  anything  on
radar.  However,  W had  not  been  expected  to  be  called  and  was
not  looking  at  a range  great  enough  to  see  the  plane,  W did

. say  that  there  were  many  targets  off  Clarence  and  Kaikoura.

The  plane  was  climbing  at  a rate  of  about  800  ft/min  at  this
time  and  travelling  at  about  200  knots  ground  speed.

25  about  0229  : the  plane  reached  the  cruising  altitude  of

about  13,000  ft  and  an  air  speed  of  215  knots,  S and  G decided
to  turn  to  the  right  toward  the  object  to  see  what  would  happen.
S made'  a turn  that  lasted  about  45  seconds.  He  hadn’t  expected
to  have  to  turn  veiry  far,  suggesting  that  the  object  was

not  directly  to  the  right  of  the  aircraft,  but  was  still
somewhat  ahead.  However,  he  found  that  he  had  to  keep
turning  and  he  finally  stopped  when  he  had  turned  about  90
to  the  right.  Before  the  turn  started  F recorded  "The  pilot
has  just  told  us  he  is  going  to  actually  level  off. .....and

head  toward  the  object  to  see  what  happens.  " During  the
turn  F recorded  the  apparent  motions  of  the  object,  not
realizing  that  the  turning  of  the  plane  made  • it  look  as
if  the  object  were  moving  up  and  then  down  and  then  to  the
front  of  the  aircraft.  After  the  turn  was  completed  the
sighting  line  to  the  object  was  ahead  and  downward.  DG
wrote  a note  " 2:30  A.M, , directly  ahead,  no  radar  reading  r
The  fact  that  it  was  not  seen  on  the  radar  scope  even
though  it  was  ahead  of  the  airplane  suggests  that  the  sighting
line  to  the  object  must  have  been  considerably  lower  than
15°  below  horizontal,  which  is  the  nominal  lower  bound  of
the  radar  beam  in  the  mapping  mode,  (The  pilot  did  not  try
to  increase  the  tilt  of  the  radar  beam.)  If  the  sighting  line
had  been  at  an  angle  of  20°  below  horizontal  and  the  object
had  been  at  an  altitude  of  3000  ft.  while  the  plane  was  at
13,000  ft,  the  distance  to  the  object  would  have  been  about
5 miles,  6 had  the  impression  that  the  plane  had  "overflown"


24


the  object  as  far  as  the  radar  beam  detection  was  concerned.

During  the  time  that  the  plane  was  on  its  southeast  course
the  sighting  line  to  the  object  moved  around  to  the  right
again.  When  the  sighting  line  was  so  far  downward  and  to  the
right  that  S couldn't  see  the  object  he  decided  to  turn  to
the  left  to  regain  his  original  track.  Before  he  turned
he  could  see  a glow  in  the  right  hand  windows  and  the  other
passengers  could  see  the  object,  S and  G remember  flying
for  "no  more  than"  4-5  minutes  on  the  southeast  heading
before  turning  back.  Actually  they  must  have  flown  only  about
1-1.5  minutes  on  that  heading.

About  the  time  of  the  turn  to  the  right,  DC  stopped
filming  and  went  downstairs  into  the  loading  bay  to  get
his  bigger  lens  (he  had  been  using  the  100  mm.  and  now  he
got  the  240  mm  lens) , It  took  several  minutes  for  him  to
Install  the  lens  on  the  camera  , but  he  was  ready  to  film
probably  just  before  the  plane  turned  to  the  left.

26  about  0231  : S could  no  longer  see  the  object  so  he

turned  left  onto  a heading  of  066  magnetic  (087  true  ) for
a short  time  and  then  he  continued  the  left  turn  to  head  back
to  the  "MOTO"  track,  P.  apparently  mentioned  the  start  of
the  turn  saying  "It's  now  dropping  away  right  below  us,..."

(He  was  not  aware  that  the  captain  had  decided  to  turn.  Since
he  was  looking  out  the  right  window,  when  the  plane  banked
to  the  left  it  would  appear  to  him  that  the  object  dropped
downward.)  Fogarty  continued  " It  appears  , in  fact,  to
be  losing  its  speed  ..  .rising,  coming  back  up  towards  us
again......  It  appears  to  be  coming  straight  for  us....

It's  getting  a little  bit  brighter."  A few  seconds  later  F
said  " It's  now  dropping  right  away  behind  us."

Probably  during  this  turn  DC  obtained  film  footage  with
his  240  mm  lens.  This  footage  shows  an  image  which  starts  off
large,  then  shrinks  to  small  bright  images,  and  then  grows
large  and  dim.  He  described  the  large  image  to  F ; "It  now
appears  to  be  an  oval  shaped  object  with  rings  of  light
going  around."  A previous  description  given  by  DC  before  the
plane  turned  to  the  right  was  that  it  had  a "brightly  lit
bottom  and  a sort  of  transparent  top"  . The  large  image  was
apparently  an  out-of -focus  version  of  the  smaL  ler  image.

During  the  time  that  the  240  mm  lens  was  in  focus  DC  did  obtain


25


images  tliat  are  consilstent  vith  his  description  of  the  object
as  seen  earlier  through  the  100  mm.  lens.  These  focused
images  are  sort  of  bell  shaped  vith  bright  bottoms  and  less
bright  tops.  The  angular  sizes  of  the  focused  images  obtained
vith  the  240  mm  lens  are  about  the  same  as  the  sizes  of  the
images  obtained  earlier  with  the  100  mm  lens,  suggesting
that  the  object  did  not  actually  get  closer  to  the  plane
at  least  during  the  time  that  DC  was  filming.  However,
it  apparently  did  get  ouite  close  to  the  plane  after
DC  filmed  it  • DC  could  not  film  when  the  sighting  line
was  too  far  below  horizontal  because  the  top  of  the  film
magazine  would  have  bumped  overhead  switches.  Therefore  he
was  not  able  to  film  it  during  the  time  that  it  apparently
passed  under  the  airplane.

During  the  left  turn  S was  surprised  to  see  the  object,

. which  had  been  on  the  right  side  of  the  aircraft,  suddenly
appear  at  the'^left  and  apparently  above  the  aircraft,  ^The
appearance  of  being  above  may  have  been  due  to  the  *
tilt  of  the  aircraft  during  the  left  turn.)  The  object
then  appeared  to  move  downward  and  pass  behind  and  beneath
the  aircraft,  F last  saw  it  out  the  far  right  window  while
looTcing  almost  straight  down  on  it,

27  about  0233  s the  plane  regained  the  MOTO  trade

at  some  point  north  of  "MOTO"  , which  is  40  miles  out  of

CH,  There  is  a "slight"  time  problem  here  in  that  the

W and  CH  controllers  were  discussing  the  position  of  the

plane  at  0229:30-0230  and  in  their  discussion  they  implied

that  the  plane  was  already  heading  for  or  about  to  reach

the  MOTO  track  , perhaps  close  to  the  point  MOTO,  The

estimate  listed  previously  that  the  plane  turned  to  the  right

at  0229  is  based  on  the  reguirement  that  the  plane  reach

its  altitude  of  13,000  ft.  and  upon  the  statement  made  by  P to

W at  0227  that,  the  plane  was  at  11,500  ft.  The  estimate  that

the  plane  turned  left  at  0231  is  based  on  the  minimum  length

of  time  taken  by  F ' s recorded  comments  during  and  after

the  turn  to  the  right.  The  estimate  that  the  plane  reached

the  MOTO  track  at  0233  is  based  on  the  travel  time  of  the

plane  to  go  along  a track  as  indicated  on  the  map  from

#36  to  #27.  These  times  and  the  estimated  path  of  the  airplane,

as  well  as  the  estimated  path  of  the  object,  are  all  subject
to  revxsion.  j

about  0241  ; W reported  to  P that  there  was  a target

at  20  miles  at  10:00,  just  off  the  coast  6 miles  north
of  Kaikoura.  The  location  of  the  object  for  #28  on  the


28


26


map  does  not  agree  exactly  with  the  location  reported
by  W,  but  it  is  close.  There  was  no^ sighting, but  S may  have
seen  it  on  the  plane  radar.

29  about  0245  j W told  P that  the  same  target  was  at

16  miles  at  about  9:30  to  the  plane.  There  was  still  no

sighting.  -

30  about  0246  s the  plane  "turned  the  corner"  at  KaiTcoura

East  and  headed  toward  Cape  Campbell,  which  they  estimated
they  would  reach  at  0300.  W read  the  Blenheim  weather  report.
Then,  at  about  0246:30,  W told  the  plane  that  the  same
target  just  north  of  Kaikoura  was  at  9:00.  The  plane  did  not
indicate  that  the  target  was  seen.

31  about  0247  : W reported  two  targets  at  .11:00  at

15  miles.  P responded  "We  don’t  seem  to  be  picking  them  up  quite
so  easily  on  the  leg  (of  the  trip) . "

32  zjbout  0248:30  : W reported  a target  at  9:00  at  8 miles.

P did  not  indicate  that  anything  was  seen.

At  about  0250  F recorded  the  following  statement:  "We've
now  just  passed  Kaikoura  and,  uh,  there's  been  no  further
activity.  There  are  pinpoints  of  light  in  the  sky,  but
nothing's  been  confirmed  on  Wellington  radar.  I,  for  one,  am
hoping  that,  uh,  we've  seen  enough  , and,  uh,  the  rest  of
our  journey  back  to  Blenheim  will  be  uneventful.  I've  had
quite  enough  of  TXFO' s for  one  night.  " Apparently  S had  the
same  feeling.  He  said  that  he  had  detected  objects  on  the
airplane  radar  which. appeared  to  him  to  be  in  the  positions
reported  by  W,  but  he  didn't  tell  anyone  and,  in  fact,  paid
veiy  little  attention  to  the  radar  screen  throughout  the  rest
of  the  trip.  He  did  tell  several  people  after  the  trip  was
over,  however,  that  he  had  had  targets  on  his  radar.

33  about  0251  : P asked  W if  there  was  a target  in  - - .

the  12:00  position,  W responded  a strong  target  at

12:00  to  you  at  20  miles..,.. 2 miles  off  the  coast,  10  miles
south  of  Cape  Campbell."  P responded  "We  have  that  one  also  (?)

and  quite  a good  visual  display  at  the  moment it  looks

like  a collection  of  lights...."  F recorded  " About  30  seconds
after  that  last  statement  we've  got  another  one  right

in  front  of  us...., very  bright seems  to  be  a long  way

away.  Another  one  just  to  the  left  of  it.  That  one  flashed

extremely  brightly.  They've  both  now  faded The  other  one's

flashing  again.  It's  giving  off  an  orange  flashing  light.

It  looks  like  an  aircraft  beacon,"  (Note:  this  comparison  is
intended  to  convey  the  visual  impression  of  very  brief  and


27


bright  flashes  as  opposed  to  "pulsations**  in  vhich  the
light  grows  and  dims  slowly  enough  so  that  the  brightness
change  appears  continuous  rather  than  abrupt.)  F continued

"It's  moving  off.  It's  extremely  bright.  It  fades and  its

dropped.  It  seems  to  have  just  dropped  at  an  incredible  speed
and  it  seems  to  be  rolling  and  turning. ... in  fact,.. one  light
has  another  beside  it.  " The  "rolling  and  turning"  was
described  by  P as  movement  around  a sort  of  elliptical  path
with  the  long  eixis  of  the  ellipse  in  the  vertical  direction.
The  object  travelled  downward  in  the  elliptical  motion  faster
than  it  rose  upwards,  in  the  opinion  of  P.  DC  obtained
about  7 feet  of  film  that  show  a light  source  that  changes
in  a regular  cyclic  manner  from  bright  white  to  dim  red  and
orange  for  about  32  cycles  at  a rate  of  1.1  cycles /sec.  The
bright  source  also  apparently  moved  up  and  down  in  a flattened
• elliptical  path  much  higher  than  it  was  wide.  This  up  and
down  motion  was  periodic,  at  least  for  the  first  portion
of  the  film,  at  a rate  of  about  2.5  cycles/sec.

After  describing  the  flashing ‘ light: that  dropped^,
rolled, and  turned,?  described  a "whole  cluster"  of  lights
including  one  that  "keeps  flashing"  and  was  part  of  a
"distinctive "pattern  of  lights.  This  one  may  have  been
the  Blenheim  airfield  beacon.

After  describing  the  "collection  of  lights"  to  W,  P
asked  W if  the  Blenheim  beacon  could  be  turned  off  so  that
the  passengers  on  the  plane  could  be  sure  that  they  weren't
mistaking  it  for  a ' flashing  UFO'.  The  Blenheim  beacon
flashed  red  every  1.5  sec.  or  so.  (Note  i At  this  time  the
beacon  would  have  been  about  45  miles  from  the  airplane
and  perhaps  under  the  1/8  cloud  cover  over  Blenheim.  The
cloud  cover  was  at  4000  ft.)  The  beacon  was  turned  off  and
at  about  the  same  time  the  bright  flashing  light  disappeared.

34  about  0252  : W called  the  plane  to  report  "..two

further  targets,  one  at  9s 00  at  8 miles  and  one  at  10:00  at
10  miles."  Within  a few  seconds  W also  reported  " the
one  south  of  Cape  Cait^bell  has  now  gone  off  radar,  '*  The
disappearance  of  the  target  from  the  radar  scope  was
approximately  (or  exactly?)  coincident  with  the  visual
disappearance  and  with  the  turning  off  of  the  Blenheim  beacon.
However,  the  radar  would  not  have  lost  a target  just  because
the  Blenheim  beacon  was  turned  off.

Whether  or  not  the  Blenheim  beacon  was  in  fact  seen
was  not  established.  Other  bright  lights,  did  appear
within  seconds  after  the  flashing  one  disappeared.  However,


28


they  may  not  have  been  to  the  left  of  the  plane  as  were  the
W radar  targets  which  "replaced"  the  "strong  target"  that
had  been  south  of  Cape  Campbell.

F recorded  "Well,  we  can't  be  right  all  the  time,  but  it
in  fact  appears  that  the  last  flashing  light  we  saw  was  in
fact  el  beacon  at  Blenheim  and  the  pilots  ashed  for  the  beacon
to  be  turned  off.  But  at  the  same  time  that  they  turned  the
beacon  of f^ Wellington  radar  told  us  that  we  had  targets
coming  from  the  left  of  us.  But  as  I speak  now,  we  have
another  one,  above  Bleriheim,  and  that's  not  a beacon  because
It's  not  in  the  same  position  as  the  lights  were  before,
and  these  sightings  at  the  moment  are  right  in  the  position
where  Wellington  radar  said  they  should  be!"  Actually,  W
radar  had  referred  to  targets  to  the  left  of  where  the
strong  target  had  been,  and  P referred  to  a light  that  was
to  the  right  of  and  higher  than  the  one 'that  had  disappeared.
DG  described  these  lights  as  "pulsing"  on  and  off  as  if  they
were  incandescent  bulbs  operated  with  dimmer  switches  so  the
the  brightness  could  change  continuously  rather  than  abruptly.


35  about  0253  : W told  P about  4 targets  at  9:00,9:30,

10:00  and  10:30,  all  about  1 mile  off  the  coast.  One  or  more
of  these  may  have  been  seen.

36  about  0254  : W told  the  plane  about  a target  at  12:00

at  2 miles.  P responded  "No  sighting  of  that  one.  "

37  about  0255  : W told  the  plane  that  it  was  about  to

merge  with  the  target  that  had  been  just  ahead.  Since  W

did  not  have  any  measure  of  the  heights  of  the  radar  targets
W could  not  have  told  the  plane  whether  it  was  above,  below,
or  level  with  the  anomalous  target.  The  passengers  were
unaware  of  any  target  close  enough  to  "merge"  with.  However,
about  0255:30  the  plane  said, to  W:*‘we  had  a pretty  bright  light.
We  have  it  again  now.  It  appears  to  be  behind  Woodbourne

( Blenheim  Airfield)  from  where  we  are Do  you  have  anything

over  there?"  W responded  "Nothing  showing  over  there  at  all,"

38  about  0256  : P asked  W if  there  was  anything  in  the  ^

2:00-3:00  position  with  respect  to  the  plane.  W responded  "
"Nothing  showing  up  2:00-3:00  to  you.  I have  a target  just

off  the  coast  at  9:30....  at  5 miles, "The  passengers  may  have
seen  targets  at  9:30  . P then  described  lights  that

looked  like  fishing  boat  lights  on  the  right  side  in  the


29


CooTc  Strait.  W then  responded  " I got  just  one  paint  now
at  3:00  to  you  at  15  miles,"  and  P said  "Roger.  Sounds  liTce
some  of  the  lights  we  can  see. ...  scattered  through  the  Strait."

39  about  0257  : the  plane  was  too  high  in  altitude  to

begin  its  descent  into  Blenheim,  so  it  did  a two  minute
right  hand  orbit  to  lose  altitude.  Just  before  the  orbit
the  passengers  had  been  watching  a pair  of  bright  lights
at  the  left  of  the  airplane  and  DC  was  about  to  film  them.

He  didn't  get  a chance  to  film  them,  however,  because  the
plane  turned,  and  when  the  plane  had  completed  its  turn
the  lights  were  gone.  W referred  to  targets  at  12:00  at

2 miles  before  the  turn  and  at  12:00  at  10  miles  as  the
orbit  began.  The  plane  apparently  attributed  these  to
fishing  boat  lights  on  the  surface  . ( W radar  could

detect  boats  in  the  CooTc  Strait  if  they  moved
fast  enough  to  exceed  the  minimtim  MTI  speed.)

It  was  probably  during  or  just  after  this  orbit  that

' G pointed  out  the  planet  Venus  that  was  just  rising  and  would
have  been  visible  at  the  altitude  of  the  plane.

40  about  0259  ; coming  out  of  the  orbit  the  plane

asTced  if  there  was  a target  over  Picton.  W responded
that  there  was  no  target  over  Picton.  This  was  the  last
anomalous  light  seen  during  the  flight.  The  plane  landed
at  Picton  at  about  0310.


A.


30  !

1 .HNICAL  DETAILS  FOR  THE  FLIGHT  SOUTH

TIME:  11:46  pm,  December  30,  1978,  to  1:01  am  December  31  , 1978.

WEATHER:  (as  determined  by  the  flight  crew)  excellent  flying  conditions

with  no  noticeable  departure  from  a standard  temperature  lapse

rate  from  ground  level  to  14,000  feet;  low  clouds  over  Wellington;

visibility  about  60km  over  the  sea;  wind  speed  at  cruising

altitude  estimated  to  be  no  more  than  10-15  knots  from  the  vest?

atmospheric  conditions  sufficiently  steady  to  allow  operation

with  automatic  pilot  and  automatic  height  control  (as  pressure

sensitive  device);  no  noticeable  inversion  effects  on  Wellington

radar.  The  temperature  and  humidity  variations  with
altitude  are  shown  in  Figure  • 3,

NUMBER  Of  WITNESSES  ON  PLANE;  5 (pilot,  co-pilot,  reporter,  cameraman,
sound  recordist)

AIR  SPEED  OF  AIRCRAFT  WHEN  CLIMBING:  155-180  knots.

CRUISING  ALTITUDE:  14,000  ft.

AIR  SPEED  AT  CRUISING  ALTITUDE:  215  knots.

TYPE  OF  AIRCRAFT:  4_engine  turbo  prop  freighter  — 2-man  crew  (Argosy,  SAE)

CAMERA  EQUIPMENT  USED:  Bolex  Hl6,  EBM  electric,  16mm.  reflex  movie

camera  operated  at  24  frames/sec.  and  a Kern,  vario-switer  16-100 rrm
zoom  lens  at  f/1.9.

FILM.  Fujicolor  type  8425,  I6rmi,  ASA 400  color  reversal  film;  standard  develcpnet

RADAR  EQUIPMENT  USED:

WELLINGTON  TOWER  RADAR:  Marconi  264,  50cm  (587  MHz),  500  kilowatts,
with  some  adaptations  for  use  at  Wellington.

WTI  CAPABILITY;  targets  with  radial  velocities  in  excess  of  15  knots
are  detected  in  the  HTI  mode  with  phase  shift  and  digital  scan
summing  electronics.  Observations  on  known  targets  with  and  without
the  MTI  processing  indicate  that  the  HTI  processing  improves  the
sensitivity  of  the  radar.  (Strong  targets  in  the  HTI  mode  may  be  i
weak  or  even  non-existent  in  the  non-MTI  mode.)


31  '


PULSE  REPETITTOW  RATE:  automatically  varied  between  six  frequencies

averaging  500/ sec.

PULSE  PURATIO/V:  2.7  microseconds

ROTATIOW  RATE:  12  sec. /revolution

AZIMUTHAL  BEAfmVTH:  2.1*  ± 0.2*^

AATTEMWA  GAIW;  30  db  over  a dipole

POLARIZATIOM:  horizontal  i

• ;

ABSOLUTE  VJSTMCE  ACCURACY:  1%  of  full  scale

. RELATIVE  VISTANCE  ACCURACY:  (set  by  blip  size  on  the  Jisplay):  about

1 mile  on  the  maximum  range

MAXIMUM  RAWGE:  150  nautical  miles  at  10,000  ft.

AMTEWWA  HEIGHT:  about  1,700  ft.  above  sea  level

UPWARP  TILT  OF  THE  CEfTTER  OF  THE  TRAV5MITTEP  LOBE:

about  4”  (there  is  no  height  resolution  for  this  radar;  the  radar
detects  surface  targets  for  a distance  of  30  to  50  miles  under
normal  conditions)

VJSPLAY:  12"  diameter  PPI  with  10  miles  range  rings  on  the  150  mile  range.

NUMBER  OF  WITNESSES:  2 (controller  and  technician)

CHRISTCHURCH  TOWER  RADAR;  Marconi  264,  50  cm. , 50  kw.

MTI  CAPABILITY:  not  as  sophisticated  as  Wellington,  but  similar

MAXIMUM  RANGE:  100  nautical  miles  at  10,000  ft.

ANTENNA  HEIGHT:  about  120  ft.  above  sea  level

UPWARP  TILT  OF  THE  TRAMSMITTEP  LOBE:  there  is  a cone  of  invisibility

extending  outward  from  the  antenna  which  rises  at  a rate  of  100  ft/mile,
beneath  which  targets  cannot  be  seen  under  ordinary  atmospheric  condition

NUMBER  OF  WITNESSES:  1


Height


32


FIGURE  3


TEMPERATURE  AND  HUMIDITY

1


VERTICAL  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  ATMOSPHERE  FOR
.CHRISTCHURCH,  N.Z,  from  the  11:00  P,M.
balloon  launching,  Dec.  30,  1978.  Data
supplied  by  J.T.  Steiner,  Ass't.  Dir-
for  Research  and  D.C,  Thompson,  Superintendant
•Physical  Meteorology  • H.Z.  Meteorological
'service,  Wellington,  N.Z,


33


TEurtNICAL  DETAILS  FOR  THE  FLIGHT  NORTH
TIME:  2:16  am  to  3:15  am,  December  31,  1978


WEATHER:


(as  determined  by  the  flight  crew):  excellent  flying  conditions

with  no  noticeable  departure  from  standard  laose  rate  conditions;
wind  speed  at  cruising  altitude  estimated  at  10-15  knots  from  the
soutliwest;? possibly  a cloud  bank  more  than  40  miles  east  of  the


South  Island'-  low  cloud  cover  1200  to  abottt  3000  ft.  above
Christchurch;  scattered  low  cloud  over  ocean?  CAVU
conditions  above  clouds;  for  Blenheim  at  about  2:45  am  the  wind
was  out  of  the  northwest  at  10-15  knots,  the  visibility  v/as  60
the  cloud  cover  was  1/8  at  4,000  ft,  and  the  temoerature  v/as  15  C;
after  achieving  the  cruising  altitude  the  crew  operated  the  plane
on  automatic  height  control.  (See  also  Figure  3.)


NUMBER  OF  WITNESSES  IN  THE  PLANE:  5 (pilot,  co-pilot,  cameraman,  Australia

reporter,  Christchurch  reporter)


CRUISING  ALTITUDE:  13,000  ft.

(cuACAa^  dztcuJUi  o/lq.  thz  iorm  cu  ^o/i  tht  ^Liqlvt  Aouth]

CAMERA  EQUIPMENT  USED:  samejhut  now  . run  at  10  frames/sec, ; also  used

Sun  Macro-Zoom,  80-240  mm  lens  used  at  f/4.  (This  lens  v/as  later
found  to  be  out  of  adjustment.  At  full  zoom  objects  at  "infinity"
came  into  focus  when  the  focus  ring  read  15  ft.,  and  distant  objects
were  out  of  focus  when  the  ring  read  "infinity."  This  condition  of
the  lens  may  explain  the  section  of  film  footage  which  shows  a
large  dim  image  which  then  contracts  to  a bright,  much  smaller  image,
and  then  expands  again  to  a dim  large  image,  accompanied  by  an
. apparent  symmetry  inversion^ >of  the  defocused  image.)

FILM:  same  type  as  for  the  flight  south.


RADAR  EQUIPMENT  USED:

WELLINGTON  TOWER  RADAR:  same  as  for  the  trip  south

NUMBER  OF  OBSERVERS:  1


CHRISTCHURCH  RADAR:  same  as  for  the  trip  south

NUMBER  OF  OBSERVERS:  1


AIRPLANE  WEATHER  RADAR:  M.E.L.  Equipment  Co.  E190  Series,  3 cm  (9375  MHz) , 15  kw.

MIT  Capability:  none

Operating  Mode:  operated  in  the  "map  mode"  which  produces  a fan-shaped  beam

extending  from  3°  to  about  15°  below  the  centerline  of  the  aircraft

Azimuthal  Sweep  Range:  ± about  50°  from  straight  ahead

Sweep  Rate:  about  3 sec.  per  cycle

Pulse  Repetition  Rate:  400/sec.

Pulse  Duration:  2.2  microseconds

Beamwidth:  .3.5°

Range:  150,  50,  20  miles  (used  on  20  mile  range)

Display:  sector  display  with  5 miles  range  rings  and  15°  azimuth  markings.


34


iATURAL  AND  ARTIFICIAL  SOURCES  OF  LIGHT  !

ASTRONOMICAL:  Jupiter,  visible  in  the  northeast,  magnitude  about  -2.0

Saturn,  visible  in  the  northeast,  magnitude  about  0.0

Venus,  visible  in  the  east  after  about  3 am  at  the  altitude
of  the  plane,  magnitude  about  -4.3,  except  on  the
horizon  where  atmospheric  extinction  reduces  its
brightness  by  a factor  of  100  or  more.

Stars  and  other  sources,  visible  in  the  clear  sky,  but  all
ditmi_pr  than  Jupiter

No  comets,  meteors,  or  aurora  v/ere  reported.  ^

(NOTE:  the  co-pilot  pointed  out  Venus  to  the  plane  passengers  near  the  end

of  the  flight  north.)

ARTIFICIAL:  City  lights.

Flashing  and  steady  coastal  and  airport  beacons,  with  flashing
or  rotation  periods  ranging  from  about  1.5  sec  (flashing  only
red)  to  30  sec  (flashing  only  white)

Japanese  fishing  fleet  lights,  used  for  squid  fishing,  were
at  distances  estimated  to  be  over  100  km  east  of  the  South
Island  and  east  to  southeast  of  Christchurch.  A larqe  boat
carrying  50,  4,000  watt  bulbs,  would  put  out  between  4 and
5 million  lumens,  yielding  a luminous  intensity  of  300,000
to  400,000  candlepower.

(NOTE:  the  pilot  and  co-pilot  pointed  out  artificial  sources  including  the

squid  fleet  to  the  passengers.)


35


Analysis  of  the  Wellington  Radar  Sightings

Geoffrey  Causer  reported  that  the  Wellington  radar
picked  up  anomalous  targets  more  or  less  continually  during
the  period  that  he  was  on  duty  from  about  11:45  PM,  Dec.  30,
through  about  4:00  AM  ^ Dec.  31.  The  previous  controller  had
also  seen  the  targets  and  had  pointed  them  out  to  GC.  The
targets  were  unusual  because  they  did  not  generally  leave
trails  on  the  radar  scope j indicating  to  the  controller  that  they
were  stationary.  However,  the  MPI  processing  was  supposed  to
reject  stationary  targets,  some  targets  would  appear  for  only
one  sweep  (in  which  case  no  motion  could  have  been  detected  anyway:
you  need  several  sweeps  for  the  motion  of  a ta^rget  to  leave  a
trail)  and  some  targets  would  rer^j.n  ^t  fixed  positions  for
msoiy  sweeps  . One  anomalous  target^  apparently  paced  the  aircraft
during  the  flight  south  when  the  aircraft  target  "doubled
in  size"  • One  other  anomalous  target  did  make  a constistent
trail.  This  target  was  observed  to  move  continuously  northward
from  a point  south  of  Cape  Campbell  to  a point  several  miles
northeast  of  CC  during  the  period  0226  to  0300,  when  it
disappeared  off  the  scope.  GC  first  reported  it  to  the  plane  at  0246
as  follows  The  most  consistent  and  interesting  target  I've
been  observing  for  the  last  20  minutes,  tih,  is  about  10
miles  south  of  Karnes  and  slowly  moving  north.  It's  moved  about
10  miles  in  that  time. " (Karnes  is  a non-geographic  reporting
point  about  4 miles  east  of  Cape  Campbell.)  The  average  velocity
suggested  by  these  statements  is  30  knots.  GC  referred  to  this
consistent  target  again  at  about  0256  : "Target  I mentioned
before  that  was  consistent  and  strong  and. moving  north  is  now
just  past  Karnes  and  still  heading  slowly  north. " During  the
time  period  0246-0256  this  target  had  moved  about  10  miles,
suggesting  a velocity  of  60  knots,  A few  minutes  later  it
disappeared  off  the  radar  scope.  The  speed  seems  somewhat
excessive  for  a fishing  boat  .

( The  characteristics  of  the  radar  targets  picked  up  during
the  early  morning  of  Dec,  31  were  similar  to  those  reported
during  the  early  morning  of  Dec,  21.  Senior  Controller  John
Cordy  and  controller  Andy  Herd  reported  targets  which  appeared
and  disappeared  off  the  coast  near  the  mouth  of  the  Clarence
River.  They  also  reported  a target  which  appeared  at  about  0300
at  160®  azimuth  and  about  48  km  (26  nautical  miles)  from
Wellington,  It  remained  at  that  location  for  a period  of  time
and  then  moved  , leaving  a continuous  track,  to  a point  80  km
away  from  Wellington  on  the  same  heading,  where  it  remained
for  "at  least  30  minutes".  The  average  speed  of  the  target
when  it  moved  was  about  120  knots.  These  radar  sighting  form
part  of  the  collection  of  radar-visual  sightings  of  Dec,  21.)


36


Stationary  targets  can  be  presented  on  an  MPI  processed
radar  scope  display  providing  that  they  can,  in  some  wayr
change  the  phase  of  the  returned  signal  or  shift  its  freouency
slightly.  Such  a phase  shift  could  be  provided  by  a vibration
of  the  surface  of  an  object  , or  by  a back  and  forth  motion
of  an  object  toward  and  away  from  the  radar  antenna.  A plasma
might  also  shift  the  phase  of  a portion  of  the  reflected
radar  signal  (this  assumes  the  object  is  a plasma  or  is
surrounded  by  a plasma) ,

The  "blips"  (bright  arc-shaped  spots)  on  the  radar  scope  that
were  made  by  the  unusual  targets  were  comparable  in  size  and
intensity  to  the  blips  made  by  the  airplane,  according  to
GC  and  Bryan  Chalmers.  However,  BC  determined  that  when  the
MTI  processing  was  removed  the  targets  were  not  seen.  ( The
non-MTI  display  showed  the  normal  amount  of  nearby  land  and
sea  clutter  and  the  plane.)  Targets  could  appear  on  the  MTI
display  and  not  on  the  non-MTI  display  if  they  were  basically
weak  targets  (i.e.,  not  very  reflective  for  the  50  cm  radar).

This  is  because  the  MTI  processing  makes  the  radar  receiver
more  sensitive  (by  integrating  over  pulses  and  more  effectively
separating  the  signal  from  the  background  noise  ) , Even
normally  strong  targets,  such  as  aircraft,  can  be  weak  reflectors
if  the  targets  are  oriented  in  such  a manner  as  to  present
small  "cross-sections "for  radar  reflection.  For  example,  a
plane  travelling  directly  toward  or  away  from  a radar  antenna
has  a smaller  cross-section  for  radar  reflection  than  a similar
plane  travelling  at  an  angle  of  90°  to  the  line-of-sight  to
the  radar  antenna,  (i.e,,  "broadside"  to  the  radar  antenna).

Thus  the  orientation  in  space  is  a major  factor  in  determining
the  cross-section.  An  object  which  appears  as  a strong  target
(relatively  large  cross-section  ) on  one  sweep  of  a radar  scope
might  turn  • between  sweeps  and  become  a weak  target

(relatively  small  cross-section)  by  the  time  of  the  next  sweep.

If  the  cross-section  were  to  become  too  small  the  target  would
"disappear",  as  far  as  the  radar  operator  is  concerned.

Blips  are  produced  on  the  radar  scope  whenever  the  radar
antenna  picks  up  sufficient  power  at  the  correct  freouency.

Except  in  the  cases  when  external  sources  of  radar  freouency
power  irradiate  the  antenna  (jamming,  interference  with  other
radars) , power  is  received  at  the  antenna  only  when  there  is
a (or  more  than  one)  reflective  object  within  the  irradiating
field  of  the  transmitter.  In  other  words,  >dien  there  are  no
reflections  of  the  radar  beam  there  are  no  targets  on  the  scope.


37


Reflections  can  be  provided  by  metallic  objects  ( e.g. , planes),
conducting  media  ( e.g,.  ionized  air  of  plasmas,  such  as  are
created  by  lightning  and  meteors)  and  by  discontinuities  or
variations  in  the  dielectric  constants  of  the  media  through
which  the  radar  signal  passes.  In  the  case  of  the  anomalous
targets  referred  to  here  , one  proposed  explanation  is  that
the  radar  was  picking  up  reflections  from  "dielectric
discontinuities  or  variations"  caused  by  clear  air  turbulence.
However,  "clear  air  turbulence "requires  that  the  air-be
turbulent.  According  to  the  flight  crew  the  air  was  quite  calm.

The  captain  estimated  that  the  wind  velocity  was  about  10-15
knots  from  the  northwest  when  they  were  near  Wellington  and
from  the  southwest  when  they  were  near  Christchurch.  He  was
able  to  operate  the  plane  on  "automatic  height  control",  a
device  which  keeps  the  plane  at  a level  corresponding  to  a
particular  air  pressure. (Since  air  pressure  decreases  with  increasing
altitude,  a particular  pressure  corresponds  to  a certain
altitude,  or  range  of  altitudes.  When  the  air  is  turbulent  the
pressure  fluctuates  considerably  and  the  automatic  height
control  will  not  operate.)  Regions  of  clear  air  turbulence
have  very  small  cross-sections  for  radar  reflection,  especially
at  rather  long  radar  wavelengths  like  50  cm.  ( clear  air
turbulence  cross-sections  may  be  one  millionth  of  the  cross-
section  of  an  Argosy  aircraft,  or  even  smaller).

An  alternative  to  having  the  atmosphere  itself  reflect  the
radiation  would  be  to  assume  that  the  atmosphere  bends  the
radar  beam  so  that  it  reflects  off  objects  on  the  surface.

Since  the  Wellington  radar  had  no  capability  of  determining  the
height  of  a target,  the  controller  could  not  tell  from  the
strength  of  the  return  whether  he  was  looking  at  a boat  , a
wave,  or  an  airplane.  However,  by  comparing  successive
blips  he  could  usually  distinguish  between  slowly  moving  targets
such  as  boats  and  waves  and  rapidly  moving  targets  such  as
airplanes.  ( A slowly  moving  airborne  object  such  as  a helicopter
could  produce  a blip  that  would  be  comparable  to  that  of  a boat.)
When  the  atmosphere  is  sufficiently  refractive  to  bend  the
radar  beam  downwards  , an  unusual  an  unusual  amount  of  land  and
sea  clutter  is  visible  on  a non-MPI  display.  As  already  pointed
out,  BC  made  such  a check  and  determined  that  there  were  no
conditions  indicative  of'anomalous  propagation "apparent  on  the
non-MTI  display.  The  lack  of  anomalous  propagation  effects  on
the  scope  is  consistent  with  what  would  be  expected  from  '*•

the  temperature -humidity  "structure  of  the  atmosphere"  as
determined  by  data  from  a balloon  launching  earlier  in  the


38


ivening  (see  Pig.  3).  Refractive  bending  of  the  radar  bean
is  caused  by  the  variations  in  air  pressure,  temperature,  and
humidity  with  altitude.  The  amount  of  bending  to  be  expected
for  a particular  temperature-pressure-humidity  “structure”
of  the  atmosphere  can  be  estimated  by  calculating  the
radar  refractivity  profile.  Fig, 4 shows  the  profile  calculated
from  data  in  Fig.  3,  Radar  ray  curvatures  in  seconds  or  arc
per  hilometer  are  also  illustrated  in  the  figure.  Only  for
a small  height  region  around  3400  meters  was  the  refractivity
sufficient  to  make  a ray  follow  the  curvature  of  the  earth.

Nowhere  was  the  refractivity  great  enough  to  bend  a ray  as
much  as  a minute  of  arc  per  kilometer  of  distance  travelled.

A " ray  which  travels  10  km  through  a medium  that  bends  it
downward  from  a starting  angle  of  50  upward  would  be  only  about
30  meters  lower  in  altitude  if  the  bending  rate  is  2 minutes
per  kilometer  than  it  would  be  if  the  bending  rate  were  0.0
minutes  per  kilometer  (no  bending) . Thus  one  can  see  that  the
effect  of  the  curvature  is  small.  The  same  ray  would  rise  to
a peak  altitude  of  about  6.5  km  after  travelling  about  150  km
■(assuming  the  refractivity  gradient  is  constant  up  to  that
altitude)  and  then  it  would  bend  downward  and  intersect  the
earth  at  a point  about  300  km  from  where  it  started  at  the  earth's
surface.  A ray  that  started  off  at  a steeper  angle  would  go
farther  before  reaching  the  earth's  surface,  and  one  that
starts  off  at  an  angle  of  less  than  5°  would  not  go  as  far.

(For  comparison  , Fig.  5 shows  the  refractivity  profile
for  the  early  morning  of  the  2ist  of  Dec.  Note  that  there  is
a sufficient  refractivity  gradient  in  the . first  kilometer  to
cause  some  trapping  of  radiation  near  the  earth's  surface.

One  might  expect  a non-MTI  display  to  show  ground  and  sea  clutter
at  greater  distances  than  would  be  normal. )

One  particular  incident  involving  the  Wellington  radar
occurred  when  the  plane  was  about  84  n.m.  (155  km)  from
Wellington  and  flying  south  (see  #12,13,14,15  in  the
event  description  listing) . The  radar  picked  up  a target  that
was  apparently  stationary  behind  the  plane  for  a over  a minute.

Then  another  (or  the  same?)  target  appeared  at  the  right  of  the
plane,  and  finally  the  return  from  the  plane  "doubled  in  size"
suggesting  that  something  was  moving  along  with  the  plane.  The
two  witnesses  to  the  scope  at  this  time  described  the  motion  of  the
large  return  blip  along  the  scc^e  as  looking  like  two  airplanes


39


Refractivity,  N units


REFRACTIVITY  PROFILE  FOR  CHRISTCHURCH, N.Z ,

' Prom  the  11:00  P.H,  balloon  launching. Dec,  30,1978'
Multiply  by  0,21 "/km  / (N/km)  to  get  curvature
in  "/km.  Curvature  is  downward  if  the  sign  is  negative.
The  earth's  curvature  is  -33"/km,  Only  at  about  3400  m
altitude  was  there  a region  with  sufficient  curvature
to  bend  rays  downward  toward  the  earth  at  a bending  rate
egual  to  the  earth's  curvature.


THE  STRUCTURE  OP  ATMOSPHERIC  RADAR
REFRACTIVITY  IN  TERMS  OP  M UNITS


-I


REFRACTIViry,  M units


Height  above  Sea  Level


REPRACTIVITY  PROFILE  FOR  CHRISTCHURCH,  N.Z  .

From  the  11:00  PM  balloon  launching,  Dec,  20,1978


41


flying  side  by  side.  The  cfuestion  now  to  be  raised  is,  can
chis  be  explained  by  anomalous  propagation  effects  or  radar
"angels"?  To  answer  this  question  one  must  keep  in  mind  that
the  existence  of  a radar  return , requires  that  there  be  something
reflective,  and  that  the  " radar,  path  length"  from  the  radar  antenna
to  the  object  be  the  value  given  on  the  radar  screen.  Since  this
value  was  apparently  the  same  as  the  path  distance  to  the  airplane
for  a period  of  over  36  seconds,  this  requirement  means  that
the  'radar  path  length  to  the  anomalous  target  must  have  increased
at  the  same  rate  as  the  path  length  to  the  aircraft.  The  simple
way  for  this  to  happen  is  to  have  a "real"  reflective  object
which  is  moving  away  from  the  radar  antenna  at  the  same  speed
as  the  aircraft.  It  also  has  to  be  at  the  same  azimuth  as  the
aircraft,  although  not  necessarily  at  the  same  altitude.  It  should
be  obvious  that  no  natural  radar  reflector  could  effectively
pace  the  aircraft  for  such  a long  period.  Another  airplane  could
do  it,  but  there  were  none.  An  alternative  hypothesis  is  that
the  radar  picked  up  a stationary  target  which  was  made  to  appear
to  move  by  effects  of  anomalous  propagation.  If  the  radar  rays
were  bent  down  sufficiently  so  that  they  could  pick  up  a
boat  or  a wave  on  the  surface,  the  assumed  boat  or  wave  could
be  at  the  distance  of  the  aircraft  , but  clearly  neither  a wave
nor  a boat  could  move  at  the  same  speed  as  the  aircraft.  Thus  a
"direct  " radar  path  from  the  antenna  to  a boat  (or  some  relatively
stationary  target)  will  not  work.  But  what  if  the  rays  from  the
antenna  first  travelled  upward  and  then  were  reflected  downward,
as  if  by  an  atmospheric  mirror,  and  then  the  reflector  started
to  move  upward!  In  this  case  the  radar  path  length  would  increase
as  the  reflector  moved  upward  while  the  reflective  target
remained  relatively  stationary  compared  to  the  speed  of  the  plane.
Fig.  6 illustrates  the  geometry.  Initially  one  might  assume  a
curved  radar  path  such  as  the  dashed  line.  However,  such  a trajectory
has  a curvature  of  about  17  minutes/km,  which  would  require  a
re:^activity  gradient  of  about'.  5000  N/km,  which  is  way  out  of  the
range  of  values  on  Fig 4 . The  only  possibility  would  be  a very
flat  ray  which  has  undergone  little  bending  on  its  way  to  the
hypothetical  ship  on  the  surface.  (The  curvature  of  the  "flat"
ray  - solid  line  - has  been  exaggerated.)  Assuming  the
refining  or  bending  region  moves  upward,  as  indicated  by. the  arrow,
the  path  length  from  the  antenna  to  the  ship  will  increase  at
a rate  approximately  given  by  (8h/x)  , where  x is  the  straight
line  distance  from  the  antenna  to  the  ship  and  h is  the  maximum
distance  between  the  straight  line  and  the  curved  path.  Since
X is  large  (84  n.m.)  and  h is  small  (Initially  zero)  , the  path  -*■
length  increases  very  slowly  as  h increases.  For  example,  let
the  straight  line  be  84  n.m,  long,  the  approximate  distance  to  the


APPARENT  MOTION  OP  ANOMA


43


plane  when  the  blip  first  increased  in  size.  The  blip  size  remained
large  for  at  least  36  seconds,  which  means  that  the  plane
travelled  at  least  2 miles.  Thus  the  radar  path  length  to  the
anomalous  target  (ship)  must  also  have  increased  by  2 miles  during
the  same  time  period.  That  means  the  solid  arc  line  on  Fig.  6
is  86  miles  long.  Using  trigonometry  and  calculus  one  can  show
that  the  arc  length  ( segment  of  a circle)  of  86  n.m.  and  the
chord  length  (straight  line)  of  84  n.m.  have  a maximum  spacing
(h)  of  about  8 n.m.  or  48608  feet,  a distance  which  would  not
even  appear  on  the  figure  if  it  were  drawn  to  scale!  (The  plane
is  only  14,000  feet  high.)  The  reflective  or  bending  region  of
the  atmosphere  would  have  to  move  upward  8 n.m.  in  the  same
time  that  the  plane  moved  only  2 miles,  or  at  a speed  four  times
faster  than  the  plane.  Needless  to  say  , volumes  of  air  (which
do  the  bending)  that  are  moving  at  4 x 215  knots  would  cause  some
turbulence  since  they  would  be  moving  faster  than  the  speed  of
sound]  One  may  conclude  from  this  argument  that  motion  of
refracting  layers  cannot  account  for  this  incident.

One  could  make  another  suggestion:  namely  that  the  radar
beam  bounced  off  the  airplane  and  hit  a stationary  target
and  then  was  reflected  back  to  the  antenna.  However,  unless
the  stationary  target  were  within  1 mile  . of  the  airplane  during
the  whole  period,  the  extra  distance  travelled  would  show  up
on  the  scope  as  a bend  in  the  unusually  long  return  blip.

A boat  on  the  surface,  properly  oriented,  might  provide  a
sufficient  reflection  .......  but  the  plane  was  flying  at  an

altitude  of  over  2 n.m. , so  the  extra  distance  travelled  by
the  twice  reflected  ray  (one  by  the  airplane  and  once  by  the
boat)  would  show  up  on  the  scope.

There  is  still  another  alternative,  illustrated  in  Fig,  7,

In  this  case  we  assxime  that  a bending  layer  develops  at  just
the  right  time  and  place  so  that  a few  rays  hit  the  surface  of
the  ocean  at  a path  distance  eijual  to  84  nm.  Then  we  assume  that
the  bending  decreases  slightly  in  time  so  that  the  rays  hit  the
surface  at  a greater  distance.  The  decrease  in  bending  has  to
occur  at  exactly  the  correct  rate  to  make  the  path  length  increase
by  2 nm  in  36  seconds.  It  would  not  require  much  of  a chahge  in
the  amount  of  bending  to  accomplish  this  , although  the
average  amount  of  bending  would  have  to  exceed  the  curvature
of  the  earth  since  the  horizon  , for  an  antenna  at  1700  feet,
is  at  47  nm  (no  bending;  straight  line  distance) .

The  big  problem  with  all  of  these  explanations  reouiring
ray  bending  is  that,  when  conditions  are  correct  to  that  "one"
ray  or  "ray  bundle"  bends  down  and  hits  the  ocean  , or  a ship  on
the  ocean,  many  adjacent  bundles  also  bend  down.  Thus  one  would


15,000  AI^PARENT  MOTION  OP  ANOMALOUS


45


expect  not  one  but  many  apparently  real  targets  at  varions
azimuths  and  distances  all  moving  at  various  apparent  velocities
as  the  conditions  of  the  atmosphere  change.  Moreover,  when  the
conditions  of  the  atmosphere  are  such  that  noticeable  ray
bending  is  talcing  place  and  producing  sea  clutter,  the  random
targets  appear  on  a non-MTI  presentation  as  well  as  on  the
MTI  presentation.  Yet  BC  saw  no  evidence  of  anomalous  propagation.
Thus  it  appears  to  be  difficult  to  ascribe  this  particular
radar  incident  to  anomalous  propagation.  It  is  also  difficult
to  ascribe  the  other  "class"  of  unusual  radar  targets,  those
that  remained  stationary  for  long  periods  of  time  (minutes)
to  anomalous  propagation  since  stationary  targets  produced
by  ray  bending  are  , nevertheless  , stationary  , and  therefore
should  not  be  able  to  defeat  the  MTI  processing.


46


Analysis  of  Radar -Visual  Sightings


I

I


A radar-visual  sighting  occurs  When  a visual  target  (object)  is
seen  in  the  same  direction  as  a radar  target.  Unfortunately
the  radar  target  may  not  be  the  same  thing  as  the  visual  object
since  the  radar  operator  has  no  way  of  estimating  altitude
(when  using  a long  range  search  radar,  as  in  this  case) , and
the  visual  observer  usually  has  no  way  of  estimating  distance.
However,  if  the  visual  and  radar  targets  are  observed  to  change
in  some  way  (e.g.  move,  "appear", or  "disappear")  at  the  same
time,  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  they  are  the  same

object  providing  that  the  nature  of  the  change  is  the  same
for  both  types ' of  observation  . In  this  case  we  have  three
classes  of  observations:  those  in  which  radar  and  visual  targets
in  the  same  direction  with  respect  to  the  plane  changed
simultaneously  (apparent  radar-visual  : ARV) j those  in  which
radar  and  visual  targets  were  changing  in  similar  ways  but  for
which  the  exact  directions  of  the  visual  targets  are  not
known  ( maybe  radar-visual :MRV)  ? and  those  in  which  there
appeared  to  be  no  synchonisom  between  radar  and  visual  targets
(not  radar -visual:  NRV) . Out  of  about  28  separable  incidents
involving  the  Wellington  radar,  16  are  NRV's,  8 are  MRV  s , and
4 are  ARV's.  The  sighting  as  the  plane  left  Christchurch  which
Involved  the  airplane  radar  for  about  4 minutes  continuously
belongs  to  the  ARV  class.  In  this  last  sighting  the  object
was  picked  up  on  radar  as  soon  as  the  radar  was  wanned  up  and
the  sighting  line  to  the  object  was  in  the  same  direction
as  the  radar  azimuth  until  the  object  was  so  far  to  the  right
of  the  plane  that  it  went  off  the  radar  scope.  The  object
was  not  detected  on  radar  when  the  plane  turned  toward  it,  but
at  that  time  the  depression  angle  (angle  below  horizontal)
was  quite  large,  so  the  object  may  have  been  below  the  radar  beam.

The  Wellington  radar  ARV's  are  described  in  the  event
description  listing  under  #3,  #10,  #17,  and  #33.  The  MRV  s
are  described  in  events  #4,5,8,3  6,20,34,35,  and  38.  Only  the
ARV's  will  be  discussed  in  detail.

Event  # 3 was  the  beginning  of  the  whole  series  of  occurrances.
This  is  considered  to  be  an  ARV  because  the  lights  were  seen
In  the  same  direction  as  the  radar  targets  and  because  the
"dynamic"  characteristics  of  the  lights  matched  those  of  the
radar  targets"  namely,  they  would  appear  and  disappear  apparently
at  random  . The  visual  estimate  of  distance  ( over  the  town
of  Kaikoura)  must  be  considered  to  be  erroneous  for  this  to
be  an  ARV  sighting.


Event  # 10  is  considered  to  be  an  ARV  because  of  the
apparently  simultaneous  appearance  of  a radar  target  and  a
light  directly  ahead  of  the  plane.  It  is  possible  that  the
two  targets  that  Fogarty  referred  to  were  sufficiently  close
together  to  look  like  a single  target  on  the  radar  scope#
or  it  may  be  that  only  one  of  them  was  sufficiently  radar
reflective  to  show  up  on  the  radar  scope.

Event  # 17  followed  the  period  of  time  when  the  radar
target  at  the  location  of  the  plane  was  twice  its  normal
size.  In  this  case  the  observers  looked  to  the  right  of  the
plane  where  Wellington  said  there  was  a target.  They  saw  a
flashing  light  which  the  copilot  eventually  lost  sight  of
as  it  drifted  behind  the  plane.  Wellington  saw  a target
which  apparently  remained  stationary  at  the  right  of  the
plane  as  the  plane  moved  along.

Event  # 33  was  the  beginning  of  the  last  series  of
sightings  just  before  the  plane  landed.  Both  Wellington
and  the  plane  referred  to  the  appearance  of  a target
almost  directly  ahead  of  the  plane.  About  a minute  later
this  target  disappeared  both  visually  and  on  the  radar  scope.
It  is  impossible  to  establish  simultaneity  of  disappearance
of  the  visual  and  radar  targets  at  this  late  date,  but  the
disappearances  occurred  within  5 or  10  seconds  at  least.  The
disappearance  of  the  visual  target  may  have  been  at  the  same
time  that  the  Blenheim  beacon  went  off,  but  certainly  the
beacon  was  not  the  radar  target.  The  object  referred  to  here
may  have  been  one  of  the  several  targets  picked  up  by  the
plane  radar  when  it  was  heading  toward  Cape  Campbell.


I


‘I


(partial  analysis  op  the  fiiw

OBTAINED  FLYING  SOUTH  AND  NORTH)


Projection  Transmissometer  Measurements
on  Magnified  Images  Using  the  Original
Film

Magnification  : 67


Each  figure  shows  the  date  of  the  analysis
(measurement)  and  the  # in  order  of  analysis.


The  number  of  a frame  obtained  when  the  plane  was
flying  south  is  obtained  by  counting  from  the
"orange*’  frame  (overexposed  when  camera  stopped
with  shutter  open)  just  before  the  first  anomalous
light  images

The  number  of  a frame  obtained  when  the  plane  was
flying  north  is  obtained  by  counting  from  the
first  anomalous  light  image  after  the  takeoff
from  Christchurch,


§

f-<  H

g

O *0  <

r-<  <l)  3

4J  <

O K

O d)  tQ


MJ  +>


^ E

« tx>

u a


•r4  «W
CQ

Id

•0  C

^ *H
« tJ'
P T<


tn

^ E

. o .o

m

<D  r4

r-

® 5

u

•P  *H

\D

»C  0

»

O tp

0}

p

E

tP

O

Id

••

Ua

<n  Id

E

C

o

«i  i:  I

H

0

•H

I ‘i*^


* P 10

c o

\D  Kn  n
cvj  m
O

geg

K S

rt  2

£ Cl4  b


•

JJ  4J  flJ
« K E


0 C
E Q]  0)

10  5

^^  C C

4J  fl)  10  in


C 4J  »D  fJ
10  Z C
O CJ  to
O W *H


mission .- Through  the  Unexposed  Film
plus  BacTcground^instruffientat  IiisrTi't


I


MARCH  26  # 11
FRAME  3042  N


(Partial  Analysis  of  the  film
obtained  near  Christchurch)

'I

(abstracted  from  a paper
submitted  to  Nature  )


. I

I

During  the  time  that  the  object  was  detected  on  radar  the  plane  was

^.limbing  on  a 54®  heading  out  of  Christchurch,  N.Z.  and  the  ground  speed

■ increased  from  about  315  to  about  370  km/hr.  Estimated  positions  of  the  plane

and  the  object  are  illustrated  on  Figure  1.  The  object  was  first  detected  on

radar  at  point  A on  the  figure,  and  it  was  continuously  on  radar  until  the

azimuthal  angle  reached  about  50°,  the  limit  of  the  radar  scan,  at  point  B.

During  that  time  (about  4 minutes)  the  plane  travelled  about  23  km  and  the

object  apparently  travelled  about  5 km.  The  witnesses  had  the  impression  that

the  object  was  at  least  as  high  as  the  top  of  the  scattered  cloud  layer  (about

800  m)  and  that  for  a period  of  time  it  actually  "paced"  the  aircraft.  Since

2

it  was  not  detected  by  the  Christchurch  radar  it  was  either  a weak  reflector
of  50  cm  waves,  or  below  about  1 km  in  altitude  (or  both).

The  photographic  equipment  consisted  of  a Bolex  EBM  electric  16  mm  movie
camera  with  a 100  mm,  f/1.9  zoom  lens  that  was  used  at  full  aperture  and  full
zoom  (except  for  a short  section  of  wide  angle  photography  which  shows  a meter
inside  the  airplane).  The  camera  was  operated  at  10  frames/sec.  Fujicolor
type  8425  color  reversal  film  with  an  ASA  speed  of  400  was  used.  The  camera
was  hand  held  (a  tripod  was  found  inconvenient  to  use  on  the  flight  deck  of
the  aircraft)  and  consequently  most  images  are  smeared.  Microdensitometer
scans  have  shown  that  the  images  which  are  small  and  not  streaked  are  very
often  highly  overexposed,  with  the  film  having  a transmission  that  approaches
the  transmission  of  the  clear  film  leader.  For  such  highly  overexposed  images
it  is  very  difficult  to  estimate  the  illuminance  on  the  film  plane.  On  the
other  hand,  smeared  images  are  somewhat  less  overexposed  and  allow  better
estimates  of  the  film  plane  illuminance.  With  less  exposure  it  is  possible
to  use  the  published  characteristic  curves  (film  density  vs  exposure)  to
estimate  the  luminous  flux  which  reached  the  film  plane  during  the  frame  time.


2


W'*'^  an  estimate  of  Image  illuminance,  and  a measurement  of  the  image  area.

It  Is  possible  to  estimate  the  flux  (lumens)  which  reached  the  film. and,
with  the  following  equation,  to  estimate  the  candlepower  of  the  source:

, . ^<*1  ” e (1)

where  I is  in  lumens/steradian  (i.e.,  candelas,  cd.),  E.  is  the  film  plane

2

illuminance  in  Im/m  , A.  is  the  image  area,  R is  the  distance  to  the  source,

T is  the  lens  transmission  (assumed  to  be  80%),  and  = uD  /4  is  the  area  of
the  lens  aperture.  For  f/1.9,  D = 10  cm/1.9  = 5.26  cm.  The  visibility,  V,
estimated  from  ground  level  data,  was  about  70  km.

Of  particular  interest  is  a single  frame  image  smear  obtained  when  the
radar  range,  R,  was  between  18  and  35  km.  This  image,  illustrated  in  Figure  2,
ranges  in  color  from  bright  yellow  in  the  "sides"  of  the  loop  to  white-yellow
at  the  top  and  bottom  of  the  loop.  Neutral  densities  (density  =
film  transmission) range  from  0.4  down  to  0.2,  while  that  of  the  clear  leader
is  about  0.12.  The  densities  for  the  three  colors  (red,  green,  blue)  in  the
portions  of  the  film  which  have  not  been  exposed  (e.g.  the  black  background)
lie  in  the  range  2.1  - 2.3.  Published  film  characteristics^  indicate  that  the
normal  density  range  is  from  about  0.10  to  about  2.3  - 2.7  for  the  three  colors,
and  that  the  "speed  point  density"  for  the  film  is  about  0.90.  Since  the  upper
density  range  of  the  film  under  study  here  is  somewhat  below  the  normal  density,
the  speed  point  may  also  be  somewhat  low.  A conservative  estimate  is  that  the
speed  point  density  for  this  film  might  be  as  low  as  0.80.

According  to  the  ANSI  standard,  ASA  400  film  reaches  its  speed  point  density

2

when  exposed  by  a flux  of  about  0.025  lm‘sec/m  (0.025*lux  sec).  For  a
0.044  sec  exposure  this  becomes  0.56  Im/m  . The  measured  loop  image  densities


3


differ  from  the  speed  point  density  by  0.4  to  0.6  density  units,  indicating
the  image  illuminance  was  10^*^= -2.5  to  10®*^  - 4 times  the  speed  point
“ illuminance.  (Note:  The  relationship  between  density  and  exposure  is  some-

what less  than  linear  to  nearly  linear  in  this  region  of  the  characteristic

curves.)  Accepting  a conservative  estimate  of  three  times  the  speed  point

2

illuminance,  = 1.7  Im/m  . The  total  image  area  for  which  the  density  is

0.4  or  less  (exposure  is  three  times  the  speed  point  value  or  greater)  is
2

about  0.003  cm  , Assuming  a radar  range  of  only  18,000  m,  equation  (1)  yields

I

about  217,000  cd.  For  R = 35  km,  equation  (1)  yields  about  2.1  x 10®  cd.

For  comparison,  a relatively  high  efficiency  10,000  watt  incandescent  bulb
♦

radiates  about  330,000  lumens  into  4ir  steradians,  which  corresponds  to  about
26,000  cd.^

A characteristic  source  size  may  be  estimated  from  the  lens  focal  length
and  the  widths  of  the  streaked  image.  The  angular  width  of  the  narrow  hori-
■ zontal  sections  is  about  0.00065  radians,  and  that  of  the  wider  vertical
sections  is  about  0.001  radians.  Assuming  a stationary  object  (streak  due  only
to  camera  motion)  these  angular  sizes  would  be  consistent  with  a non-circular
source  which,  at  18  km,  would  be  about  12  m high  by  about  18  meters  wide.  At
35  km  the  dimensions  would  be  about  twice  those  given.

It  is  not  the  intent  of  this  paper  to  offer  an  explanation  for  the  unusual
bright  source.  However,  one  may  note  that  the  brightness  (over  100,000  cd),
the  size  (on  the  order  of  20  m or  more),  and  the  duration  (it  was  seen  for  over
twelve  minutes  ) place  rather  severe  requirements  on  a conventional  phenomenon
such  as,  for  example,  glowing  plasma  or  "ball  lightning."

A.


4


Bibliography  and  Notes


The  object  discussed  here  was  one  of  several  that  were  seen,  filmed,  and
detected  on  radar  during  the  flight  of  an  Argosy  air  freighter  that  flew
from  Wellington  to  Christchurch  and  then  to  Blenheim,  New  Zealand,  between
0010  and  0300  on  December  31,  1978.  An  intensive  non-government  related
Investigation  has  ruled  out  conventional  explanations,  including  Venus  and
other  planets,  stars,  meteors,  squid  fishing  boats,  ground  lights,
atmospheric  effects,  military  maneuvers,  balloons,  mating  mutton  birds,
glowing  bugs,  and  hoax.

The  airplane  has  a 3 cm  wavelength  weather  radar  made  by  the  H.  E.  L.
Equipment  Co.  of  Crawley,  England.  It  was  operated  in  the  mapping  mode
with  a radar  lobe  that  is  centered  at  an  angle  of  about  9®  below  the
centerline  of  the  aircraft.  In  the  vertical  plane  the  half  power  points
are  about  6“  above  and  below  the  center  of  the  lobe.  The  azimuth  of  the
radar  target  was  the  same  as  that  of  the  sighting  line  to  the  bright
object  as  nearly  as  the  witnesses  could  determine.  The  radar  target  was
unusually  large,  with  an  azimuthal  width  on  the  radar  screen  of  about  10°,
even  though  the  rated  azimuthal  beamwidth  is  only  about  3.5°.  The  object
was  not  detected  by  the  Christchurch  50  cm  radar,  which  cannot  detect
objects  below  about  16  meters^for  every  kilometei^away  from  the  antenna.

Photo-lab  Index,  Morgan  and  Morgan,  Inc.,  Dobbs  Ferry,  N.Y.  (1978)

Handbook  of  Optics,  Driscoll,  W.  G.,  Editor,  McGraw-Hill,  N.Y.  (1978)


5.  The  object  was  seen  for  about  3 minutes  before  the  radar  warmed  up,  and
i It  was  seen  for  about  6 minutes  after  it  went  off  radar.  The  object

was  last  seen  apparently  passing  beneath  and  behind  the  aircraft  as  the
aircraft  turned  to  the  left  to  regain  its  northeasterly  heading  after
flying  southeasterly  toward  the  object  for  a minute  or  so.


A.


6


FIGURE  CAPTIONS


Figure  1 Relative  positions  of  the  airplane  and  the  bright  object  during
the  period  of  radar  detection.  The  plane  travelled  along  the  path  indicated
by  the  dashed  line.  The  altitude  of  the  plane  increased  from  about  WOO  m at
point  A to  about-4&00  m at  point  B.  |

Figure  2 Tracing  of  the  smeared  image  on  a single  frame  from  the  New
Zealand  film  of  December  31,  1978.  The  background  neutral  density  is  about
2.18,  as  it  is  for  preceding  and  succeeding  frames.  The  time  duration  of  the
frame  was  about  0.044  sec.  The  bright  yellow-white  color  is  consistent  with
the  witness  descriptions.


7


FIGURE  1


FIGURE  2


MINUTE  SHEET


Mh


f NP4^

r

s..  ? Uk


Subject:


M<X>


Department

File  No.:

Date: I/..


-y=-,


/^V

a


<1^  (m

J^.y!i^


LA  rXD


J2jjfto y^

y^  <--Cr^^'-^

XjL.<7^(iyyKX^  ^ -


OL


<x


c:^^yi/\-Q''-*-^


%


( /yVCj  }ZjuJ^  "»^4s=¥  ~7"^g

— L


£>>.


/^^'^\'\y^ji^.’^i''-''~6~,>C^  ^>c.g.^uv

r&uc^Csyy  ?/iaUy^  ^ /teiC<f<x^  ,

^jyC&y  Qj2JS^  ’"fCc.

ff/)-^A<yKyC^  y'^X^ /-yS^f^-.


iJ^w  ct.


d


/x)^  i>  O ^xycY


^ Jo  - -4  s


ucrT7


2.  ^f>t.


^ ^ycX.^L.^yL-^f^  o,yty/'C<y<y>^

y~<^  (y<ic^  •


I Item  503


MINUTE  SHEET


Department:


Subject:


MINUTE  SHEET


Subject:  Department:

File  No.:  ..
Date:


\ K:  V ^


. iVV  >’  ^ Vc?.ei,Ao  e.cA  Ci  ^7'x><W  «C


,Xis,tA'J'"5  rA  '»'»WvJt^  --Yv  j_<-e-  V-3CU  e-  V\v.Xjt,  \cvC,%<_  .*~^

'■'i  rt  ' , .,  . '

<^^-\j(.-y-,,  c^  \ ir<  v_^\AO-  I Vtv- 1 fi; V*  ■•^«^  \"'-cj^\s_V  a-<-^£''^  . <5.'^  «>

Cl3-Wu.'>«^'-<1-  ->iVva-<-N  VVV^  ^O^ASuWv-tttJ^  . ^Va_

\,^iWc.X-v  <'Q-;Airi.o.'v-*.C-^  -bVc.Jt^.:ClVCt-i--^  ^ WCnL  ci’''<X-.-'<^^^''^  I

t*2-LK  ^ I 'oJU^.  , Vn^cVv^^^’  'sWA^j.i-  -Vv^oA  i.o©9.  cJli:,i-^-«J‘  ^

•^[V-C.  'Ni-c^^iOto-Crvif  Ct^  \ »'v'\Ci>-A^\>-^  \\\*::i  ^ iM

CXa--vA  ^_a,.^  VtAVv  t.A5S^C\jeci  \V-vSKv^  i\C,;l?3j-

iv4;-x..  ( ](vj^  \)'-S\Wlx  (U^

VWi-S  Vvw-ViA?/'  W'^tv\Ji_g5  "va^Wj  Cv_^-^j«XL.,r'2-£A  Sfc'WiiA  Cv«ii^  <'s>Xi-^  'sWilLjti-

XU^i4:  Aw.  <''-vvr^  ^ !■«-•->

■k.  -Wis-A',  ^■e-se-4'xcxt


Cs_i  J\f^  ViL,>.>_


\ <-V  ’^'x-


c\v.-<«a|  \>t-A  C&W'c^.  'A.'.'vA  a.z

tj.^  -VVv,  -i)tTiAii,A  pVixvu-  OcX<>V.4e-'s  6 , W-v

^AC  e^-N.^-,^  r.Ac’>trAii.i'vi  ok  AjiA^ir  Av.Vvfe.  Voc.:>  c.  V'.fc  Cf.  /Vv.^;.\ro-'A  -A\.i.  •.>-..

i.W.xAkiA  CkIa  U T ‘A-.N-v  r,


d.4kk.-:-


\U-  N;(‘«  ‘*'"1


’ii  C:'


V


U .


.^fAt^A

\W.v.  Xw


to\  ,0^  ^'v-'^  <' * ‘‘''^

v^i.  O^A.V-  ^'^.vc'  VVv.*^v^^


vAo'^**-'-?  >_-‘.'n  V-^v*^VVVv_'^*  '^Vv;i^,^

\-»r, . ^A^'v  W-  '^\  '--v^A


<; (,/_  • tA,  t -\/^i  A^o  i?..  j ^ *V^  ' A -V*-  sit

v.sc  < >i  C‘>’'s^,_  V'W'-v  vj^  ^r>- Vv-^  j;


{\,\\d  \vjL  Vk^.>^a.C<J^I.,,


vA:v^' Vx-^xA


A ksiWfcjA.  >AV


^ A


V


/U  ‘Vn/


e +•

vV

{T^

a ^

J)


(:)C-'^


:i


C..5!  --(/'


i ^


, i^<^i


0^


i .


K-t-J--<’


''  A


S-Cj^-^-e-^


MINUTE  SHEET


Depariment:


yj^r\i  *7^


File  No.:


o.:

Date:  ...'£.^.'^.2'?..


1-..^ :


^ • ■'Sj^.^^  Ki.iL.i  jJ  OL  t 'K/-  hyy^ ^2. ^.  L^.

' ^^fu^cUUi fjJ-U^  t^f  ^ JLA  flt-V  y ^

. ,„  K/‘  09. . „ c / 6 tp4*^  />u  . o r i...

<^-XJLev  * ^

f>€j.  Q^^A  Z .. „ ^


„ ^


3^^


V V

k2.-—£ciky^  fWt.  f-in^^j  ^ t _£ ^

^-(Caa.  . of  ^-r^A  rJt  tA/  A.^  rk.Ay\ ^ JC^LS^--:LA :^__

,^gw/>{  .


^ ^Ctsiot-  i iLu.  /^  A^  Aj)cx? ^ c^Y’c^  ^

A^  lr>fnAS^fU  '^KJ ^W.gy^

A?  <Vm:)  ( j a t > tj-.^  ^ thr*^.  , .s..t  . V.-^.. . ....

AA  <L^ ^ 4 !^_ tYJ^rl.^.€l4>>r./.^!i '.

^ Jo  U ( i _ .


jr^ikix^. .Cl  ^{(a


PHYSICS  AND  ENGINEERING  LABORATORY
DSIR


NEW  ZEALAND


Postal  Address


PHYSICS  AND  ENGINEERING  LABORATORY,  DSIR
PRIVATE  BAG
LOWER  HUTT
NEW  ZEALAND


Location :

PHYSICS  AND  ENGINEERING  LABORATORY,  DSIR
GRACEFIELD  ROAD
LOWER  HUTT
Near  WELLINGTON


W79E— 3000/4/78TC


COMPUTER  ANALYSIS  OF  SELECTED
CLARENCE  RIVER  "UFO  IMAGES”  FILMED  BY

TV1

M.J.  McDonnell
and

A.D.W.  Fowler


Physics  and  Engineering  Laboratory
Report  No.  632  February  1979


ABSTRACT

On  3 January  1979  some  cine  film  of  a suspected  ”UFO”  was  taken
by  a Television  One  camera  crew  in  the  Clarence  River  area.

Computer  image  processing  techniques  were  used  to  analyse  some
frames  of  this  film.  The  results  of  this  analysis  are  presented  in
this  report.


_1_


1.  INTRODUCTION


Early  on  the  morning  of  3 Juanury  1979  some  cine  film  of  a
bright  light  in  the  night  sky  was  taken  by  a Television  One  (TVl)
camera  crew  in  the  Clarence  River  area  north  of  Kaikoura.  This  film
was  widely  publicised  as  being  of  a suspected  ’’unidentified  flying
object  (UFO)”.  As  this  film  appeared  to  be  blurred  it  was
considered  worthwhile  applying  computer  image  processing  techniques
to  some  frames  of  the  film,  in  order  to  assess  whether  the  image  was
blurred,  and  if  so  in  what  way.  If  the  image  frames  were  blurred,
it  was  hoped  to  be  able  to  deblur  them.  This  image  processing
system  has  been  developed  by  the  Remote  Sensing  Section  of  the
Physics  and  Engineering  Laboratory  (PEL).

Two  samples  of  the  original  film,  each  containing  several
frames,  were  kindly  provided  to  PEL  by  TVl.  The  first  sample  was
near  the  beginning  of  the  original  film  sequence,  and  the  second
near  the  middle.  Each  sample  was  chosen  to  be  at  a time  when  the
image  was  steady.


2.  IMAGE  DIGITISATION

Five  sample  frames  (numbered  A to  E)  of  the  16  mm  colour  film
provided  (the  first  two  being  from  the  first  piece  of  Fuji  8425
film)  were  enlarged  by  a factor  of  7,  and  printed  through  a
92  Wratten  red  filter  onto  an  Ilford  Pan  F black  and  white  film.

Each  black  and  white  image  was  then  digitised  on  the  Remote
Sensing  Section’s  scanning  microdensitometer  to  produce  a 64  x 64
matrix  of  picture  elements  (pixels)  which  was  stored  on  magnetic
tape.  For  each  pixel,  the  intensity  of  light  transmitted  through  it
V7as  measured  to  an  accuracy  of  8 bits.  The  gamma  for  the  Fuji  film
was  calculated  to  be  1.8  and  that  for  the  Ilford  film ,0.6.  Each
sampled  image  was  then  corrected  to  have  a resultant  gamma  of  1.0
and  a constant  was  subtracted  from  each  image  to  give  a background
level  of  0.  Each  image  then  consisted  of  pixels  ranging  in
intensity  value  from  0-90.

Each  image  was  then  smoothed  according  to  the  following
algorithm  which  was  applied  first  in  the  along  scan  line  direction,
and  then  in  the  cross  scan  line  direction.  If  a pixel  was  greater
than  or  less  than  both  of  its  nearest  neighbours  it  was  replaced  by
the  average  of  itself  and  its  nearest  neighbours.  The  purpose  of
this  smoothing  procedure  was  to  reduce  the  effect  of  film  grain
noise  in  the  original  image  frames.  The  result  of  applying  this
smoothing  procedure  in  the  along  scan  line  direction  only  is  shown
in  Figure  1.  The  images  in  Figures  1-12  were  written  out  on  the
Remote  Sensing  Section’s  Optronics  Colorwrite  machine  using  the
100  micron  spot  size.


d.  INTENSITY  OF  LIGHT  SOURCE


The  original  400  ASA  film  was  taken  with  a 600  ram  lens  using  an
f/5.6  aperture  setting  and  an  exposure  time  of  1/50  sec.  The  image
formed  on  each  frame  of  the  first  film  sample  can  be  approximated  by
a uniformly  bright  circle  of  diameter  0.70  mm  on  a black
background.  The  circle  had  an  average  density  of  approximately
0.62.  Using  this  information  and  referring  to  Thomas  (1973)
page  815  it  was  calculated  that  the  total  luminant  energy  recorded
on  the  film  was  1.5  x 10”°  lumen  seconds.  It  is  estimated  that
this  calculation  could  be  in  error  by  up  to  a factor  of  2.

By  comparison,  on  the  morning  the  original  film  was  taken,  Venus
had  a stellar  magnitude  of  -4.2.  Assuming  an  elevation  of  angle  of
20°,  it  was  calculated  that  Venus  would  have  caused  a total
luminant  energy  of  1.9  x lO”®  lumen  seconds  bo  be  recorded  on  each
film  frame.  This  figure  is  estimated  to  be  in  error  by  up  to  a
factor  of  1.5.  The  brightness  of  the  original  film  is  therefore
consistent  with  its  having  been  an  image  of  Venus.


4.  IMAGE  ANALYSIS  AND  RESTORATION


Each  64  x 64  pixel  image  was  Fourier  transformed  on  the  Varian
V76  computer  at  PEL  to  give  a new  64  x 64  pixel  image  matrix.  The
complex  part  of  the  Fourier  transform  was  set  to  zero.  Any
resulting  real  pixel  value  which  was  negative  was  set  equal  to  +1.
The  logarithm  of  the  resultant  image  matrix  was  then  taken  and  the
result  scaled  to  range  from  0 to  255.  The  result  of  applying  this
procedure  to  images  A and  B is  shown  in  Figures  2 and  3
respectively.  Each  of  these  images  includes  a series  of  concentric
rings  around  the  central  d.c.  term.  These  rings  are  caused  by  phase
reversals  in  the  Fourier  transform  and  are  characteristic  of
out-of-focus  blurring  (McDonnell  1975).  From  the  rings,  and  their
spacing  it  can  be  concluded  that  the  original  image  is  strongly  out
of  focus.

A strongly  out  of  focus  image  should  be  uniform  in  its  centre.
Each  of  the  original  images  scanned  had  a noticeable  darkening  near
the  image  centre  which  is  very  probably  caused  by  spherical
aberration  in  the  imaging  lens.  It  was  decided  to  concentrate  on
image  B as  the  darkening  was  least  for  this  image  and  it  had  the
clearest  Fourier  transform  rings.  The  smoothness  of  the  scanned
image  and  the  number  of  visible  Fourier  transform  rings  indicated
that  it  would  be  worthwhile  attempting  to  deblur  the  selected  image
frames .

The  first  step  in  the  restoration  procedure  was  to  estimate  the
blurring  point  spread  function  (psf).  For  out  of  focus  blurring  the
psf  should  be  a disc.  It  was  decided  to  complicate  this  model
slightly  to  include  the  effect  of  spherical  aberration.  This  was
done  by  subtracting  from  the  disc  a cone  with  the  diameter  of  the
disc  and  zero  at  its  edge.  Initially  the  diameter  of  the  disc  was
chosen  to  be  45  pixels  and  the  height  of  the  cone  to  be  105S  of  that
of  the  disc.


-3-


The  restoration  of  image  B was  then  carried  out  using  standard
Wiener  filtering  techniques  (McDonnell  1975).  The  restoration
program  accepted  five  input  variables.  These  were  the  psf  average
diameter,  its  ellipticity,  the  cone  height,  the  film  gamma  and  a
constant  noise  to  signal  ratio.  The  psf  disc  was  allowed  to  be
distorted  into  an  ellipse  as  it  was  suspected  from  the  shape  of  the
blurred  image  that  the  true  psf  might  be  slightly  elliptical.  The
film  gamma  was  allowed  to  vary  to  compensate  for  errors  in  the
original  estimate.

The  diameter  of  the  model  psf  implies  that  the  original  image
should  have  been  a small  bright  object  on  a black  background.  Any
errors  in  the  above  input  parameters  would  cause  noise  or  artefacts
to  be  distributed  throughout  the  restored  image.  The  restoration
procedure  is  based  on  the  concept  that  the  worse  the  estimate  of  the
input  parameters  the  more  pronounced 'the  artefacts.

Each  parameter  was  varied  in  turn  so  as  to  reduce  the  intensity
of  the  brightest  artefact.  This  procedure  was  interatively  repeated
until  a stable  result  was  obtained.  The  optimum  restored  image  B
was  obtained  using  a circular  psf  of  diameter  47,75  pixels,  with
cone  height  10^,  a film  gamma  correction  of  1.05,  and  a noise  to
signal  ratio  of  0.004.  The  cone  height,  film  gamma  and  noise  to
signal  ratio  were  not  critical.  The  critical  parameters  were  the
ellipticity  and  the  psf  diameter.  The  resulting  restored  image  B is
shown  in  Figure  5.  The  maximum  artefact  intensity  is  10^  of  maximum
image  intensity.

The  same  restoration  procedure  (but  using  the  optimum  psf  of
image  B)  was  then  applied  to  images  A,  C,  D and  E.  The  results  are
shown  in  Figures  4,  6,  7 and  8 respectively.  All  five  restored
images  have  a similar  size  although  they  have  no  discernible  shape.
This  shows  that  the  restoration  procedure  is  producing  consistent
results.  Figure  5 is  the  most  reliable  image  as  the  restoration
procedure  has  been  optimised  for  this  image.

Figure  9 is  the  result  of  deblurring  the  above  psf  by  itself
with  the  same  assumed  noise  to  signal  ratio.  It  shows  that  the
restoration  procedure  is  not  noticeably  contributing  to  the  residual
blurring  present  in  the  deblurred  images.  The  aim  of  the  above
restoration  procedure  has  been  to  produce  the  image  that  would  have
been  obtained  if  the  camera  had  been  in  focus.  The  residual
blurring  present  in  Figure  5 is  partly  caused  by  errors  in
estimating  the  psf  but  may  also  have  been  contributed  to  by
atmospheric  effects.

Figure  10  is  the  result  of  clipping  the  image  in  Figure  5 so  as
to  cut  out  the  lowest  20?  of  the  intensity  range.  This  eliminates
the  artefacts.  The  same  clipping  was  used  to  produce  Figures  11  and
12,  which  show  the  images  in  Figures  4 and  5 enlarged  by  a factor  of
4.  Figure  12  is  the  best  restored  image  that  was  produced.  The
image  in  Figure  5 has  a maximum  half  width  of  7 pixels  which
corresponds  to  35  seconds  of  arc.  This  is  a reliable  upper  limit  on
the  size  of  the  original  object.  By  comparison,  when  the  original
image  was  recorded,  Venus  subtended  an  angle  of  28  seconds  of  arc.
The  size  of  the  restored  image  is  therefore  consistent  with  its
being  an  image  of  Venus.


On  the  night  the  original  image  was  recorded,  Venus  had  a broad
crescent  shape  which  would  have  been  oriented  along  the  diagonal
from  bottom  left  to  top  right  in  Figure  12.  Such  a crescent  shape
is  not  discernible  in  Figure  12.  However,  it  is  quite  likely  that
such  a small  crescent  shape  would  not  have  been  observable  even  if
the  original  image  had  been  in  focus.


5.  CONCLUSIONS

The  following  conclusions  may  be  drawn  from  the  work  reported
here .

(a)  The  brightness  of  each  original  TVl  image  frame  is
consistent  with  its  having  been  an  image  of  Venus,

(b)  The  original  image  frames  are  severely  out  of  focus.

(c)  Deblurring  selected  image  frames  produced  images  of  a size
consistent  with  what  would  have  been  expected  of  Venus.

(d)  The  size  of  the  original  object  is  too  small  for  detail  on
it  to  be  resolved  on  the  deblurred  image.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We  are  grateful  to  TVl  for  their  co-operation,  and  to
Mr  N.J.  Rumsey  of  PEL  for  a number  of  helpful  discussions.


-5-


REFERENCES

THOMAS,  W.  Ed.,  "SPSE  Handbook  of  Photographic  Science  and
Engineering",  1973-

McDonnell,  M.J.,  "Nonrecurslve  Digital  Image  Restoration",  Ph.D.
dissertation.  Department  of  Electrical  Engineering,  University  of
Canterbury,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand,  1975.


-6


FIGURE  CAPTIONS


Figure

1.

Figure

2.

Figure

3.

Figure

4.

Figure

5.

Figure

6..

Figure

7.

Figure

8.

Figure

9.

Figure

10.

Figure

11.

Figure

12.

Original  image  B after  scanning  and  vertical
smoothing.

Logarithm  of  positive  real  Fourier  transform  of  image

A.

Logarithm  of  positive  real  Fourier  transform  of  image

B.

Image  A deblurred  using  Image  B psf.

Image  B deblurred  using  Image  B psf.

Image  C deblurred  using  Image  B psf.

Image  D deblurred  using  Image  B psf.

Image  E deblurred  using  Image  B psf.

Image  B psf  deblurred  by  itself.

Figure  5 with  dark  20/S  clipped.

Figure  4 clipped  and  enlarged  by  a factor  of  4.

Figure  10  enlarged  by  a factor  of  4.


10


11


12


Reference  DL  ^rf  ^5


Prom:  Group  Captain  I.V.Mackay,  AEG.

New  Zealand  High  Commission


New  Zealand  Defence  Liaison  Sialf
New  Zealand  House
Hay  market
London  SW I V 4TC>

Tciephon  e : o I -930  842  2 Tel  ex : 2438!  1

February  1979


Wing  Gonunander  J .B. Clements,
Director  of  Operations,
Defence  Headquarters,
Private  Bag,

WELLINGTON.


UFO  Witness  Reports.


Some  time  before  leaving  on  my  recent  visit  to  New  Zealand,  I
agreed  to  speak  to  Mr.  Andrew  Andrea,  6k,  Mornington  Crescent,
London  N.W.l  7RH,  about  the  UFO  report  questionnaire  that  he  put  to-
gether. I may  have  mentioned  the  impending  interview  with  him,  when
we  spoke  on  29th  January.


The  UFO  sightings  in  New  Zealand  in  late  December  sparked  off  Mtr.
Andrea's  interest,  although  it  is  clear  that  he  has  an  abiding  interest
in  such  phenomena.  I know  only  what  I read  in  the  papers,  about  the
RNZAF  (Clements)  report,  and  I leave  it  to  you  to  decide  if  possession
of  a stack  of  questionnaires  of  the  sort  Mr.  Andrea  has  produced,  would
facilitate  UFO  reporting  in  future  by  individuals  in  New  Zealand,  and
thereby  aid  the  author  of  the  official  comment,  in  arriving  at  his
conclusions .


End:  UFO  Witness  Report  Sheet  (z)


UNIDENTIFIED  FLYING  OBJECT  WITNESS  REPORT  SHEET.

This  questionnaire  has  been  prepared  in  order  to  give  the  authorities  as
much  information  as  possible  on  the  Phenomen  that  you  witnessed^  In  order
that  a detailed  investigation  can  be  carried  out  in  finding  an  explanation
to  your  sighting,  try  to  answer  as  many  questions  as  possible.  Any  information  ‘
that  you  give  will  be  treated  in  the  strictest  confidence^

i ^ yoti  have  any  additional  in  Lo  rnia  tion  that  you  think  may  be  helpful  , including
d i ag rams , use  the  re ve rse  side  of  each  q ue stionnai re,  or  on  a similar  sized
sheet  of  paper.


1 . When  was  the  object  seen?

Day

Month  -

Year

Time  am/pm,

6.  Weather  (underline  any)
DRY
FOGGY
MISTY
LIGHT  RAIN
HEAVY  RAIN
SNOW

HAIL  STONES

2.  Approximate  vicinity  that  you
were  in  when  sighted.

(or  nearest  postal  address)

7.  Wind  (underline  any)
NO  WIND
SLIGHT  BREEZE
STRONG  WIND
COLD  WIND
WARM  WIND

3.  How  long  did  you  observe
the  object?

Hours-

Minutes

Seconds

Was  the  object  brighter  than
the  sky?

YES.  NO.

8.  Temperature  (underline  any)
COLD
COOL
WARM
HUMID
HOT

5.  What  were  the  weather  conditions
at  the  time  you  saw  the  object?
(underline  any)

CLOUDY

CLEAR  SKY

HAZY

SCATTERED  CLOUDS
THICK  or  HEAVY  CLOUDS

3.  If  you  saw  the  object  at  night,  dawn  or-
dusk  did  you  notice  the  moon  or  any  stars. .
(underline  one  or  more)

STARS  • moon

None  Bright

Some  Dull

Many  Hazy

don't  remember  don't  remember

Si gned  ,


10*  j the  object  do  any  of  the
fo^r  1 owi  ng?

(Under)  i ne  one  or  more)

a.  Appear  to  stand  still

b.  Suddenly  accelerate

c«  Separate  into  different  parts

d.  Give  off  smoke

€•  Get  brighter  or  dimmer

f.  Change  shape

g.  Throb  or  pulsate

Any  additional  remarks  to  be
written  on  reverse  side  of  this
sheet.

]].  Did  the  object  move  behind  or  in
front  of  any  clouds  or  buildings?

a.  YES

b.  NO


15.  Did  you  observe  the  object  through
of  the  follov>^ing?

(Underline  one  or  more)

3c  Eyeglasses

b.  Sun  glasses

c.  Car  windows

d.  House  windows

e.  Binoculars

f.  Telescope
g-  Camera  lens
ho  Curtains

i . Other  . . . ^ ^

16.  If  you  took  a picture  of  the  object
please  complete  the  followingo

Hov  i e came  ra

(make  and  model)


any


If  yes  please  state  which


12.  Where  was  the  sun  located  when  you
saw  the  object?  (Underline  one)

a.  Behind  you

b.  To  your  left

Co  In  front  of  you

d . To  your  ri ght

e.  Don^t  remember

13.  When  did  you  first  report  the
sighting  to  an  official?

day  ^

month  o o • o . .

year ^ ^ ^

Did  the  object  appear  to  you
, (Under  1 r ne  one)

a.  Sol  I d

b.  Transparent

c.  Don't  know


Still  camera

(make  and  model)

What  size  film  used

A.  S . A.  rating

Aperture  setting  f

Camera  speed  used

At  what  setting  was  lens  focus
ring  ,

If  movie  camera  was  used,  how  many
frames  per  second  (F.P.S.)  was
came  ra  set  at  .

Does  your  camera  have  an  automatic
exposure  meter?

a.  YES

b.  NO

17*  Can  you  estimate  the  distance  of  the
object  from  your  position

a.  YES

b.  NO

If  yes,  please  s tate  es t i ma t i on

miles

yards


feet


S i gned


Date


18.  How, large  did  the  object
rm's  length?  (Under

a . Pi n head

b . Nail  head

c . Sh ! rt  button

d.  Jacket  button

e.  1 cent  piece


appear  compared  with  any  of
i ne  any)

f . 2 cent  piece

g.  5 cent  piece

h . 10  cent  p i e ce

i.  20  cent  piece
J . 50  cent  piece


items  listed  below,  held

k.  Ping  pong  ball'

I . Cri  cket  ba  1 1

m.  Grapefruit

n.  Footba  1 1

p.  Other


19.  How  certain  are  you  of  the  above  answers?  (Underline  any)

a.  100  per  cent  certain  d.  Uncertain

b.  Fai riy  certain  e.  Guess

c . Not  very  certai n


20.  Describe  as  best  you  can  the  following.  (If  none  write  NONE)
a.  Colour


b*  Sound

c.  Electrical  malfunctions  in  your  immediate  area


21.  How  did  the  object  disappear  from  your  view?


22.  If  you  are  familiar  with  angular  direction  answer  the  following,
i.  When  you  first  saw  the  object.

a,  from  true  North  Degrees

b,  from  horizon  Degrees


i i .When  you  last  saw  object.

a,  from  true  North

b . from  hori zon


Degrees

Degrees


If  you  suf fered


any  injuries  on  the  date  mentioned  in  Question  1.  specify  below


S i gned


Date


fi-'  the  object?


a.  North

b.  North  East


c.  East

d.  South  East


e.  South

f.  South  V;es


”■  "Of  the  object?


g.  West
h ..  North  Wes  t
1 . Don ’ t know


a.  North

b.  North  East


Co  East
do  South  East


e.  South

f.  South  Wes  1


26.  Please  state  names  and  addresses  of  any  other  witnesses.


g.  West
h*  North  West
i . Don ' t know


Add  ress


Address


Tel ephone


Te lephone


laSin'gsr  = --ks  on  the  object  such  as  fetters  or  unknown

9.  YES
b.  NO

If  yes,  try  to  duplicate  as  best  you  can  on  reverse  side  of  this  sheet.

Did  the  object  do  any  of  the  following?  (Underline  one  or  more)

a.  Stay  motionless

b.  Move  upwards  downwards

c.  Move  to  your  left


Other  comments


d.  Move  to  your  r i gh t
e*  Move  downwards
f*  Move  towards  you
g.  Move  away  from  you


p.  As  best  as  you  can  remember  which  of  the  above


first


movements  occurred  first,  if  any,


second


Other  comments


Si gned


Date


,30.  V/e  the  edges  of  the  object

a.  Fuzzy

b.  Star  like


(Underline  one  or  more)

c.  Don't  remember

d.  Other  comments


31.  How  many  objects  did  you  see?


32.


Please  give  the  following  details
should  the  necessity  arise.


of  yourself  in  order  that  you  could  be  contacted


Name

last  name  middle  name

Full  postal  address


fi  rst  name


Telephone


Country


33.


If  the  above  address  is
through  which  you  could


temporary  give  details  of  permanent  address  or  an  address
be  contacted*


Add  ress


I

I


I


I


Telephone

Country

Profession

Date  of  bi rth  *
Sex


I

I

j


I

I

I' — “ — —

I FOR  OFFICIAL  USE.


Signed

date  of  completion


CODE  NUMBER


UNIDENTIFIED  FLYING  OBJECT  WITNESS  REPORT  SHEET.

'This  questionnaire  has  been  prepared  in  order  to  give  the  authorities  as
much  information  as  possible  on  the  Phenonien  that  you  witnessed.  In  order
that  a detailed  investigation  can  be  carried  out  in  finding  an  explanation
to  your  sighting,  try  to  answer  as  many  questions  as  possible.  Any  information
that  you  give  will  be  treated  in  the  strictest  confidence.

If  you  have  any  additional  information  that  you  think  may  be  helpful,  including
diagrams,  use  the  reverse  side  of  each  questionnaire,  or  on  a similar  sized
sheet  of  paper.


1.  When  was  the  object  seen?

Day

Month

Year

Time  ■ am/pnu

6.  We'ather  (underline  any)
DRY
FOGGY
MISTY

LIGHT  RAIN
HEAVY  RAIN
SNOW

HAIL  STONES

2,  Approximate  vicinity  that  you
were  in  when  sighted.

(or  nearest  postal  address)  ^

7.  Wind  (underline  any)
NO  WIND
SLIGHT  BREEZE
STRONG  WIND
COLD  WIND
WARM  WIND

3-  Hw  long  did  you  observe
the  object?

Hours

Minutes

Seconds

8.  Temperature  (underline  any)
COLD
COOL
WARM
HUMID
HOT

k.  Was  the  object  brighter  than
the  sky?

YES.  NO.

5.  What  were  the  weather  conditions
at  the  time  you  saw  the  object?
(unde  rl  i ne  any)

CLOUDY

CLEAR  SKY

HAZY

SCATTERED  CLOUDS
THICK  or  HEAVY  CLOUDS

9«  If  you  saw  the  object  at  night,  dawn  or
dusk  did  you  notice  the  moon  or  any  stars,
(underline  one  or  more)

STARS  ' moon

None  Bright

Some  Dull

Many  Hazy

don't  remember  don't  remember

Signed


!0,  D'~\  the  object  do  any  of  the
foV]  owing?

(Underline  one  or  more)
a.  Appear  to  stand  still
b-  Suddenly  accelerate

c.  Separate  into  different  parts

d.  Give  off  smoke

e.  Get  brighter  or  din^mer

f.  Change  shape

g . Throb  or  pul  sate

Any  additional  remarks  to  be
written  on  reverse  side  of  this
sheet.

11*  Did  the  object  move  behind  or  in
front  of  any  clouds  or  buildings?

a.  YES

b.  NO

If  yes  please  state  which


15.  Did  you  observe  the  object  through  any
of  the  following?

(Underline  one  or  more)

a.  Eyeglasses

b.  Sun  glasses
Car  wi ndows

d.  House  windows

e.  Binoculars

f.  Telescope

g.  Camera  lens
ho  Curtains.

i 4 Other • . , .

16.  If  you  took  a picture  of  the  object
please  complete  the  following.

Hov i e came  ra  ♦ c *

(make  and  model)

Still  camera

(make  and  model)


12*  Where  was  the  sun  located  when  you
saw  the  object?  (Underline  one)


What  size  film  used

AoSoAo  rating

Aperture  setting  f.


a.  Behind  you
. b.  To  your  left

c.  In*  front  of  you

d.  To  your  right

e.  Don’t  remember

13.  When  did  you  first  report  the
sighting  to  an  official?

day

month

year „ ^

1^4  Did  the  object  appear  to  you
(Underl i ne  one)

a . Soli d

b.  Transparent

c.  Don’t  know


Camera  speed  used

At  what  setting  was  lens  focus-
ring ^

If  movie  camera  was  used,  how  many
frames  per  second  (F.P.S.)  was
camera  set  at

Does  your  camera  have  an  automatic
exposure  meter?

a.  YES

b.  NO

17.  Can  you  estimate  the  distance  of  the
object  from  your  position

a.  YES

b 4 NO'

tf  yes,  please  state  estimation

miles

yards  * . . . .


S I gned
Date  .

O-  '


length"  (SideH?raSyr'’‘"'’''  ‘

f,  2 cent  piece


a . Pin  head

b . Nail  head

c . Shirt  button

d.  Jacket  button

e.  I cent  piece


g.  5 cent  piece
h*  10  cent  piece
i , 20  cent  p I ece
j . 50  cent  pi ece


k.  Pi ng  pong  bal  1
I . Cri  eke t ba  ! )
nu  Grapefruit
n > Footba 1 1
p.  Other


19.  How  certain  are  you  of  the  above  answers?  (Underline  any)

a.  100  per  cent  certain  d.  Uncertain

b.  Fairly  certain  e*  Guess

c.  Not  very  certai n


20,  Describe  as  best  you  can  the  following,  (If  none  write  NONE)

a.  Colour

b . Sound

c.  Electrical  malfunctions  in  your  immediate  area


21.  How  did  the  object  disappear  from  your  view?


12.  If  you  are  familiar  with  angular  direction  answer  the  following,
i.  When  you  first  saw  the  object.

a.  from  true  North  Degrees

b,  from  horizon  Degrees

i i ;When  you  last  saw  object.

ue  North  ...............  De g rees

b.  from  horizon  Degrees


>3.  If  you  suffered  any  injuries  on  the  date  mentioned  in  Question  1.  specify  bel


ow


S I gned
Date  ,


o-


2k . Wha-^  vdi  rect  i


( Uri  w-r  i i ne  any)

a.  North

b.  North  East


on  were  you  looking  in  when  you  fi


rs  t saw  the  object?


c*  East
d.  South  Easi


South

f*  South  V/est


9-  West
b ..  North  Wes  t
i . Don ' t know


saw  the  object?


a.  North

b.  North  East


c.  East

d.  South  East


26.  Please  state  names  and  addresses  of  a


e.  South

f.  South  West


ny  other  witnesses.


g . Wes  t

h.  North  Wesi
i . Don  ’ t knov


Address  ,


Address


Tel ephone


Te  lephone


distinguishing  „anks  on  the  object  such  as  letters  „7

a.  YES


unknown


b.  NO

" duplicate  as  best  you  can  on  reverse  side  of  this  sheet.

ddject  do  any  of  the  following?  (Underline  one  or  more)

a.  Stay  motionless  • ^

d.  Hove  to  your  r i gh t

b.  Move  upwards  .

e.  Move  downwards

c*  Move  to  your  left  f m

I Move  towards  you


ir  comments  *


9-  Move  away  from  you


129*  As  best  as


eg.  a.


you  can  remember  which  of  the  abo
f i rs  t


ve  movements  occurred  first,  i f anN


second


comments


Si gned


Date


30.  Wer^Jihe  edges  of  the  object

a.  Fuzzy

b.  Star  like


(Underline  one  or  more)

c.  Don't  remember

d.  Other  comments


3K  How  many  objects  did  you  see?


3^


Please  give  the  following  details  of  yourself
should  the  necessity  arise.


in  order  that  you  could  be  contacted


Name  ^ ^

last  name  ^ middle  name

Full  postal  address


fi  rst  name


Telephone

Country

33.  If  the  above  address  is  temporary  give  details  of  permanent  address  or  an  address
through  which  you  could  be  contacted.

Address  . . .


Telephone

Country
3^ . Profess  ion  ....
Date  of  b i rth  .
Sex


Signed

> date  of  completion

FOR  OFFICIAL  USE.


CODE  NUMBER


MINUTE  SHEET


To-


vif/


Subject


RAi>MV  gp^iTftot  0,p.r,m=„t:


. bC'E


File  No.


e:  J.


3 WTlo  CLcJ-^tcu^  Vv^  L ft


Iftfsii7  l^z>  kJi»*


i , Uw  fhJX  t-7il


0.^«_jDu  oJ^  'Fl  CL©  ufOo  ix,  (Lc4i>rvu

UUo  U/y'  CL^  »!'  /^-^■uZoFu^)  (kJ(

aA  F -Sj-gu^  (x*-^-t/^  ci  .


' ft  Mt»W


C\.  %oo  K/


UiU  ciU'otv  I ^Jur^^^^<jc>4  -U
0>«,.a-«„,  HjL  ^JUo  OaJI^,  ^


tVniMUIt  ^Hbtl


kx.  4o  W-


Ae_e{.  aJ:  D ^3S


“IF

fejL  <L^^'  ^

0--e-  AT  c

c

04w

CO\A^-^  cAiLAJL-XsA  CO-.-n3^oi^

—

k

ko,Xt  ^ Cu^  tt\j  JLv  Co  < cAjiv  ^ c\

1>

lo  lue.'  0L/Tt£U^  ^-«>

i>  i^Us  ^

(AJV-o

rvi>“^

V£cc!^aK  O-tX  TV-  to

ita

Ku

iiKo

TTJf


MINUTE  SHEET


C>9.S..J.


Duptir  I irv?nl


Filo  Nu.


To..  .

(i€iGS7


V


Ia/

ptuO'Ur'i

7^  £

2.^  mm  t


. .^5. . n^kV  . . Wl’Cop^<m


l^iWVDik.

..  . Cs^iilk..  !>^./


A , _Cf.€b^ repc^h .. /l(opk  . <j|


4Ul


. ._..Wlic.co^^ up  ....  _.^.  .. ..  ai..  .1^ a-

,Si?t4ed.. ©O'...  .ikfetS  .ciU/


UC.CQV

0/>C^  ..  (^.:S  ■ ...  — .

,G.CTQ5.>c.o^

6„  c<!CxS-  Ss:^ a!:  ..  Its.  be

oifYioji- __  Ay«/jL^_..^ 2^. ci*.Spl:^(Qc/ ja._ . tsiibiLc. i^.kl'

beA.efekk_..i..alMoik !j.b: . . /.ii^Kl'3..-._.ik?i- . . ..^ilP^.-. (?p2sv'

.)o_ luW£. .SoAQi/  ..,,  ry7jSl^.^('

_...^ Hel'.copW-  d\Sop()ew?ed . .norjJi..  ..|j^i«rlk  eaA


..^ is: Mdl iis l^e Oesse.1


keofjlii^ t<>> Qr<gr>, Q

.sK>p k>)lv nji. . _..ighb._j^_  ..?i^

„[) Ij... ....  .'r^...-..^eQ... <7^.  ...L.Ci^uJ.o'... . j€e

|{-  ^ crAcc of — -k3kk„-.-....i:^


hd.'.co.p.'Xj..*


. ^L-.£  sA


RZV>iilU  fi;:>j:i>iq{i
2NV  RRRRR
R 252.1307  JRN  ?9  ,

FH  RN2BF  NOOInnijRNr
TO  RZVYUT/SGHO  RfizOF
INFO  R?Y?(€E/NZDEF  ftU‘
IT  ■ ■


R F S T R I C T F B
HIG  KSY/KSZ


.IflSE  . *-MN  .-i,  HI  TO  REPORT  FROM  JHI:;


I


Pc


^tfc^ISfl963  OU
RZyXCE

BE  EEVXm)  5107  0222140
^NR  UOliOli
R 22012 0£  JfiN  ?S
FM  RNZflF  R00B3OURNE
TO  fiZBEF  fill?

2T  ' • •

liNCLftS

BIG  RTT/KSY/K32

ELEOfiTION  sighting  BEHRING  098f1  4 PT  5 DEGREE

JlEUHTION^^  ^IHS  .IJN  BEHRING  OF  07DN  ALSO  AT  4 PT  5 DEGREE

FDirORrfil  oh  page  ten  of  6-  JflN


fiCTIOH  SGPEROISOR


KSy  0
fiCTTOH  0PS2  11
INFO


KSZ  Q

HCnON  0PS3  11
INFO


To —


MINUTE  SHEET

Subject:  Ct


Department:  ..  ^

File  No.


/IaxA


sTV

€h,*y\  ,y-\JUiU^  ^ ‘-<C<»  ^'Ci*  t-lTVl  I ^VO»  (7t<J?1

r

(e?6e>t  ^ Oy^r^  ^X).^  jCO»

_ _..

(X.JZ..  i/'i‘\/ <.  ^ t\^  C.-CC  ^ ^ ^

^t-t  i t'-y^  j^-^k.iy*^  ^<K /<r  r ci^''-^

— i T"7^  r

c-w/^  'A)  f e^V»v^  t-c/t«— / C-c<  4t  ‘•'V.— /

jW

OVdL^^CKjt  iM  — ^.CiA,..^  JUtilr  AO  ^ '

7 c'

£a/^U/\  , *^/^^u-5  rvo  /^

(f  ^ ^

^ki.  '

^ 7aa^  ^ ''•  ■<-(  ^^^  'Xa.'K

: X./ / - - - -

Item  504  85A3/7/7S— Y29

Item  504

8S43/7/78— Y29


Item  5(M


8543/7/78— Y29


NOTICE


Defence  Duty  Officer


mo  SIGHiriHGS


TT  liiy  report  a rrb  Igraif  lo  UontrbT

Autkorities  of  unidentified  radar  contacte  are  to  ke  nassed

as  soon  as  possible.  As  as  possible

sbould  be  obtained  from  ATC  Including  any  visual  or  radar
contacts  made  by  aircraft  at  or  about  the  same  tisw,

2,  . Any  reports  from  civilians  Sbbttld  be  recorded  with,

details  of  time,  place , height  j descritpiibn  etc  and  passed
to  the  DASG  during  normal  workiBg  hotirs.

5.  Thank  you*


14  Feb  79


..  ■'%i...'hr^p..  A-/j Pl’.^  . .th>r'K ..  N^'€'f^-<_

^ ^ ‘ . Ar^  ■ c j /?  A.-  Ai.  "~nr .


‘ h:  ™ ..^.  _


/ 6'  ■


.5  . f

^ ^.) AV A^  .„

^CIW^  //Ct^  <^0-^  /x>g^ CUs^  j /^\

..,  -.  ....  J

fS  5^. ^.,??rkrr:/^-C„  ^.^0>v..i  ._.  //Cv

C MW  ,<?-rrr^

'^yy^>VL(r\  - '^l<v^-^;>V7>. ?.

vn/^  vy<3^  ^ ^ QlA/  — c?/  'AivP

■v-^  . „ ji?_ ti^SkjJi

f^H'^CL  Lj^'^yJL^  'i t^Cw  t^l

.V

^ c>3  Jr^^

, , f ..  ^

,v^


ie


J^<=^„^VrC“: _T71 . ^^'tL^/yf

ijyy<)^  P,  , ^ ^ -

j;:ri

. Ar^^

J

^L..*...  ^-r^y:

i^iM^  (jj^ ^ .

....  .^?!9!‘fV^r4?/.,  ,.  -

J:2f2?2!  •'vx.  V <^\/'V-v/  '

fL^Nj

/!cc.->^


'Vo


(t«m  503


^^<^...ti:sX  [_.^^h  ^

. -l^vX^..  ..„5^^w  ...^  . . ,/fe?e!^...

..^9


fli_.  _ _ .*  •'

-^,f-;?..


* $-v''-ev

'■~

-Z^^rL_„iJ5st.-...6


<P


j>  Vi^


jw  u-  ^

=^-~-£ii:=r^^=~-0f W kji,.^ £<rvvv_(


-.-i?:£.rx..e

K/<2<.-^  /V  A.e<K_


.vv- — -j


-/


L.  ■^/_i^_.%]^___  p-t;^  ,

A.  D ^ . L.

-4_^^3csL:L ^

p - .

--^  cu' ('<  ‘ikj


Ps


./Vo-R


-..-  -' -V P. i^._  _.^j, . „ .^^L. .?. ...

. -.‘rr.J^.  t-j-  ^ (^ctr

-iyi^..1^_..  !^_...  .' <s<Wjl.  . ' ■ [


Item  503


\/QkAS\


CW^  QSuA/V  VsC^

'J-

^ /M>J  ^<y}


c5ic'!^  ^


Ih


I P9h>  (f)


y\..


PHYSICS  AND  ENGINEERING  LABORATORY
DSIR


NEW  ZEALAND


Posta!  Address:


PHYSICS  AND  ENGINEERING  LABORATORY,  DSIR
PRIVATE  BAG
LOWER  HUTT
NEW  ZEALAND


Location :

PHYSICS  AND  ENGINEERING  LABORATORY,  DSIR
GRACEFIELD  ROAD
LOWER  HUTT
Near  WELLINGTON


9979E— 3000/4/7BTC


OPTICAL  QUALITY  OF  THE  WINDOWS  OP
•’ARGOSY"  ■ AIRCRAFT  IN  RELATION  TO
PHOTOGRAPHY  WITH  LENSES  OF  LARGE
APERTURE .

by  N.J.  RUMSEY.

PEL  REPORT  NO.  625  JANUARY  1979


Xn t r o due  t i on


On  the  evening  of  Tuesday,  2 January  1979,  TV1  showed  a
film  taken  by  a ¥ellington  photographer,  Mr  David  Crockett,
from  a SAFE  AIR  Argosy  aircraft  on  the  night  of  31  December
1978,  for  a Melbourne  TV  channel.  Photographs  of  a brxght
object  taken  with  a long-focus  lens  (25O  mm  focal  length)  show
structure  in  the  form  of  horizontal  streaks.  It  seemed  to
me  very  probable  that  these  streaks  were  an  artifact  produced
by  imperfections  in  the  aircraft  window.  It  also  seemed  to
me  possible  that  the  image  was  somewhat  defocussed.  These
points  needed  to  be  settled  before  there  could  be  any  possibilxty
of  placing  a reliable  interpretation  on  the  image.

Method  of  Investigation

A suitable  test  method  had  to  be  one  that  could  be  carried
out  relatively  quickly  and  ivith  no  disturbance  to  the  normal
running  of  the  aircraft.  Ve  put  together  a short  telescope
(for  portability)  of  high  magnification  (for  ease  in  detecting
defects  in  the  image).  The  objective  was  of  75  inm  aperture
and  relative  aperture  f/5‘  three  high  quality  collimator

objectives  recently  made  by  Garry  Nankivell  of  the  PEL  Optics
Section.  The  eyepiece  was  an  ’’orthoscopic " of  h mm  focal  length
intended  for  astronomical  use.  The  magnification  was  thus
75  X 5/^  = 9^  X approximately.  A small  area  light  source
consisted  of  an  illuminated  torch  bulb  placed  sufficiently  far
away  that  any  significant  blurring  of  the  image  would  destroy
the  ability  to  recognise  the  filament  as  such.  In  practice,
when  the  crucial  test  of  the  window  through  which  most  of  the
photography  had  been  done  was  carried  out,  the  distance  was
probably  about  hO  metres.  The  test  was  qualitative  rather  than
quantitative,  or  at  best  semiquantitative . "When  the  light

source  was  viewed  directly,  i.e,  not  through  an  aircraft  window,
the  presence  of  some  residual  aberration  in  the  optical  system
in  the  form  of  secondary  spectrum  (a  lack  of  perfect  coincidence
of  the  foci  in  different  colours)  was  easily  detected;  but  the
envelope  of  the  torch  bulb  appeared  well  defined  and  the  bright
image  of  the  filament  nowhere  obliterated  the  outline  of  the  bulb

Obsenrvations


When  the  author  arrived  at  ¥oodbourne  the  aircraft  from
the  photography  had  been  done  was  not  available,  so  three
windows  of  another  Argosy  were  tested.  The  first  two  windows
caused  the  image  of  the  light  source  to  show  considerable  ^ coma
(a  lop—sided  flare),  and  the  third  caused  astigmatism  (which
gives  as  the  image  of  a point  of  light  two  lines  at  right— angles
to  each  other  and  separated  along  the  line  of  sight).

¥hen  the  plan  arrived  from  which  the  photography  had  been
done,  the  crew  pointed  out  the  ^d.ndow  through  which  most  of
the  photographs  had  been  taken,  ¥hen  this  was  tested  through


-2-


an  area  near  its  bottom,  the  most  compact  image  found  by  varying
, ~^the  focus  setting  had  an  outline  shaped  like  an  inverted  pear
■■'^and  it  was  crossed  by  two  bright  streaks.  "When  the  telescope
was  moved,  the  appearance  of  the  image  changed  rapidly;  but
horizontal  streaks  were  generally  present.  This  observation,
taken  in  conjunction  with  the  -way  in  which  the  position  of
the  streaks  on  the  filmed  image  changed  as  the  line  of  sight
moved  relative  to  the  window,  make  it  substantially  certain
that  (as  conjectured)  the  streaks  across  the  filmed  image  are
artifacts  caused  by  the  window  and  are  not  images  of  genuine
detail  in  the  object.  On  the  other  hand,  it  appears  that  we

should  absolve  the  photographer  from  illegitimate  enlargement
of  the  image,  Tor  the  most  compact  images  that  could  be  obtained
were  generally  less  compact  than  I had  expected.

Conclusions

^

During  the  admittedly  rather  brief  testing  of  four
different  windows  in  the  Argosy  aircraft,  no  part  of  any  window
was  found  that  did  not  introduce  serious  aberrations  into  the
images  formed  by  an  optical  system  of  75  mm  aperture.  Thus  the
windows  are  not  suitable  for  photography  with  long  focus  lenses
(which,  for  a given  relative  aperture,  have  of  course  an  absolute
aperture  proportional  to  their  focal  length).  F^xrther,  the
particular  window  through  which  film  was  shot  with  a long  focus
lens  was  almost  certainly  responsible  for  the  horizontal  streaks
that  appear  in  the  resulting  images.  Thus  the  only  use  to
which  these  images  can  safely  be  put  (apart  from  making  money)
appears  to  be  to  set  an  upper  limit  to  the  angular  size  of  the
object  photographed.  (it  would  be  extremely  difficult  to
establish  how  much  smaller' than  this  a sharply  defined  image
would  have  been. )

Acknowledgement

The  author  is  particularly  indebted  tp  Mr  J.  K'undycki ,
Assistant  General  Manager  of  SAFE  AIR  LIMITED,  who  spared  no
effort  to  facilitate  these  investigations.


LKH084RFri.‘ibn
""  J2VKCF

i-*^.  ^'f  ‘ ?S5u  Oi?2i.3il


HH


/ ff-  4.-

^ i i\ w i\ n r»

1719152  JhN  79
SGHQ  RNZfiF
*8  ^-EN/RnZAF  ^JIGRhH
RZVXOii/RNZflF  ROODBOURNE
info  kimmzKF  m

J I

E‘  E S T R I C T E I)


01/7/


h -


J9


C X*


MG  KSY/KS


22


sLiJjir  onibLtifio^

WjSUfiL  flNIl  RftJflR  SIGHTIHI  Suite  IM  nfiS,4“o^r  ™'“fNTIFIEB

Sp-tWiENTS  RHO  HflV  HflSSyR^EB  ni  ' OTHIWnr  SERWfrtlEN  OR
SE  FuRtRflRBEII  EKPEKTTOljsLV  THiVkO^^'^  REPORTS  RRE


fifiNH

KGV  0
HCiroH  0PS2  11
INFO


iiCnON  OPS  5 11
INFO


t


p-fWAQP


AdCji^sas  ail  inquh'ios  to:

Public  Relations,

Defence  Headquarters,
W8llin9torvf=<*i^*

Telephone:  49  800  Ext.  882  or  792,


I^ZAF  UFO  SIGHTING  REPORT

The  unidentified  radar  and  visual  sightings  reported  by  aircraft  and
the  Air  Traffic  Control  radars  off  the  north  east  coast  of  the  Soutli  Island
recently,  are  the  result  of  natural  but  unusual  atmospheric  phenomena.


This  is  the  conclusion  arrived  at  in  the  Air  Force's  just  completed
investigation  into  the  sightings.


Before  arriving  at  his  conclusions,  the  investigating  officer
interviewed  all  the  principle  witnesses  involved  in  the  sightings  on  the
nights  of  20  and  30  December.  He  also  worked  closely  with  the  Department
of  Scientific  and  Industrial  Research,  the  Civil  Aviation  Division  of  the
Ministry  of  Transport,  and  the  Meteorological  Service.

His  report  reveals  that  during  the  months  of  December  and  early
January , atmospheric  conditions  over  ^7ew  Zealand  were  conducive  to  freak
effects  on  radar  and  light  waves.  Also,  the  planet  Venus  was  rising  in  the
eastern  sky  early  in  the  morning,  and  at  this  time  of  the.  year  is  unusually
bright  in  appearance.


It  was  also  revealed  that  for  some  time  the  VJellington  Air  Traffic
Control  radar  has  been  giving  spurious  returns  off  the  east  coast  of  the
South  Island.


Over  the  period  more  than  50  Japanese  squid  boats  sailed  from
Wellington  tc  a position  120  miles  off  Banks  Peninsula.

^ot  only  would  the  squid  boats  give  a good  source  of  radar  return
whilst  in  transit  to  the  squid  fishing  grounds,  but  they  generate  a very
large  amount  of  light  when  fishing  at  night.  Each  boat  generates  about
200..:kilowatts  of  light  to  attract  squid  to  its  lures,  and  this  light  source
cannot  ne  discounted  as  a cause  of  some  of  the  visual  sightings.


\„J  investigating  officer  also  speculates  that  lights  seen  in  the
Clarence  River  mouth  could  have  come  from  trains  or  vehicles- travelling
along  the  coast,  and  affected  by  unusual  atmospheric  reflections  and
refractions.

There  is  no  evidence  to  connect  the  many  radar  and  visual  sightings
in  the  Clarence  River  and  the  larger  lights  seen  to  the  east.


A Ministry  of  Defence  spokesman  said  the  Ministry  was  completely
satisfied  there  v;ere  no  unexplained  physical  objects  in  the  skies  at  the
time  of  the  sightings.


The  lights  were  almost  certainly  from  surface  or  planetary  sources
affected  by  atmospheric  reflection,  refraction  and  distortion.

Radar  sets  are  known  to  be  subject  to  spurious  returns,  and  it  v;as
significant  that  on  the  occasions  the  large  light  was  being  filmed  by  a
television  team  on  board  the  Argosy  freighter,  neither  Christchurch  or
Wellington  radars  reported  any  related  visual  sightings  on  their  screens.

The  spokesman  said  that  the  Ministry  of  Defence  was  not  specifically
charged  with  formal  responsibility  for  investigating  so—oalled  unidentified ■
flying  objects  in  peacetime.  However,  the  Ministry  does  take  an  active
interest  in  all  such  reports  and  within  the  limitations  of  its  resources,
conducts  investigations  as  necessary.


Commenting  on  some  media  speculation  that  the  country  was  defenceless
against  air  attack,  the  spokesman  said  that  New  Zealand  did  not  have
a complex  air  defence  system,  comprising  sophisticated  radar  equipment
and  a force  of  missiles  and  interceptor  aircraft.


3.


The  recently  announced  Defence  Reviev;  explains  that  over  the  next
decade  at  least,  a physical  threat  to  New  Zealand's  security,  by  sea
or  from  the  air,  is  so  remote  that  expenditure  of  funds  on
sophisticated  air  defence  equipments  could  not  be  justified.

•No  costing  of  a comprehensive  air  defence  system  for  New  Zealand
had  been  done,  but  the  Defence  spokesman  said  that  the  bill  would  be
enormous  and  well  beyond  current  x'esource  levels.

The  Defence  spokesman  concluded  by  saying  that  the  Ministry  totally
discounts  the  possibility  of  visits  to  New  ^Zealand,  and  particularly
to  the  areas  of  the  country  where  the  recent  reports  have  suggested,  of
alien  aircraft  or  other  flying  machines.  It  also  categorically  discounts
any  suggestion  that  air  activity  of  any  kind  has  taken  place  which  poses
any  uhreat  to  New  Zealand’s  security.  Defence  does  not  share  the  view  of
those  who  believe  v/e  are  visited  from  outer  space,  or  covertly  by  the  air-
craft or  machines  of  potentially  unfriendly  nations.


70

i j


m


On


Reference
i Appointment


RR  RZV)iSI}

DE  RZVXCIi  220;

2HV  RRRRR
R 1602402  JRN
FH  N23EF  flIR
TO  R2VRTT/0PHQ  RN2fiF
R2VrUT/8QHQ  RNZfiF
2T

RESTRICTED
DIGKBVZKSZ  '

849  filR  3623/3  SUBJECT  UNIDENTIFIED  S-IGHTINGS  CgRENCE  RIUER
nOUTH  RREfl  PS  HBUIN6  CONDUCTED  INaUIRY  INTO  RECENT  QUOTE  UNIBENT
yiSUBL  RND  RfiBRR'  SIGHTINGS  UNQUOTE  IN  CLARENCE  REGION  THERE  REHAIHS
SOHE  BOUBT  ABOUT  THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  LIGHTS  THAT  HERE  OBSERUEB
2Y  THREE  SAFE  ARCOSY  CRERS  PD  REQUEST  ANY  FEEDBACK  FROH  GROUPS
ESPECIALLY  OBSERUATIQNS  IN  THE  AREA  AT  NIGHT  FB  SPECULATIUELY  CHH
IT  IS  POSSIBLE  THAT  LIGHTS  ON  COAST- COULD  BE  FRQN  CARS  AND  TRAINS
SINCE  ALL  HAD  BERN- APPEARANCE  PB  UNLIKELY  THAT  THEY  uc-,i4r^

FRON  A SQUADRON  OF  HELICOPTERS  AS  NO  REPORTS. OF  AERONfiUIICBL
fiCTIOITY  RECEIUEB  FROH  LOCAL  INHABITANTS  PD  FOR  YOUR  RERCflT'YOUR:
INFO  ONLY  CHH  HOST  PROBABLE  THAT  RASAl^  RETURNS  HERE  SPURIOUS
•BT  ' ' • ••

C4IR-4HE-Y-RERE-


IFIEB


NNNH

KSY


lu-N


e

0PS2  li


INFO


KS2

ACTION

INFO


0

0PS3


-7  ^
M X


^\jr^uvViS  o


„r_

P.E.L


RECEIVED


P.E.L.  rh^l


DI5TAIL3  0?  R3IATBTC-  TO  SIGIITKC-S  OP  OBjCCTS  OPP

•SOUTK  ISlAim  EAST  COAST  , .MCRPHTG-  OP  iTecember  ■ 31  st  1978.


15JAN1979


Quei-itirx  Pogarty,32,.  a journalist  from  lielbourne
Trlevision  ATVsO  is  an  old  friend.  Ke  his  w<pfe  and
t'/;o  children  planned  to  come  to  iie'vv  Zealand  for  a noliday
..plans  were  made  about  the  middle  of.  1978,.

2)  Fogarty,  as  part  of  his  duties  as  o general  repor  oOi  . •

V

for  Channel  0,  covered  a similar  'UPp*  event  in  Bass  .

• Strait  during  1978.  A young  Pilot  named  Valent ich -dijamed
he  had  been'buszed  by  a 'UFO'  in  his  last  radio  contact
-before  he  disappeared.

3)  \7hile  Fogarty  was  on  holdday  at  his  wifes4:si  parents  larm
in  Martin  borough  i^e  was  asked  by  Channel  0 to  prepare  a
report  on  a sight iiag  by  Safe,  Air  Capt,  Vern  Powell
on  I)ec.2lst,  Fogarty  filmed  at  V/ellington  Rader  Centre,
and  with  the  ministry  of  transport  and  made  arrangement  s
to  travel  with  the  Safe  Air  Argosy,  delivering  Sunday
newspapers  to  the  South  Island  on  the  night  of  Sat '30th/3un31  si

December.  .

i|.)  He  hired  a ’stringer’  or  contracted -film  crew,  David

and  Rgaire  Crdckett

5)  Fogartj'-,  the  Crocketts,  Safe  Air  Pilot  Bill  Startup
and  Pix'st  Officer  Bob  Guard  flew  to  Christchurch  and
encountered- ob  jects  on  the  trip  South.


- —

bef wafts D }

ln^  A C - i


A

)


6)  lly  first  contact  with  ?ogarty  was  when  he  called  me
fx’om  Christchurch  Airport  (approx'.^1  am) , He  informed
me  of  the  contacts.  I

V’  -i  -Pp
••  ‘***^  *


7)  ’.Vhen  we  arrived  at  the  airport  Pogarty  and  the  Safe

Air  Crew  ’.vere  in  the  Christchurch  Radar  Centre  discussing
what  they  had  seen  with  Christchurch  Operators,

8)  Mrs  Crockett,  who  was  acting  as  sound  recordist  for
her  cameraman  husband,  informed  her  husband  and  Fogarty
she  was  upset  at  what  she  had  witnessed  and  would  not
make  the  return  trip  to  Blenheim,

9)  I asked  B'ogarty  would  he  have  any  objections  to

my  travelling  to  Blenheim  on  the  Argosy,  He  did  not,

I' asked  Pilot  Bill- Startup  if  he  had  any  objections
and  he  said  I was  welcome,  to  fly  vJith  them.


10)  The  Flight  left  Christchurch  at  2.16am  (Approx)

FogaV'ty  and  I were  seated  at  the  rear  of  the  air  .craft  •
and  remained  there  until  the  ^Fasten  Seat  3elt^  light  was
extinguished  and  "we  made  our  v/ay  to  the  Flight  ^

11 ) On  the‘ Flight  Deck  Cap t Startup  was  seated  on  the


left  monitor ing  the  planes  radar.  First  Off.  Gurad

Vi^as  on  the  right  in  coniDiand  of  the<  Air  craft  which

was  in  the  ’Auto-pilot*  mode.  Cameraman  Crockett

was  in  the  third  seat  in  the  centre  and  behini^  the  ,

two-fr  nt  seats.  Fogarty  was  to  Crocketts  right

ehind  Guard.  .,,1  was  to-  his  left  , behind  C'-po,  Startup.

WvN  -

Crockett,  Guard  and  Startup  wejie;:±n-  headphone s.crv'5  >-'  ' '


■^Summer  Time  1.2)  At  2,l8*l3y  my  watch  the  object  v/as  pointed  out  to

me  by  ]?lrst  Officer  Guard.  It  v/as  to  the  right  of  the

Argosy  and  below  the  craft .. .keeping  pace  with  us.

1 P ^ t wo

13)  I checked  with  Capt..  our  hieght . .1 3-’thousand


feet  and  speed. . .ayprox  170  mph. cScocpdeTiciheccre44

1 b )

ye llov'ipyi  light  varying  in  intensity.  At  one  point  I
saw  a reflection  from  the  object  on  the  surface  of  the
Ocean.**  . r-

15)  Crpt  ixtsce  Startup  estimated  the  object  came  as  close
, as  1 0 miles  on  his  radar.

I

16)  The  object  kept  abreast  and  below  us  for  approx

40  miles  when  First  OJficer. Guard  took  the  plane  off

Auto-pilot  and  heeded  directly  toy;ards  the  object.

L-q±— a goeptgr  speed  than  us_^

The  Object  moved  to  our~rigiit]'until  it  went  out  of

radar

our  .view  and  off  the  screen.

•■17)  SbER12UH^jmS2*Slb3QS5tt3il-^e!SI^^

♦Travelling  As  v’c>- approached  Blenheim*! ' saw  a mmaller  object

NV/  approx.

Object  over  the  town,.. after  some  four  or  five  minutes  it  was

slightly • , ’

left  of  joined  at  the  same,  height  by  a similar  object.. as  we  •

dead  ahead.  •

• . turned  the.  aircraft  for  landing.  I lost  sight  of  .

both  of  them.  ' •


The  object  appeared  to  be  circular  in  shape... a whitish/


18)  We  landed  and  I made  arrangements  to  get  a film
crew  to  B/stLttheim  where^ later  in  the  m->rning^I  filmed
a report  of  my  experiences  and  i.ntervie\'.'ed  Mes  rs
Startup  and  Guard.  , •

**  Experiment  -with  Dennis  Grant  at  Clarence  on  hight  5/6  January.  Gary,

Lewis  walked  away  with  a torch  to  a distance,  where  Grant  estimated  the

size  of  the  light  to  be  approximately  the  same  as  the  UFO.  Distance

was  30  paces  (;^5=i'.yards ) and  torch  fhce  2^  inches  across.  Hence  size
p^0.13°  = 8*  of  arc.


~)  and

"19)  I do  not  wear  »-}=ergrfi'e«.,  enjoy  excellent  health,

1 had  two  glasses  of*  white  wine  with  my  meal  at  approx

7pm  the  previous  evening.  I • do  not  smoke,  except  for

the  oc'-asional  cigar.


\


\ ^ickrvbiovx

t)9^  ^b?'(


C4DH  \


■ML


THE  MINISTER  OF  SCIENCE  - IN  CONFIDENCE


INTERIM  REPORT  ON  UFO  SIGHTING

oanterbury  coast


Introduction  Reference

-Dublicised  sightings  of  unidentif  - sometimes^

...  _j:n 4.^ ^ j 'i^itiTj'iT’ns - — wei'e  made  uii


£7«P°rts  of”unidintified  radar  Vaturiia  - ««l«  madB  ud
the  nights  of  20/21  December  1978,  30/31  December  1978,  and  .

morning  of  3 January  1979-  In  addition  to  vxsual  reports,  two  fxlm
17cot£  of  the  sightings  were  obtained  and  i^identxfxed  returns
were  recorded  by  the  ¥ellington  Axrport  Traffxc  Control  ^^dar
Hawkins  Hill.  The  Physics  and  Engineerxng  Laboratory,  DSIR,
uSd^SL"  so;,  investiiation  of  th,  reported  sightings  rn  support
of  the  detailed  inves tigation  being  conducted  by  the  Mxnxs  ry
Defence.  This  report  is  limited  to  comment  on  the  physxca
conditions  prevailing  at  the  time  of  the  sightings.


2.  Sightings

The  major  reported  sightings  were  made  by  responsible  people
with  considerable  experience,  and  who  would  not  be  easxly
by  normal  natural  phenomena.  These  comprised  the  crews  of  two
Safe  Air  Argosy  transport  aircraft  - the  I^^st  °n  the  nxght  of
20/21  December  piloted  by  Captain  Vern  Powell,  and  the  second  on
the  night  of  30/31  December  piloted  by  Captain  Bxll  Startup.  An
Australian  TV  report  and  NZ  cameraman  (Mr  Quintan  Joggayy  and  Mr
David  Crockett)  were  present  on  Captain  Startup  s flxgkt,  A
camera  crew  made  sightings  from  the  Clarence  River  valley  on  the
morning  of  3 January  1979-

In  addition,  many  reports  from  individuals  have  been  received.


3.  Physical  Factors

Physical  factors  which  need  to  be  considered,  and  which
prevailed  over  this  period  are  as  follows  ;


1.  The  atmosphere  was  very  clear.

2.  Venus  which  was  rising  at  about  3«15  a.m.  (NZ  Daylxght  Savxng
Time),  was  at  its  bx-ightest  in  late  December  (table  1).  Venus
was  12  times  brighter  than  the  brightest  star  (Sirius)  over
this  period.

3.  Jupiter,  which  was  rising  about  10  p.m.  (NZ  Daylight  Saving
Time),  will  be  at  its  brightest  in  late  January.

4.  North  westerly  winds  were  producing  inversion  layers  over  the
Canterbury  coast.

5.  The  movement  into  the  sea  off  the  Canterbury  coast  of
approximately  75  Japanese  fishing  boats.

4.  DSIR  Involvement

DSIR  involvement  was  to  provide  technical  support  to  the  Defence
investigation.  This  support  was  provided  by  physxcists  from  the
Physics  and  Engineering  Laboratory  (PEL).  Investigations  were  as

follows  ;


•

Examination  of  the  films  of  the  UFO‘s  taken  on  31  December
from  an  Argosy,  and  3 January  from  the  Clarence  River.

In  both  films  it  was  obvious  that  some  distortions  were
present  making  identification  of  the  object  filmed  difficult,
if  not  impossible.  Hence  the  laboratory  endeavoured  to
obtain  selected  frames  of  these  films  to  see  if  such
distortion  could  be  removed  to  enable  a clearer  picture.

Subsequent  investigations  of  the  conditions  under  which  the
films  were  produced  indicate  that  there  is  little  merit  in
proceeding  with  an  analysis  of  the  film  taken  by  Mr  Crockett
on  31  December,  since  the  image  recorded  is  almost  entirely
due  to  imperfections  of  the  window  of  the  Argosy  aircraft
(Appendix  1 ) .

Analysis  of  the  film  obtained  by  a TV1  camera  crew  under  the
direction  of  Terry  Olson  on  3 January  from  the  Clarence  River,
vill  continue  since  the  greatest  distortion  appears  to  have
been  produced,  by  out  of  focus.  Analysis  will  take  approx.

2 months  due,  largely,  to  pressure  of  other  work.

2.  Obtaining  further  data.  Unfortunately  data  relating  to
direction  and  height  of  observations  was  lacking  from  most
early  reports  although  reasonably  accurate  times  were  available.
Date  on  these'  parameters  was  obtained  by  interview  and  field
parties  (Appendix  2) .

3.  Radar  Signals,  The  Canterbury  coast  is  well  knoi-m  for  its
anomalous  radio  wave  propagation  and  PEL  has  studied  this
phenomenon  for  many  years  — the  first  occasion  being  in  19^8.
Officers  of  the  laboratory  spent  the  nights  of  5/^  and  7/8
January  observing  the  Wellington  Airport  Authority  radar
(Appendix  3)*


Findings


It  is  not  possible  to  prove  what  other  people  have  seen,  but
merely  to  predict  probabilities.  Careful  examination  of  sightings
and  data  obtained  indicates  that  the  majority  of  substantive
sightings  occurred  from  about  3 a.m,  looking  toward  the  east  and
low  on  the  horizon.  These  observarions  are  consistent  with  the
UFQ’s  being  related  to  the  rising  of  Venus,  but  are  not  consistent
with  the  normal  appearance  of  that  planet.


It  is  known,  moreover,  that  atmospheric  temperature  inversions
produce  considerable  refraction  of  light  (and  radar  waves)  producing
strange  effects  upon  an  image.  Such  effects  are  often  referred  to
as  mirag'es*  It  sh-Oiald  be  noted  tliat  on  the  night  ot  each  majon
sighting  snch  atmosphenic  inversions  were  recorded*  The  most
outstanding  observation  reported  (that  oT  the  Argosy  piloted  by
Captain  Startup)  sighted  their  TJFO  shortly  aiter  0230  a.m.  ~ some
10  minutes  before  Venus  should  rise  at  their  altitude.  The
description  of  the  object  is  classic  for  that  of  a planet  substant-
j^g^3_3_y  refracted  by  the  atmosphere  as  indeed  it  must  be  to  appear
10  minutes  early!  Rapid,  random  motion  (as  observed)  is  also  to
be  expected  as  the  atmospheric  conditions  change.


It  should  be  pointed  out  that  Venus  was  at  its  most  brilliant
and  the  atmospheric  disturbance  would  have  made  its  identifica'tion
difficult  indeed^  on  one  observation  by  PEL  staff  (Appendix  2)


-3-


?


a star  was  observed  on  tlie  horizon  directly  above  a fishing  vessel.
The  heat  produced  by  this  vessel  was  sufficient  to  produce
"^mospheric  disturbances  which  refracted  the  image  considerably  -
the  effect  being  similar  to  that  described  in  the  majority  of
sightings .


Estimates  of  distance  from  one  fixed  point  are  difficult.  In
each  reported  sighting  distances  were  estimated  as  being  "A  few
miles".  However,  rough  estimates  for  distance  are  possible  for
the  sightings  of  the  20/21  and  30/3I  December.  For  the  former,
an  aircraft  sighting  at  0335  a.m.  and  a sighting  from  ¥oodbourne
airfield  at  0335  a.m.  could  be  correlated  and  indicate  the  object
was  at  a very  great  distance  - consistent  with  Venus.  For  the
latter,  observations  of  the  reflection  of  the  object  in  the  sea  ^
indicate  a very  small  angular  difference  — certainly  less  than  5 •
Hence,  even  without  atmospheric  refraction  the  object  could  not  have
been  closer  than  100  km  and  was  most  likely  ab  a much  greater
distance.


Unidentified  radar  reflections  are  quite  common  from  the  radar
on  Hawkins  Hill,  and  may  be  produced  by  a variety  of  targets  brought
into  the  beam  by  super  refraction  (or  ducting).  Super  refraction
is  one  consequence  of  atmospheric  temperature  inversions . In  no
case  brought  to  my  attention  was  it  shown  that  unidentified
reflections  were  coincident  with  visual  UFO  sightings.  Also,  at
least  one  reflection  reported  by  Hawkins  Hill  6ind  which  should
have  been  seen  by  Christchurch  Airport  radar,  was  not.  Radar
operators  are  very  skilled  at  interpretation  and  in  general  recognise
signals  ■”  indeed  most  operators  agree  that  most  signals
observed  on  the  nights  in  question  fit  that  category.  However,
two  changes  to  the  radar  system  have  been  made  recently  (a  signal
processor  and  tilting  of  the  aerial)  which  will  have  produced  effects
not  yet  assimilated  into  the  experience  of  the  operator.

On  the  night  of  7/8  January  1979,  an  officer  of  PEL  (expert
wave  propagation  in  this  area)  attended  the  Wellington
Airport  Control  Centre  and  observed  many  unidentified  radar  returns;

3 ground  parties  on  tbe  Kaikoura  coast  were  in  radio  contact  witb
liim  but  failed  to  make  any  visual  contact  to  suggest  these  were
other  than  known  targets  (e*g,  ships)  or  spurious  returns  (appendices

2 and  3 ) •


mi±le  the  above  relates  to  the  majority  of  sightings,  several
others  are  not  well  enough  defined  to  follow  up*  In  addition,  two
pieces  of  data  do  not  fit  this  pattern*  Firstly,  in  the  flight  of
20/21  December  (Captain  Vern  Powell)  a pulsating  light  was  observed
moving  toward  the  aircraft  from  Banks  Peninsula  which  veered  away
to  the  left,  and  this  was  accompanied  by  an  on-board  radar  return*
The  speed  was  estimated  as  being  about  15^000  km  per  hour.  The
sighting  as  described  was  not  confirmed  by  Wellington  radar*  No
further  data  is  available,  hence  one  can  only  speculate  on  the
cause,  but  meteorite  showers  have  the  appropriate  characteristics.
Secondly,  on  the  flight  of  30/31  December  (Captain  Bill  Startup)
the  visual  observation  was  accompanied  by  a large  on— board  raoar
signal  in  approximately  the  right  bearing  which  indicated  an  object
keeping  station  at  about  I6  km*  This  object  was  not  seen  by  ground
based  radar  but  - had  an  object  been  there  - it  shoiild  have  been.
Distance  estimates  (above)  suggest  the  visual  sights  were
certainly  not  coincident.  Hence,  this  unidentified  return  could
be  attributed  to  a mirror  reflection  from  the  atmosphere  not
observed  by  Wellington  because  of  (1)  the  different  look  angle ,
and  (2)  the  different  radar  wavelength.


-4-


• CONCLUSION

This  report;  does  not  attempt  a detailed  explanation  of  all
reported  UFO  siglitings  in  New  Zealand  over  the  December- January
period.  It  doesj  however j deal  with  the  physical  conditions
occurring • and  major  sightings.  In  each  case  (with  the  exceptions
noted  above),  it  is  our  interim  conclusion  that  the  major  sightings
are  consistent  with  observations  of  the  planet  Venus  through  a
disturbed  atmosphere.


(M.A.  Collins)
12  January  1979


TABLE  1


Data  on  Venus  Rising.


Date

Rise  time  (sea  level)

NZ  Daylight  Saving  Time

Bearing

Magnitude

.21  Dec  1978

0331

S of  E

-4.3

31  Dec  1978

0316

9^°  S of  E ^

-4.3

3 Jan  1979

0313

10°  S of  E

-4.3

NOTE;  Magnitue  of  brightest  Star,  Sirius,  is  -1.6


appendix  1


OPTICAL  QUALITY  OF  THE  ¥INDOWS  OP
•'ARGOSY ” AIRCRAFT  IN  RELATION  TO
PHOTOGRAPHY  IflTH  LENSES  OF  LARGE
APERTURE .

by  N.J.  RUMSEY.

PEL  REPORT  NO..  625  JANUARY  1979


O-


Xntroduc tion

On  tlie  evening  of  Tuesday,  2 January  1979,  TV1  showed  a
film  taken  by  a ¥ellington  photographer,  Mr  David  Crockett,
from  a SAFE  AIR  Argosy  aircraft  on  the  night  of  31  December
1978  for  a Melbourne  TV  channel.  Photographs  of  a bright
object  taken  with  a long-focus  lens  (250  mm  focal  length)  show
structure  in  the  form  of  horizontal  streaks.  It  seemed  to
me  very  probable  that  these  streaks  were  an  artifact  produced
by  imperfections  in  the  aircraft  window.  It  also  seemed  o
me  possible  that  the  image  was  somewhat  defocussed.  These
points  needed  to  be  settled  before  there  could  be  any  possibility
of  placing  a reliable  interpretation  on  the  image.

Method  of  Investigation

A suitable  test  method  had  to  be  one  that  could  be  carried
out  relatively  quickly  and  with  no  disturbance  to  the  normal
running  of  the  aircraft.  ¥e  put  together  a short  _ teles.cope
(for  portability)  of  high  magnification  (for  ease  in  detecting
defects  in  the  image).  The  objective  was  of  75  mm  aper  ure
and  relative  aperture  f/5:  one  of  three

objectives  recently  made  by  Garry  Nankivell  of  the  PEL  Optics
Section.  The  eyepiece  was  an  "orthoscopic  of  4 mm  ^^ocal  leng  h
intended  for  astronomical  use.  The  magnification  was  thus
75  X 5/4  = 94  X approximately.  A small  area  light  source
consisted  of  an  illuminated  torch  bulb  placed  sufficiently  far
away  that  any  significant  blurring  of  the  image  would  destroy
the  ability  to  recognise  the  filament  as  such.  In  practice,
when  the  crucial  test  of  the  window  through  which  most  of  the
photography  had  been  done  was  carried  out,  the  distance  was
probably  about  40  metres.  The  test  was  qualitative  rather  than
quantitative,  or  at  best  semiquantitative . men  the  ^rght
source  was  viewed  directly,  i.e.  not  through  an  aircraft  window,
the  presence  of  some  residual  aberration  in  the  optical  system
in  the  form  of  secondary  spectrum  (a  lack  of  perfect  coincidence
of  the  foci  in  different  colours)  was  easily  detected;  but  the
envelope  of  the  torch  bulb  appeared  well  defined  and  the  bright
image  of  the  filament  nowhere  obliterated  the  outline  of  the  bulb


Ob  serrations

men  the  author  arrived  at  Woodbourne  the  aircraft  from
which  the  photography  had  been  done  was  not  available,  so  three
windows  of  another  Argosy  were  tested.  The  first  two  windows
caused  the  image  of  the  light  source  to  show  considerable • coma
(a  lop-sided  flare),  and  the  third  caused  astigmatism  which
gives  as  the  image  of  a point  of  light  two  lines  at  right-angles
to  each  other  and  separated  along  the  line  of  sight J .

When  the  plan  arrived  from  which  the  photography  had  been
done,  the  crew  pointed  out  the  ^d.ndow  through  which  most  of
the  photographs  had  been  talcen.  men  this  was  tested  through


-2—

•4.  n the  most  compact  image  found  hy  varying

an  area  near  xts  bo  * ^ shaped  like  an  inverted  pear

Qhe  focus  setting  had  streaks.  When  the  telescope

'and  it  was  crossed  by  t image  changed  rapidly;  but

was  moved,  the  appearance  ' ' oresent.  This  observatxon,

horizontal  streaks  in  vhich  the  position  of

taken  in  conjunctxon  wx  chanced  as  the  line  of  sight

the  streaks  on  ™tndow  make  it  substantially  certain

moved  relative  to  the  w^nd  ^ k filmed  image  are

that  (as  not  images  of  genuine

;ftfir^^thr:boelu  on  the^other  V ^laS^rt

Tltl  S;giT"f°h%S°mo?root.pact  images  »»at  could  he  obtained
were  generally  less  compact  than  1 haa  p

Conclusions.

During  the  admittedly  ^ ^no  *^p2t  of  any  window

different  windows  in  the  ^ ns’alDerrations  into  the

.was  found  that  did  of  75  mm  aperture.  Thus  the

images  formed  by  ^Viotocraphy  with  long  focxis  lenses

windows  are  not  suxtable  for  P ^ iia-ve  of  course  an  absolute

(which,  for  a given  Further,  the

aperture  proportxonal  was^shot  with  a long  focus

particular  window  throug  w t-nonsible  fox’  the  horizontal  streaks

lens  was  almost  certaxnly  responsible  tox^^

that  appear  in  the  resulting  xmg^  (^part  from  making  money)
which  these  images  ®an  safely  ^^lar  size  of  the

appears  to^be  to  set  extremely  difficult  to

^si^blxsStTmuch  ;malLr  than  this  a sharply  defined  image
would  have  been. )

Acknowledgement

A=.istS"t  l^tlTno

tffort  to  facilitate  these  xnvestxgatxons .


• j-xx  X


VISUAL  OBSERVATIONS  FROM  CANTERBURY  COAST
5/6  AND  7/8  JANUARY  1979.

Observations  were  made  of  ttie  azimuth,  and  elevation  of  objects
tliat  could  be  interpreted  as  UFO's  on  the  nights  of  5/6  and  7/8
- Jaiiuajry  1979.  In  order  to  determine  their  position  in  space  these
were  made  from  three  different  points.

1)  Trig  Station  near  Met.  Office  Kaikoura,  elevation  108  metres.

2)  DSIR  Magnetic  Radio  Station,  Clarence  River  Mouth,  about
20  miles  north  east  of  Kaikoura.

3)  Coast  at  eastern  end  of  Kaikoura  Peninsula  (5/6  January)  and
the  Post  Office  radio  relay  station  Waipapa  point  (elevation
360  metres)  a few  km  south  of  Clarence  River  Mouth  (7/8  Jan. ).

Although  not  essential  for  determining  position,  the  third
station  was  included  at  a different  level  in  case  atmospheric  ^
refraction  influence  had  significantly  different  effects  at  different
heights.

NZ  Army  supplied  two  land  rovers  equipped  with  VHF  and  HF
transceivers  together  with  driver/radio  operators  and  portable  VHF
transceivers.  One  station  was  to  be  in  HF  contact  with  the
Surveillance  Radar  in  Wellington  where  a scientist  from  PEL  would  be
located.  Communication  was  not  established  on  the  night  of  ,5/6
January.

Azimuth  and  elevation  were  determined  by  theodolite,  magnetic
compass  (azimuth)  and  inclinometer  (elevation).  ^ The  former  was
useful  only  on  fixed  or  very  slightly  moving  objects,  the  latter
were  necessary  for  something  moving  more  rapidly.  Instruments
were  cross-checked  against  each  other  using  stars,  observations  being
synchronised  from  the  base  station  by  VHF.  After  an  observing
routine  had  been  established,  checks  on  stars  showed  the  scatter
of  the  order  of  1 deg.  which  was  satisfactory.

5/6  January  1979

Light  southerly  mainly  clear  though  with  a little  cloud  low
in  the  east.  No  temperature  inversion  predicted  or  observed  from
radiosonde  from  Christchurch.

Nothing  unusual  observed  before  3*15  a.m.  when  a series  of^
observations  was  made  on  Venus  during  the  first  half  hour  after  it
rose  to  check  the  effects  of  refraction.  These  have  still  to  be
reduced  but  Venus  appeared  to  behave  normally.

At  4 a.m, ,what  afterwards  turned  out  to  be  a star,  rose  slightly
south  do\m  wind  of  a ship  anchored  a few  miles  offshore  from  Clarence
River  mouth.  The  heat  given  off  by  the  ship  produced  "shimmering"
effect  on  the  star  image  which  appeared  as  a random  motion  of  about
5 minutes  of  arc  for  amplitude  and  several  seconds  in  mean  period.
Other  stars  to  the  north  and  south  showed  no  such  effects . The
random  motion  continued  for  several  minutes  until  the  star  went
behind  a cloud.  It  reappeared  later  at  higher  elevation  and  the
motion  was  less  obvious;  after  10  minutes  it  was  no  longer  detect-
able , comparable  motion  was  not  seen  from  the  Kaikoura  station.


' This  was  an  excellent  example  of  a phenomenon  that  could  he
interpreted  as  a UFO.  The  motion  of  the  image  produced  by  the
l/-^alised  heat  source  could  be  described  as  "hovering”  and  the
"'wO  would  have  approached"  as  the  star  slowly  rose  in  the  sky.

It  is  important  to  realise  that  there  would  have  been  a small  area
a few  km  up  the  coast  where  the  line  of  sight  of  Venus  would  have
passed  close  to  the  ship,  and  anyone  in  that  area  would  have
observed  a spectacular  "UFO".

It  was  subsequently  confirmed  that  no  spurious  echoes  were
detected  by  the  Wellington  radar  on  the  night  of  5/6  January.


7/8  January  1979

Light  westerly  conditions,  mild  to  warm  temperature  inversion
predicted  to. be  at  300  metres  elevation  off  shore.  This  prediction
was  consistent  with  conditions  at  the  Waipapa  Point  site  where  it
was  generally  mild,  though  sometimes  relatively  cool  for  short
periods,  suggesting  the  site  was  then  temporarily  below  the  inversion.

No  unusual  optical  effects  were  observed,  although  due  to  cloud,
Venus  could  not  be  seen  until  it  was  nearly  a degree  above  the
horizon,  and  it  was  intermittently  obscured  for  20  minutes.
Observations  made  similar  to  those  on  the  previous  occasion  are  not
yet  reduced •

A large  number  of  spurious  eclioes  were  observed  on  the  Wellington
radar  by  ¥.  Ireland.  The  directions  of  some  of  these  from  the
observing  sites  were  passed  by  radio  and  observations  then  made  by
(theodolite)  telescope,  binoculars  and  visually  from  O to  high
elevations.  Nothing  was  seen  corresponding  to  I8  different  radar
echoes  or  groups  of  echoes.  Some  echoes  were  almost  overhead
of  a site,  one  group  was  interpreted  by  the  Wellington  radar
controller  as  a rain  shower!


There  was  clearly  very  substantial  ducting  but  it  appears
temperature  (and  humidity)  gradients  that  produced  spurious  echoes
were  not  appropriate  to  produce  effects  on  stars  or  planets  which
might  lead  to  their  being  interpreted  as  a UFO.  This  is  not
surprising,  spurious  echoes  on  the  Wellington  surveillance  radar
are  quite  common  in  summer  when  inversions  are  present,  but  optical
effects  leading  to  a "UFO  sighting"  relatively  rare.


(r.S.  Unwin)

10  January  1979


APPENDIX  3


OBSERVATIONS  OF  UNIDENTIFIED  RADAR  RETURNS
ON  50  cm  HAWKINS  HILL  RADAR.  8. 1.79.

C)  In  the  early  morning  of  Monday  8.1.79>  I kept  watch  with  John
Cordy  at  the  Nellington  Control,  Centre . The  general  consensus  of
others  present  Before  midnight  was  that  there  was  an  inversion  -
witness  echoes  from  mountains  such  as  Ruapehu  to  confirm  this.  In
extreme  inversions  the  coast  near  Wanganui  is  seenj  hut  it  was  not
seen  on  Monday  morning.

Significant  modifications  to  the  radar  have  taken  place  since
last  summer.  The  effect  on  the  display  of  anomalous  echoes  is
probably  significant,  but  I have  not  attempted  to  verify  this
assumption.

Anomalous  returns  %di.ich  John  Cordy  could  not  identify  were
present  all  the  time,  especially  between  about  1 a.m.  and  3 a.^. ,
when  there  may  have  been  a dozen  present  at  a time . They  all
had  the  appearance  of  aircraft  echoes  when  seen  on  the  MTI  (Moving
target  displey) • I think  they  were  generally  absent  when  viewing
"raw  video".  I suspect  that  even  the  "raw  video"  was  pre-processed
somewhat •

Early  in  the  morning  we  attached  no  significance  to  movement
of  the  anomalous  returns,  but  on  reflection,  I think  they  were
moving  qud.ckly  outwards , because  the  afterglow  was-  often  visible
at  shorter  range.  John  had  pointed  this  out  at  some  stage.

Most  of  the  anomalous  returns  were  noticed  in  the  area  off
the  Kaikoura— Cape  Campbell  coast,  but  others  occurred  in  Cook
Strait  and  over  Marlborough  Province.  They  generally  appeared
suid(;3.enly  and  lasted  for  a short  time , rarely  for  more  than  a few
minutes .

A persistent  group,  seen  I think  only  with  raw  video,  occurred
about  15  miles  from  Christchurch.  They  moved  generally  northwards
over  more  than  hours.  (The  radar  is  calibrated  in  nautical  miles.)

Between  0450  and  05OO  unusual  "spotty"  echoes  covered  the
coastline  at  Kaikoura—Clarence  R.  John  Cordy  identified  these  as
rain,  but  there  was  no  rain  there  at  that  time.

On  the  MTI  photo  at  0219  an  echo  composed  of  three  spots
appears.  This  was  different  to  all  the  others  seen.  It  moved
northwards  and  I would  identify  it  as  a ship  seen  on  "raw  video
photos  later,  moving  at  about  11  knots,  passing  Cape  Campbell  at
about  0340.  Another  ship  was  tracked  from  Brothers  westwards
for  an  hour  at  about  17  knots  — this  was  visible  on  MTI.

The  most  interesting  example  was  seen  to  be  moving  radially
outwards  at  172°  at  an  erratic  100-1 50  knots  for  10-1 5 minutes.

It  was  50-60  N. MILES  from  Nellington.  Although  we  did  not  notice
when  it  first  became  visible,  it  disappeared  quite  quickly  at
about  0445 •


(N.  Ireland)

9 January  1979


q3,i3.  \MDSo.  /(boM/.

PB a/ INSULA  KeruR\i

/vr  /e/h/v^:^

7"UiO  PtNOMABOcI^  ^c(4oes
Ml.  NO/^TH  OF  P.


045’0.  ^>^^0  '?o  «/-

‘"/?A(f\j‘''  BCHOE^  0\ibF  mKoa^k
pOii^&Lh  St^lP  fFF  /?M/,


o3'33.  [/iJ)Eo.  iGo^l

g/lA/KS  PB/^iN£ULf\  /leruR/v/
#vr  MAytr'  aa-Nae

j'ujo  f\Noi^f\GOoii  ^ctrioes
Ml.  r^o/Q.T/-/  OF  &FAlKi  P.


I

I

/ i

045^0.  i//5£0  '?o  :

j

£CF06£  0\J~BF  KMK0U^/[  |

I

pOiStSLfc  SFIP  PfT  IS- Ml,  j

I

I

[

J

}

I


02.1^.  y[.T~L.  (OH  I adc(.£S

THiPLE:  ECHO  posSjBL'^  S^IP

fifj-  ^6>  M./.

f>rL-L  oTHEfl  BCI40ES  (^g")
A-^OMA'^Oc{.$.


04f5'(^‘.  (0M(  apcui

BHiP  OFF  SOa/v^S  Z6  M.  I,

ZfA/OM A-i^OW-S  ECHO  F“  >12°  '

5"OM{^  M.OI//A/C  (IPC^  if\LLy  : I

ouToJBfKi)S  tOO~>S"o  KT.  ;


Air  59/5/5


11th  Janua


REPORT  ON  UNIDEISTTIFUilD  VISUAL  AND
RADAR  SIGPITINGS  EAST  COAST  SOUTH  ISLAED
DECEMBER  1978


Introduction

1 . On  the  nights  of  20/21  December  V8  and  50/5i  December
78  Wellington  ATC  Radar,  and  the  crews  of  SAPE  Argosy  aircraft
(both  visually  and  on  radar)  made  many  unidentified  sightings
off  the  east  coast  of  the  South  Island,  The  first  sightings
gave  rise  to  much  publicity  by  the  media  and  eventual  involvement
of  the  RNZAF  when  it  was  decided  to  conduct  an  Orion  surveillance
of  the  area  on  the  night  of  2/5  January  79*  At  that  time  it  was
decided  to  start  a Defence  investigation  and  this  report  is
submitted  in  accordance  with  DCAS  instructions  to  provide  a report
on  the  events  surrounding  the  various  sightings,

2,  Air  Staff  was  first  advised  by  Civil  Aviation  Division
of  Ministry  of  Transport  (CADMOT)  of  these  events  mid-morning  21
December  78,  Historically,  Defence  has  adopted  a ‘low  profile'
in  connection  with  reports  of  unidentified  sightings.  Thus
CADMOT  has  not  normally  reported  unusual  sightings  to  Defence.
However,  because  of  the  number  and  nature  of  reports  on  the  night
20/21  December  78  the  Director  of  Civil  Aviation  specifically
instructed  his  staff  to  advise  Defence.  On  the  basis  of  the  infor-
mation received  Air  Staff  decided  that  should  any  further  similar
instances  occur  we  would,  if  possible,  carry  out  an  investigation
by  the  most  appropriate  aircraft  available  over  the  Christmas
period.  CADMOT  were  advised  to  contact  the  Defence  Duty  Officer

in  the  event  of  any  more  sightings.  As  it  transpired  the  memor-
andum from  CADMOT  Head  Office  to  the  ATC  Centre  was  not  delivered,
thus  the  events  of  50/5i  December  78  were  not  reported  to  Air
Staff  until  the  next  day.

5.  Other  Government  agencies,  notably  DSIR  and  KZ  Meteor-

ological Services,  are  conducting  their  own  investigations  and
have  provided  relevant  input  to  this  report.  The  report  is
confined  to  the  events  of  21  and  5^1  December  78.  It  does  not
take  into  account  the  film  made  by  TV1  on  5 January  79  which  is
now  being  examined  by  DSIR  and  will  most  probably  prove  to  be  a
film  of  Venus  and  Jupiter  rising.

4.  ?.Tien  interviewing  witnesses  it  was  pointed  out  to  them

that  this  was  not  a judicial  enquiry.  The  credibility  of
witnesses'  statements  was  taken  at  face  value.  However,  witnesses
were  not  necessarily  interviewed  separately  because  it  was  con-
sidered that,  with  a fairly  emotive  issue  such  as  'UFOs',  corrob-
oration was  best  achieved  by  interviewing  observers  of  the  same
events  together.


/Events  20/21  . , ,


RESTRICTED


-2-


Events  20/2^i  December  ?8  (Refer  Chart  at'  Annex  A)


5.

from


On  20/21
Woodbourne  to


December  78  there  ;vere  two  SAFE  Argosy  flights
Christchurch  one  of  which  proceeded  to  Dunedin
and  terminated,  and  the  other  returned  to  Woodbourne.  The  fi'--st
aircraft  departed  Woodbourne  210110  NZDT.  At  01  ^>9  when  south-
bound to  Christchurch  the  aircraft  captain  was  asked  by  Wellinr^ton
Radar  to  check  the  Clarence  River  area  because  Wellington  ATC
was  receiving  radar  returns  from  there.  The  crew  observed  lights
at  low  level  that  could  possibly  have  been  off  the  Clarence  River
mouth  but  when  the  aircraft  was  about  30  miles  north  the  lights
appeared  to  go  out  or  disappear.  During  this  period  Christchurch
was  visible  and  the  sky  was  clear.  Later  in  the  morning  (0406)
when  the  aircraft  was  nojcthbound  the  crew  was  again  requested  to
check  the  area  because  '.Vellington  Radar  was  again  picking  xip  radax’'
returns  in  that  vicinity.  The  aircraft  crew'^conf irmed  that  lights
were  visible  to  seavvard  and  the  ci*ew  got  the  impression  of  nhe
lights  making  rectangular  patterns  at  irregular  frequency.  The
lights  had  a beam  appearance  rather  than  .a  point  source  appearance
and  seemed  to  turn  away  rather  than  turn  off.  One  light  appeared
to  illuminate  the  surface  of  the  water  and  the  aircraft  captain-
assesses  that  the  source  of  the  light  could  have  been  at  about
1,000  feet.  However,  it  is  the  reporting  officer's  opinion  that
from  the  aircraft's  height  (14,000  feet)  it  would  not  be  possible
to  judge  accurately  the  height  of  lights  below  the  aircraft.

One  possibility  is  that  the  aircraft  captain  was  observing  l.ights
from  cars  or  trains  because  the  main  road  and  railway  run  parallel
and  very  close  to  the  coast  for  some  miles  in  this  area.  However,

have  been

whole  thing  was  'quite


the  aircraft  captain  considers  that  the  sightings  could
produced  bjr  four  or  five  helicopters  and  the
undraraatic'i  The  likelihood  of  such  extensive
activity  has  not  been  confirmed  by  any  reports


Police  or  local  inhabitants.


In  fact,  no  reports  have


received  and  the  Police  do  not  have  any  interest  in


aeronautical
received  from
been

ciP6  S, «


the


6.  The  second  aircraft,  which  departed  V/oodbourne  at  O315,
was  also  asked  by  Wellington  Radar  to  look  at  the  Clarence  River
mouth  area  because  vVellington  was  picking  up  radar  returns  ther;.
That  aircraft  crew  did  not  observe  anything  in  the  region  ei ther
visually  or  on  radar.

7.  ^ Subsequent  investigations  and  scientific  observation

carried  out  by  DSIR  proves  conclusively  (in  the  reporting  officer's
opinion)  that  V/ellington  SRE  Radar  does  give  anomalous  radar
returns  off  the  east  coast  off  the  South  Island.  This  was  r-roved
by  DSIR  observation  of  the  Wellington  radar  8/9  January  79  snd
taking  a series  of  photographs  of  the  radar  presentation  throughout
the  Right. ^ Concurrently  three  field  parties  were  stationed  at
vantage  points  along  the  east  coast  with  radio  communications  to
the  Radar  Controj.  Cennre.  On  several  occasions  during  the  night
when  many  large  returns  were  painting  on  Wellington  Radar  the
observers  on  tne  coast  could  see  nothing  either  in  the  air  or  on
the  sea  in  the  positions  passed  to  them  by  the  Radar  Controller,


/Furthermore


RESTRICTED


RESTRICTED


Furthermore , from  discussions  with  two  or  three  control] ers  it
Is  evident  that  the  '”el].ingtor!  5FF  has  for  several  months  been
giving  anomalous  radar  returns  in  the  Clarence  area  and  so’jth
of  ^'ellington.  Tt  is  possible  that  this  could  be  caused  by
a modification  that  w'as  recently  made  to  the  radar  head  at
’Vellington  depressing  it  one  degree,  DGIS  scientists  are  fcllow/ing
up  this  possibility  and  their  findings  should  be  available  in  due
course .


8,  There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  there  v^aa  ary

clandestine  activity  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Clarence  River  mouth.
It  is  possible  however  that  surface  vessels  could  have  been  in
the  a.rea  with  or  without  navigation  lights  but  it  is  doubtful
that  such  vessels  could  have  given  rise  to  the  visual  observations
made  by  the  aircraft  crew.  The  fact  that  vVellington  Radar
both  aii^craft  captains  to  look  for  objects  in  the  Clarence  area
might  well  have  induced  observations  from  the  air  which  might  or
might  not  have  been  related  to  the  'Vellington  Radar  returns.


ice  ye  d '


9,  From  information  supplied  by  DSTR,  the  I'TZ  Meteorological

Cervices,  and  astronomers,  it  is  evident  that  during  this  period,
and  indeed  for  the  last  month  or  so,  atmospheric  conditions  have
been  conducive  to  freak  propogation  of  radio  and  light  waves.

Thus  it  is  possible  that  the  lights  observed  by  the  aircraft  captain
could  have  been  produced  by  ships’  lights  reflected  or  refracted
from  afar.  Such  anomalous  propogation  (ducting)  could  also  give
ri.se  to  spurious  radar  returns.  Note;  The  reporting  of.ficer  has
just  received  (d155  NZNT)  a report  from  Auckland  that  ATC  has
issued  a NOTAM  that  .Auckland  Radar  is  giving  spurious  returns  caused
b;y  atmospheric  conditions.


10.  During  the  pe.riod  that  the  Wellington  Radar  Controller

was  in  dialogue  with  the  aircraft  captains  about  radar  I'eturns  in
the  Ola'^ence  area  the  radar  was  also  tracking  a steady  .return  on
a track  of  14o'^(M)  which  started  at  -Vellington,  proceeded  to  90
miles  and  then,  with  leas  consistent  radar  returns,  lumcked  out  to
60  rai.les  where  it  became  stationary  for  minutes.  It  then  moved
west  and  appeared  to  'track'  the  second  southbound  Arerosy  at  about
The" ’Wellington  Radar  Controller  alerted  the  captain  that
there  was  a .strong  radar  I’eturn  about  29  miles  to  the?  port  of  the
a.i '’CX'’art . The  aircraft  ci'ew  observed  on  that  bonring  a ve.ry  bright
light  7/hi.ch  they  variously  describe  as  a bright  orb,  pear  .shaped
with  a reddish  tinge  that*  th«n  tu..rned  white.  From  the  aircraf't
the  object  appeared  to  be  stationary  by  vis'i.al  cb.servation  but  by


the  ai.rc7’3ft  ra--.lar  appeared  to  track  tlic  airc.ra.''t . Tlie  light
to  be  very  close  - less  than  ten  miles.  Althoug.h  the

.1  obse.rvati


appeared  to  be  very  close  - less  than  ten  m.i  le
ai-l'craft  radar  I'etuxT.  and  the  vuLsual  obse.rvstion  of  (he  light  were
on  mo.re  or  less  the  same  bearing  the  crew  can'’ol  confirm  that  the
range  was  coincident.  Tt  is  sig.ni ficant  that  within  a f-sv;  minutes
o.f  the  crev/'a  observation,  Venus  was  .risi.ng  on  a bearing;  that
ccinci‘.I“d  with  t:neir  visual  ob.servation.  D2IR  optics,  physics,
and  meteorological  experts  have  cort rix>t;ied  t’l.at  prevailing  atmos-
pheric fjcn-i  iticns  m ipfiit  well  have  produced  mo.st  unusual  but  r;ot
unknown  p’ner.omena  that  co’jld  hs'vn  !n.ade  v'enu-s  app'e.er  large,  bright
avid  oranc'e.  There  is  a.  plet’’'io.c-a  of  a.stronomical

has  it  is  highly  iu‘


orangi
crihes  this  phenomenoi'


i t'i  v'o  r m a ?;  .i.  o n (:•  hat


'obable


that  the


.y.~  r'C.rew


onse.rvat'i on  was  an  unu.‘raav.i.  vievi  ot


RESHUCTEg


_4-


11,

have

have


The  radar  returns  observed  on  the  aircraft  radar  ralght


been  caused  by  a natural  return  by  a ship


pez-’haps  could


been  anornalous  returns  caused  by  the  prevailing  atmospheric
conditions.  During  the  period  1?  - 28  Dece:nber  ?8  some  50
Japanese  squid  boats  sailed  from  V/ellington  to  the  area  of  the
riernoo  Danlc  (120  miles  east  of  Banb-s  Peninsula).  These  vessels
departed  Tellington  in  grciips  of  about  1C  and  their  track  to
their  fishing  grounds  is  almost  identical  to  the  radar  track
plotted  by  Wellington  radar.  ''diile  there  is  no  cohclusive  proof
that  these  vessels  could  have  caused  the  fairly  steady  trace
observed  by  •’•’ellington  it  is  a fact  that  during  the  period  of  all
these  observations  there  was  no  shortage  of  shipping  in  the  area,
furthermore,  once  in  position  and  fishing,  the  squid  fleet  would
have  produced  an  intense  light  source  which  coupled  with  prevailing
meteorological  conditions  could  have  been  responsible  for  many  and
varied  reflected  or  refracted  light  images.  (Bach  boat  puts  out
about  200kw  of  light.)

12.  k further  observation  (which  has  not  been  reported  by

the  media)  '.vas  made  by  the  crevi>  of  this  the  same  Argosy  when  the
aircraft  was  some  50  miles  xiorth  east  of  Christchurch.  The
captain  observed  five  consecutive  blips  on  the  aircraft  radar  which
over  a period  of  five  seconds  traced  a pattern  towards  the  aircraft
and  then  veered  off  very  sharply  to  its  port.  Simultaneously  the
co-pilot  observed  a flashing  white  light  (which  looked  like  a
strobe  light)  describing  the  same  sort  of  path.  For  the  brief
period  that  the  returns  were  received  on  radar  the  object  must
have  been  travelling  at  about  10,800mph;  This  sighting,  above
all  others  during  the  night,  caused  the  crew  considerable  consterna
tionl  It  is  possible  that  such  a phenomenon  could  be  pi'oduced
bjr  a meteor  which  are  not  unknown  at  this  time  of  theyear.  A
further  possible  explanation  could  be  that  the  effect  was  caused
by  a 'double  bounce'  radar  contact  produced  by  ducting.  It  is
note-worthy  that  an  DRZ-AF  Orion  crossing  Cape  Palliser  on  9 January
78  at  1552'^TTZDT  observed  a radar  contact  at  I5  miles  moving  fast
towards  the  aircraft.  There  was  no  cloud  and  no  surface  contacts
visible.  The  radar  return  crossed  the  aii'craft's  track,  one  mile
ahead,  but  there  was  no  visual  sighting.  The  closing  speed  was
calculated  at  1 ,0O0mph  thus  the  object  itself  was  travelling  at
some  650  mx’h.  0P?IQ  staffs  have  conside.red  the  possibilities  and
assess  that  the  radar  return  could  have  been  of  an  object  200
miles  noi-th  of  KZ  (perhaps  cloud)  with  freak  propogation  giving
rise  to  the  radar  observation  made  in  the  aircraft.  But  .for
knowing  that  a Defence  eDquii.'j/  was  under  way  0.PHQ  would  not  normall
have  coriside.red  it  necessa.ry  io  oass  on  this  information.


•15.  A further  sighting  on  the  20/21  December  ?8  was  male  by

the  Orderly  Officer  and  Duty  Air  Traffic  Contz’oller  at  STTZA?  Pase
■■'•ood bourne.  At  ,2550  the  Orderly  Officer  saw  v;hat  he  considered
to  be  three  lipjhts  o.f  a Bristol  Freighter  three  to  four  miles
from  '.Voodbourne . Hcwever,  as  no  aircr.&ft  could  be  heard  and  the
lights  did  not  .appear  to  get  any  close.r  he  checked  through  binoc-
ulars .and  determined  that:  the  light.s  appeared  to  be  g;oing  towai-ds
ingtOD . Of  the  l;hi''ee  lights  the  middle  one  appeared  as  a
white  beam  pointing  northward.  The  li’hts  sppeai*ed  to  move  upjH'ax''


/and  a.rfaind


PvKTPirTcn


-5-


and  around  in  a rectangular  pattern  but  at  randoTn  epeed.  He
observed  the  lights  for  about  50  minutes.  The  bearing  from
V/oodbourne  was  about  OSO  (M)  ^ i.e.  , towards  Gape  i./ampbell  <

At  one  stage  the  lights  appeared  to  'rush  for'ward'  but  generally
over  the  period  seemed  to  move  northvvard  and  eventually  fade^

In  comparative  terms  the  observer  considered  that  the  lights'
pattern  looked  like  somebody  'spotlighting'.  The  Duty  Axr
Traffic  Controller  observed  the  same  lights  from  the  control
tower  balcony.  His  impression  was  that  the  lights  comprised
one  bright  orange  light  and  two  less  intense  white  lights.  The
large  light  appeared  to  remain  stationary  while  the  other  two
seemed  to  move  north.  A shaft  of  light  periodigally  appeared
to  'beam  down'  from  the  white  lights  at  about  U-0  in  a northerly
direction.  Using  binoculars  apparently  had  no  enlarging  effect
on  the  lights!  This  could  indicate  that  the  lights  were  at
a great  distance  from  the  observer  and  not  in  Cook  Sti'ait  as  h«

mvv-?  o -f-vipcsno  -1  o hv  t:he  ‘PAc+i  'hhn'b  OT\  cbockine:

with  Wellington  Radar  the  Woodbourne  observer  was  advised  thao
the  radar  was  painting  five  targets, in  the  Clarence  area  but  no
mention  was  made  of  any  returns  in  Cook  Strait.  It  is  highly
improbable  that  the  radar  returns  and  the  visual  observations  were
in  any  way  connected.


The  reporting  officer  awaits  a copy  of  the  taped  conver-
sation between  the  Wellington  Radar  Controller,  the  aircraft  and
the  Woodbourne  observer  and  in  addition  the  Woodbourne  observer
is  preparing  a sketch  map  showing  beai'ings^  etCp  in  more  detail.

',Vhen  these  two  pieces  of’ evidence  are  available  they  may  shed
more  light  on  the  occurrence!


Summary


15,  It  is  the  reporting  officer's  opinion  that  alraost  all
the  sightings  made  20/21  December  ?8  can  be  explained  by  natura
but  unusual  phenomena.  There  were  atmospheric  conditions  that


could  have  produced  unusual  visual  and  radar  I’eturns,
is  no  doubt  that  Wellington  SRE  was  (and  still  is)  giv


There

Epuri


s


X'adar  returns  in  the  area  under  surveillance.  vVith  some  of  the
visual  sightings  of  'beams’  of  light  it  is  only  possible  to
speculate  on  possible  causes.  On-going  investigation  by  DSjR
scientists  and  the  reporting  officer  may  helti  to  clarify  this
in  due  course.  Perhaps  the  most  difficult  aspect  to  explain
away  is  the  apparent  concern  - even  apprehension  - of  the  aircrews
involved  in  the  sightings.  At  present  they  do  not  seem  to  be
prepared  to  accept  the  fact  that  they  might  have  observed  Venus.
Thankfully,  however.,  neither  do  they  believe  that  they  saw  a visitor
from  outer  space!  Perhaps^ when  more  scientific  evidence  is
gathered^ their  minds  will  be  set  at  rest.


Events  30/51  December  78  (Refer  Chart  at  A,rnex  B)


16.

carrying

departed


On  30/51  .December  ?8  an  Argosy  on  a routine  flight
the  TV  crew  that  made  the  film  shown  on  Australian  TV)
Wellington  at  2346  to  proceed  Christchurch  and  then


/return


irTCIX,


cu


-6-


retijrn  to  '//ocdbourne.

'17,  At  OCI3  while  climbing  to  14,000  feet  the  aircraft

crew  observed  four  to  five  lights  close  to  the  surface  near  uhe
coast  of  the  Kaikoura  Peninsula  (pos-'ibly  in  the  ^'J.arence  Hiver
area  but  the  crew  were  not  sure  and  did  not  confirm  wi^/h  thexr
radar).  On  checking  with  Wellington  ATC  the  crew  were  adyise^x^
that  V'^ellington  Radar  had  contacts  I3  miles  ahead  of  the  iircrait
Cthese'vvould  have  been  off  Clarence).  The  crew  observed  a
pulsing  ti'pe  of  white  light  that  looked  like  a helicopter  searcn
light  zooming  on  to  the  beach  somewhere  north  of  t..e  ..aikoura
Peninsula.  Again,  it  is  difficult  to  explain  the  lights,  snore
of  them  being  some  anomalous  type  of  reflection  or  refraction,
cars, or  trains.  However  it  is  most  probable  that  the  Wellington
Radar  returns  were  spurious.

'ig.  At  0018  when  the  aircraft  was  about  10  miles  north  of

, ^ ^-1  ....  -^>4 ...  -t-v  -iJT  ^ -i  ^ i ^ ^ o .-1  -1  o o/J  tV*  0 C TS'W

the  CiareiiCc;  axvc;x"  .aOuuxi,  ---  ^

that  there  was  a strong  radar  return  hehino.  them*  They  croioea
and  saw  nothing.  This  was  almost  certainly  a spurious  radar
return*

'jo.  At  0042  when  the  aircraft  was  about  10  miles  northeast

of*Motmiau  Island  ’-Vellington  Radar  advised  the  crew  that  there
was  a large  radar  target  behind  the  aircraft  thai  appeared  cui
the  radar  screen  as  a blip  larger  than  the  aircraft  return  and
appeared  to  be  tracking  the  Argosy.  The  aircraft  captain  cai^oed
out  a left  orbit  but  neither  he  nor  the  first  officer  saw  s.nything.
The  drew  did  not  refer  to  the  aircraft  radar  ana  yhristchurch
radar  was  not  operating  for  ATC  purposes  at  the  time.

20.  Jxist  before  crossing  the  coast  near  Woodend  the  crew

ob^e-f'ved  a v/hite  light  on  the  starboard  side  of  the  aircraft  and
Christchurch  Radar  advised  that  there  was  a target  at  three-o ’ c ioc.k;
to  the  aircraft  that  ’moved  off'  when  the  aircralt  was  about
1.5  miles  from  touch  down.  No  reports  have  been  received  x'rorn
inhabitants  of  the  area  of  any  unusual  lights  or  aeronautical  _ _ ^
activity.  Thus,  again,  the  natural  explanation  is  that  tne  l3.?iiv
and  radW  return  were  spurious^  possibly  caused  by  some  sort  Ox
anomalous  propogation.

2'’,  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  v/hile  _ taxiing  to  dispersal

both  the  aircrew  on  the  A.rgosy  and  the  ATC  oiiicers  in  mhe  control
tower  observed  lights  to  the  right  of  Sugar  Loaf  Hip  wnicy  seemea
to  have  the  same  pulsating  characterisrics  as  the  lights  ooservea
earlier  during  the  flight.  The  bearing  of  these  lights  wouW^
almost  certainly  coincide  with  the  bearing  of  the  squid  fleeu  iX’om
Christchurch  and  if  the  lights  could  be  proved  to  be  refracted
or  reflected  returns  from  the  squid  vessels  much  of  the  mystery
v^ould  be  solved  I

22,  At  0216  the  aircraft  departed  Christchurch  on  the  033

radial.  7iTien  overhead  ’-Voodend  both  crew  members  observed  a
large  white  light  to  the  northeast.  They  also  observed  on  the
aircraft  radar  a very  large  target  at  18  mij.es  from  the  aircraxt.
The  crew  cannot  be  positive  that  the  lignt  arm  the  radai’  return
wei'e  coincident  but"  that  was  the  appearance  that  they  gave.

Slightly  before  these  observations  the  first  officex'  had  noticed
through  thin  cloud  a light  which  ne  describes  as  having  the


-7-


appearance  of  a squashed  orange.  Eventually  this  light  became

fully  visible  and  measured  against  the  thumb  at  arms  length

appeared  to  be  about  two  inches  long,  that  is,  a very  large

source  of  light.  The  crew  observed  this  light  for  some  minutes

while  cruising  at  13,000  feet.  Between  55  and  40  miles  from

Christchurch  the  aircraft  captain,  of  his  own  volition,  turned

towards  the  light.  This  necessitated  a 90°  turn  onto  a heading

of  about  125°  at  about  25°  bank.  The  aircraft  speed  was  215

knots.  The  image  on  the  aircraft  radar  moved  to  10  miles  from

the  aircraft  but  the  crew  cannot  say  whether  this  was  due  to  >

their  velocity  or  the  movement  of  the  radar  return.  The  radar  1

image  then  stayed  in  the  same  relative  position  to  the  aircraft

for  a few  minutes  (as  if  it  were  'backing  up*  at  the  aircraft's

speed).  At  this  stage  the  large  light  appeared  to  go  above,

behind,  and  below  the  aircraft  as  the  captain  turned  left  to

regain  track  and  avoid  further  'confrontation*  with  the  ob;jectI

This  series  of  events  occurred  over  a time  frame  of  about  20  I

minutes.  Throughout,  Christchurch  radar  was  working  but  reported

nothing.  Wellington  Radar  had  been  observing  the  aircraft  during

the  period  but  did  not  report  any  unidentified  radar  contact  in

that  area,

23 » The  visual  observation  made  by  the  crew  is  consistent

with  an  unusual  view  of  Venus,  The  bearing  of  the  observation
coincides  with  the  point  at  which  Venus  would  have  been  visible.

However,  this  observation  was  made  at  about  0225  and  Venus  did
not  rise  until  about  0328.  Nevertheless,  DSIR  scientists  have
advised  that  with  super  refraction  it  would  be  possible  to  see
the  planet  some  time  before  it*s  actual  rising  and  if  it  were  |

seen  it  would  have  the  appearance  that  the  crew  described.  The  j

last  effect  of  the  light  passing  above,  below  and  behind  the
aircraft  could  be  explained  by  an  astronomical  phenomenon  known
as  the  'troublesome  layer'.  In  the  prevailing  conditions  with
a marked  inversion  above  about  10,000  feet,  and  fairly  strong
westerly  winds  with  standing  waves  on  the  leeward  side  of  the
Alps  the  inversion  layer  can  take  on  a marked  wave  form.  Thus  !

at  the  time  that  the  light  performed  its  convolutions  around  ,

the  aircraft  it  is  possible  that  the  aircraft  was  passing  from  j

one  side  of  the  inversion  layer  to  the  other.  The  fact  that  |

the  light  was  no  longer  visible  tends  to  support  this  thesis  and  i

it  is  most  probable  that  the  aircraft's  radar  return  was  spurious  |

or  of  a ship,  in  view  of  the  lack  of  confirmation  of  any  other  j

targets  in  the  area  by  the  Wellington  Radar,  j

f

J

24.  As  the  aircraft  approached  Kaikoura  two  or  three  radar  !

contacts  were  noted  on  the  aircraft  radar  at  about  ten  o'clock  |

position.  These  would  be  consistent  with  the  radar  returns  i

Wellington  had  noted  in  the  Clarence  area  for  most  of  the  night  - 1

and  were  almost  certainly  spurious.  1

25.  Approaching  Cape  Campbell  the  aircraft  captain  observed  i

what  he  thought  was  a fishing  fleet  off  Cape  Palliser.  These

might  well  have  been  part  of  the  squid  fleet  enroute  south.  •

26.  As  the  aircraft  turned  towards  Blenheim  the  first  officer
observed  what  appeared  to  be  orange  lights  in  the  Nelson  Bay  area
which  appeared  to  move  across  the  sounds  towards  Picton.  No
explanation  can  be  offered  for  this  observation  but  it  has  not


/hppcn  p.rm "P T TTnefl


The


-8-


been  confirmed  by  any  sightings  made  from  the  ground,
aircraft  landed  at  Blenheim  at  0315»

Conclusions

27.  The  foregoing  report  has  been  compiled  after  interviews
with  most  of  the  principle  witnesses  involved  with  the  sightings
20/21  and  50/5'1  December  1978.  The  SAFE  pilots  were  most  help-
ful to  the  reporting  officer  in  the  very  frank  manner  in  which
they  related  their  experiences  and  the  time  they  spent  in  inter-
view, It  is  considered  that  the  reporting  officer  should » as
soon  as  possible,  informally  debrief  the  SAFE  aircrew  involved

on  the  general  tenor  of  the  findings  to  date,

28.  It  is  evident  that  because  of  the  interest  over  these
sightings  reports  will  continue  to  come  in  from  Various  sources
and  on-going  investigations  by  DSIE  and  meteorological  officers
will  probably  serve  to  correlate  much  of  the  information.
Nevertheless,  it  is  considered  that  Defence  should  issue  a PR
statement  fairly  soon  in  order  to  tone  down  much  of  the  wild
speculation  that  has  existed  over  recent  weeks,

29.  In  summary  the  reporting  officer  has  made  the  following
findings:

a.  During  the  period  of  the  observations,  and  indeed
now,  atmospheric  conditions  over  NZ  are  conducive
to  freak  propogation  of  radio  and  light  waves.

b.  Venus  was  rising  in  the  eastern  sky  and  at  this
time  of  the  year  is  unusually  bright  in  appearance,

c.  Wellington  Radar  has  been  giving  spurious  indica-
tions off  the  east  coast  of  the  South  Island  for
some  time  but  over  recent  weeks  anomalous  returns
seem  to  have  been  more  prevalent.

d.  During  the  period  an  unusually  large  number  of
vessels  (the  squid  fleet)  sailed  from  Wellington,
often  at  night,  to  position  off  Banks  Peninsula.

Not  only  would  these  vessels  provide  a good  source
for  radar  returns  but  the  lights  that  they  use
when  fishing  could  explain  some  of  the  visual
sightings  of  unusual  lights.

e.  The  reporting  officer  speculates  that  the  observa-
tion of  lights  in  the  Clarence  area  might  have
been  caused  by  trains  or  cars,

f.  The  reporting  officer  is  of  the  opinion  that
the  large  number  of  unusual  occurrences  on


/the  nights


RiSIklCIED


g


“9-


the  nights  in  gnestion  made  some  aircrew  and
air  traffic  controllers  particularly  respon-
sive to  the  various  sightings.

There  is  no  connection  between  the  many  sightings
in  the  Clarence  area  and  the  larger  lights  seen
to  the  east  (and  which  were  the  subject  of  the
much  publicised  TV  films).

h.  Almost  all  the  sightings  can  be  explained  by
natural  but  unusual  phenomena.  The  few  for
which  the  evidence  to  date  in  inconclusive  may
well  be  explained  in  due  course  when  current
investigations  are  completed.


Wing  Commander
Director  of  Operations


RESTRierCB^—


I I


/^NMg'X  A To
k>ps  e£p(?fcT
l^ATg?)  I I


* K'CCt)  ^uCf^E
■ ■


SBc5

l/g/ly  t>!Xf-r
^ OrJ  Ajc..


>'


>*!•


O/f^sF/^v/Ar/o/vs

2o  /2i  D£c  78


SClU  I b r-  l.££  J


>


»>  '
«oa:^


T^^-^crro  ir^xcn


0^


vM


>

V':-


^ir

Nise^tx.'*


SRE  Wexford  Road/ha » kins  Rill  Ch^nreF


SRS

SA  120  .

Radar  Rx..
Processors
L/R  SRE


Notannred  RNO  O91  30<^


PP?  ;=  Ri,)0  ~-\hrS,  9fs^  (i-  I7f,b


New  aerial  reflector,  slotted  feed  arxd  co-ax  run
from^rotating  Joint.  Re-conditioncd  pedestal  and
rotatin;-'  Joint  - data  gear'Pox  - r-'j  chanre.  '’Jip'n  al
turning  encoder  fitted.  ' *

Two  S 2 0|3 0 solid  state  re c e i v e r s i n s t a l ].e d , o .1  d P.R  ^ 00
receivers  still  in  roaition  iTut  avvitched  off  and.  sy-
passed  - can  "be  hrooght  into  service  i.j‘  required.

Two  S7100  solid  st.ots,  digita.!  r-co-.,-essorva  installed.
Both  SJIOOO’s  roiT.oved  from  liH  as  ;vcll  as  associated
delay  cells.

K'lax  range  - ibOnm.  Range  2/SD  i'o10  distilay  T.B,
amplifiers  set  to  place  B0n;-n  range  nine  under  the
cursor  Anohs.


VidgijHaap  - set  at  ISim


rrradji.


teai'anc^e  mai


lot.  avail;


mark  Bma.


C 5:5  ■


. Remote  swite

Aerial

MTI

Radar

Faults


hing  - No  change  except  DSP  B7lo0/1  and  2 replaces
SJ  1000/1  and  2.

■ff-

Tilt  wr  deg.


To  he  run  at  half  speed.


Cancelled  radar  clutter  is  excc-i-ivo;  but  levels  will
be  adjusted  over  the  next  .few  weeks.

Uncancellcd  radar  appears  .-U.fforent  to  previous  radar
due  to  use  of  the  S2050  radar  reoplver  iog/PLD
(pulse  length  discriminator)  video  .output  at  ilH.

Until  staff  are  more  fait'iliar  wit.h  tT;e  .new  equicn’ent
'days  2 will  look  after  faults  on  the  ffOBO  ro-'-eive^s
ana  F7100  data  :.roce?,..orE.  - an  of'-er  fa«lta  to  If
cleare.d  as  before  the  urs.rrrdlng,

TTO  -SRE,

-Veil ington  Air r ort


£'ni


^Oo  -f-  'Cg  - c
•

1 1 ^


/<n>T


O C C>  B-  ^


CCOC^  ;


PERSONNEL  IRTERVIEWED


Name

Capt  V.  Powell
First  Off  I.  Pirie
Capt  J.  Randle

W/0  Uff indell
Mr  V/,  Frame
Mr  M.  Collins
Mr  N.  Rumsey
Dr  D.  Phillips
Mr  R.  Davison
Mr  J . Cord^

Mr  A.  Herd
Capt  W.  Startup
First  Off  R.  Guard
Mr  G.  Causer
Sqn  Ldr  R.  Carran


Designation


Captain  SAFE  Argosy  22  Dec  78  (second  acft).

First  Officer  SAFE  Argosy  21  Dec  78.

Captain  SAFE  Argosy  22  Dec  78  (first
aircraft) .

RNZAF  Duty  Officer  Woodbourne  22  Dec  78.
Flight  Service  Woodbourne  22  Dec  78,

Director  Physics  Laboratory  DSIR.

Head  of  Optics  Division  DSIR.

NZ  Meteorological  Service.

Superintending  Engineer  Radar  CADMOT.

ATC  Radar  Controller  22  Dec  78.

ATC  Radar  Controller  22  Dec  78.

Captain  SAFE  Argosy  51  Dec  78.

First  Officer  SAFE  Argosy  51  Dec  78.

ATC  Radar  Controller  51  Dec  78.

Orion  Captain  Jan  79 •

Fisheries  Control  Centre,  MAP.


Po4-t.r\A/>s.


[\W


AIDE  MEMOIEE


Possibilities ;


Ducting

Hotspots

Venus

Jupiter

Stars

Planets

Clandestine  Operations
Hoax

'Real  UFO*

Ships

Birds

Wave  Cap  Radar  Returns
Cyclical  Patterns?

Light  Waves
Radio  Waves

Squid  Fleet  Movement  over  period?

Dr  Wall  Porirua  - freak  propogation  experiment  Canterbury  19^8.

Dr  Neil  Cherry  Lincoln  College  - current  study  Canterbury  NW
conditions.

Clarence  TV  film  - possible  planet  or  star  rising?

DSIR  Clarence/Kaikoura  theodolite  observation  star  rising.  Apparent
movement  caused  by  heat  from  Japanese  vessel  on  horizon  in  line  of
sight.

Coincidence  of  observations  only  by  SAFE  Argosy  crews?

Freak  return  generated  by  aircraft  itself  (mirror,  mirage,  radar
return  etc)?

Squid  fleet  position  21  Dec  78' onwards.

Squid  fleet  lights  turn  off  time.

Meteorite,  asteroid  shoals  - refer  astronomy  info.

Jupiter/Venus  rising/setting  times,

ANZ  timetables  (strobe  lights).

Observations  all  over  water,  distances  vague  except  for  radar  plots.
Radar  plots  possibly  not  coincident  with  visual  sightings.
Lighthouses,  aerodrome,  navigation  etc  beacons.

Last  month  extreme  clarity  of  atmosphere.

Inversion  layer  (refer  gram).

Examine  films  (Sqn  Ldr  Clarke  to  arrange).

DDI  interest?

Customs  interest?

Police  interest?

Fisheries  interest?


MANUAL  OF  AIR  TRAFFIC  CONTROL


SURVEILLANCE  RADAR  EQUIPMENT
1 - MARCONI  RADAR  TYPES  3264  AND  S264A

TECHNICAL  DATA


Wave  Length

Prequenoy

Peak  Power  Output

Bea/u  width

Pulee  Length

Pulse  Recurrenoe
Frequency

Rate  ot  Scan
Range  Selection

jMitenna  System

Wind  l4Aitationa

Presentation

Special  FaQlUtlaa


50  cms4
585  “ 610  ffiOS
50-60KW

S264Aj^500KW  (n<»alnal)i/"

2 or  4 microsf^^  r

3264:  525  - 775  p.p*s.

S264A :

500  - 800  pps  (2i»b  pulse)

260  • 585  ppa  (4m  pulse)

5 or  io

In  ratio  of  1 : 2 i 3 J 4 according
to  range  ayailable

Parabolic  reflector  with  offset
linear  wave  guide  feed.

Up  to  60  kno^  at  10
Up  to  90  knoie  at  5 r-p.a.

S264:  Moving  coll  12  in.  PPl

S264A;  Fixed  coll  12  ii^.  PPX

MTX#  STC*  Srwept  Galhi  Video  Happing>
Off  centering.


2.  GENERAL


2.1  The  naln  features  of  the  S264  are  its  alsoat  complete  freedom
Trcm  weather  clutter^  the  a table  and  efficient  Mfl  ayatem  and  the
high  overall  radar  perforaanoe  obtained  with  oon^aratlvely  low  power.

sa64  can  be  converted  to  S264A  equipment  at  any  time.

2.2  The  S264A  poaseaaea  all  the  main  ewivantagea  of  the  S264  plus
the  exceptional  range  and  altitude  cover.  These  features  make  this
«quip»«^t  roost  suitable  for  its  dual  role  as  both  area  and  approach
3 «H  .£ .


3-  a FECIAL  FACILITIES


5*1  Mil

3.1.1  This  is  a fully  dol^erent  system  with  the  transmitter^  reference
oaolllator  anu  trigger  pulee  generator  all  crystal  controlled.  No
automatic  frequency  control  Is  required  as  the  receiver  is  looked  to


Departraent  of  Civil  Aviation
New  Zealand


o/^t  Dec.


'3a5^


/ffo  h/k(QueNC


Cajjf^  J^/Wtuc

=4  f Ml


l^U^^UJL  OC^jkJ^  c j ^riujfi

h>\£^  A/  ^ JV^-V  p^/^-Uld

^ ^!o  (4^  Tu^^^kul

! 9<^W-^k<  ' T^o  SrH'vaJi'i'"(

k-A^  k^h  CAjCL4\JUa.^  /Q.UAJLA.


"cCr-\^


^ r / <^^Mj:ii^  /j  (r^o^P^

' - S/^  ^

- c#  -~-  — Wis.  3cy<J'  ^IsK^^oicej


) K>0


Q(tc

— /vg

O^iO

.•— 5

•^lAvi’(

f-'ijLaAf'  ,'<LMu^tZ.e{

'“T,

^ ( cX  ^

/ >

f

H fj'

) (’^-O

Nre^

'75>  bc<M/?

^ /

o^  <^i^4swK  . ^77'^  i!^^)  OH  OiA^j

l'(  O /\14^4  :


Scr/i


( 0e5Ty  , <>  f ^^U^J^  0^  ^

^ ^ V C ^ 'f*4<iU.'VAjC^  — j

W-Wcu.'O  £r  ^ r5  |?  lXiJ^

W-V  io  /*v^o  iC-  ^nr  1 O^o  - J

\;-J^\/  L-  j \f  <zxj^jxJ^(x  * % v\/>^


>A-


Kj^u>t  ^ vv^twUj  <7^  Wi.iu.

C i/V  - O'-^S

I r \J  ^-^>-0"' 4 ^ t/'

Vc  ^ (S^.c^  ^


<


P^ix.^  .e--||J2.^4^ , ?1^c — cx—J^  J J


J^  ^-W\  OJK^Ajr-T'  1'<'c\_eA^  "^C  i^I^jDvi^  W <n/  |^V  &-e<i

^ CrvsJL  •v  £«w_«.  gVjcl£-i^  ^C.  4<iV-o  S-Uq4M><  t~o<A~(;  ^cx^a^  W{(a„«4

V ^ ^^==-4oQ.aw^  W'rv/ «»,  ^ _


MINUTE  SHEET


Subject:


Uht


Department:

File  No.

Date:.


X.  ^ ■


t&isL^LdyiicL  Me  5~'o^K,79


7c  a ^ixian-U  i^cA  o-vk  Uf6  l/fxilcc


yecr.


i'i.^a'Ts  ^s2i2M'^  CL  ^tcci'nA^’'  C^.  i(  o^Cl^)  L-}\  y ^ixe'^  d\.  ^uJCr


ccPcgg^^s  CL.  /xdt  -^AA2ieg/  oiyect.  /c<^<cU.c.L  ot\  Xz.  lU£t  Lu  Xtr

Oi  ^ . i .


0 P * P

%1a,yec(  'Hr  jL^tZiL  Aa-c/V , /ecux:;^in  Q cc><u,Cer  upy^/^S^f'cys,

./■  PPPPPPPjP  / ) A>


-vK  ^ /uALxuc^  i^iXiLC  (cia^i  i^t  ccn^rt^cl  ) <k  /ctry<?  >'yu27^f.


^cu.(S.iL/~  lOtM^  fkxk  Cj?pjccrCu\.cs>  jy^  cjKiO/OJi  o/aw  ^KCnj^iMcl.


kci^xsL  ^ saw^ct  'funjs  LJin  ct  evao  dU/iTuj-Lsfi  L


^ cc^Lcmz-rC'Cum


(x^jch^lL  ’^y  rou.'i'<£  %ui  h&ctcl/<x’)oc(  ■


^ *fL  ) hccOux')  </  CiXcoy^  / luxoi.


CU\


(^CiP

Peo  ki-z£ .


Item  504


90608B— 140,OOOpads/2/77  D


uvri,

OBSERVATIONS  OF  UNIDENTIFIED  RADAR  RETURNS
ON  50  cm  HAWKINS  HILL  RADAR,  8.1.79.


In  the  early  morning  of  Monday  8.1.79,  I kept  watch  with  John
Cerdy  at  the  Wellington  Control  Centre.  The  general  consensus  of
others  present  before  midnight  was  that  there  was  an  inversion  -
witness  echoes  from  mountains  such  as  Ruapehu  to  confirm  this.  In
extreme  inversions  the  coast  near  Wanganui  is  seen,  but  it  was
not  seen  on  Monday  morning.

Significant  modifications  to  the  radar  have  taken  place  since
last  summer.  The  effect  on  the  display  of  anomalous  echoes  is
probably  significant,  but  I have  not  attempted  to  verify  this
assumption.

Anomalous  returns  which  John  Cardy  could  not  identify  were
present  all  the  time,  especially  between  about  1 a.m.  and  3 a.ra.,
when  there  may  have  been  a dozen  present  at  a time.  They  all
had  the  appearance  of  aircraft  echoes  when  seen  on  the  MTI  (moving
target  display)  . I think  they  v/ere  generally  absent  when  viewing
"raw  video”.  I suspect  that  even  the  "raw  video"  was  pre-processed
somewhat .

Early  in  the  morning  we  attached  no  significance  to  movement
of  the  anomalous  returns,  but  on  reflection,  I think  they  were
moving  quickly  outwards,  because  the  afterglov?  was  often  visible
at  shorter  range.  John  had  pointed  this  out  at  some  stage.

Most  of  the  anomalous  returns  were  noticed  in  the  area  off
the  Kaikoura-Cape  Campbell  coast,  but  others  occurred  in  Cook
Strait  and  over  Marlborough  Province.  They  generally  appeared
suddenly  and  lasted  for  a short  time,  rarely  for  more  than  a few
minutes .

A persistent  group,  seen  I think  only  with  raw  video,  occurred
about  15  miles  from  Christchurch.  They  moved  generally  northwards
over  more  than  1^  hours.

Between  0450  and  0500  unusual  "spotty"  echoes  covered  the
coastline  at  Kaikoura-Clarence  R.  John  Cardy  identified  these
as  rain,  but  there  was  no  rain  there  at  that  time.

On  the  MTI  photo  at  0219  an  echo  composed  of  three  spots
appears.  This  was  different  to  all  the  others  seen.  It  moved
northwards  and  I would  identify  it  as  a ship  seen  on  "raw  video"
photos  later,  moving  at  about  11  knots,  passing  Cape  Campbell
at  about  0340.  Another  ship  was  tracked  from  the  Brothers  west-
wards for  an  hour  at  about  17  knots  - this  was  visible  on  MTI.

The  most  interesting  example  was  seen  to  be  moving  radially
outwards  at  172°  at  an  erratic  100-150  knots  for  10-15  minutes.

It  was  50-60  N. MILES  from  Wellington.  Although  we  did  not  notice
when  it  first  became  visible,  it  disappeared  quite  quickly  at
about  0445.


^ J


W.  Ireland
9.1.79.


0333,  UIDEO.  /feoMi.

g4A/«S  PBf^!N£ULf\  Keru^hi
/VT  {if^NG.e

7"UJ0  f\  NOMf{  L~0(A.i  ^Ctrioes

/S'  mL  Ho^TH  of  f^A/\JKi  r,


OAS'O.  OibEo  9o  HI.

''/?A(k\J‘''  FCHOBB  oyilF  mKOUi^k
poii^ULt  SHIP  Pfr  IS  Ml,


TfiiPLE  echo  Possible  si-iip
fi^r  ^'‘

fH-L  OTHE/i  EC140ES  (o^
f\-MOt^EtLOUS.


0i4S($^  M.r,  r.  10^1

5>f/p  ofE  sou-t^ys  3 6 M/.

/q-Al(?Mft40a.S  echo  A-T'  /72°(t')
M.oi/^A/G  /?A>

100-'S"0  KT.


MIgUTE


Defence  Duty  Officer


UFO  SIGETIKGS


1 . Any  reports  from  Wellington  Air  (Traffic  Control  Author-
ities of  xinident.if ied.  radar  contacts  are  to  be  reported  to  D Ops
(Wg  Cdr  Clements)  home  telephone  number  399^^'^  as  soon  as
possible.  As  much  detail  as  possible  should  be  obtained  from
ATC  including  any  visual  or  radar  contacts  made  by  aircraft  at

or  about  the  same  time.

2,  Any  reports  from  civilians  should  be  recorded  with
details  of  time,  place,  hei^t , description  etc  and  passed  to
D Ops  during  normal  wo:]^iiig  hours,

3»  Thank  you.


5 Jan


MESSAGE  FORM


LtNE  1


LINE  2


FOR  COMM  CEN/SIGNALS  USE

r


iiiirrnTiT3T


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION


LINE  3 DE


LINE  4


PRECEDENCE  - ACTION  PRECEDENCE  - INFO

ROUTINE


DATE  -

6 36  r"  2r  7 °l


ROUTING  INDICATORS


FROM

TO  j"'  —


DIG/ORIG  No.

■fesy  729


iVr/ftf  o/7/k  one  addressee  per  fine

Cv  r?-r


C I '


^rr


' * f f 7'o  < 0-7 -5  i


O V'-’ -V  'y<c  1}


BRING  UP

ON

TO

INITIALS

FILE

DATE

INITIALS


r Htb  ^


CL


~7o  / ^ C 7


'■  7y,Cti  ( d


r 6 : r 7 •••■!!;  ^ . c-  t iSf  f H

c-  ■■)  L.  f**  V/.  '“V  ’1  ' ''  ■■'  2>  ^ ^


' - y\  ( y ? Cr  c t ^ C A~  3

vo<^c,t,w  <rf  ^ "-IK  L"  fj

• V A I t ii  *\c  n/i^s'  ^

' t f c * ^ Ac >- / A-r\i  ^ L C.  "7  ' \ ' t t

^ ^"L  - • % A.  ^ V ^ V ^ ^ r ^ .


Vw


At  -A  -'^’V


'I  / i.y.  /


C.  7t  i V ' i V.^


REFERS  TO  MESSAGE

PAGE  No.

DRAFTER^S  name  AND  TITLE

• c ’■  ■ t - ’7C  ^r-A

PHONE  No.

• 1 7Kif

REF.  FILE  No.

CLASSIFIED

YES

CD  NO

No.  of  PAGES

f

RELEASER'S  NAME  AND  TITLE

ft

L'

/SIGNATURE

i-Aj  ' i .■■-*

■ : ■

FOR  DATE  TIME  SYSTEM  OPERATOR  DATE  TIME  SYSTEM  lOPERATOF

OPR'S  R D


SECURITY  CLASSIFtCAnOTN'

N 't  A /r  .'  s,

9584 2C-20, 000/6/77  D


SUMMARY  OF  INTERVIEW


S'jirC.-Jl  CA'5'C-i^


WITH  CAPTAIN  W.  STARTUP

FUst  ©jfvC/A,  \rfX2A^  rtvX

1 . Captain  Startup/.  . of <\SAFE  Argosy  that  took

off  Wellington  50  Dec  78  at  25^6  hours  to  proceed  via  Cape  Campbell,
abeam  Kaikoura  thence  Motunau  Island  to  Christchurch.  The  air-
craft radar  was  not  used  on  the  South-bound  leg  to  Christchurch.


2.  At  ^nOOT5.;  while  climbing  to  14,000  feet  the  aircraft

crew  observed  four  to  five  lights  close  to  the  surface  near  the
coast  and  with  the  lights  of  Kaikoura  in  the  background.  The
crew  asked  Wellington  ATC  Radar  controller  whether  there  were  any
radar  returns  in  that  area.  Wellington  Radar  Controller  replied
that  they  did  have  radar  contacts  15  nautical  miles  ahead  of  the
aircraft.  The  crew  saw  ”a  pulsing”  type  of  white  light  that
looked  like  helicopter  search  light  zooming  onto  the  beach  north
side  of  Kaikoura  penihsulasti-  The  crew  could  not  relate  these
lights  to  the  Wellington  radar  returns.  (My  feeling  is  that
they  were  the  same  four  or  five  radar  contacts  that  Wellington
Radar  was  plotting  in  Clarence  River  Mouth  area).

5.  5'10018  when  the  aircraft  was  about  ten  miles  northeast

of  the  Clarence  River  Mouth  Wellington  Radar  advised  crew  that
there  was  a radar  return  behind  them.  They  orbited  and  saw
nothing.


4,  5'^0042  when  the  aircraft  was  about  ten  miles  northeast
of  Motunau  Island  Wellington  Radar  advised  that  they  had  a radar
target  one  mile  from  the  aircraft  which  appeared  as  a larger  radar
return  than  the  aircraft  and  appeared  to  be  tracking  the  aircraft.
Captain  Startup  carried  out  a left  orbit  but  neither  he  nor  First
Officer  Guard  saw  anything.  Christchurch  radar  was  not  operating
for  ATC  purposes  at  this  time.

5,  Just  before  crossing  the  coast  near  Woodend  the  crew
observed  what  appeared  to  be  a white  light  on  the  starboard  side
of  the  aircraft?and  radar  advised  (which  radar?)  that  there  was  a
target  at  three  o'clock  to  the  aircraft  that  "moved  off"  when  the
Argosy  was  on  short  finals,  about  1.5  miles  from  touchdown.

6,  When  taxiing  to  dispersal^ area  the  crew  and  the  controllers

in  the  tower  observed  lights  to  the  right  of  Sugar  Loaf  Hill  which
had  the  same  pulsating  characteristicsfes  the' liightu seen  earlier  in  •
the  flight  J (s.fi.uA.W/'.ve'i  I

7*  The  aircraft  departed  Christchurch  5^^021 6 and  climbed  out

on  the  055  degrees  radial.  Both  crew  members  observed  a big  white
light  to  the  northeast.  The  aircraft  was  then  seven  miles  north-
east of  Christchurch  with  the  aircraft  radar  on  "mapping  mode".

With  the  aircraft  radar  on  the  fifty  mile  range  the  return  appeared
as  a small  blip  at  two  o'clock.  On  the  twenty  mile  scale  the
image  appeared  at  18  miles  and  was  in  length.  Thus  the  radar
return  was  about  25  miles  from  Christchurch  Airport  to  the  north-
east. (Some  doubt  as  to  whether  the  light  that  was  observed  and
the  radar  contact  were  one  and  the  same^  bearing  in  mind  there  would
be  no  background  upon  which  the  crew  could  visually  assess  the  distance
of  the  light.)  Slightly  before  the  first  officer  had  observed
through  the  cloud  a light  which  he  describes  as  looking  like  a
"squashed  orange".  Eventually  this  light  became  Visible  and


o


-2-


measured  against  the  thumb  at  arms  length  appeared  to  be  about
two  inches  long,  ie , a very  large  light  if  it  was  a long  way
from  the  aircraft.  The  crew  observed  this  light  for  some  time
and  when  at  13,000  feet  and  between  55  and  40  miles  from
Christchurch  the  aircraft  captain  of  his  own  volition  turned
towards  the  light.  This  necessitated  a 90  degree  turn  onto
a heading  of  about  125  degrees  magnetic  at  about  25  degrees  bank.
The  aircraft  speed  was  215  knots.  The  image  on  the  aircraft
radar  moved  to  ten  nautical  miles  from  the  aircraft  (the  crew
cannot  say  whether  this  was  due  to  their  velocity  or  the  movement
of  the  radar  return) . The  radar  image  then  stayed  in  the  same
relative  position  to  the  aircraft  for  a few  minutes  (as  if  it  were
badking  at  the  aircraft  speed)  and  then  the  light  which  had  been
previously  observed  appeared  to  go  above,  behind  and  below  the
aircraft  as  it  turned  left  to  regain  track  and  avoid  further
"confrontation"  with  the  object,*  This  episode  concluded  when
the  aircraft  was  about  55  miles  from  Christchurch  so  encompassed
a time  frame  of  about  20  minutes,

8.  Throughout,  Christchurch  radar  was  working  but  reported
nothing.  Wellington  radar  had  been  observing  the  aircraft  at

153  miles  from  Wellington  when  it  was  at  13,000  feet  but  apparently
did  nbt  report  any  unidentified  radar  contacts  to  the  aircraft  and
the  aircraft  captain  decided  that  he  would  "keep  this  particular
episode  to  himself".  However  it  was  during  this  period  that  the
TV  film  was  made  so  it  is  possible  that  distraction  in  the  aircraft
precluded  ^dsm;  much  dialogue  with  ATC.  (Check  this  with  Captain
Startup  and  Wellington  ATC^,

9.  As  the  aircraft  approached  Kaikoura-,;  east  two  or  three
radar  returns  were  noted  on  the  aircraft  radar  at  about  the  ten
o'clock  position,  (These  would  be  consistent  with  the  radar
returns  Wellington  had  noted  in  the  Clarence  area  for  most  of  the
period) .

10.  The  aircraft  captain  observed  what  he  thought  was  a

fishing  fleet  off  Palliser  (note:  40  or  so  Japanese  fishing  boats

sailed  from  Wellington  on  the  night  of  30/51  December  to  take  up
their  position  off  Banks  Peninsula.  And  six  squid  boats  have  been
in  position  off  Banks  Peninsula  since  21  Dec.  (Check  with  FCC
for  precise  movements  of  squid  fleet.)

11.  As  the  aircraft  turned  towards  Blenheim  the  First  Officer
observed  what  appeared  to  be  orange  lights  in  the  Nelson  Bay  area
which  tended  to  move  across  the  sounds  towards  Piet on.

12.  The  aircraft  landed  at  Blenheim  at  0515*

(%.  Irvf-eokAUXs/s.  cAjtOok  j IaAHjl  clcyw«>/

VA/  S C ^ oKQji^


'<T  '-5?


4

\

. \


\ i

\,S r


; •(.*

v t i v^
Vrr'\\  I

<r\  ^ i \ \ - \


\ )

t\

}


40-


I


'tv


c


tr\


1/


, 4

J


/

t

'A.


irV--ife^/eb  T»i,^vg.  f«p3ti  s«»wN»

'f  /

Tv/


■ /
\

A


W^SrfTS'  a/'

, . iOfljpACft  cofti  SrA*^''^

/ I 8tAl*»i  TOimtc  Q<f

ww  nn^n/L  d*n»vHJ  ISiWfc


/ X


KftintM  aF«sr*

JJ  ,or  *f  Oj4b  PlU3?t  TvMW  tSUAMe,  elWACr
o*^^cr  ^ cic^f^  -T^t  /On»s  WX

. Oftj!(W«;  4(JSUJ  SetfJ

-■^-■-i):-  AMUJoiHA — £ilic>2/6  AT  is*w^wc  ,y*x  (Lfi^M,


At  ASomT


. „ 45


Qzftr';f^

(i,  lo^  6c^u\AiA


...  G.MT.  .-'T-/..'..


mG


‘\f,  ,c4«f'^»08  AW«>*  10^0436  W C.C.,

/\  i OO/^

L U4is<li  €»J9<L  (t|  - t2A»C:

I i ^fcw^  'Ajfj


x 'W#4  Kevft  ^uttSo

Of  Uftv^Ts  af^y


Efss-r  .

* ovJl*  ^P/A  (^/Vt  fUiRjM5D<J  (5?®A'fe^'V\'

,4£^  X -furVN^^ti  <if(i

N€AC  Wc»C5!><:*30  |JChT  S-nit  US

\-S^\  if^ik(\L  CM  .


c ^ Y I

?L.e©T  J I


CeL^  ■ .


G.MT


7S


cfj  JeAjJQy,^^  ^ Cof  -So/^

-^L  /


00/ ^ cp'^^C^  CX,,<1,,><^-^^  C j /I'T  C

j ( O (y\^  Co  A/ ^ O ^ c\,^  o “ a-'Ca-e^^  ^


AjCL-^^O-'X-h^  !^<SLj^


A^  - ^ ^ AjUxjj^


-J  i ‘ r >/


f O (A.  X


{(


OA^-e-^^rf  "^e)  .

/L^?a_-<1  1^  --'U:x^

cx^  ftw^  ^1


'''t-^^ulZ  Ca^^s  ^=«— ^ A/  c

(Co  ATC-


CA'iyt'tC


O-0-. cs_^

^ (f>Vj63^ ^ ^--4^0  ^

■ j^a-c2a_  c

: ^ CM  tVa— 7

l/t,j?V/^?vv_^  ly  J>0  ^ Ixl^'-^Q — S^

CkJJ.  fX— lOSA—j-  C~  ^ ^ T


SUMMARY  or  INTERVIEW
WITH  CAPTAIR  J.  RARDLE


1.  Captain  Randle  was  the  Captain  of  a SAFE  Argosy  that
took  off  from  Woodbourne  2?  Dec  78  at  0110  for  a 7/oodbo-urrne ,
Christchurch,  Auckland,  Woodbourne  flight,

2,  VvTien  going  on  duty  at  about  midnight  he  observed  what
could  have  been  two  vehicles  on  the  hills  towards  the  Cape
Campbell  direction  moving  in  a northerly  direction.  He  thought
these  could  be  two  landrovers  driving  fairly  fast  over  very  rough
terrain.  He  makes  this  observation  because  of  the  light  beams
described  by  the  Woodbourne  Orderly  Officer  and  Mr  Frame.

5.  At  0159  on  the  south-bound  leg  to  Christchurch  with

Christchurch  visible  from  Cape  Campbell  and  a clear  sky  he
was  asked  by  Wellington  radar  to  check  the  Clarence  River  area
because  Vfellington  were  receiving  radar  returns  from  that  area.

He  observed  some  lights  at  low  level  that  could  possibly  have  been
in  the  Clarence  area.  When  the  aircraft  was  about  50  miles  north
the  lights  appeared  to  go  out  or  disappear.

From  Kaikoura  east  the  aircraft  plotted  on  radar  a large
vessel  17  miles  northeast  of  Motunau  about  seven  miles  off  the  coast.
The  crew  had  visual  contact  v^ith  a ships  lights  in  that  position.
However  Captain  Randle  estimates  that  for  the  size  of  the  radar
return  the  ship  must  have  been  fairly  large  (1,000  tons  or  so),
and  he  considered  it  unusual  that  such  a large  vessel  would  have
been  so  close  to  the  coast.

5.  At  0406  enroute  to  Auckland  from  Christchurch  WeiJ-lington
Radar  again  requested  that  the  Clarence  river  radar  returns  be _
checked.  The  aircraft  captain  confirmed  that  lights  were  visible
in  that  area  out  to  sea  and  he  srot  the  impression  of  the  lights
making  a rectangular  pattern  at  irregular  frequency.  The  lights
had  a beam  appearance  rather  than  a point  source  appearance  and
seemed  to  "turn  away"  rather  than  turn  off.  One  light  appeared
to  illuminate  the  surface  and  Captain  Randle  assesses  that  the
source  of  the  light  could  have  been  at  about  1,000  feet.

6.  The  Clarence  returns  were  the  only  ones  that  Captain
Randle  was  asked  to  look  at.

7.  Captain  Randle  has  produced  two  sets  of  notes,  one  made
during  the  flight  and  one  afterwards  providing  his  comment/specula-
tion about  the  incident.


NOTES  GOIvgILED  BY  CAPTAIN  J.  lUNDLE
SAFE  AHGOSY  FLIGHT  22  DEC  78
'■VOODBOUBNE/CHRISTCHUECH/AUCKLAND


South-bound,  Lights  were  seen  close  to  shore  which
corresponded  with  l¥ellington  radar  returns  at  ranges  of  50  plus
miles.  These  were  unusually  bright  for  normal  ground  lights  and
in  one  case  appeared  to  be  lighting  up  the  surface  in  the  Kekerenge(?)
district.  None  were  continuous.  In  some/most  cases  seemed
directional  (beam  not  point  source).  I saw  no  lights  closer  than

50  odd  miles  which  were  not  (most  probably)  ships.

2.  a.  Aircraft  radar  return  about  Gore  Bay  about  seven

miles  off  coast  then  lights  corresponding  to  fair
size  ship.

b.  Three  light  groups  with  two  defined  radar  returns

about  ©50/25  nautical  miles  Christchurch.  At  points
of  letter  L with  about  three  and  eight  m.ile  arms.

Centre  target  apparently  large  ship  with  floodlit
decks.

5,  North-bound.  No  unusual  lights,  other  than  known

ships.  In  mid  straits  a 180®  check  showed  lights  corresponding
to  Wellington  radar  position  off  Clarence.  These  behaved  like
unexplained  lights  in  para  1 , intensity  and  with  switching  effect
with  some  possible  sea/cloud  reflection  light  not  constant  in
bearing  and  possibly  in  altitude  - or  two  plus  sources.

Wellington  radar  targets  which  were  close  to  us  both  north  and
south-bound  and  were  not  ships,  were  not  seen  visually  or  on  our
radar  i.e.  the  mystery  lights  were  not  observed  at  less  than  50
odd  miles.  Venus(?)  was  low  and  very  bright  to  east  and  while
this  would  not  affect  radar  it  could  give  some  red /white  light
effects  visually.  Cloud  cover  u/u  Venus  about  -i/S  ths.  Our
radar  will  not  scan  normally  targets  smaller  than  about  800
tons  - say  Holm  line  beats  - First  Officer  noted  two  light  sources
which  I did  not  see;

a.  Green  light.

b.  Fast  white  light.

c.  Will  differ  in  some  details.


C«nment,  Speculation*

Proa  infli«kt  notes.  My/our  sightings  were  «ost  un<ra*atic
and  while  no  accurate  count  was  nade,  fixe  oodefn,  say
Iroquois  type  helicopters  could  hare  produced  the  whole
performance ,

When  the  surface  was  briefly  lit  up,  in  both  directions,
the  illumination  was  V/V  a/C  landing  lights  of  about  750  watts
stronger  and  consistent  with  a light  of  somewhere  up  to
2000  watts  at  about  1,000  feet.  While  all  light  sources  were
consistent  with  this  asat  med  strength  focussing  effects  could  have
prod  uced  apparent  strength,  but  not  surface  floodlighting.

The  ability  of  our  weather  radar  to  pick  up  surface  shins
is  based  against  visual  checks  on  Jap  fishing  boats  during
attempts  to  range,  and  pot  them,.  It  is  always  possible  that
Tom  Hood  has  screwed  up  the  gear  a notch  and  this  estimate  is
invalid.,

A normal  number  of  presumed  fishing  boat  lights  which  did  not  give
returns  on  our  radar  were  seen.  The  vessels  mentioned  were  unusual
by  virtue  of  their  assumed  tonnage  and  area  and  tracks.  There  was
no  other  reason  to  consider  them  unusual.  They  were  not
inconsistent, taken  together  with  a Russian  whaling/  shipping  fleet
where  the  standard  vessels  are  larger  than  the  Jap  { I have
not  targeted  a Russian  size  vessel  with  our  radar,  this  is
an  assumption)

The  only  question  with  MY  sightings  is  not  how,  for  helicopters
could  easily  have  reproduced  all  radar  and  visual  effects,
but  why,  IB  I dont  want  to  blame  anyone  Russiians  or  RNZAI
they  both  could,  it  is  Illogical  to  assume  either  would.

The  undramatic  nature  of  my  sightings  does  not  mean  that
I have  any  doubts  as  to  the  validity  of  what  others  saw(  Pilots
I mean) , Just  that  I cant  comment  on  what  I didnt  see,

I would  exclude

Mutton  birds,,,,  lights  and  nature  and  one  target  too  far  to
sea  and  speeds  given  of  up  to  I20knots,  surfac  wind  assumed
to  be  almost  calm

Duct  propagation.  Impossible  on  angles

Venus.  I could  see  Venus  Northbound  as  well  as  lights

Meteors, , Stationary  ?

Boats,,  May  have  been  related  but  were  not  source  of  **  radar"  light
Blectrical  Disturbance...  Twenty  knot  winds  at  height,  near  calm
no  surf  line  visible  on  surface.  No  buildups. Stratiform  cloud
S/t  over  breaking  to  far  to  East.  Near  oerfect  vis  under

cloud.  No  cloud  below  about  15000  southbound  and  nerhaes  a bit
lower  14000  Noryhbound  in  area.

Distress  flares,  fire  orks  etc,.  Not  consistent  with  these,  several
sources  close,  in  miles.  Does  not  acorunt  for  radar.

As  noted  Venus  was  at  an  altitude  and  Brilliance  to  give  some
illusions  u.nd  at  least  one  ground  renort  on  noght  seemed
related  to  this


SUMMARY  OF  INTERVIEW  WITH
W/0  UFF INDELL  AND  MR  FRAME


1.  Messrs  Uff indell  and  Frame  were  the  Woodbourne  Orderly
Officer  and  Flight  Service  Duty  Officer  on  the  night  2tD/2^  Dec  78.

2.  At  2350  hours  Mr  Uff indell  saw  what  he  initially  considered
to  be  the  three  lights  of  a Bristol  Freighter  airdraft  three  to

four  miles  away  from  Woodbourne  on  finals  for  the  airfield.  The
lights  did  not  get  any  closer  he  then  checked  the  lights  through
binoculars  and  determined  that  they  appeared  to  be  going  to  Wellington
Of  the  three  lights  the  middle  one  appeared  as  a white  beam  pointing
northward.  The  lights  appeared  to  move  upward  and  around  in  rec-
tangles. He  observed  the  lights  for  about  50  minutes.  The
bearing  from  Woodbourne  was  about  080  degrees  magnetic  that  is  towards
Cape  Palliser.  At  one  stage  the  lights  appeared  to  "rush  forward" .
Over  a period  the  lights  seemed  to  move  northeast  and  then  gradually
faded, iie  describes  the  light's  appearanee  as  teEXKgx  looking  like
somebody  spotlighting.  There  was  no  cloud  in  the  sky.

3.  The  largest  of  the  three  lights  was  yellowish  and  the
other  two  were  white.  They  were  initially  observed  beyond  Cape
Campbell  and  then  sntEd  moved  north.  They  were  about  one  inch

apart  when  measured  at  arms  length.

4.  Mr  Frame  in  company  with  W/0  Uff indell  observed  the
lights  from  the  control  tower  balcony.  He  describes  the  three
lights  as  having  one  bright  orange  and  two  other  less  intense
lights.  The  large  orange  light  appeared  fairly  stationary  and
the  other  two  appeared  to  move  north.  A shaft  appeared  from  the
two  white  lights  angling  down  at  about  40  degrees  in  a northely
direction.  Using  binoculars  appjxrently  had  no  enlarging  effect

on  the  lights.'  Mr  Frame  notified  ATC  Wellington  of  his  observations
and  was  told  by  Wellington  that  they  had  five  radar  targets  in  the
Clarence  area. (Apparently  nothing  to  do  with  the  Woodbourne  sightings.

5.  The  lights  appeared  to  be  slightly  above  the  hills  to  the
southeast  of  Blenheim  and  all  but  one  disappeared  over  a period.

One  of  the  smaller  lights  was  still  visible  when  the  Argosy  took
off  about  0120  hours.

6.  At  0.325  Wellington  phoned  Mr  Frame  to  say  they  had  a large
target  east-north-east  of  White  Bluffs  (Wairau  Bar;.  ’ Nothing  was
visible  from  the  Woodbourne  tower,

7.  At  about  ©355  Mr  Frame  observed  .a  white/red  tinged  light
(alternating)  for  about  five  minutes.

8.  Messrs  Uffindell  and  Frame  will  produce  a map  showing
more  accurately  the  bearings  from  Woodbourne  on  which  they  made
their  observations.


SUMMABY  OF  INTEBVIEIV
WITH  CAPTAIN  V.  POWELL


Captain  Powell  with  First  Officer  Pirie  were  the  crew
of  a SAFE  Argosy  from  Woodbourne  to  Christchurch  and  then  Dunedin
on  2&2  Dec  78.  The  aircraft  departed  Woodbourne  at  O315  hours.

The  w^eather  thouughout  the  flight  was  good  with  a light  northeasterly
wind  and  cloud  to  the  east  of  the  South  Island.  There  was  no
turbulence.

2.  At  0550  Wellington  ATC  asked  the  crew  to  investigate  the

Clarence  Biver  area  for  radar  returns  that  Wellington  was  picking
up.  The  aircraft  crew  did  not  observe  any  activity  either  on
radar  or  visually.

5.  At  0358  the  crew  were  asked  by  Wellington  Badar  to

identify  a strong  radar  return  that  Wellington  was  receiving  about
25  nautical  miles  to  the  port  of  the  Argosy.  Both  the  captain  and
the  First  Officer  observed  a very  bright  light  which  they  variously
desciiLbed  as  bright  orb/pear  shaped  - reddish  tinge  then  turned
white.  From  the  aircraft  the  object  appeared  to  be  stationary
by  visual  observation  however  by  radar  the  object  appeared  to  "track
the  aircraft".  It  appeared  to  be  very  close  - less  than  ten  miles.
(Although  the  light  was  on  the  bearing  indicated  by  the  aircraft
radar  and  apparently  in  the  position  described  by  Wellington  Badar
confirmation  is  necessary  as  to  whether  the  light  could  in  fact  have
been  at  great  distance  bearing  in  mind  the  crew  would  have  ho ‘back-
drop  to  assess  distances  - query  depth  perception.)  The  light
passed  behind  it  out  of  sight  and  radar  contact.  (When  the  crew
say  the  light  tracked  the  aircraft  confirmation  is  necessary  that
it  was  seen  to  move  on  rad^r  because  by  visual  observation  it
appeared  stationary  which  in  fact  would  indicate  that  the  light  was
at  a great  distance  from  the  aircraft.)

_ At  0400  when  50  miles  northeast  of  Christchurch  the
Captain  observed  on  the  aircraft  radar  a return  that  approached  the
aircraft  very  rapidly  and  then  veered  off  sharply  to  the  aircraft's
left.  During  a period  of  about  five  seconds  about  five  radar
returns  were  received  and  in  the  space  of  that  time  the  blips  passed
through  a distance  of  some  I5  miles  on  the  radar  range  scale  and
then  disappeared  from  the  radar  screen.  (10,000mph  per  hour!)

During  this  period  the  aircraft  radar  was  also  plotting  ships  near
the  coast.  Simultaneously  the  First  Officer  observed  a light  he
describes  as  being  like  a Boeing  flashing  strobe  light  which
followed  the  same  path  as  the  radar  returns.  (This  episode  above
all  others  caused  both  aircrew  mild  consternation  to  say  the  least!)

5.  Captain  Powell  checked  with  Christchurch  radar  whether

they  had  had  any  radar  contacts  but  were  advised  that  it  was "not
worth  having  the  radar  on".  (Check  whether  Wellington  radar  observed
anything. )


Gp^F  LG  (2)  W ( ^

FL«  WR

‘V  WELLINGTON

\ ) V.W—

> /

S'  \


42-  Snrrl-

sk


n^lLdWER  X
y Hu^  X /

/USyOsLJ


7 N ^

r Btf)'  I

N-w^LLlNGjONn
V®R  DMH^DBI


F:.GW!0SEC/^  / f ..

, Qibton  Poiny^  iyr  ‘••*


: '/  'I...-  ^ ^>L*^aA-C  •


-'•'=7822


■ ^^oLuniu  UUnd


/ f Ccc  a

■/  o'f"  .•:;i:-~"-..^J'


'i  X / \

( P^^US  BAY  \ y
Caiapoh^^  j

XJ  X

KRISTOHURpH''


:.£^'LG^?v^w^  \J

'^^rrjEiroN

r'^r^,

I BANKS  PENI.\iSUJ.A

^ • 7 J73  I FI  G'.v  5 5£C  /'''^'‘  '•  ■

< r /

Vv  i-r

\ Vr  '*'  iO  SEC


X / XtT I

j ),  X -

/ x/  S’  :

( 'C^o  -f  :

•\  / • - N 'i

\/  X.  O :


vf  l '*'t0  5EC

ALiroi  H<»J


\ACC,  , ■ . I ,


X


■xi  1 I t I t 1 l.U.J.L.MlJ  i 1 t > ? ’ H ; 1 1 t J I < ; 1 I 1 Ll.l  .uJLLi.JLJ-  -U  J-t-I-t  i- -)  i ,>,<-:  I t f

Sccpf  fV-<=jo£v^  rou.H-b©l^


\


\


U i-  5^^


1?-


V -V  ,

>vc^


Mow


fitvcfoi^j  y\t\elco\.  aU:  CCx


i ^ irn  Mkm

i:  •:^:  HELi-i  mt  Si«l:^?f?5- :*»i^  '■


i.: '


y«#'i


nr  £


Cjlux^

. ^ '


^U/\
6 T«MCV  '


NiW

9:;


S>  ©


H?)


I lV
U>eo  (iW


t ''*i .


Pcptn  Ufijid


^\J  '•  \ / <^ukc-u-x  /;-‘-  ••

395!  ^;?  '•  "•' -•"■•"  ''“'‘"/t.^-^^^-  I UPPE p/ HUT.-

V.  P.-^OJaHA  - ‘


•5990


NELSON
Richmond  jj


^ / W*  ^ J .-'  .—  f

7 /I  "'''■'’  POI^iRUA;'*' :.<^-/  ; ^ -..,■  :.

/ i/  ^ ^:r  /’aowER  X /'“■'• '''t'.


- 3PW  T"< rl^lFT  ^

<i-!r  c/.  . . t i '-■i^  ''■^


:-"]7  •^


, ■ BLENHEIM^^


/ ^ Q

^Actfe4iLi;A  {Ad'^'K


N.w>/  X .-


S/  V^^LLtNCWOr.'-
- p-  i -


5555

^ j-  G»*SSA4t/*£


•F<r  IK.


\

i'-N  \-


[v  ’Clpc  Omp^ll


; V Ror<7»7*


>P®«||  . y I / .\  /V

AvA^.'-'xl


• \A  i

I i V 6837  J

I I .[/  ‘ ( jrrrT^r-Qrrv

^ E -T£'7'ff  i - J


T 9465,

'i'‘‘'i^rpTrrpii',jim|i-T


/••■  cM  '

f ^ '"v
/■I  ll


7409*  (;^A


Clarence


•6570  ;eSA'


^ A'’


• -8562  =

‘ KiilieufJ  Penmtutaj


^ AA{TVwft/l


.6152  7-;  h^'-


I .

il  7 # /'l'--i552?'A


I , y


. r\j


/ c9<


Ao-t/  ^ / V .'

^ "

/ A=.GVv«0jf,r/^  / . y

^ k Gtlnon  Poioi/

i*Js^7  /y  SJT  / W p

■•+ — ■rf'  --  ^ ‘’^A:'~-

''T  / * ^ y''  r


W ^''J


^-'"  /'■


1/  ■ :.-


kv2  y*\r  .‘ArV-''**'

K--'  -.r  l

-./  \^  X'  I

A \ y'^  > / C"--

/PECASUS  RAY  \ / / ■-)  '“1

'^x  7a  > r A


'••^WchURCK


/ ../-y
. -\

\


.A-/

xA-.  ,A


/ ir


^oryuiOpi  I

r ?r-A\

\.-.  '•*  )f


\

^ -y

\ F
^ v F

} p


i


^ i\


j i,  BANKS  PENiNSULA


/ r . r

1 f./


\ ^ liANK^b  I-

..U

/ <*  ■ J

! J

"'■<  \\.^7

\'''i  -*'i/jiiC

Ai>il  1^4  !{«;)■}


■\  A
//I

A _.L


'^HC‘  A'-  At-A


F


-i.Ll-:.iji  i.i  uLixlAXi-i,


A/\y^  to<C’‘-^l  ( Ac  /


u V''’^  fv 2 1/**/^^  i ^t^AuU'7


175^


OZi^  ^ lOHl  ttdCC.B$

~RiPLE  E<^t~(0  poSSjBU'^  SW/P

fifT  6 EiP

A-/-L  0Jf~(6/l  ECUOES  (^S')
f\/^Ot^PrLOUS,


T-


The  last  17  pj
this  File  have
mistakenly  re
by  the  printer


es  of


]-*


i'


\k  ypc '


■ v.,Li


(OM(  apsLEi

~>S  36  M/.

to  /vr  /72«

I - >S"0  KT.  ;


Air  39/5/3


HEPORT  ON  UNIDEMTIFHi:D  VISUAL  AND
RADAR  SIGHTINGS  EAST  COAST  SOUTH  ISLAND
DECEMBER  1978


Introduction

1.  On  tke  nights  of  20/21  December '78  and  30/5^  December
78  ?/ellington  ATC  Radar,  and  the  crews  of  SAFE  Argosy  aircraft
(both  visually  and  on  radar)  made  many  unidentified  sightings
off  the  east  coast  of  the  South  Island.  The  first  sightings
gave  rise  to  much  publicity  by  the  media  and  eventual  involvement
of  the  EMZAE  when  it  was  decided  to  conduct  an  Orion  surveillance
of  the  area  on  the  night  of  2/5  January  79*  At  that  time  it  was
decided  to  start  a Defence  investigation  and  this  report  is
submitted,  in  accordance  with  DCAS  instructions  to  provide  a report
on  the  events  surrounding  the  various  sightings.

2,  Air  Staff  was  first  advised  by  Civil  Aviation  Division
of  Ministry  of  Transport  (CADMOT)  of  these  events  mid-morning  21
December  78.  Historically,  Defence  has  adopted  a 'low  profile*
in  connection  with  reports  of  unidentified  sightings.  Thus
CA.DM0T  has  not  normally  reported  unusual  sightings  to  Defence,
However,  because  of  the  number  and  neture  of  reports  on  the  night
20/21  December  78  the  Director  of  Civil  Aviation  specifically
instructed  his  staff  to  advise  Defence.  On  the  basis  of  the  infor-
mation received  Air  Staff  decided  that  should  any  further  similar
instances  occur  we  would,  if  possible,  carry  out  an  investigation

by  the  most  appropriate  aircraft  available  over  the  Christmas
period.  CADMOT  were  advised  to  contact  the  Defence  Duty  Officer
in  the  event  of  any  more  sightings.  As  it  transpired  the  memor-
andum from  CADMOT  Head  Office  to  the  ATC  Centre  was  not  delivered,
thus  the  events  of  30/31  December  78  were  not  reported  to  Air
Staff  until  the  next  day.

5.  Other  Government  agencies,  notably  DSIR  and  NZ  Meteor-

ological Services,  are  conducting  their  own  investigations  and
have  provided  relevant  input  to  this  report.  The  report  is
confined  to  the  events  of  21  and  31  December  78.  It  does  not
take  into  account  the  film  made  by  TV1  on  3 January  79  which  is
now  being  examined  by  DSIR  and  will  most  probably  prove  to  be  a
film  of  Venus  and  Jupiter  rising.

4,  ?,'hen  interviewing  witnesses  it  was  pointed  out  to  them

that  this  was  not  a judicial  enquiry.  The  credibility  of
witnesses'  statements  was  taken  at  face  value.  However,  witnesses
were  not  necessarily  interviewed  separately  because  it  was  con-
sidered that,  with  a fairly  emotive  issue  such  as  'UFOs*,  corrob-
oration was  best  achieved  by  interviewing  observers  of  the  same
events  together.


/Events  20/21  . . .


-2^


Events  20/21  December  7S  (Refer  Chart  at  Annex  A)

5.  On  20/21  Deccniber  7S  there  v.’ere  two  SAFE  Argosy  flights

from  vVoodbonrne  to  Christchurch  one  of  which  proceeded  to  Dunedin
and  terminated,  and  the  other  returned  to  Woodbourne.  The  fi''-st
aircraft  departed  V/oodbourne  210110  NZD'T.  At  O'! 5-9  when  south-
bound to  Christchurch  the  aircraft  captain  was  asked  by  Wellington
Radar  to  check  the  Clarence  River  area  beca\ise  Wellington  ATC
was  receiving  radar  returns  from  there.  The  crev;  observed  lights
at  low  level  that  could  possibly  have  been  off  the  Clarence  River
mouth  but  when  the  aircraft  v/as  about  50  miles  north  the  lights
appeared  to  go  out  or  disappear.  During  this  period  Christchurch
was  visible  and  the  sky  was  clear.  Later  in  the  (fioriiing  (O-^OG)
when  the  aircraft  was  northbound  the  crew  was  again  requested  to
check  the  area  because  Wellington  Radar  was  again  pDck;ing  up  radar
returns  in  that  vicinity.  The  aircraft  crew'^conf irmed  that  lights
were  visible  to  sea'ward  and  the  cx-ew  got  the  impression  of  rhe
lights  making  rectangular  patterns  at  irregular  frequency.  The
lights  had  a beam  appearance  rather  than  .a  point  source  appearance
and  seemed  to  turn  away  rather  than  turn  off.  One  light  appeared
to  illuminate  the  surface  of  the  water  a.nd  the  aircraft  captain-
assesses  that  the  source  of  the  light  could  have  been  at  about
1,000  feet.  However,  it  is  the  reporting  officer's  opinion  that
from  the  aircraft's  height  (1^1-, 000  feet)  it  would  not  be  possible
to  judge  accurately  the  height  of  lights  below  the  aircraft.

One  possibility  is  that  the  aircraft  captain  was  observing  lights
from  cars  or  trains  because  the  main  road  and  railway  run  parallel
and  very  close  to  the  coast  for  some  miles  in  this  area.  * However,
the  aircraft  captain  considers  that  the  sightings  could  have  been
produced  hj  four  or  five  helicopters  and  the  whole  thing  v/as  'quite
undramatic  ' .'  The  likelihood  of  such  extensive  aeronautical
activity  has  not  been  confirmed  by  any  reports  received  from  the
Police  or  local  inhabitants.  In  fact,  no" reports  have  been
received  and  the  Police  do  not  have  any  interest  in  the  area.


6.  The  second  aircraft,  which  departed  V/oodbourne  at  O515,

was  also  asked  by  Wellington  Radar  to  look  at  the  Clarence  River
mouth  area  because  Wellington  was  picking  up  radar  returns  there.
That  aircraft  crew  did  not  obsei’ve  anything  in  the  regj.on  either
visually  or  on  radar.


7.  _ Subsequent  investigations  and  scientific  observation

carried  out  by  DSIR  proves  conclusively  (in  the  reporting  officer's
opinion)  that  V/ellington  SRE  Radar  does  give  anomalous  radar
returns  off  the  east  coast  off  the  South  Island.  This  was  rrovsd
by  DSIR  observation  of  the  Wellington  radar  8/9  January  79  and
taking  a series  of  photographs  of  the  radar  presentation  throughout
the  night. ^ Concurrently  three  field  parties  were  stationed  at
vantage  points  along  the  east  coast  with  radio  communications  to
the  Radar  Control  Ceiitx'e.  On  several  occasions  d, urine:  the  night
when  many  large  returns  were  painting  on  ’Vellingtcn  Radar  the
observers  on  the  coast  could  see  nothing  either  in  the  air  or  on
the  sea  in  tne  positions  passed  to  them  by  the  Radar  Controller,


/Furthermore


RPgTBirTFn


restricted


-3-


FurtherTnore , .from  discussions  with  two  or  three  controllers  it
is  evident  that  the  '??ellington  SHE  has  for  several  months  been
giving  anomalous  radar  returns  in  the  Clarence  area  and  south
of  Wellington.  It  is  possible  that  this  could  be  caused  by
a modification  that  was  recently  made  to  the  radar  head  at
Wellington  depressing  it  one  degree.  DSIR  scientists  are  following
up  this  possibility  and  their  findings  should  be  available  in  due
course ,


8.  There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  there  was  any
clandestine  activity  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Clarence  River  mouth.

It  is  possible  however  that  surface  vessels  could  have  been  in
the  area  with  or  without  navigation  lights  but  it  is  doubtful
that  such  vessels  could  have  given  rise  to  the  visual  observations
made  by  the  aircraft  crew.  The  fact  that  Wellington  Radar  'keyed'
both  aircraft  captains  to  look  for  objects  in  the  Clarence  area
might  well  have  induced  observations  from  the  air  which  might  or
might  not  have  been  related  to  the  Wellington  Radar  returns.

9.  From  information  supplied  by  DSIR,  the  ITZ  Meteorological
Services,  and  astronomers,  it  is  evident  that  during  this  period,
and  indeed  for  the  last  month  or  so,  atmospheric  conditions  have
been  conducive  to  freak  propogation  of  radio  and  light  waves.

Thus  it  is  possible  that  the  lights  observed  by  the  aircraft  captain
could,  have  been  produced  by  ships'  lights  reflected  or  refracted
from  afar.  Such  anomalous  propogation  (ducting)  could  also  give
rise  to  spurious  radar  returns.  Note;  The  reporting  officer  has
just  received  ('1155  NZDT)  a report  from  Auckland  that  ATC  has
issued  a NOTAM  that  Auckland  Radar  is  giving  spurious  returns  caused
by  atmospheric  conditions.

10.  During  the  period  that  the  Wellington  Radar  Controller
was  in  dialogue  with  the  aircraft  captains  about  radar  returns  in
the  Clarence  area  the  radar  was  also  tracking  a steady  return  on
a track  of  140° (M)  which  started  at  Wellington,  proceeded  to  50
miles  and  then,  with  less  consistent  radar  returns,  tracked  out  to
60  miles  where  it  became  stationary  for  ^5  minutes.  It  then  moved
west  and  appeared  to  'track'  the  second  southbound  Argosy  at  about
0528.  The  ;”ellington  Radar  Controller  alerted  the  captain  that
there  was  a strong  radar  return  about  25  miles  to  the  port  of  the
aircraft.  The  aircraft  crew  observed  on  that  bearing  a very  bright
lisbit  which  they  variously  describe  as  a bright  orb,  pear  shaped
with  a reddish  tinge  that  then  turned  white.  Prom  the  aircraft
the  object  appeared  to  be  stationary  by  visual  observation  but  by
the  aircraft  radar  appeared  to  track  the  aircraft.  The  light
appeared  to  be  very  close  - less  than  ten  miles.  Although  bhe
aircraft  radar  return  and  the  visual  observation  of  the  light  were
on  more  or  less  the  same  bearing  the  crew  cannot  confirm  that  the
range  was  coincident.  It  is  significant  that  withina  few  minutes
of  the  crew's  observation,  Venus  was  rising  on  a bearing  that
coincided  with  their  visual  observation.  DSIE  optics,  physics,
and  meteoi'ological  experts  have  confii'‘n!ed  that  prevailing  atmos-
pheric conditions  might  ’well  have  produced  most  unusual  but  not
unknown  phenomena  that  could  have  made  Venus  appear  large,  bright
and  orange.  There  is  a plethora  of  astronomical  information  that
describes  this  phenomenon'.  Thus  it  is  highly  probable  that  the
aircrew's  observation  was  an  unus'ual  view  of  Venus.


rl  T'


11.  The  radar  returns  observed  on  the  aircraft  radar  might
have  been  caused  by  a natural  return  by  a ship  or  perhaps  could
have  been  anomalous  returns  caused  by  the  prevailing  atmospheric
conditions.  During  the  period  19-28  December  78  some  50
Japanese  squid  boats  sailed  from  'Wellington  to  the  area  of  the
Mernoo  Banh  (120  miles  east  of  Banks  Peninsula).  These  vessels
departed  Tellington  in  groups  of  about  10  and  their  track  to
their  fishing  grounds  is  almost  identical  to  the  radar  track
plotted  by  Wellington  radar.  Wl’iile  there  is  no  cohclusive  proof
that  these  vessels  could  have  caused  the  fairly  steady  trace
observed  by  Wellington  it  is  a fact  that  during  the  period  of  all
these  observations  there  was  no  shortage  of  shipping  in  the  area.
Furthermore,  once  in  position  and  fishing,  the  squid  fleet  would,
have  produced  an  intense  light  source  which  coupled  with  prevailing
meteorological  conditions  could  have  been  responsible  for  many  and
varied  reflected  or  refracted  light  images.  (Bach  boat  puts  out
about  200kw  of  light.)

12.  A further  observation  (which  has  not  been  reported  by
the  media)  was  made  by  the  crew  of  this  the  same  Argosy  when  the
aircraft  was  some  50  miles  north  east  of  Christchurch.  The
captain  observed  five  consecutive  blips  on  the  aircraft  radar  which
over  a period  of  five  seconds  traced  a pattern  towards  the  aircraft
and  then  veered  off  very  sharply  to  its  port.  Simultaneously  the
co-pilot  observed  a flashing  white  light  (which  looked  like  a
strobe  light)  describing  the  same  sort  of  path.  For  the  brief
period  that  the  returns  were  received  on  radar  the  object  must
have  been  travelling  at  about  10,800mphl  This  sighting,  above

all  others  during  the  night,  caused  the  crew  considerable  consterna-
tion! It  is  possible  that  such  a phenomenon  could  be  produced
by  a meteor  which  are  not  unknown  at  this  time  of  theyear,  A
further  possible  explanation  could,  be  that  the  effect  was  caused
by  a ’double  bounce'  radar  contact  produced  by  ducting.  It  is
note-worthy  that  an  RNZAF  Orion  crossing  Cape  Palliser  on  9 January
78  at  1652  ITZDT  observed  a radar  contact  at  15  miles  moving  fast
towards  the  aircraft.  There  was  no  cloud  and  no  surface  contacts
visible.  The  radar  return  crossed  the  aircraft's  track  one  mile
ahead,  but  there  was  no  visual  sighting.  The  closing  speed  was
calculated  at  1 ,000mph  thus  the  object  itself  was  travelling  at
some  650  mph.  CPHQ  staffs  have  conside.red  the  possibilities  and
assess  that  the  radar  return  could  have  been  of  an  object  200
miles  north  of  MZ  (perhaps  cloud)  with  freak  propogation  giving
rise  to  the  radar  observation  made  in  the  aircraft.  But  for
knowing  that  a Defence  enquiry  was  under  way  OPHQ  would  not  normally
h.ave  considered  it  necessary  to  pass  on  this  information.

15.  A further  sighting  on  the  20/21  December  78  was  made  by

the  Orderly  Officer  and  Dut^/  Ai.r  Traffic  Controller  at  HWZA.F  Ease
h'oodbourne.  A.t  2550  the  Orderly  Officer  saw  what  he  considered
to  be  three  lights  o.f  a Bristol  Freighter  three  to  four  miles
from  \Voodbourne.  However,  as  no  aircraft  could  he  heard  and  the
lights  did.  not  appear  to  get  any  close.r  he  checked  through  binoc-
ulars and  determined  that  the  lights  appeared  to  be  going  towards
'Venington.  Of  the  three  lights  the  middle  one  appeared  as  a
white  beam  pointing  northward.  The  lights  appeared  to  move  upiward


/and  around


-5-


and  around  in  a racbangular  pattern  but  at  random  speed.  He
observed  the  lights  for  about  50  minutes.  The  bearing  from
v/oodbourne  was  about  080  (w1) , i.e«  , towards  Cape  i^ampbell.

At  one  stage  the  lights  appeared  to  'rush  forward'  but  generally
over  the  period  seemed  to  move  northv»aro.  anc  eventually  fade ^ ^

In  comparative  terms  the  observer  considered  that  the  lights'
pattern  looked  like  somebody  'spotlighting'.  The  Huty  Air
Traffic  Controller  observed  the  same  lights  from  the  control
tower  balcony.  His  impression  was  that  the  lights  comprised
one  bright  orange  light  and  two  less  intense  white  lights.  The
large  light  appeared  to  remain  stationary  while  the  other  two
seemed  to  move  north.  A shaft  of  light  periodigally  appeared
to  'beam  down'  from  the  v;hite  lights  at  abou.t  40  in  a northerly
direction.  Using  binoculars  apparently  had  no  enlarging  effect
on  the  lights.'  This  could  indicate  that  the  lights  were  at
a o-reat  distance  from  the  observer  and  not  in  Cook  Strait  as  he

4->ipc!-;a  -i  c ci vnno'f’'h Ad  b''^  the  fact  that  on  checkinsz

with  vVellington  Eadar  the  Woodbourne  _ observer  was  advised  thao
the  radar  was  painting  five  targets^ in  the  Clarence  area  but  no
mention  was  made  of  any  returns  in  Cook  Strait.  It  is  highly
improbable  that  the  radar  returns  and  the  visual  observations  were
in  any  way  connected.


14,  The  reporting  officer  awaits  a copy  of  the  taped  conver-

sation between  the  Y'ellington  Radar  Controller,  the  aircraft  and
the  y/oodbourne  observer  and  in  addition  the  y/oodbourne  observer
is  preparing  a sketch  map  showing  bearings^  etCj,  in  more  detail,
i’hen  these  two  pieces  of"  evidence  are  available  they  may  shed
more  light  on  the  occurrence!


Summary

15,  It  is  the  reporting  officer's  opinion  that  almost  all

the  sightings  made  20/21  December  78  can  be  explained,  by  natural
but  unusual  phenomena.  There  iwere  atmospheric  conditions  Phat
co\ild  have  produced  unusual  visual  and  radar  I'eturns.  .There
is  no  doubt  that  '.Vellington  SEE  was  (and  still  ip)  .giving  spurious
radar  returns  in  the  area  under  surveillance,  iVith  some  01  the
visual  sightings  of  'beams’  of  light  it  is  only  possible  to
speculate  on  possible  causes.  On-going  investigation  by  DSiR
scientists  and  the  reporting  officer  may  help  to  clarify  this
in  due  course.  Perhaps  the  most  difficult  aspect  to  explain
away  is  the  aonarent  concern  - even  apprehension  - of  the  aircrews
involved  in  the  sightings.  At  present  they  do  not  seem  to  be
prepared  to  accept  the  fact  that  they  might  have  observed  Venus.
Thankfully,  however,  neither  do  they  believe  that  they  saw  a visitor
from  outer  space.'  Perhaps^  when  more  scientific  evidence  is
gathered,  their  minds  will  be  set  at  rest.


Events  50/31  December  78  (Refer  Chart  at  Arnex  B)

16.  On  30/51  .December  78  an  Argosy  on  a routine  flight  (:.>ut

carrying  the  TV  crew  that  made  the  film  shown  on  Australian  TV)
departed  Wellington  at  2346  to  proceed  Christchurch  and  then


/return


irxiir^L


KJil^HWri  cu

-6-


retiirn  to  IVoodbourne.

•17  00^3  while  climbing  to  14^000  feet  the  aircraft

c^;w  observed  four  to  five  lights

coast  of  the  Kaikoura  Peninsula  (pos'-ibly  in  ...he  are  nee  Hive. t

area  but  the  crew  were  not  sure  and  did  not  confirm  wi^h  thexr
rSar).  On  checking  with  Wellington  ATC  the  crew  were  advised

Wellington  Hadar  had  contacts  15  miles  ahead  ox  ^he  xircrait
rthesr-would  have  been  off  Clarence).  The  crew  observed  a ^ ^

pulsing  tj-pe  of  white  light  that  looked  like  a helicopter  searen
light  z-ooming  on  to  the  beach  somewhere  north  0^  Kaikoura

Peninsula.  Again,  it  is  difficult  to  explain  the  lights snore
of  them  being  some  anomalous  type  of  reflection  or  refraction,
carCor  trails.  However  it  is  most  probable  that  the  Wellington
Hadar  returns  were  spurious.

At  0018  when  the  aircraft  was  about  10  miles  north  of
the  Clax'ence  River  mouth,  'Vellmgtcn  Hadar ^acvised
that  there  was  a strong  radar  return  behind  them.  They  orbitea
and  saw  nothing.  This  was  almost  certainly  a spurious  radar
return.

/jo  0042  when  the  aircraft  was  about  10  miles  northeast

of*Motunau  Island, Wellington  Hadar  advised  the  crew  that  there
was  a large  radar  target  behind  the  aircraft  thar  appeared  on
the  radar  screen  as  a blip  larger  than  the  aircra^-t  return  and  ^
anpeared  to  be  tracking  the  Argosy.  The  aircraft  captain  carried
Sut  a left  orbit  but  neither  he  nor  the  first  officer  pw  anything.
The  crew  did  not  refer  to  the  aircraft  radar  ana  ynnstCv-urct.
radar  was  not  operating  for  ATC  purposes  at  the  time.

PQ  Jiist  before  crossing  the  coast  near  irVoodend  the  crew

observed  a white  light  on  the  starboard  side  of  the  aircraft  ano.
Christchurch  Hadar  advised  that  there  was  a target  at  onree-o  ciock
to  the  aircraft  that  ’moved  off’  when  the  aircraft  was  about
1.5  miles  from  touch  down.  Ho  reports  have  been  receavea  j.rom
inhabitants  of  the  area  of  any  unusual  lights  or  aeronautical


activity,
and  radar
anomalous


Thus , again ,


return  were  spurious^
propogation.


the  natural  explanation  is  that  the  lish
possibly  caused  by  some  sort  of


p^i  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  while  taxiing  to  dispersal

both  the  aii'crew  on  the  Argosy  and  the  ATC  officers  in  the  contro^
tower  observed  lights  to  the  right  of  Sugar  Loaf  Hill  wnicn  seemea
to  have  the  same  pulsating  characteristics  as  the  lights  ooservea
earlier  during  the  flight.  The  bearing  of  these  lights  would ^
almost  certainly  coincide  with  the  bearing  of  the  squid  fleeu  .trom
Christchurch  and  if  the  lights  could  be  proved  to  be  refracted
or  reflected  returns  from  the  squid  vessels  much  of  the  mystery
would  be  solved I

22.  At  0216  the  aircraft  departed  Christchurch  on  the  033

radial.  V,1ien  overhead  ’-Voodend  both  c.rew  members  observed  a
large  white  light  to  the  northeast.  They  also  observed  on  the
aircraft  radar  a very  large  target  at  18  miles  from  the  aircraft.
The  crew  cannot  be  positive  that  the  lignt  and  the  radar  return
were  coincident  but  that  was  the  appearance  that  they  gave.^^
Slightly  before  these  observations  the  officer  had  noticed

through  thin  cloud  a light  which  ne  describes  as  having  the


g rcTR  irTPB


^liS^RICrED^


-7-


appearance  of  a squashed  orange.  Eventually  this  light  became
fully  visible  and  measured  against  the  thumb  at  arms  length
appeared  to  be  about  two  inches  long,  that  is,  a very  large
source  of  light.  The  crew  observed  this  light  for  some  minutes
while  cruising  at  13 >000  feet.  Between  35  and  40  miles  from
Christchurch  the  aircraft  captain,  of  his  own  volition,  turned
towards  the  light.  This  necessitated  a 90°  turn  onto  a heading
of  about  125°  at  about  25°  bank.  The  aircraft  speed  was  215
knots.  The  image  on  the  aircraft  radar  moved  to  10  miles  from
the  aircraft  but  the  crew  cannot  say  whether  this  was  due  to
their  velocity  or  the  movement  of  the  radar  return.  The  radar
image  then  stayed  in  the  same  relative  position  to  the  aircraft
for  a few  minutes  (as  if  it  were  'backing  up’  at  the  aircraft's
speed).  At  this  stage  the  large  light  appeared  to  go  above,
behind,  and  below  the  aircraft  as  the  captain  turned  left  to
regain  track  and  avoid  further  'confrontation'  with  the  object.'
This  series  of  events  occurred  over  a time  frame  of  about  20
minutes.  Throughout,  Christchurch  radar  was  working  but  reported
nothing.  Wellington  Radar  had  been  observing  the  aircraft  during
the  period  but  did  not  report  any  unidentified  radar  contact  in
that  area.


23.  The  visual  observation  made  by  the  crew  is  consistent

with  an  unusual  view  of  Venus.  The  bearing  of  the  observation

coincides  with  the  point  at  which  Venus  would  have  been  visible.
However,  this  observation  was  made  at  about  0225  and  Venus  did
not  rise  until  about  0328.  Nevertheless,  DSIR  scientists  have
advised  that  with  super  refraction  it  would  be  possible  to  see
the  planet  some  time  before  it's  actual  rising  and  if  it  were
seen  it  would  have  the  appearance  that  the  crew  described.  The
last  effect  of  the  light  passing  above,  below  and  behind  the
aircraft  could  be  explained  by  an  astronomical  phenomenon  known
as  the  'troublesome  layer'.  In  the  prevailing  conditions  with
a marked  inversion  above  about  10,000  feet,  and  fairly  strong
westerly  winds  with  standing  waves  on  the  leeward  side  of  the
Alps  the  inversion  layer  can  take  on  a marked  wave  form.  Thus
at  the  time  that  the  light  performed  its  convolutions  around
the  aircraft  it  is  possible  that  the  aircraft  was  passing  from
one  side  of  the  inversion  layer  to  the  other.  The  fact  that
the  light  was  no  longer  visible  tends  to  support  this  thesis  and
it  is  most  probable  that  the  aircraft's  radar  return  was  spurious
or  of  a ship,  in  view  of  the  lack  of  confirmation  of  any  other
targets  in  the  area  by  the  Wellington  Radar.

24.  As  the  aircraft  approached  Kaikoura  two  or  three  radar
contacts  were  noted  on  the  aircraft  radar  at  about  ten  o'clock
position.  These  would  be  consistent  with  the  radar  returns
Wellington  had  noted  in  the  Clarence  area  for  most  of  the  night  -
and  were  almost  certainly  spurious.

25.  Approaching  Cape  Campbell  the  aircraft  captain  observed

what  he  thought  was  a fishing  fleet  off  Cape  Palliser.  These

might  well  have  been  part  of  the  squid  fleet  enroute  south.

26.  As  the  aircraft  turned  towards  Blenheim  the  first  officer
observed  what  appeared  to  be  orange  lights  in  the  Nelson  Bay  area
which  appeared  to  move  across  the  sounds  towards  Picton.  No
explanation  can  be  offered  for  this  observation  but  it  has  not


/hppn  p. n rvT "i  T»7n pH


-8-


been  confirmed  by  any  sightings  made  from  the  ground.  The
aircraft  landed  at  Blenheim  at  03'! 5 •

Conclusions


27.  The  foregoing  report  has  been  compiled  after  interviews
with  most  of  the  principle  witnesses  involved  with  the  sightings
20/21  and  30/3'1  December  1978.  The  SAFE  pilots  were  most  help-
ful to  the  reporting  officer  in  the  very  frank  manner  in  which
they  related  their  experiences  and  the  time  they  spent  in  inter-
view. It  is  considered  that  the  reporting  officer  should,  as
soon  as  possible,  informally  debrief  the  SAFE  aircrew  involved
on  the  general  tenor  of  the  findings  to  date.

28,  It  is  evident  that  because  of  the  interest  over  these
sightings  reports  will  continue  to  come  in  from  various  sources
and  on-going  investigations  by  DSIE  and  meteorological  officers
will  probably  serve  to  correlate  much  of  the  information.
Nevertheless,  it  is  considered  that  Defence  should  issue  a PR
statement  fairly  soon  in  order  to  tone  down  much  of  the  wild
speculation  that  has  existed  over  recent  weeks,

29*  In  summary  the  reporting  officer  has  made  the  following

findings :

a.  During  the  period  of  the  observations,  and  indeed
now,  atmospheric  conditions  over  NZ  are  conducive
to  freak  propogation  of  radio  and  light  waves,

b.  Venus  was  rising  in  the  eastern  sky  and  at  this
time  of  the  year  is  unusually  bright  in  appearance,

c.  Wellington  Radar  has  been  giving  spurious  indica-
tions off  the  east  coast  of  the  South  Island  for
some  time  but  over  recent  weeks  anomalous  returns
seem  to  have  been  more  prevalent,

d.  During  the  period  an  unusually  large  number  of
vessels  (the  squid  fleet)  sailed  from  Wellington,
often  at  night,  to  position  off  Banks  Peninsula.

Not  only  would  these  vessels  provide  a good  source
for  radar  returns  but  the  lights  that  they  use
when  fishing  could  explain  some  of  the  visual
sightings  of  unusual  lights,

e.  The  reporting  officer  speculates  that  the  observa-
tion of  lights  in  the  Clarence  area  might  have
been  caused  by  trains  or  cars.

f.  The  reporting  officer  is  of  the  opinion  that
the  large  number  of  unusual  occurrences  on


/the  nights


RiSmJCTED


-9-


the  nights  in  question  made  some  aircrew  and
air  traffic  controllers  particularly  respon-
sive to  the  various  sightings.

g.  There  is  no  connection  between  the  many  sightings
in  the  Clarence  area  and  the  larger  lights  seen
to  the  east  (and  which  were  the  subject  of  the
much  publicised  TV  films).

h.  Almost  all  the  sightings  can  be  explained  by
natural  but  unusual  phenomena.  The  few  for
which  the  evidence  to  date  in  inconclusive  may
well  be  explained  in  due  course  when  current
investigations  are  completed.


Wing  Commander
Director  of  Operations


r,.


/iNMg'K  A To

frpps  neporcr

PATET)  II  J ■


\s  i


d Wcc0  5c:a4Ca^€

-w-  AaCV^^

^-^<>.fVr,H ^

2S:5C>  t^iBo


Ci-A/:ej


!(j  RAi>aa,l(l£'TUfli^i
, (11  C.i^‘=X.(fj^LS  TU-iiea^rHMT

'''^'^  ,c>  •• «,  '


T|i.DkC^j5p'  VsTn:

' '~^0  (^O  MAAS

\


/ f^ft


\


\.


ucHX  r^X

5^0MS  /ir/l-f  Of^SrC


\ S’T'A'TiCW  A<1^

A^i  ^

CcVcU-vi
‘ /v\t?Vc  I'V  c


A < £T

P'A.Ct-


A jC*


/L££^.

X;A  X.

Af>^  L ,V7

AA^oS^

^W/irrs'  /=bC  r/ffe^AJ^

*rr|-£7s/

T<ACfaL&  ^*T  ^


<.3^7


OBS^ER.'^AT  fdfsiS

2o/2i  D£C  18


7


S C2aJ  lb  P L.  E £ X


^1  '

4rf*>S5i  ^rjjp*^


v\I


v'i


Ifi


T>-&caiij  ir'TPn


V’'


Vr


n T


SRE  Wexford  Road/Havvkins  Hi?.l  Chanrer .


✓ SHE

"SA  120  .

Radar  Rx,.


Notannred  RNO  0^1  50<^


td:


UOO  -Ill'll  9^'  &


Mew  aerial  reflector,  slotted  feed  and  co-ax  s'un
froiTi  rotatin/T  joint.  Re-conditioned  pedestal  and
rotat'.nr’  joint  - data  FeaT-^ox  - no  change.  IHFjtal
turning  encoder  fitted.

Two  S2O5O  solid  state  receivers  installed,  old  PS’OO
receivers  still  in  position  hut.  swi^'ched  off  and  by-
passed — can  he  h.roo:?nt  into  se.rv.ice  ii’  ^‘cciui .i"ed.

Two  S7100  solid  st.o*s,  digital  pr. essors  instnlled.
Both  EJ1  goo’s  removed  from  liH  as  v/oll  as  associated
delay  cells,

Wax  range  - l60nni.  Rofige  2/Sl)  dist.tiay  T.B,

aciplifiers  set  to  place  80n;n  range  i-in.c  under  tr.e
cursor  knohs.

Vid^jo-n^iap  set  at  Vonrii., — idlOnra,

f

Remote  switching  - Mo  change  except  DSP  S?1U;/1  and  2 replaces
SJ  1000/1  and  2.

To  he  run  at  half  speed..  Tilt  nr  deg.


Processors


L/R  SRE


Ae rial
MTI


Radar


Paiilts


Cancelled  radar  clutter  is  exc~Klve  hut  levels  will
he  adjusted  over  the  next  few  wroeks,

IJncancelled  radar  apueai's  .different  to  previous  radar
due  to  use  of  the  S2050  radar  receiver  log/pLD
(pulse  length  discriminator)  video  .'>'jtput  at  liH.

Until  staff  are  more  familiar  with  the  new  equir-rent
Ways  2 will  look  after  faults  on  the  02050  rcureivers
and  P71OO  data  u.rocessors  - all  other  faults  to  be
cleared  as  before  the  ungrading,

TTO  SR.E,

•,7e  11  i ngton  .i  1 v r ort .


O “ ^ -

^ /-Oo  ^ ^ ^

c^; 7 /?■

/ 7 r f\


o C ^ r?  ^ -Al^


CC..W  !


PERSONNEL  INTERVIEWED


Name

Capt  V,  Powell
First  Off  I.  Pirie
Capt  J.  Randle

W/0  Uff indell
Mr  7/.  Frame
Mr  M.  Collins
Mr  N.  Rumsey
Dr  D.  Phillips
Mr  R.  Davison
Mr  J.  Cordj
Mr  A.  Herd
Capt  W.  Startup
First  Off  R.  Guard
Mr  G.  Causer
Sqn  Ldr  R,  Carran

t)vs.


Desip;nation


Captain  SAFE  Argosy  22  Dec  78  (second  ac

First  Officer  SAFE  Argosy  21  Dec  78.

Captain  SAFE  Argosy  22  Dec  78  (first
aircraft) .

ENZAF  Duty  Officer  Woodbourne  22  Dec  78.
Plight  Service  Woodbourne  22  Dec  78.
Director  Physics  Laboratory  DSIR,

Head  of  Optics  Division  DSIR.

NZ  Meteorological  Service,

Superintending  Engineer  Radar  CADMOT.

ATC  Radar  Controller  22  Dec  78.

ATC  Radar  Controller  22  Dec  78.

Captain  SAFE  Argosy  Dec  78.

First  Officer  SAFE  Argosy  51  Dec  78.

ATC  Radar  Controller  31  Dec  78.

Orion  Captain  Jan  79 •

Fisheries  Control  Centre,  MAF.


H II


AIDE  MEMOIEE


Possibilities :


Ducting

Hotspots

Venus

Jupiter

Stars

Planets

Clandestine  Operations
Hoax

•Real  UPO'

Ships

Birds

Wave  Cap  Radar  Returns
Cyclical  Patterns?

Light  Waves
Radio  Waves

Squid  Fleet  Movement  over  period?

Dr  Wall  Porirua  - freak  propogation  experiment  Canterbury  1948.

Dr  Heil  Cherry  Lincoln  College  - current  study  Canterbury  NW
conditions.

Clarence  TV  film  - possible  planet  or  star  rising?

DSIR  Clare nce/Kaikoura  theodolite  observation  star  rising.  Apparent
movement  caused  by  heat  from  Japanese  vessel  on  horizon  in  line  of
sight .

Coincidence  of  observations  only  by  SAFE  Argosy  crews?

Freak  return  generated  by  aircraft  itself  (mirror,  mirage,  radar
return  etc)?

Squid  fleet  position  21  Dec  78'  onwards.

Squid  fleet  lights  turn  off  time.

Meteorite,  asteroid  shoals  - refer  astronomy  info.

Jupiter/Venus  rising/setting  times.

AHZ  timetables  (strobe  lights).

Observations  all  over  water,  distances  vague  except  for  radar  plots.
Radar  plots  possibly  not  coincident  with  visual  sightings.
Lighthouses,  aerodrome,  navigation  etc  beacons.

Last  month  extreme  clarity  of  atmosphere.

Inversion  layer  (refer  TO- gram).

Examine  films  (Sqn  Ldr  Clarke  to  arrange).

DDI  interest?

Customs  interest?

Police  interest?

Fisheries  interest?


KANUAL  OF  AIR  TRAFFIC  CONTROL


SURVEILLANCE  RADAR  EQUIPMENT
1 • MARCONI  RADAR  TYPES  3264  AND  3264A

TECHNICAL  DATA


Wave  Length  50  cms,

Prequenoy  583  - 6 10  oo»


Pe&k  Power  Output

BeaiS  width

Pulee  Length

Pulse  Recurrence
Frequency

Rate  of  Scan


50-6OKW

S264Aj^50OKW  (ncMidnal)^/

2^0

2 or  4

3264;  525  - 775  p.p-»*

S264A ;

500  - 8CX>  pps  f2afi  pulse)
260  - 385  pps  (4iBfi  pulse)

5 or  10  r^p.m.


Range  Selection


In  ratio  of  1 ; 2 ; 3 1 4 according
to  range  available


Antenna  Syate^


Wind  ;4ialtatipna
Presentation


Special  Faollitifa


Parabolic  reflector  with  otTaet
linear  wave  guide  feed*

Up  to  60  knote  at  10  r*p*m«

Up  to  90  knots  at  5 r-p*».

S264:  Moving  coll  12  in*  PPI

S264A:  Fixed  coll  12  in.  iH

MTI^  STC»  3rw%pt  Galnt  Video  Happing^
Off  centering.


2.  GENERAL


2.1  The  oain  features  of  the  S264  are  its  alnost  complete  freedom
from  weather  olutterj  the  stable  and  efficient  MTI  syatesi  and  the
high  overall  radar  performance  obtained  with  comparatively  low  power*
*nie  3^4  can  be  converted  to  S264A  equipment  at  any  time.

2.2  The  S264A  poasesaea  all  the  laalii  advantages  of  the  S264  plus
the  exceptional  range  and  altitude  cover*  These  features  isake  this
equipment  most  suitable  for  its  dual  role  as  both  area  and  approach
3 «K.E.


3*  SPECIAL  FACILITIES


3.1  KTI

3.1.1  Thla  is  a fully  Coherent  ays  tern  with  the  transmitter^  reference
oscillator  anu  trigger  pulae  generator  all  crystal  controlled.  Ho
automatic  frequency  oontroX  is  required  as  the  receiver  is  looked  to


Departruent  of  Civil  Aviation
Hew  Eealand
