MEDITATIONS
ON THE PEAKS


JULIUS EVOLA


BERSERKER


BOOKS


- w


_—_ Contents m__


Foreword


Part One: Doctrine


. The Mountain and Spirituality
|. Some Remarks Concerning the Divinity of the Mountains
. Spirituality of the Mountain


. A Mystic of the Tibetan Mountains


Race and the Mountain


The Mountain, Sport, and Contemplation


. Ascending and Descending


Part Two: Experiences
The Northern Wall of Eastem Lyskamm


Notes Concerning Psychic Training in the Mountains


. The Ascent of Mount Langkopfel

. Ice and the Spirit

. The Valley of the Wind

. The Ascent of Mount Gross-Glockner
. Meditations on the Peaks


. A Storm on Mount Rosa


83
87


Appendix A.
Appendix B.
Appendix C.
Appendix D.


Appendix E.


Index


Part Three: Appendices
An Artist of the Heights: Nicholas Roerich
Art and Symbol in the Seat of the Snows
Religiosity of Tyrol
The Kingdom of the Demon of the Peaks


Height


116


een, PART ONE me


Doctrine


ee |e


The Mountain and Spirituality


[ the modern world there are two factors that, more than any others, are
responsible for hindering our realization of the spirituality that was known
in the most ancient traditions: the first is the abstract character of our cul-
ture; the second is the glorification of a blind and frantic obsession with
activity.

On one hand, there are people who identify the “spirit” with the erudi-
tion acquired in libraries and university classrooms, or with the intellec-
tual games played by philosophers, or with literary or pseudomystical aes-
theticism. On the other hand, the new generations have tured athletic
competition into a religion and appear to be unable to conceive anything
beyond the excitement of training sessions, competitions, and physical
achievements; they have truly tumed accomplishment in sports into an
end in itself and even into an obsession rather than as means to a higher
end.

Some people regard this opposition of lifestyles as some kind of di-
lemma. In reality, in the so-called scholarly type, we often find an innate
strong dislike for any kind of physical discipline; likewise, in many sports-
practicing people, the sense of physical strength fosters contempt for those
in “ivory towers” who confine themselves to books and to battles of words
they view as harmless.

These two lifestyles should be regarded as misguided and as the fruits
of modem decadence because they are both foreign to the heroic vision of
the spirit that constituted the axis of the best Western classical traditions
which, in the context of the actual renovation of Italy, is being successfully
evoked.


Doctrine


All too often people forget that spirituality is essentially a way of life
and that its measure does not consist of notions, theories, and ideas that
have been stored in one’s head. Spirituality is actually what has been suc-
cessfully actualized and translated into a sense of superiority which is
experienced inside by the soul, and a noble demeanor, which is expressed
in the body.

From this perspective it is possible to appreciate a discipline which,
although it may concem the energies of the body, will not begin and end
with them but will become instead the means to awakening a living and
organic spirituality. This is the discipline of a superior inner character.

Inthe ascetic, such a discipline is present in a negative way, so tospeak;
in the hero it is present in a positive, affirmative way, typical of the Westem
world. The inner victory against the deepest forces that surface in one’s
consciousness during times of tension and mortal danger is a triumph in an
external sense, but it is also the sign of a victory of the spirit against itself
and of an inner transfiguration. Hence, in antiquity an aura of sacredness
surrounded both the hero and the initiate to a religious or esoteric move-
ment, and heroic figures were regarded as symbols of immortality.

However, in modern civilization everything tends to suffocate the
heroic sense of life. Everything is more or less mechanized, spiritually
impoverished, and reduced to a prudent and regulated association of
beings who are needy and have lost their self-suffiency. The contact
between man’s deep and free powers and the powers of things and of
nature has been cut off; metropolitan life petrifies everything, synco-
pates every breath, and contaminates every spiritual “well.” As if that
weren't enough, faint-hearted ideologies foster contempt for those val-
ues that in other times were the foundation of more rational and bright
social organizations. In ancient societies the peak of the hierarchy was
occupied by the caste of warrior aristocracy, whereas today, in the paci-
fist-humanitarian utopias (especially in the Anglo-Saxon ones), attempts
are made to portray the warrior as some kind of anachronism, and as a
dangerous and harmful entity that one day will be conveniently disposed
of in the name of progress.

Once it is suffocated, the heroic will seek further outlets outside the
net of practical interests, passions, and yearnings, and that net becomes


Twe MOUNTAIN AND SpiRiTuALiTY


tighter and tighter with the passing of time: the excitement that sports
induce in our contemporaries is just an expression of this. But the heroic
will need to be made self-aware again and to move beyond the limits of
materialism.

In the struggle against mountain heights, action is finally free from all
machines, and from everything that detracts from man’s direct and abso-
lute relationship with things. Up close to the sky and to crevasses—among
the still and silent greatness of the peaks; in the impetuous raging winds
and snowstorms; among the dazzling brightness of glaciers; or among the
fierce, hopeless verticality of rock faces—it is possible toreawaken (through
what may at first appear to be the mere employment of the body) the
symbol of overcoming, a truly spiritual and virile light, and make contact
with primordial forces locked within the body’s limbs. In this way the
climber’s struggle will be more than physical and the successful climb
may come to represent the achievement of something that is no longer
merely human. In ancient mythologies the mountain peaks were regarded
as the seats of the gods; this is myth, but it is also the allegorical expres-
sion of a real belief that may always come alive again sub specie
interioritatis.

In life—as has been pointed out, since Nietzsche, by Simmel—hu-
mans have a strange and almost incredible power to reach certain existen-
tial peaks at which “living more” (mehr leben), or the highest intensity of
life, is transformed into “more than living” (mehrals leben). At these peaks,
just as heat transforms into light, life becomes free of itself; not in the
sense of the death of individuality or some kind of mystical shipwreck, but
inthe sense of a transcendent affirmation of life, in which anxiety, endless
craving, yearning and worrying, the quest for religious faith, human sup-
ports and goals, all give way to a dominating state of calm. There is some-
thing greater than life, within life itself, and not outside of it. This heroic
experience is valuable and good in itself, whereas ordinary life is only
driven by interests, external things, and human conventions. I use the word
experience, because this state is not connected with any particular creed
or theory (which are always worthless and relative); rather it presents it-
self in a most direct and undoubiable way, just like the experiences of
pain and pleasure.


Doctaine


‘This profound dimension of the spirit, which perceives itself as infi-
nite, self-transcending, and beyond all manifest reality, is reawakened
and shines forth—even though not entirely consciously—in the “insanity”
of those who, in increasing numbers and without a specific reason, dare to
challenge the mountain heights, led by a will that prevails over fears, ex-
haustion, and the primitive instincts of prudence and self-preservation.

Feeling left with only one’s resources, without help in a hopeless situ-
ation, clothed only in one’s strength or weakness, with no one torely upon
other than one’s self; to climb from rock to rock, from hold to hold, from
ridge to ridge, inexorably, for hours and hours; with the feeling of the
height and of imminent danger all around; and finally, after the harsh test
of calling upon all one’s self-discipline, the feeling of an indescribable
liberation, of a solar solitude and of silence; the end of the struggle, the
subjugation of fears, and the revelation of a limitless horizon, for miles
and miles, while everything else lies down below—in all of this one can
truly find the real possibility of purification, of awakening, of the rebirth of
something transcendent.

It does not matter that the heroic symbolism of the mountain can only
be experienced initially by a few people. When these meanings are duly
focused upon, they will influence people. There is no real climber who is
not able to experience mountain climbing, if only in a few occasional
flashes, as something more than a mere sport. Likewise, there is no real
climber who does not display, in the eyes or in the face darkened by the
sun’s reflection on the snow, the mark of a race that has transformed be-
yond that of the people of the plains.

On this basis, we should save the mountains from the contaminating
invasion of tourists who attempt to conguer them by building their “civi-
lized” base camps, I am not just referring to those faint-hearted youths
who bring with them to popular mountain resorts their vain, mundane city
habits (such as discos and tennis courts), and who snobbishly display the
colorful new equipment they’ve bought to use only for some harmless
walk in the woods. I am also referring to those who tamish silent and
uncontaminated places with materialism and triviality, namely with a com-
petitive spirit and a mania for that which is difficult and unusual, for the
sake of setting new records.


Twe MOUNTAIN AND SpiRITUALITY
‘The mountain requires purity and simplicity; it requires asceticism.


O sky above me! O pure, deep sky! You abyss of light! Gaz-
ing into you, I tremble with divine desires. To cast myself
into your height—that is my depth! To hide myself in your
purity—that is my innocence! And when I wandered alone
what did my soul hunger after by night and on treacherous
paths? And when I climbed mountains, whom did I always
seek, if not you, upon mountains? And all my wandering and
mountain climbing, it was merely a necessity and an expedi-
ent of clumsiness: my whole will desires only to fly, to fly
into you! (Nietzsche, Thus Spoke Zarathustra (translated by
Hollingdale, Penguin, 1961), 184]


‘These are words that Friedrich Nietzsche, the philosopher who champi-
oned the will to power, wrote in the secluded mountains of Engadine. To
some people these words may amount to nothing more than lyrical cffu-
sions. To others they may contain both the intimate sense of the heroic
spiritual attitude, the spirit of which is action, and the discipline of ruthless
self-contol. The temple of this spirit is the primordial majesty of the peaks,
the glaciers, the crevasses, and the boundless blue sky.

In this context the mountainous peaks and the spiritual peaks con-
verge in one simple and yet powerful reality.


Some Remarks Concerning
the Divinity of the Mountains


I an editorial published in the Rivista del Club Alpino Italiano [Review
of the Italian Mountain Association], $. Manaresi has underlined with
efficacious words something that can never be overemphasized, namely,
the necessity of overcoming the limiting antithesis between a scholarly,
physically weak type—who is cut off from the deepest forces of the body
and of life because of his self-imposed confinement to a culture made of
words and books—and the sports-minded, healthy, athletic, and physi-
cally strong type—who nevertheless lacks all metaphysical reference
points, It is necessary today to go beyond the one-sidedness of either of
these two types and toreach something more complete, namely, ahuman
being in whom the spirit becomes power and life and in whom physical
discipline in turn becomes the introduction to, the symbol and almost a rite
of, a spiritual discipline.

S.Manaresihas repeatedly claimed that among sports, mountain climb-
ing is certainly the one that offers the most accessible opportunities for
achieving this union of body and spirit. Truly, the enormity, the silence,
and the majesty of the great mountains naturally incline the soul toward
that which is greater than human, and thus attract the better people to the
point at which the physical aspect of climbing (with all the courage, the
self-mastery, and mental lucidity that it requires) and an inner spiritual
realization, become the inseparable and complementary parts of one and
the same thing.

It may be interesting to remark that views such as these, which today


Doctrine


are beginning to be emphasized by qualified individuals in order to pro
mote the right attitudes in the next generation, can at the same time be
traced to a very ancient tradition, to something which may be called tradi-
tional in the broadest sense of the word. Although the ancients did not
practice mountain climbing, notwithstanding a few rudimentary excep-
tions, they nonetheless had a very vivid sense of the sacredness and sym-
bolism of the mountain. They also thought—and this is rather telling—
that climbing mountains and living therein was a prerogative of heroes
and initiates, in other words, beings who were believed to have gone be-
yond the limits of the common and mediocre life of the plains.

In the following pages I will offer a few comments on the traditional
notion of the divinity of the mountain, looking beyond its symbols to its
inner sense. Hopefully my observations will evoke some aspects of the
spiritual side of mountain-climbing feats, the technical description of which
only represents the outer dimension, or the caput mortuum.


The notion of the divinity of the mountains is found equally in both East-
erm and Western traditions, from the Chinese to the Aztecs of pre-
Columbian America; from the Egyptians to the Aryan Nordic-Germanics;
from Greeks to Iranians to Hindus. This notion is expressed in the form of
myths and legends concerning either the mountain of the gods or of the
heroes—which is allegedly the dwelling place of those who have been
“taken up there”—or places inhabited by mysterious forces of glory and
immortality.

The general foundation for the symbolism of the mountain is simple:
since the earth has been associated with everything human (the etymol-
ogy of the word human is from humus, “soil’”), the earth’s peaks, which
reachto the sky and which are transfigured by perennial snow, were spon-
taneously regarded as the most apt material to express, through allego-
ries, transcendental states of consciousness, inner spiritual realizations,
and apparitions of extranormal modes of being, often portrayed figura-
tively as gods and supematural beings. Thus, we read not only of the moun-
tains as symbolic “seats” of the gods, but we also encounter pertinent tra-
ditions, such as those of the ancient Aryans living in Iran and in Media, in
which people, according to Xenophon, never erected temples for their


SOME REMARKS CONCERNING THE DIVINITY OF THE MOONTAINS


deities, but used mountain peaks to celebrate the cult of and the sacrifice
to fire and the god of light. These cultures regarded mountains as wor-
thier, more grandiose sites, analogically closer to the divine than any man-
made temple or sacred building.

According to the Hindus, the most divine mountain chain is the Hima-
layan, a name that means in Sanskrit, “the seat of the snows.” More spe-
cifically, Mount Meruis the sacred mountain and is believed to be located
in the Himalayas. It is important to note two things. First, Mount Meru is
conceived to be the place in which Shiva, the great ascetic, performed his
meditations. Second, it is from here that Shiva incinerated Kama, the Hindu
god of love, when the latter tried to expose his heart to passion. In the
Hindu tradition, the idea of absolute asceticism and stringent purification
of nature is associated with the highest mountain peak. This idea is inac-
cessible to anything coming from lust and desire and is therefore stable in
a transcendent sense. Hence, in the ancient Vedic formulas for the conse-
cration of kings, we find the image of the mountain symbolizing the stabil-
ity of the power and of the imperium the king will assume. Moreover, in
the Mahabarata we see Arjuna go to the Himalayas in order to practice
asceticism because it is written that “only on the high mountains could he
have achieved the divine vision.” Likewise, the emperor Yudhisthira trav-
eled to the Himalayas to achieve his apotheosis by climbing onto the
“chariot” of the “king of the gods.”

It is also notable that the Sanskrit word paradesha means “elevated
site,” or “high region,” and therefore, in a specific material sense, moun-
tain peak. But paradesha may be etymologically associated with the
Chaldean word pardes; hence the term paradise, which has been tumed
into a dogmatic theological concept by the later Judeo-Christian faith. In
the primordial Aryan idea of paradise, we find an intimate association
with the concept of heights, of mountain peaks; this association, as we
shall see later on, is formulated in a clear manner in the Doric-Achaean
notion of Olympus.

At this point I must mention the Hellenic legends of those mythic
characters who have been transported to a mountain. It is well known that
the Hellenes, just like almost all the other Aryan tribes, had a markedly
aristocratic view of the postmortem. The fate of most people, of those who


Doctrine


never elevated themselves over and above ordinary life, was thought to
be Hades, namely, a larval and residual existence after death, devoid of
tue consciousness, spent in the underground world of shadows. Immortal-
ity, besides the Olympian gods’, was the privilege of the heroes, or, in
other words, was the exceptional achievement of a few superior beings. In
the oldest Hellenic traditions we find that the heroes’ achievement of im-
mortality was often portrayed through the symbolism of their ascending or
disappearing into the mountains. Thus, we find again the mystery of the
heights, since in this disappearing we must see the material symbol of a
spiritual transfiguration. The expressions “to disappear,” “to become in-
visible,” and “to be taken up into the peaks,” should not be taken literally,
but essentially mean to be virtually introduced to the world beyond the
senses, in which there is no death, and removed from the visible world of
physical bodies, which is that of common human experience.

This tradition is by no means confined to Greece. In Buddhism men-
tion is made of a mountain to which those who achieve spiritual enlighten-
ment, described by the Majjhima Nikkayo as “further-men, undefeated
and intact beings, extinct to and free from craving,” are said to disappear.
Chinese Taoist traditions speak of Mount Kuen-Lun, on which legendary
royal beings have found the potion of immortality. Something similar is
found in some Eastem Islamic traditions concerning people who have gone
through initiation and have been taken to a mountain, thus being spared
the experience of death. Ancient Egyptians talked about a mountain (Seth
Amentet) that houses a passage through which those who are destined to
“solar” immortality eventually enter a “triumphant land,” in which, ac-
cording to a hieroglyphic inscription, “the leaders who dwell by the throne
of the great god proclaim their eternal life and power.”

Crossing the Atlantic Ocean, in pre-Columbian Mexico we find an
impressive correspondence with these symbols: the great mountain
Culhuacan (meaning “curved mountain,” because its top is bent slightly
downward) was thought of as a divine point that, regardless of its loft,
maintained a connection with the inferior regions. According to ancient
American traditions, some Aztec emperors were believed to have disap-
peared in an analogous mountain. It is well known that this theme is found
in the legends of the Western Roman-Germanic Middle Ages: mountains


Some Rewarks CONCERNING THE DIVINITY OF THE MOUNTAINS


such as the Kyffhauser and the Odenberg were believed to be places where
kings such as Charlemagne, Arthur, Frederick J, and Frederick II had been
taken. These kings allegedly are not dead but are waiting for the time to
appear again. In the cycle of the legends of the grail, we find Mount
Monsalvat, which means, according to Guénon, “mountain of health” or
“mountain of salvation.” The battle cry of the medieval knights was
“Montjoie.” In a legend that has no historical counterpart whatsoever, but
that nevertheless has a very rich spiritual meaning, to go through a moun-
tain was the step preceding the sacred imperial coronation of Arthur. I
cannot describe in detail the inner meaning of these symbols and myths,
especially those concerning the kings who have disappeared but who are
going to retum one day. I will only say that in these myths of many differ-
ent origins we find the common theme of the mountain conceived as a
seat of immortality where spiritual people become realized and heroes
disappear.


My next remarks concem two points: the mountain as the seat of the haoma
and of the glory and the mountain as Walhalla.

The Iranian term haoma corresponds to the Sanskrit soma, the so-
called potion of immortality. In these two ancient Aryan ideas we have an.
association of different concepts, partly rea] and partly symbolic, partly
material and partly translatable into terms describing spiritual experience.
Hindu traditions, for instance, describe the soma both as a god and as the
juice of a plant that is capable of inducing feelings of exaltation. These
feelings were highly regarded and were induced during rituals of inner
transformation to provide a taste of immortality.

Just as Buddha compared to a high mountain the state “in which
there is no here nor there, no coming or going, but calmness and enlight-
enment as in an infinite ocean” (the state of nirvana), likewise we read
in Yashna that the mysterious haoma grows on high mountains. And so,
once again, we find the association of the idea of heights with the idea of
an enthusiasm capable of transforming, inspiring, and leading people to
that which is beyond human, mortal, and ephemeral. This very same
theme is also found in Greece in early Dionysism. According to very
ancient testimonies, those who, during religious festivals, were possessed


Doctrine


by the “divine frenzy of Dionysus,” were led toward the wild peaks of
the Thracian mountains by a strange and overwhelming power that arose
in their souls.

And yet there is something else that can correct whatever is still cha~
otic and not completely pure at a Dionysian level; there is an ancient Ira~
nian view, espoused by the Yashl, conceming the mountain, namely, the
mighty Mount Ushi-darena, which is also the seat of glory.

In the Iranian tradition, “glory” (hvareno or farr) was not an abstract
concept. It was conceived as a real and almost physical force, although
invisible and of nonhuman origin. Glory was generally the privilege of the
luminous Aryan race, but more specifically it belonged to kings, priests,
and conquerors belonging to this race. A sign gave witness to the presence
of glory: victory. The glory was attributed to solar origins, since the sun
was regarded as the symbol of a luminous entity that triumphed every
morning over darkness. By transferring these concepts sub specie
interioritatis, the glory expressed the achievements of victorious races, in
whom superiority was power (victory) and power superiority, as in the
solar and immortal heavenly beings. In the Yasht it is written not only that
the plant of haoma (of Dionysian states) grows on the mountains, but also
that the mightiest mountain, Ushi-darena, is the scat of the Aryan glory.

As I said before, the mountain was also thought of as Walhalla. The
word Walhalla has been popularized by Richard Wagner's operas, which
in several instances adopt a literal interpretation of the ancient Nordic-
Scandinavian views of the Edda, from which Wagner drew most of his
inspiration. Such views, however, are open to deeper interpretations.
Walhalla literally meant “the court of the fallen heroes,” the king of which
is Odin. This expresses the notion of a privileged seat of immortality (in
these traditions, just as in the Greek ones, most people are destined to lead
after death a dark and larval existence in the Niflheim, the Nordic equiva-
lent of Hades), which is reserved for the nobility and the heroes who die
onthe battlefield. Almost according to the saying, “The blood of heroes is
more precious to God than the ink of philosophers and the prayers of the
faithful,” in these ancient traditions, dying on a battlefield was the sacri-
fice most cherished by the highest deity (Odin, Wotan, or Tiuz) and the
most fruitful of all superhuman feats. Odin transformed the fallen soldiers


Some Renares Concerning THe Divinity oF THe MOUNTAINS


into his sons and made them immortal, together with the deified kings, in
Walhalla. This seat was often associated with Asgard, the city of the Asen,
the divine luminous beings engaged in a perennial struggle against the
dark creatures of the earth (elementarwesen).

The concepts of Walhalla and Asgard originally enjoyed an immedi-
ate relationship with the mountain, so much so that Walhalla became the
name of Swedish and other Scandinavian mountains. Moreover, when it
was thought to be located on ancient mountains, such as Helgafell,
Krossholar, and Hlidskjalf, Walhalla was thought to be the seat of heroes
and of deified rulers. Asgard is often referred to in the Edda as Glitmirbjorg,
the “shiny mountain” or as Himinbjorg, in which the ideas of mountain
and of luminous sky, or of a luminous, heavenly quality, are fused to-
gether. Thus we still find the central theme of Asgard asa very high moun-
tain, on the icy top of which an eternal brightness shines forth above the
clouds and fog.

When Walhalla is thought of as a mountain, it is the place from which
the so-called Wildes Heer departs and to which it retums. This is an an-
cient popular Nordic idea that was formulated at a higher level when it
was associated with the army led by Odin, an army made up of fallen
heroes. According to this tradition, the heroic sacrifice of one’s life (which
in the Roman tradition was called mors triumphalis and through which the
victorious initiate joined the ranks of heroes and victorious soldiers) added
a new recruit to that irresistible spiritual army, the Wildes Heer, which
Odin, the god of battles, needed for an ultimate and transcendent goal: to
fight against the ragna rokkr, namely, the destined twilight of the divine
that lurked over the world from the distant past.

Through these traditions, assumed in their inner meaning rather than
in their external mythological form, we arrive at the highest view of this
cycle of myths concerning the divinity of the mountain, which is almost
an echo of these distant realities. Seat of awakening, of heroism, and at
times of a transfiguring heroic death; place of an enthusiasm leading
toward transcendent states; place of a pure asceticism and of a trium-
phant solar force that opposes the powers that paralyze, obscure, and
degrade life—these seem to comprise the ancients’ symbolic perception
of the mountain. This perception emergesin a cycle of legends and myths


Doctrine


that are endowed with many similar characteristics, the above-mentioned
examples of which are just a few among a vast array.

Naturally, Ido not suggest espousing anachronistic evocations of myths,
and yet this is not merely a list of curious examples from history. Behind
the myth and the symbol that are conditioned by time there is a spirit that
may always live again and be expressed in new forms and in new actions:
this is what really counts.

The best wish we can make for the new generations is that mountain
climbing may not amount to a desecration of the mountain. Moreover, I
sincerely hope that those deep sensations at the root of the ancients’ mytho-
logical deification of the mountain may be increasingly reawakened and
come to exercise an enlightening influence on those who, today, led in a
confused way by the instinct to overcome the limitations inherent in the
everyday commercial and mechanical life of the plains, climb rocks, crests,
and walls surrounded by the sky and by the abyss, pressing on toward icy
and bright peaks,


—— 3


Spirituality of the Mountain


als o talk about the spirituality of the mountain today is not easy,
especially because in many cases it has become commonplace. Prob-
ably few eras before our own have heard so much talk about the “spirit”;
the “spirit” and the “spiritual” have almost been tumed into a sort of con-
diment used to spice all kinds of dishes. This generalization, however, is
in stark contrast with the fact that the contemporary era truly lacks au-
thentically transcendent principles and visions.

We should not regard most modern references to spirituality as posi-
tive phenomena, but rather as confused aspirations that have no value
unless they receive further development in a true orientation, in the sense
of a firm self-consciousness, as a result of contact with some higher real-
ity. At this point I would like to present my thoughts concerning moun-
tains and alpine sports, and discuss the potential for the true spirituality
they contain.

First of all, this potential is real and it does not have anything to do
with the fashion trends of our era or with the short-lived enthusiasm of the
younger generations; we know this because the spirituality of the moun-
tain is traditional in the highest, strictest, and most universally understood
sense of the word. [ have gathered specific proof in an attempt todemon-
strate that, since the oldest times, in almost every civilization, the moun-
tain was uniformly regarded as the symbol of inner and transcendent states
of being and as the allegorical seat of divine natures, of heroes, and of
transfigured beings who had been taken beyond the mere human condi-
tion. According to various myths, climbing the mountains or being spirited
to the peaks symbolized a mysterious transcendent process, a spiritual


17


Doctrine


integration, and a participation in an Olympian immortality. To those who
do not agree with the falsifying interpretation of the materialistic and ra-
tionalistic nineteenth century, according to which the ancient myths were
nothing but poetry and arbitrary fancies, all this assumes the value of a
specific testimony, the most hidden meaning of which needs to be investi-
gated. All these ancient tales—in which recur the theme of the sacredness
of the mountain—should be regarded by those people as hints of a spiri-
tual reality, the connection of which with the symbolism of the mountain
cannot be accidental. Ancient men did not casually choose the mountain
as a means to express meanings that are clearly transcendent. Rather,
they were induced to adopt the mountain as a symbol because of the anal-
ogy, or better, because of the foreboding that the experience of the moun-
tain caused in the deepest recesses of their being, provided this experi-
ence is adequately cultivated,

To further analyze what the mountain symbolizes, it is first necessary
toreject all the contemporary interpretations of the spirituality of the moun-
tain and of mountain climbing. In other words, it is necessary to limit its
scope to subordinate its various conditioned points of view to one absolute
point of view.

‘The first of the current assumptions is the purely lyrical view of the
mountain. I am referring to the world of literary rhetoric and poetry of
the worst kind that consists of bourgeois sentimentalism and conven-
tional and stereotypical idealism. From this perspective, the mountain is
seen as part of the landscape, from a distance, and is represented as
“picturesque.” Poets describe the mountain in brilliant and exhilarating
terms that lack serious content and do not express a sincere and direct
experience. The mountain man and the true mountain climber do not
share in this rhetoric. This rhetoric, which is confined to the aesthetic
world of books, is fortunately no longer fashionable, since it is now seen
as the residue of nineteenth-century romanticism and as the compensa-
tion of a bourgeois generation that only yearned for the snowy peaks
through easy verbal enthusiasm and for common places through verbal
lyricism.

Second, we find the spirituality of the mountain conceived in terms of
naturalism. This is the view of a generation characterized by an opposite


SPIRITUALITY OF THE MOUNTAIN


sentiment to that which I have just described; this generation may be char-
acterized as “the generation of the crisis,” which, by and large, is a Ger-
man product. Out of an obscure need for an organic, biological, and even
psychic compensation, and out of an instinctive revolt against a civiliza~
tion that had become synonymous with dry intellectualism, with mechani-
cal forces, with utilitarianism, and with conformism, what has occurred is
an exodus toward nature and the emergence of an absolute need for the
mountain to represent that which is anticity and anticulture. Thus, what
has arisen is a new primitivist mysticism in regard to nature and the sports
practiced in nature. This new primitivism takes up again most of Jean-
Jacques Rousseau's ideas and the same indictment of civilization that was
promoted by people like Nordau, Freud, Lessing, Bergmann, and Klanges.

In regard to this phenomenon, it is important to avoid misunderstand-
ings. Obviously, there is nothing wrong with the idea that people need to
rest, relax, and derive new strength from contact with nature and the moun-
tain. Indeed, this is desirable; therefore mountain sports assume a role of
social renovation of unquestionable value. And yet, we should not con-
fuse what are very distinct realities and conclude that more or less physi-
cal sensations of well-being and organic refreshment have something to
do with spirituality; nor should we believe that a man immersed in a cli-
mate of primitivist and naturalist practice is any closer to the essential part
of his own being than when he is involved in the disciplines and the struggles
of civilized life, Escapism, the reaction that accompanies it, and this exal-
tation of nature, in most cases are cnough—due to their negative charac-
teristics—to limit the scope of naturalism. The plane on which the spiri-
tual personality may realize or strengthen its sense of itself is beyond both
civilization (in the limited, materialistic, social, and intellectualist senses
the term has assumed in recent times) and anticivilization, which is namely
“nature” understood as a mere antithesis to civilized society. This is the
plane I am talking about, not that of the conditions and the best ways to
repair or preserve bodies and brains that have been negatively affected
by the material and psychic poisons of modem life.

Third, it is necessary to overcome the attitude that holds the spiritual-
ity of the mountain and of mountain climbing in terms of mere sensations
of physical heroism; this is the attitude of the elite who practice climbing,


Doctrine


seriously and actively. The mountain is spirit in all that it involves: disci-
pline of the nerves and body, clear-minded courage, desire for conquest,
and the impulse to engage in pure action in an environment of pure forces.
Now, anything that contains a highly educational value deserves to be
further qualified. Such a qualification concerns once again the finalities,
Just as naturalism has its reasons for being at a certain plane, likewise
mountain climbing has its own reasons for serving as a school for the pre-
viously mentioned qualities. It is undoubtedly desirable that the younger
generations become capable of that spirit of boldness and of that
psychophysical fitness that results from the active pursuit of mountain climb-
ing. But is this the highest level to which they may aspire?

When we examine the inner aspect of this issue, that is, leaving out of
consideration qualities of the younger generations that can and should be
appreciated (such as health, energy, and self-discipline), we cannot help
but notice the presence among our young people, of love for risk and even
of heroism. Quite often the value of these qualities amounts to a mere
sensation and their end result is the exasperating view of personality and
virility as purely physical, hard, and closed. This modern view is already
abnormally developed and it certainly does not constitute the best condi-
tion for the reattainment of a true, liberated, and transcendent spirituality.
‘It must be recognized that mountain climbing, when experienced only in
keeping with this view, would not be easily distinguished from the pursuit
of emotions for their own sake. This pursuit of radical sensations gener-
ates, especially in the United States, all kinds of extravagant and desper-
ate feats and bold acrobatic activities, such as jumping in midair from one
plane to another, daredevil stunts, extreme sports, and so on. All things
considered, these things do not differ very much from other excitements or
drugs, the employment of which suggests the absence rather than the pres-
ence of a true sense of personality, and also the need to be stunned rather
than to possess oneself. Even the technical component in mountain climb-
ing may easily degenerate; we often find climbers who are automatically
inclined, out of habit, to engage in all kinds of ascents, including that of
skyscrapers.

However, it is certain that if there is an element that is open to under-
standing a superior realization in the experience of the mountain, it is the


20


Spipituauity OF THE MOUNTAIN


emotional or sensory element; and yet it is essential to see in that only a
starting point, the raw material, and to consider sensory experience as
only a means and not as an end in itself.

Modern man has a totally wrong attitude in regard to what he feels.
Sensation is to him something that begins and ends in itself and in relation
to which he is passive. He is too weak to separate from a sensation or an
emotion the purely irrational element, or that which in this sensation is
merely an impression or an inner turmoil. He is incapable of deriving from
it, with an inner action, something that may be used directly and actively
by the spirit as superior knowledge.

‘This is also the case of the experience of the mountain. Those who are
irresistibly attracted to the mountains have often only experienced in an
emotion a greatness that isbeyond their understanding. They have notlearmed
to master a new inner state emerging from the deepest recesses of their
beings, Thus, they do not know why they seek increasingly wider horizons,
freer skies, tougher peaks; or why, from peak to peak, from wall to wall, and
from danger to danger, through their experiences they have become inex-
plicably disillusioned with everything that, in their ordinary lives, appeared
to them as most lively, important, and exciting, That which appeals to them
and moves them is the powerful inner message that is directly evident in
everything in the mountains. The mountain can be destructive and is awe-
some in its greatness, its solitude, its inaccessibility, its silence, the primor-
dial nature of its storms, its immutability through the succession of seasons
and the constant formation and dissolution of the cloud banks—all these
things should be regarded as intimations of immortality.

Thus, the mountain could serve as a symbol, and as such it could lead
to a corresponding inner realization. More often than not, man stops at the
emotional level, which usually has a perturbing quality rather than a feel-
ing of conquest and special knowledge. The irrationality of impressions,
visions, of inexplicable clan, and gratuitous acts of heroism urge man for-
ward along ascending paths; thus, he eventually begins to act from an
interior motive, It is in the context of the subconscious that he finds him-
self introduced to a wider reality through which he is transformed to a
state of calmness, self-sufficiency, simplicity, purity. Moreover, he receives
an almost supematural inflow of energies that cannot be explained through


aL


Doctrine


the determinism of physiology. He also feels an indomitable will to keep
on going, to commit himself again, to challenge new peaks, new abysses,
new faces. It is precisely in this drive that we find inadequate the transla-
tion of the material action in regard to its meaning (the transcendence of
the spiritual impulse in relation to external conditions), to the deeds, the
visions, and the bold actions that have propagated its awakening and that
still constitute the necessary material for the concrete expression of that
very drive.

Ido not think it is hasty to conclude that this determination must have
been the secret behind the greatest mountain feats ever performed, those
feats that seem to have really transcended the limits of ordinary human
possibilities. And yet this level of accomplishment should be accompa-
nied by true realization, by overcoming the instinctive and irrational ele-
ment, and by a full and unwavering self-awareness, namely, the transfor-
mation of the experience of the mountain into a way of being. Then what
would arise in the best subjects is the feeling that every mountain excur-
sion, every climb, every conquest, and every daring feat are only means
through which he expresses an immaterial reality that he could also ex-
press in other ways. This then is the strength of those who may be said to
never return from the peaks to the plains. This is the strength of those for
whom there is no longer going out or coming back because the mountain is
in their spirit, because the symbol has become reality, and because all
dross has been shed. For these people the mountain is no longer a new
adventure or a romantic escape or a sensory high, or heroism for its own
sake or a sport carried to new technical heights. Rather the mountain is
connected to something that has no beginning and no end and that, having
become an inalienable spiritual conquest, has become part of one’s na-
ture, something one carries everywhere that bestows a new meaning to
every action, every experience, and every struggle in everyday life.

In this way, beyond the natural symbol of the mountain, which is di-
rectly perceived by the senses, we can access its doctrinal and traditional
symbolism, namely, the deeper content of all the previously mentioned
ancient myths in which the mountain appears as the seat of divine natures,
immortalizing substances, forces of a solar and supernatural regality (for
example, the solar mountain referred to in the traditions of the Hellenized


22


SpuniTuALiTy OF THE MOUNTAIN


Roman Empire and the mountain as the seat of Mazdean glory), a spiri-
tual center (Mount Meru and the other symbolic mountains conceived as
poles), and so forth. In fact, in all this we see the various depictions, per-
sonifications, and projections of transcendent states of consciousness, of
inner awakenings and enlightenments. These projections are said to be
real when they no longer represent something vague, mystical, or fantas-
tic, but rather when they are perceived according to the evidence and
normalcy of a superior order that regards as abnormal everything that was
previously regarded as familiar and habitual.

Itis possible that the ancients, who ignored mountain climbing or only
knew some rudimentary techniques (and therefore knew the mountain as
an inaccessible and inviolable entity), were consequently led to experi-
ence it as a symbol and as a transcendent spirituality. Considering that
today the mountain has been physically conquered and that there are few
peaks that man has not yet reached, it is important to keep the conquest
from being debased and from losing its higher meaning. Thus, it is neces-
sary that the younger generations gradually come to appreciate action at
the level of ritual and that they slowly succeed in finding again a transcen-
dent reference point. It is through this reference point that the feats of
audacity, risk, and conquest as well as the disciplines of the body, the
senses, and the will that are practiced in the immovable, great, and sym-
bolic mountain peaks, lead men to the realization that all in man is beyond
himself. In this way these feats will be justified in the context of the spiri-
tual revolutionary movement that is currently emerging among our people.


23


ey ee


A Mystic of the Tibetan Mountains


ilarepa was a strange Tibetan ascetic and poet who lived around

the eleventh century a.p. He is credited with a revival of the meta-
physical doctrine of Northem Buddhism, or Mahayana, in the form of a
tradition that has been transmitted orally up to our time. His teachings are
known in the form of songs that include descriptions of some episodes of
his life. I believe my readers will find it interesting to briefly explore this
mysticism, in which the impressions made by high mountains, the struggle
with the elements, various symbols, doctrines, and the allusion to enig-
matic phenomena of a supematural type are intimately interconnected. I
will first summarize the narrative parts of Milarepa’s poems.


Six months had gone by since the ascetic Milarepa, having taken to the
high mountains near the great glaciers, had been caught with little food in
a snowstorm that had isolated the mountain peaks from the rest of the
world. Believing that Milarepa had died, his disciples made the sacrificial
offerings prescribed for the dead. At the beginning of spring they went to
look for him, forging a path through the snow, wishing toretrieve the body
of their teacher.

During one stop in the glaciers a snow leopard appeared to them. They
began to follow it when suddenly, to their astonishment, it tumed into a
tiger. At the entrance of the Cave of the Demons, they heard a voice sing-
ing a song, which they recognized as Milarepa’s, and immediately ran
inside to embrace their teacher; it was he who had projected the images of
the leopard and the tiger through a far-reaching illusion, having sensed his
approaching disciples.


2s


Docraine


He told them how, during his contemplation, although eating almost
nothing, he had not felt the need for food; that during the feast days, the
aerial spirits of the peaks had brought to him the essence of the offerings
made to him by his friends; and that when his disciples, believing Milarepa
to have died, had begun to make offerings, these became for him a sort of
food that made him feel satiated and he wanted nothing.

Athis disciples’ request, Milarepa agreed to suspend his ascetic prac-
tices in the mountains and descend to the plateau, where, at the news of
his safe retum, a rejoicing crowd gathered. Milarepa, questioned by the
people, told the story of his stay on the mountain peak and how he was
able to endure the elements, the icy temperatures, and the raging wind,
thus overcoming the invisible forces (the “demons”) disguised as snow.
Then he offered his teachings.


The Song of the Snow


At the end of the Tiger Year, before the Rabbit Year
began, on the sixth day of Wa Jal, a sense of renunciation
grew within me.

To the remote Lashi snow mountain came Milarepa, the
anchorite who clings to solitude.

Heaven and earth held a council; a wind that tears the skin
was sent.

The rivers ran and torrents surged; black clouds swept in
from all directions.

The sun and the moon were shut in darkness and the
bwenty-cight constellations were fixed in place; the Milky
Way was pegged-down and the cight planets were tied by
an iron chain,

The firmament was wrapped in fog; in the mist, snow fell
for nine days and nights. Then more and more for a further
eighteen nights and days.

The snow fell, big as bags of wool, fell like birds flying in
the sky, fell like a whirling swarm of bees.

Flakes fell small as a spindle’s wheel, felll as tiny as bean
seed, fell like tufts of cotton.


26


A Mrstic oF THe Tibetan MOUNTAINS


The snowfall was beyond all measure. Snow covered the
whole mountain and even touched the sky, falling through
the bushes and weighing down the trees.

In this great disaster I remained in utter solitude.

The snow, the wintry blast, and my thin cotton garment
fought against each other on the white mountain. The
snow, as it fell on me, tured into drizzle. I conquered the
raging winds, subduing them to silent rest.

The cotton cloth I wore was like a burning brand.

The struggle was of life and death, as when giants wrestle
and sabers clash.

I, the competent yogi, was victorious; my power over the
vital heat (tumo) and the two channels was thus shown.
By observing carefully the Four Ills caused by meditation
and keeping to the inner practice, the cold and the warm
pranas became the essence. This was why the raging wind
grew tame and the storm, subdued, lost its power.

Not even the devas’ army could compete with me. This
battle, I, the yogi, won.

Son of a lion, of all beasts the king, I have ever lived in
snow mountains: no need to worry about me.

If you believe what this old man tells, Dharma will grow
and spread afar.


The Song of Joy


In answer to my disciples’ questioning, this is the happy
song the old man sings! The falling snow enclosed my
house of meditation; goddesses gave me food and
sustenance,

By observing my own mind, all things are seen; by sitting in
a lowly place, the royal throne is reached.

I, Milarepa, came to the Lashi Snow Mountain to occupy
alone the Cave of the Demons. For six full months, the
experiences of meditation grew. I now disclose them in this,
the song of the Six Essences of Meditative Experiences.


27


Docraine


If there be obstacles, it cannot be called space; if there be
numbers, it cannot be called stars.

One cannot say, “This is a mountain,” if it moves and
shakes.

It cannot be an ocean should it grow or shrink,

One cannot be called a swimmer if he needs a bridge.

It is not a rainbow if it can be grasped.

These are the Six Outer Parables.


The limits of the definite restrict understanding.
Drowsiness and distractions are not meditation.
Acceptance and rejection are not acts of will.

A constant flow of thought is not yoga.

If there be East and West, it is not wisdom.

If birth and death, it is not Buddha.

These are the Six Ianer Faults.


Great faith; reliance on a wise and strict guru;

g00d discipline, solitude in hermitage; determined,
persevering practice; and meditation—these are the
Six Ways that lead to liberation.


The original inborn wisdom is the sphere of primordial
depth. Without exterior or interior is the sphere of aware-
ness; without brightness or darkness is the sphere of
insight; omnipresent and all-embracing is the sphere of
Dharma; without mutation or transition is the sphere of tig
Le; without interruption is the sphere of experience.
These are the Six Unshakable Realms of Essence.

I sing this song of Six Essences of my experiences last
winter while meditating.


The anguish of the heart that considers real that which has
e darkness of the
illusion generated by lack of knowledge is dissolved.

The white lotus of the intellectual vision opens up; the
torch of a clear self-consciousness is lit; wisdom awakens.
Is my spirit really awake?


conditioned existence is overcome;


28


A Mystic oF THE TIBETAN Mountains


When I look up to the blue sky, the emptiness of what
exists is clearly evident to me and I do not fear the
doctrine of the reality of things.

When I look at the sun and the moon, enlightenment arises
in a distinct manner within my consciousness and I do not
fear spiritual dullness and torpor.

When I look to the mountain peaks, the immutable object
of contemplation is clearly perceived by my consciousness
and I do not fear the unceasing changes of mere theories.
When I look down to the river below, the idea of continuity
clearly arises in my consciousness, thus I do not fear
unforeseeable events,

When I see the rainbow, the emptiness of phenomena is
experienced in the most central part of my inner being and
I fear neither that which endures, nor that which passes
away.

When I sce the image of the moon reflected by the water,
self-liberation, freed from all concerns, clearly appears to
my consciousness and I do not fear stupidity and frivolity.


The Song of the Essence of Things


The storm, the thunder, the clouds from the south, When
they arise, they arise from the sky; when they disappear
they do so into the sky.

The rainbow, the fog, and the mist. When they arise, they
arise from the air; when they disappear they do so into the
air.

The substance of all fruits and of every crop comes from
the earth; when it disappears it does so into the earth.
Rivers, waves, and sea foam. When they arise, they arise
from the ocean; when they disappear they do so into the
ocean.

Passions, yearning, and greed. When they arise, they arise
from the mind; when they disappear they do so into the
mind.

Wisdom, enlightenment, liberation. When they arise, they


29


Doctrine


arise from the mind; when they disappear, they do so into
the mind.

The freedom from rebirth, the unconditioned, the ineffable,
when they arise, they arise from being; when they disap-
pear, they do so into being.

That which is regarded as. a demon, when it arises, it arises
from within the ascetic; when it disappears, it does so into
the ascetic, since these apparitions are only an illusory
game of the inner essence.

By realizing the true nature of the mind, it is possible to
realize that the state of enlightenment does not come, nor
does it leave.

When the mind, which is deluded by the apparition of the
extemal world, has finally understood the teaching
concerning the phenomena, it experiences that there is no
difference whatsoever between phenomena and empti-
ness, When the true nature of the mind is compared to that
of ether, the essence of truth is properly understood.


—


Race and the Mountain


Nee to the main tenet of the doctrine of race, the qualities of a
race are essentially hereditary factors. The environment exercises
its influence but is not a decisive factor, since by itself it cannot generate
permanent modifications that will be passed on as new legacies. Never-
theless, the environment assumes a special importance wherever there
are types containing different hereditary factors due to previous racial
inter-breeding. In these cases, the environment may act in such a way as
to encourage the development of some of these factors instead of others,
which may be inhibited or reduced to a latent state. On this basis, the
environment is a factor that should be carefully considered wherever the
question of trait-selection arises. A certain environment may test the vari-
ety of inherited dispositions and measure their strength; it may cause a
discrimination; and it may even isolate and stabilize a predominant type
when it presents the same conditions for a sufficiently long time.

The above-mentioned passing remarks are meant to constitute a gen-
eral premise for some considerations I intend to present. These consider-
ations concern the meaning the experience of the mountain has for an ac-
tive view of the race, namely, the view that intends to give a greater empha-
sis, inthe Italian people, to the qualities and gifts of the Aryan-Roman type.

Ihave said “experience of the mountain” and not simply “the moun-
tain” because I am not referring to the people who inhabit the alpine ar-
eas. In this context I would like to address the effect of the experience and
of the habit of the mountain on those who do not belong to this environ-
ment, and to whom the mountain represents an opportunity to react against
the dull pace of everyday life.


31


Doctrine


Moreover, I donot intend to write about the physiological and psycho-
logical effects of mountain climbing, the beneficial and reintegrating as-
pect of which is common knowledge. Rather, I wish to focus on the aspect
of trait selection and of character formation.

First, anybody who agrees with the predominant view according to
which the original stock of the conquering Aryan race became differenti-
ated from other peoples and asserted itself in the events and in the particu-
larly harsh environment of the end of the glacial age will also acknowl-
edge that, if there is a natural environment that might encourage the emer-
gence of an analogous inner form, this is the mountainous environment—
especially those areas where great glaciers and high peaks are to be found.
In this case, the evocation of a primordial legacy may unfold under the
right conditions, without imposing a priori an organic acclimatization on
those who, after millennia spent away from the ancestors’ homeland, at-
tempted to derive positive experiences from a prolonged experience of
the arctic regions.

Second, by virtue of its primordial nature, its elements, its distance
from the petty world of the thoughts and feelings of the domesticated and
rationalistic modern man, the mountain also invites people, in a spiritual
way, to retum to their origins, to the inner realization of something that
reflects the simplicity, the greatness, the pure force, and the untouchabil-
ity of the world of the icy and bright peaks. The fact that almost every
ancient tradition knew the symbolism of the mountain—conceiving the
mountain peaks as the seat of either divine and Olympian forces, or of
heroes and transfigured men—confirms the evocative power I have just
attributed to the mountain, It is necessary to emphasize this point: talking
about a return to the origins and reconstructing human types, forms of
civilization, and styles of ancient times is always going to amount to mere
intellectualism and to a sterile nostalgia, unless one achieves a direct sense
of what is primordial. Only nature can help in this task. J mean nature in
whose aspects no room is left for what is beautiful, romantic, picturesque;
I mean when nature ceases to speak to man; [mean nature that is substan-
tiated by greatness and pure forces. Therefore, I would not refrain from
saying that he who has conquered the mountain, namely, he who has
learned to adapt himself to its fundamental meaning, already possesses a


Race ano THE MOUNTAIN


key to comprehending the original spirit and the spirit of the Aryan-
Roman world in its most severe, pure, and monumental aspects. Such a
key is not to be found in ordinary culture and scholarship.

Now I wish to discuss four elements of form. All those who are serious
about mountain climbing, who climb ridges, walls, overhanging rocks, icy
pathways, and narrow ledges, embody a common way of being. The main
features of which resemble the features that were typically exemplified by
the Aryan-Roman and Aryan-Nordic races and are also very different from
those of a certain “Mediterranean” human type. In all this [ am inclined to
see the effect of a natural selection, and almost of a renewal, which occurs
as the result of specific tasks, trials, and also a special environment.

‘The first characteristic is sparsity of words and reduced verbal com-
munication. The mountain teaches silence; it discourages idle chatter, use-
less words, and exuberant and pointless effusive outbursts. It promotes
simplification and the turning of one’s attention inward. In an alpine envi-
ronment, gestures and signals are more eloquent than long speeches, This
is especially true when one is busy climbing, or making holes on the
mountain’s face, or crossing ravines; in these circumstances one instinc-
tively adopts a military style and a terseness in warning, giving instruc-
tions, or confirming. This style can be extended from climbing to life in the
mountains in general. It is true that sometimes one encounters relapses,
especially among young people who do not shun noise and exuberance
when staying at mountain shelters. And yet these relapses do not affect
the essential, and have the value of juxtaposing this attitude with that found
among true climbers and more qualified people, to whom the mountain is
much more than a sporadic adventure and a fleeting emotion.

The second feature of serious mountain climbers, which is immedi-
ately connected to the first, is inner discipline: a total control of reflexes;
the style of a deliberate, lucid, and purposeful action; a boldness that is
not reckless or hasty, but which is connected to the knowledge of one’s
limitations and strengths and of the exact terms of the problems to be
solved. In relation to this characteristic, we also find yet another one: the
control of one’s imagination and the capability to immediately neutral-
ize any useless and harmful inner turmoil. These elements have much in
common with the traits of ascetics, but here they arc put into practice as


33


Doctrine


the presuppositions of any relevant climbing excursion. A lucid concen-
tration, fit for the purpose, this is yet another trait that the experience of
the mountain awakens and stabilizes, until it transforms it in many people
into a natural way of being or into some kind of habit. He who, when
walking across an open icy ridge, thinks about something other than the
next foot-step; or he who, during a climb, allows himself to think about
the danger and the void yawning beneath him, instead of fixing his mind
on the rapid and exact solution to the various questions of weight, equi-
librium, and the right grip—such a person will hardly retum a second
time to the mountain, even if he still yearns for adventure. To return to
the mountain; to face and to love the risks; to master the proper tech-
nique—all this means to give to one’s being a certain form, which in
some people eventually influences everyday, ordinary behavior. The
active realism—that lucid and perfectly mastered instinct, that style of a
spirit that keeps the soul and any irrational reaction under total control,
are also the main characteristics of the Aryan-Nordic and Aryan-Roman
style, It is true that analogous traits can also be developed in other sports,
yet the experience of the mountain contains a number of elements that
lead to their spiritualization, thus climinating the danger of mechaniza-
tion befalling those who have become a bundle of well-controlled re-
flexes.

Third, the experience of the mountain empowers one to act, to per-
form without spectators, and to display a heroism that shuns rhetoric and
grandiose gestures. Again, it is the environment itself that brings about
this purification of action, the overcoming of vanity, and an active disin-
terest. While the “Mediterranean type” is characterized by the need fora
public and by the inclination to behave in a theatrical manner, the experi-
ence of the mountain is one of the best antidotes against this Mediterra-
nean component that may remain in our Italian souls. Those who really
practice mountain climbing leam an opposite joy to that of the Mediterra-
nean type, namely the joy of being alone, of being left to one’s self amid
the changelessness of things, alone with one’s action and contemplation.
The fact that in the great majority of alpine feats people are roped to each
other does not contradict the above-mentioned point, because there is no
serious climber who at some point did not tackle the mountain alone. The


34


Race AND THE MOUNTAIN


other people he is roped with are never an audience; they are elements of
a single unit who perform different tasks in the course of a common ac-
tion. Everybody knows that a person in a roped party is expected to do
much more than if he were alone, considering the consequences that an
imprudent action or a weakness could have for others.

‘This leads me to consider a fourth characteristic, which I refer to as a
special way of being and of acting together. Camaraderie, in this context,
is too generic an expression. Here the connection is more individual and
personal. Sentiment and affection play more minor roles than in the ge-
neric cases of camaraderie, yet with the effect of greater intensity. An-
other way to putit is to be simultaneously alone and with other people—a
connection occurring essentially through action. To lead and show the way
is justan example of the tasks that must always be fulfilled through strength.
Maybe only some forms of camaraderie, forged during wartime on the
battleficld, may bring about, like the experience of the mountain, this spe-
cial sense of active solidarity, which keeps a distance between people and
yet presupposes the full harmony of their forces because of the precise
assessment of and trust in each member's potential.

This is virility without ostentation and mutual help without hesitation,
among people who are on the same plane; it is based on a freely chosen
and common goal.

Thus, this latter element, when compared to it, reminds us of the type
of community that was one of the most characteristic elements of the an-
cient Aryan races and the Aryan-Roman people; this type of community
had nothing to do with socialism. Its foundation was neither a collective
entity nor individualism, but rather personality. Its law was action; in it
there were relationships of real men, cemented by trust, loyalty and truth-
fulness, not to mention the shared dignity of belonging to the same race.
Subordination did not humiliate people in this type of society, because of
the precise vision of the whole and because of the vision shared by each
individual.

These are the main elements that, through the natural selection of the
environment and by the test of action, are most cherished by those who
take the mountain experience seriously. These people, with a significant
degree of uniformity, tend to rectify or neutralize other inclinations and


35


Doctaine


qualities that are emphasized in life on the plains and in the great cities.
Nothing is created out of nothing; thus, the present considerations do not
apply tothe completely bastardized modem man who has beenreduced to
a working and sporting animal. These considerations apply instead to those
in whom the sense of race (race in a spiritual, higher sense) still means
something and, rather, represents the main departing point for a will ori-
ented toward liberation and awakening. In these people, the mountainous
milieu awakens a primordial legacy and possibly contributes to the gradual
emergence of a transcendent sense of freedom—which does not signify
escapism, but is instead a principle of pure strength. This sense of freedom
finds its most perfect expression within one’s limited self, in concentra-
tion, in a deliberate action, in the complete, lucid dominion of the irratio-
nal part of the human being, and finally, inthe readiness to be freely trans-
formed into an element of solid action, in which the goal is located above
everybody and everything else.


36


The Mountain, Sport,
and Contemplation


ie arecent publication of the Italian Mountain Association, I came across
a polemic. Far from wanting to fuel this quarrel, I intend to make some
general comments that will scrve as a reference point for my readers.

The quarrel is about the meaning of true mountain climbing. Carlo
Anguissola d’Emet has taken a position against an overly technical ap-
proach to climbing, which he characterizes as follows:


A real climber cannot be somebody who does not love, un-
derstand, and pursue the fifth or sixth degree. A climber is
someone who carties ropes, nails, hooks, shoes, snaplinks,
sleeping bag, and a lot of equipment during his excursions. A
climber is one who has repeatedly bivouacked on the walls,
connected to nails, [and] slept in the open under the rain or
during a storm, waiting for the break of dawn,


Anguissola deplores that in the periodicals devoted to mountain climbing
this technical approach is increasingly predominant, so much so that the
only things that matter these days are degrees of difficulty or this or that
school of mountain climbing. Moreover, he complains that it is possible to
notice an increasingly snobbish attitude in young people, who display col-
orful sweaters, pipes in their mouths, and big patches from various ski or
climbing schools, all the while flaunting technical jargon.

Anguissola definitely admits the “usefulness of certain notions of
climbing,” yet claims that the casualty of the overemphasis on technique


37


Docteine


is the qualitative aspect of mountain climbing. Worse yet, the latter's spon-
taneous, original, and sincere character is suffocated. The result is the
diminution of the contemplation of and direct contact with one of the most
grandiose forms of nature, The American passion for records seems to
have become a predominant concer. It seems that the true climber is one
who taunts those who love the mountain in all of its forms, whether they
be high peaks, such as Mount Cervino or Mount Lavaredo, or plateaus,
True mountain lovers, while being experienced climbers, still give prior-
ity to the contemplative interest and the impulse to establish contact with
a world that helps one forget the mechanical and dull life of the modern
cities.

Anguissola was rebuffed by P. Marimonti on the pages of the same
review. Marimonti claimed that such an argument is outdated and that the
only thing that matters is “what is a great climbing feat, and in what man-
ner it is carried out.” He proceeded to quote the words of Emilio Comici:


In order to really feel the power of the mountain, it is neces-
sary to confront a wall of the fifth or sixth degree of diffi-
culty. Those who have never tried it before cannot judge oth-
ers who have. We do not goto the mountain just to practice a
contemplative form of climbing. . . . This takes place only
during days of rest, when, in contemplation, we dream of a
beautiful and difficult feat.


According to Marimonti, these words of Comici’s characterize the most
complete form of mountain climbing, and he added: “Not all those who
take to the mountain have the necessary qualities to understand it,” In his
view, the people who are closer to understanding the mountain are those
who “attend with profit schools and courses of mountain climbing.”
Thus, there seems to be a conflict of interpretations. To clarify mat-
ters, I would like to acknowledge and deplore, with Marimonti, the exist-
ence of relevant literature that “more often than not represents a rhetori-
cal outburst rather than expressing true feelings.” The mountain as an
ideal place toinduce sweet and poetic feelings, a place that delights people
with beautiful sunsets and starry nights, belongs to an outdated generation
that was infected with bourgeois sentimentalism and romanticism. The


38


Te Mountain, Sport, aN> ContemPLation


mountain itself appears to me tobe the best antidote to similar deviations.
In few of its manifestations does nature give us the sense of what, in its
greatness, purity, power, and primordial nature, is far above the insignifi-
cant lives and artificial lyricism of ordinary people. In my view, such a
catharsis, and such a removal of the J from the shallow world of mere
subjectivity and its literary and psychological appendices, ought to be the
first salutary effect derived from the practice of true mountain climbing,
and also the reason why climbing in its essence ought to be regarded by
the best elements as something more than mere sport.

Is this a matter of contemplation? Let me explain. This word has dif-
ferent meanings. The most current meaning is the one that has been pro-
faned the most. According to it, contemplation signifies flights of fantasy
and a passive abiding in the impressions and in the inner repercussions of
spectacular views. Originally, contemplation referred to asceticism and
signified something else altogether: it represented a sphere superior to
“active life” (in some cases culminating in it), characterized by the over-
coming of the ordinary and individual sense of one’s self. The correspond-
ing Greek term, theoria, implies a through-and-through inner realization
or identification: consciousness that lives directly in its object. When we
talk of catharsis, or of purification as an overcoming of that which is sub-
jective, sentimental, and bourgeois thanks to the experience of the moun-
tain, we can refer to this older and more austere meaning of the contem-
plative dimension.

At this point we ought to wonder, of all those who take to the moun-
tain, how many possess the necessary qualities to understand, or better,
to welcome the transforming power of the experience of the mountain?
Moreover, we ought to wonder whether the ones closer to it are those
who concentrate on the technical preparations and on the love of effort
and risk, despising contemplative feelings (which, judging from the quoted
words, amount to “dreaming of a beautiful and difficult conquest during
times of rest”). The right perspective seems to me to fall above both
extremes.

Tbelieve that on the mountain contemplation and action ought to be
two inseparable elements of an organic whole, outside of which they
immediately lose their specific and higher meaning. In order to realize


39


Docteine


this, let us take the two terms separately and thus reach absurd conclu-
sions. The limit of a contemplation without action can be realized on an
airplane. Sitting comfortably in first class on the Venice-Munich or the
Venice-Vienna route, flying several thousand feet above sea level, one
might enjoy the magnificent and vast view of the Alps and the sky (es-
pecially in wintertime). This view would be much more beautiful than
that available for contemplations (in the restricted sense of the word)
that can be experienced from the highest peaks, climbed with much ef-
fort and concentration.

As far as action without contemplation is concerned, think about those
acrobatic feats performed on a rope suspended between two skyscrapers,
or on a trapeze, in which everything depends on the exact and flawless
execution of a jump. I wonder if the schools of mountain climbing have
truly much more to offer on the matter of discipline in the face of danger,
control of one’s reflexes, and technique. It is clear therefore, that the two
things have their respective relative values: mountain climbing is an im-
portant and serious business—and educational in a superior and not only.
in a degraded and modern sense—only when it involves a special action
that derives its meaning from contemplation and when it includes a spe-
cial contemplation that derives its meaning from action.

It can hardly be disputed that the technical character of modem al-
pinism (which is most often based on the quest for new records, on in-
creasing difficulties, on the wall that has never been attempted before,
even when it is possible to get to the top through other ways), with its
inevitable mechanical quality, often represents a regression in regard to
the above-mentioned holistic approach. The spiritual lesson that the
mountain has to offer those who climb, having been called and chosen
by it, no school of fifth or sixth degree can offer. Quite frankly, repeti-
tion and experience inevitably lead to a dulling of sensibility—at least,
this is what my own personal experience has taught me.

That which one learns from the peaks and glaciers by traveling alone,
with a minimal knowledge of technique, becomes less of a learning expe-
rience after a routine has been established, after one has leamed danger-
ous techniques and trained his mind to concentrate on the best solution to
the next technical problem presented by the next step in the ice and by the


40


Tue Mountain, Sport, AND CONTEMPLATION


next grip on the rock. This is a very helpful way for training oneself in a
sportslike manner and for educating body and nerves, but it inevitably
leads to the extinction of the spiritual experience of the mountain and also
reduces the opportunities for catharsis that may be contained therein. Let
us not confuse the issue by talking about the mountain as “a great school
of courage, a school of climbing mountain men who specialize in great
feats.” Those feats are specializations: forms which of course have a high
value, although only in their own limited fields. In this context the moun-
tain appears merely as an X degree of difficulty, which has to be over-
come through appropriate means in relation to a special form of action
oriented to a Y goal, just like a military action. This very circumscribed
context allows no room for considerations of a superior order.

It is also a fact that in recent generations there are evident symptoms
of increasing materialism and mechanization in mountain climbing,
which—especially in regard to the mania for records and the pursuit of
difficulty for its own sake—is somewhat influenced by the American men-
tality and by its frivolous obsession with sports. Another danger —caused
by other factors—is the “mass” phenomenon, that invades the mountains,
which unavoidably brings a plebcian quality and causes the loss of spiri-
tual quality, the level and value of the experience. Finally, there is a spe-
cial snobbery, exemplified by those who act like new Trenkers,! with a
mixture of false simplicity and ostentation.

‘And thus in the mountains, especially during the winter and summer
seasons, there is no longer any room. It will be great luck if the best climb-
ers are able to overcome the already mentioned limitations and find again
in the mountains and the peaks the ways of a really wholesome experi-
ence, of some kind of silent ascesis and inner liberation,


1, Louis Trenker, bor in Ortisei in 1892, was.a movie director, cinematographer, and actor in
German movies, although he retained his Austrian citizenship. He achieves his greatest
notoriety in the 1930s starring in mountain-climbing roles.


4\


—


Ascending and Descending


here is no significant upheaval in the world of culture, social phe-

nomena, and, in general, collective sensibility, that is not capable of
having a symbolic meaning and of pointing to an order of things that usu-
ally escapes a superficial observer.

The world of sports in this regard is far from representing an excep-
tion. Moreover, we may add that the very phenomenon of the growth
and importance that sports have enjoyed in contemporary Wester life
is the barometric index of the shift, on the part of the Western soul, to a
worldview that is very different from that of the previous bourgeois and
intellectualist nineteenth century. It is superfluous, at this point, to em-
phasize the relationship between this upheaval and the action-oriented
new political currents.

But even in the domain of the various sports, similar considerations
have to be made. In this context, I wish to confine them to a circumscribed
topic, namely, to the meaning of the immediate, general popularity that
skiing has enjoyed, particularly compared to the meaning of another simi-
lar form of sport, namely, mountain climbing.

In order to prevent misunderstandings, Imust specify the level to which
my thoughts apply. First of all I would like to make it very clearthat I have
never had, nor will I ever have, anything against the practical value of
skiing. I will gladly acknowledge everything that may be acquired from
this sport in terms of health, bravery, physical and mental invigoration,
and its refreshing effect upon our youth, whom the modern metropolitan
life suffocates and oppresses. Let this be clear from the start; therefore,
what I will say later on in no way should induce my readers to think that I


43


Doctaine


deny such practical value to skiing as a sport. I also wish to add that I
myself practice skiing as well as mountain climbing—obviously as a mere
amateur—without being affected by the negative symbolic meaning, very
revealing of our times, which this sport has come to assume.

Skiing has enjoyed a rapidly growing popularity considering that, as
a sport, it is not even sixty years old. The first skiing competition was
held in 1870 in Christiania, where the villagers of Telemark defeated
their opponents by employing a special technique, causing a universal
astonishment. Naturally, skis were previously known in Northern Euro-
pean countries as means for traveling through snow-covered areas; people
thought of them as natural and useful tools, just as a boat that is em-
ployed to cross the waters. However, skiing as a sport that awakens a
special passion and generates a certain pleasure has acquired a great
popularity among the great European nations only in very recent times.
In the aftermath of World War I it has won the hearts of the younger
generation. Skiing’s rapid success, its universal appeal, the genuine in-
terest and enthusiasm it induces in both sexes are so characteristic that it
would be superficial to see in it something merely casual. Rather, it is
something that ought to be explained as that which precisely typifies the
contemporary spirit.

Thus, we should inquire: what constitutes the essence of skiing? What
is its nucleus, the point around which its other aspects revolve? The an-
swer is easy: it is the descent.

Just as in elementary climbing, the fundamental element and the cen-
ter of interest is ascending, likewise, in skiing this corresponds to descend-
ing. The dominant motif in mountain climbing is conquest. Once the peak
is reached and the point beyond which one cannot go any further is at-
tained, the phase most interesting to an ice or rock climber ends. In skiing,
the opposite is true: the purpose of every ascent is descending. Hours of
effort, which are necessary to reach a certain height, are spent only in
order to be able to slide downhill. Thus, in more developed and modern
winter resorts, the problem is solved in favor of the true interest of skiers
through the construction of cables that carry them effortlessly to the top;
after coming down they are ready to go up again, for as many rides as they
wish. Just as climbing is characterized by the thrill of the ascent, likewise


Ascenping ano Descenoing


as a conquest, skiing is characterized by the thrill of the descent, by speed,
and even by eventual falls.

This last point is not irrelevant. The relationship between the self and
one’s own body differs greatly between climbing and skiing. In climbing
we find a direct sense of one’s whole body. The forms emphasize equilib-
rium, elan, and effort, which presuppose mastery over the body—the lucid
and calculated shift of all its weight in response to each challenge pre-
sented by the ascent, the grip, the reliability of the step carved in the ice.
In skiing it is a different story: the relationship of the self and the body,
which is connected to the skis and put at the mercy of the forces of gravity,
may truly be compared to the relationship between somebody driving a
car and the car itself, once it is moving at full speed. Once the skier has
begun his race downhill, there is only one thing he can do: guide himself,
using precise movements, by regulating speed and direction, and by de-
veloping a mastery of those reflexes that control the descent. This is like
the case of a driver who enjoys driving at full speed in a road crowded
with people and other cars, without slowing down, but acting with quick
reflexes in order to avoid various obstacles or people, almost playing with
them, and then moving on to other obstacles.

As far as the inner aspect of skiing is concemed, namely, conceming
that which it has to offer to the spirit, it is necessary to remember one’s
impression of putting on skis for the very first time: onc has the impression
that the ground is slipping from underneath one’s feet, or of falling. Such
an impression surfaces again in more difficult forms of this sport, such as
downhill racing and ski jumping. On this basis I do not think I am wrong to
say that the deepest meaning of skiing consists of transforming the instinc-
tive fear of falling, or the instinct of holding back or of stopping—which
accompanies every fall—into a sensation of exhilaration, of pleasure, which
makes one wish to go faster and play with speed. Paradoxical as it seems,
skiing may be defined as the technique, game, and enjoyment of falling.
In skiing we find a form of boldness, of courage (which for all practical
purposes should not be despised), and yet it is a special form that is com-
pletely different from the boldness of a mountain climber and is likewise
tied to antithetical meanings: it is an essentially modern form of boldness.

With the term falling, we describe the symbolic meaning of skiing and


45


Doctrine


the deep reason for its growing popularity. Among the many varieties of
sports, skiing should definitely be counted among those that least reflect
classical values. This is why, while the ancient traditions of all people
symbolically portray the mountain as the goal of ascents and of transfigu-
rations (this despite almost total ignorance of climbing techniques), there
is no reference in these traditions to skiing. The fact is that in skiing, the
modem spirit finds itself essentially at home; this modem spirit is intoxi-
cated with speed, with constant change, with acceleration. Until recently
this intoxication was celebrated as the spirit of progress, despite the fact
that, in many regards, it is nothing other than a collapsing and a falling
down, This exhilarating motion, joined with a cerebral feeling of control
over the direction of these forces hurled and no longer really mastered, is
typical of the modem world, in which the self achieves its most intense
self-awareness. As if through a reflection, I believe that values similar to
those of climbing appear in skiing and characterize it in regard to climb-
ing, as the physical translation of the opposite of ascending, elevating one-
self, overcoming the forces of gravity.

Let me repeat that I myself practice skiing, although I am not dis-
turbed or distracted by these ideas. One should not shun any experience.
What matters is to maintain openness toward all experiences and thus be
always aware lest physical and emotional elements attempt to exercise a
seductive influence upon higher domains.


46


en, PART TU


Experiences


iy ae


The Northern Wall
of Eastern Lyskamm


think my readers will be interested in learning about my climb of the

Eastern Lyskamm (4532 meters) by the northeastern wall, on August
29, 1930. It was not the first time this climb had been attempted; in 1890
the roped party of Norman Neruda, Klucker, and Reinstadler followed the
rocky path of the mountain for almost the entire ascent. The second climb,
the first ever to be attempted by Italians, was accomplished by Dr. Carlo
Fortina with the mountain guide Augusto Welf from Gressoney. In 1926
two Germans climbed it without a guide; in 1927 the German W. Kehl
climbed it with two guides. On August 26, 1929, the brave Italian female
climber Nini Pietrasanta, with the mountain guide Chiara from Alagna,
performed the first all-women climb, thus winning a new record for Italian
mountaineering. Two young men from Torino, Emanuele Andreis and Luigi
Bon, during that same August, were the first Italians to climb it without a
guide.

However, considering the importance of this mountain, the majesty of
its northern side, the remarkably lucky circumstances under which our
climb took place, and the straight path we followed, I wish to publish my
notes.


My companion is Eugenio David, from Gressoney, one of the best young
mountain guides from the Val d’ Aosta. Tall, agile, calm, of a steadfastness
equal to his courage, he is a painter and a musician and had once been a
member of the elite Mountain Troops (Alpini). He is the best companion for


49


Experiences


somconce like me, who likes to climb the mountain alone or with as few
people as possible, tackling the mountain at a fast pace, rather than con-
quering it at a slow and steady pace.

We set base camp at Capanna Gnifenti (3647 meters). The night had
been stormy, marked by repeated lightning flashes and gusts of hail and
snow. Even though everybody tried to discourage us, shortly before dawn,
brandishing lantems, we descend onto the glacier. Ignoring the difficul-
ties, we resolve to achieve our goal and to make as much progress as
possible. In the early light, the clouds appear to coagulate in the valleys
below, revealing the bright white fresh snow and a clear sky of marine
blue color. The peaks look majestic, forming a choirlike ensemble; behind
them lay our intended objective, Mount Lyskamm. Before we reach Mount
Lysjoch, the return of icy gusts of wind and of clouds, which arise from the
southern valleys and envelope the peaks, cause us to stop and reflect on
our next move. Considering the circumstances, David declares that at-
tempting to go on is risky business. At first I do not try to persuade him to
g0 on; since waiting has made us cold, I propose to him, asa pis aller, to
cross the two Lyskamms using the ordinary path on which I had walked
just two days earlier. By the time we reach the first slopes the horizon
clears up again. My companion finds his original resolve again, following
my joke about “the Girl Scout’s walk” we are about to begin. After he
replies, “OK, let’s go!” we set off at a running pace toward Mount Lysjoch
and go even farther, ending up at the foot of Mount Grenzgletscher, al-
most intoxicated by the thought of the adventure we have committed our-
selves to,

It is six o’clock A.M. sharp when we reach the bottom of the mountain
face. There are no more clouds or wind, there is only a bright light that is
spreading slowly over the sky and the snow. Above our heads the icy
slopes appear merciless, vertiginous, disconcerting. All around us, moun-
tain peaks,

The bottom of the mountain wall is surrounded by a deep, permanent
crevasse; today its edges are rather treacherous due to the very recent
snowfall. We carefully circumnavigate it until we find a place to cross
over. David descends into the crevasse, trusting an area covered with snow
to hold his weight. He climbs the slope of the crevasse and makes it to the


50


Twe Nortueen Watt or Eastern LysKany


other side. Quickly, and without hesitating, I follow suit, Now it is time to
begin our climb.

From the very start the incline is formidable: not less than sixty de-
grees. The ground, which is covered by clinging fresh snow to which the
hook and the ice axe on which we lean for support can easily hold, allows
us a short-lived hope. A little later we are discouraged to leam that the
ground is covered only by a thin layer of snow that is insufficient to hold
our weight but also thick enough to prevent our spiked soles from reaching
the ice underneath and thereby from getting a firm hold. Farther on we
encounter pure ice with a few areas covered by snow that had frozen over
the night before.

We are in the middle of our adventure. We proceed. The rope be-
comes useless. It is also useless to think about reciprocal holds. We cannot
Plunge the ice axe into the ground, nor can we possibly lean on it, consid-
ering that the notches of the steps and the firmness of the natural holds are
insufficient to hold even the lesser weight of the “vertical component” of
an inclined body. Moreover, not only is it useless to attempt zigzagging to
reduce the incline, but also dangerous, since to move a foot sideways be-
tween the almost vertical ice and the other foot, which is resting uncer-
tainly, is a big risk. We have no other choice but to press onward indepen-
dent of each other because if one of us fell he would certainly drag the
other to a sure death. We thrust the ice axes upward with all our strength,
trying to gain that minimal amount of safety and hold that will allow our
agility to spare us digging a hole into the ice—this activity is truly chal-
Ienging for our arms.

The view of the crevasse yawning beneath us, into which we could
fall as a result of a minor mistake, has disappeared. We are alone in the
middle of the uncompromising icy slope, left to our resources for better or
for worse. Beyond the crevasse lies Mount Dufour, an imposing mountain
marked by black, tough ridges. All around us a nonhuman silence; that
lightness of the air that makes every perception acute; and these great,
motionless, calm, and brightrealities that make a strange contrast with our
inner state of tension and our sensation of imminent danger. Just like our
bodies, our souls too have little or no support. There is nothing varying or
picturesque about our ascent; as a matter of fact it is as monotonous as a


SI


Experiences


stone or a mountain stream. There is something almost closed, fierce, and
relentless about it. This ascent requires pure strength and a pure, calm,
and uncompromising will. Slowly but steadily, something arises in us: that
automatic, almost supematural state of security, lack of tiredness, and lu-
cidity that arises at great heights and in the face of mortal danger, after
one’s initial strength and sensations have been depleted. We press on-
ward, upward, with strong resolve, a strange calm and precision in our
every move. Higher up, we can see the first rocks of the mountain rib,
simultaneously close and far away, due to the deceiving perspective of
the snows. We aim straight for them.

When we finally reach these rocks, ourhands, quite frozen despite the
heavy gloves, struggle to wrest a hold from the ice. The length of our ice
axe embarrasses us; a small axc would have done the job. The vertical
slope doesnot show any breaks, not even at this level; however, itis easier
to deal with that than with the wall ofice that we encounter here and there
in between rocks. We climb at a rapid pace, assaulting the rock, forgoing
safety measures with the rope because we fear we have taken too much
time already. All of a sudden, a rock on which I placed my foot, thinking it
offered a steady hold, gives way; as it falls downward, I follow suit. It is
almost a miracle that my ice axe stops my fall right away, even before I
have time to wam David, whois in front of me. This was the only incident.
Quite frankly, the fact that we did not experience any slides or losses of
footholds in an adventure such as this one, conducted in the way that we
did, seems to me to be more than a case of pure luck.

‘The mountain ribs are about to end. Our eyes, which very often turn
upward, instinctively and questioningly, now contemplate a sort of cliff
with seracs and stalactites touched by the sun light. To our left, fragments
of ice fall from above every now and then, at frightening speed, barely
touching the mountain wall, bouncing off, piercing the air with a noise
resembling that of bullets. We better hurry up. We do not need to engage
the seracs, since we canturn right and proceed where the cliff is less steep.

And finally, as we are approaching the top, bathed in sunlight, we
pause to take a deep breath. Before us, the wall’s inclination decreases
rapidly to forty-five degrees or less. Better yet, it is covered by a layer of
fresh, packed snow. Above us, the peak! The characteristic tripodlike shape


52


Tue Norrwern Watt oF Eastern LYSKAMM


of the Eastem Lyskamm is still there, clearly visible in the background
straight ahead. We could not have aimed better at our intended target.
David, who had studied our route from Mount Dufour, is proud and rightly
so. We do not stop but press on at a rapid pace. Here and there are more
slopes and hard ice, which we bypass without hesitation by following the
contours of dark rocks; these slopes are easier on us than the previous
ones.

At 11:30 a.m. we finally make it to the top. Our ascent has taken ex-
actly five and a half hours; we are not unhappy about it, considering the
difficult conditions of the mountain wall.

The daylight has become glorious and shiny. And now, after the ac-
tion, contemplation ensues. It is time to enjoy the peaks and heights from
our vantage point: where the view becomes circular and celestial, where
petty concems of ordinary people, of the meaningless struggles of the life
of the plains, disappear; where nothing else exists but the sky and the free
and powerful forces that reflect the titanic choir of the peaks. “Many meters
above sea level, but many more above what is human!” wrote F. Nietzsche
a long time ago.

Our journey back is uneventful. Since the condition of the snow pre-
vents us from descending along the southwestern wall, on the right side of
“the Nose” (as we had planned originally and which my friend David had
attempted), cross the Lyskamm along its long side, turning to the left, fol-
lowing the ridge, heading toward Mount Lysjoch.

Two hours later we reach the mountain refuge, Gnifetti. We had left
there, for our return, two very different and yet complementary things, a
bottle of White Horse whiskey and a text of warrior asceticism, the
Bhagavadgita.


53


Notes Concerning
Psychic Training in the Mountains


mong the many strange things Alexandra David-Neel wrote about
her thirteen-year-long stay on the Tibetan plateaus, on the peaks of
the Himalayas, and on the Mongolian steppes, one in particular stands out.

She had been traveling for many days through a vast region of desert
and mountains with her caravan, when, in the distance, she saw a small,
black, moving dot. At first she thought it was an animal—which would
have been odd considering the barren surroundings—but a while later she
identified it as a man. She thought it must be a lost traveler, or the survivor
of a destroyed caravan. Somebody from her party yelled out to the man.
The man was getting closer and yet he did not attempt to reply, as if he
had not noticed the voices or even David-Neel’s caravan. They saw that
he was almost running, taking great rhythmic and elastic steps (David-
Neel compared the impression she received with that of cinematic slow
motion), following a straight line, his head straight, staring ahead, He passed
next to these people without taking notice of them and then went farther
and farther away, keeping the same rhythm. From the caravan, somebody
decided to follow him on horseback, until he saw the man climbing a steep
slope, always following the same direction and retaining the same pace,
until he disappeared among the cliffs.

David-Neel also relates that among the many possibilities cultivated
by a civilization such as the Tibetan, which has focused for thousands of
years on the study of the psychic dimension rather than on the physical
dimension of people and things, there is that of inducing special mental


55


Experiences


states. During these states itis possible to climinate tiredness and to travel
for days and nights without any rest, with little or no food.

David-Neel also relates that these powers are developed in Tibet
through special practices that are mostly aimed at obtaining mastery over
one’s breathing and mind. The mind must acquire the capability to de-
velop an absolute concentration (symbols and formulas are sometimes
employed to help the mind stay focused during such a forced march). Af-
ter determining the goal to be achieved and its general direction in rela-
tion to the starting point, the subject enters into an extraordinary mental
state, which cannot be characterized as mediumistic or trancelike because,
rather than subconscious it is superconscious; in other words it is an active
rather than a passive state. The only similarities with a trance are merely
superficial, external traits. From that moment on, a person's inner strength
is concentrated on the goal; in a way, the subject is separated both from
other beings and from the external world, with the exception of the ground
that is immediately before him. What sets in isa tireless and quick pace
that remains unaltered whether on the plain or slope. Something else
emerges, namely, a supernormal, instinctive, direct sense of orientation.
Thus, without a break, these strange beings travel to the preestablished
it is several days and nights away, almost as if they lived


location, even it
outside of time.

David-Neel’s caravan had encountered one of these travelers in the
middle of a plateau that was several days away from the closest inhabited
center. She came to leam of other cases, both through personal experi-
ence and through word of mouth. The universally recognized seriousness
of this writer and traveler demands that we believe that these are not
made up stories or the fruits of her imagination. We have to agree with
one of Shakespeare’s sayings, according to which “There are in heaven
and earth more things than what is contained in all human philosophy.”


By mentioning this episode in this context, | am certainly not urging people to
become Tibetan yogis and to devote themselves to practices of extraordinary
psychic development. All things considered, these practices are notreally suited
for the mentality and physical constitution of a modern Westem person; on the
other hand, I do not mention this episode merely out of curiosity.


56


Notes Cowceeninc Psycuic Training IN THE MOUNTAINS


‘The fact is that, in regard to mountain climbing, there exist possibilities
of inner training which, without being so extraordinary or dramatic as David-
Neel’s story, may lead those who cultivate them further than those who do
not. These possibilities are not inaccessible. We may acknowledge that
among serious climbers there are some who have developed these possi-
bilities in a partial fashion, without being aware of it and without employing
a specific method; indeed, these possibilities developed as the indirect re-
sult of a purely physical training conducted in special circumstances.

It is necessary to begin by acknowledging the mechanical character
of sports training in general, notwithstanding some exceptions in whom it
isalmost always possible to detect the presence of a certain spiritual level.
In this type of sports training, the relationship of the “self” with the body
resembles the relationship a person may have with another person or an
animal he intends to dominate and subject to his will. There is really no
direct relationship between them; the self commands the body, through
nerves and muscles, to perform certain movements or to make certain
efforts. As a result, some reactions (for example, tiredness, pain, and so
on) ensue; through repetition one attempts to eliminate these reactions
and to gradually create in the body some automatic habits and dispositions
that one did not previously have. Once this is accomplished, the body ceases
to resist and suffer, and it obeys just as with ordinary movements, like a
tamed animal. Thus, the desired level of training has been achieved.

However, in order to experience such possibilities, one must recog-
nize a third element, of an intermediary nature (which is neither psychic
nor merely corporeal) between the body and the self, which we may call
vital force, or vital principle. Somehow, such an element has always been
acknowledged in ancient traditions which, in this regard, had more com-
plete views on man’s nature than those elaborated by modem positivist
science. This element is the foundation of the body’s life; one of the func-
tions with which it is most directly related is breathing.

It is possible to achieve a different type of training and control over
the physical dimension by acting upon this vital force, by making action
depend ont, instead of acting directly through nerves, muscles, and so on.
‘The difficulty is in the fact that the vital force manifests itself on the plane
of the body’s subconscious and thus it cannot be immediately controlled


37


Experiences


(with the exception of some special and extraordinary cases—further on I
will briefly mention the effect of great heights). However, the will can
easily act upon the breath, and thus, due to the above-mentioned relation-
ship between breath and vital force, it is possible to achieve the goal.

These are the premises. On their basis one can join a purely physical
training with psychic training (or should I say psychophysical) in which
what acts is not so much a group of muscles, more or less developed, but
rather a direct spiritual force; thus we shall sce that some limitations en-
countered in the first type of training can be overcome by applying the
second type.

In specific regard to mountain climbs (by this termI do not mean acro-
batic feats or the overcoming of vertical walls, but circumstances in which
the climb, no matter how tough, always requires a certain continuous pace),
we can distinguish between a common method and a method I character-
ize as an attack.

Considering that the power of the moral-psychic element over the
physical dimension is sufficiently known, I will not emphasize it in this
context: through inner resources and feelings of exaltation or enthusiasm,
even weak and wom out bodies have proven, in countless cases, to be
able to successfully overcome difficulties and to engage in the most in-
credible and strenuous efforts (in wartime there have been plenty of in-
stances of this). Anybody who has practiced climbing may remember what
a strange influx of new strength has sometimes occurred when, after feel-
ing literally worn out by a storm and having almost reached a point of
giving up, all of a sudden the place of and the way to safety are recog-
nized; or when, after hours spent on the mountain face, feeling exhausted
and uncertain about the way out, one finally sees the much yearned-for
peak.

Psychology has given a name to this phenomenon: it is called the “sec-
ond wind” (W. James). In this way we must recognize that, aside from the
vital force, which is usually at work in the limbs and organs related to
them, there is a deeper and greater reservoir that manifests itself only in
exceptional circumstances, almost always under the influence of a psy-
chological or emotional factor. Thus, the task consists of finding a method
through which to tap into this hidden source of energy, the essence of


58


Noves Concerning Psvcuic TRAINING IN THE MOUNTAINS


which is, however, experienced instinctively, casually, and emotionally.

‘The first way to achieve such a goal is rather intuitive. First of all itis
necessary to empty one’s self and to be willing to exhaust, as quickly as
possible, the amount of energy available to the body, until a critical level
of exhaustion is reached. Then, what occurs is the phenomenon of the
second wind, in which the vital energies in reserve are forced to emerge.
Since they are not connected to the physical body, they are not limited;
they can do much more than physical energies. Thus, one enters into a
new rhythm and state of tirelessness,

And so, for all practical purposes, one can overthrow the habitual con-
duct among climbers of trying to avoid exhaustion by proceeding at a slow
pace, by becoming fatigued as soon as possible, tackling the ascent offen-
sively, just like those enthusiastic amateurs about whom expert climbers
say, “In less than twenty minutes we will find them sitting down, breath-
less, waiting for us.” He who knows begins the climb offensively and con-
tinues in this fashion: it is he who has to wait for others in huts or on tops of
peaks, sometimes even for hours, without being breathless, better yet,
without being nearly as tired as others.

The secret lies for the most part in the breath. It is necessary to get used
to feeling one’s breath, to immediately take control of it from the very first
step, without ever letting go of it. Second, it is necessary to connect the
thythm of breathing to the pace of walking, without ever breaking this con-
nection: inhale while taking a step, hold the breath in between steps, and
exhale while making the next step with the other leg, and so forth. Due to
the different inclines, when the climb is steeper one can regulate the walk-
ing pace and even slow it down; in the flatter areas one could even acceler-
ate this pace, without ever breaking, for any reason, the correspondence
between the rhythm of breathing and the pace of walking.

This technique has its equivalent in the habit cultivated by experi-


enced climbers and mountain guides, who retain the same pace without
ever stopping to catch their breath. The difference is that in the former
case, this must be done in a conscious and controlled fashion and not in an.
automatic way. The point is to activate a psychic force because the pace
must be increased and yet that connection with breath must also be main-
tained. Thus, what occurs after a short time is a condition of weariness that


59


EXPERIENCES


would induce most people to break the connection in order to breath more
frequently or even to stop and to catch one’s breath. Once a certain limitis
reached, an inner act is required in order to go further. Then what sets in is
anew state in which walking and breathing form a natural unity no longer
Tequiring one’s supervision; there is nomore tiredness and the initial speed
of the assault is not only maintained effortlessly, almost by some mysteri-
ous inner push, but it is even increased despite steep inclines.

I would not talk about this unless I had a personal, though limited,
experience of it and unless I had not personally verified and repeatedly
heard from others how, through this method, climbs can be done in half the
time (or even less) than that usually taken by a mountain guide or by a
well-trained climber.

Moreover, [ have personally verified the curious phenomenon whereby,
as soon as I tried to stop for just an instant, a strange force that was almost
beyond my control immediately urged me onward. The inner act that acti-
vates the second wave at the precise moment the habitual energies are
depleted can hardly be described and taught; each person needs to find it
by himself. However, it can hardly be understood by those who have not
learned to divide their souls into two parts: one being used for absolute
commanding, the other for unconditional obeying.

I wish to add two more brief comments. The first concems the heart.
Such training is not recommended for those who suffer from a cardiac
condition. But those who are healthy will certainly not be harmed by it.
This is not the context in which to explain at length the reason why; I will
only say that it is dangerous to one’s health to engage in a training of a
purely physical character, in which one acts almost automatically with-
out any contact with the inner functions, often subjecting to an overwork
the limited energies which are available to the organs. Conversely, there
are fewer dangers when the real support is no longer provided by the
body but by the spirit, and where mysterious, supernatural, and deep-
seated energies are evoked, which not even modem parapsychology has
been able to measure in all their possibilities. This is not, as someone
may think, an effort destined to have a fatal repercussion, such as the
collapse of the body at a later time. Those who have really learned to
master this training do not lament any reaction in that sense: I can testify


Nores Concerning Psycuic TRAINING IN THE MOUNTAINS


from personal experience, I spent long summer periods in the mountains
and on glaciers practicing that technique without any negative conse-
quence to my body or to my nervous system.

My second observation concerns great heights. Great heights (from
3500 meters and up) represent a particularly favorable condition for psy-
chic mountain training. They offer the opportunity for an easier and more
spontaneous unfolding of the vital force, not without reference to the dif-
ferent rhythm of the blood circulation, caused by the lighter atmospheric
pressure, We can even say—from an inner point of view, not that to which
ordinary medicine is limited—that mountain sickness constitutes a spon-
tancous emergence of this phenomenon in a person who has only been
able to experience it in a passive way.

When this phenomenon is actively assumed and actualized, mountain
sickness is replaced by a sense of lightness, by lack of tiredness, and al-
most by an intoxication that does not dull the senses but which bestows
lucidity, a sense of impulse to action, which is the same that, in psychic
training, always accompanies in a particularly lively and characteristic
way every ascent, almost crasing the perception of time.

I will conclude on this note.

In the example I presented previously of using breath in climbing, I
only meant to hint at the limit of certain possibilities. Again, I wish to
repeat that in no way do I intend to suggest that climbers ought to become
like fakirs. After all, even in the East, the fakirs, those who are busy pro-
ducing prodigious feats, are regarded by the higher castes with no more
respect than we regard illusionists. This is not what I am talking about.
Even the desire of being able to climb a mountain at a fast pace is a ques-
tionable thing.

However, in each of the above-mentioned descriptions, there is an
inner and an outer aspect; only the first one is essential, the latter is only
consequential. Ihave remarked that what I have mentioned in this context
about technique is often part of the experience of the best climbers, those
who do not consider climbing to be a mere sport. Those who, in every
physical ascent, experience a little the sense of an inner elevation; those
who look at every icy height almost as the symbol of an intangible culmi-
nation; those who really grasp the message of the vast spaces, where there


61


Experiences


are only heaven and pure, free forces—they will most likely experience
themselves not as body, but rather as life; they are likely to transform their
lives with a creative vital tension so much as to achieve the results of the
technique I describe.

In contrast, those who do not ascend as if they were carried by the
body as if by a well-trained beast of burden are guarding the body’s life
forces. They are directly and consciously supporting the body with its in-
ner energy, and thereby exalting it, energizing it, and bringing it forward
in a manner that does not need to struggle against the flesh's weariness
and weight. They are the most likely tointimately perceive the ritual mean-
ing of an ascent, that living meaning of purification and liberation, whereby
the ancient world (from the Greek Mount Olympus to the Hindu Mount
Meru) saw in the great heights the symbolic dwelling of superhuman enti-
ties: what I have described in this chapter is one aspect of what the an-
cients may have experienced as sacred on a mountain.


62


—o


The Ascent of Mount Langkopfel


H™ many more hours to the top?” somebody asks. Looking elsewhere,
almost as if it was not worth it to look at the mountain orat the people,
the mountain guide answers softly, “Four.”

Four hours is not a long time, and yet, knowing that does not make the
peak look any friendlier. The mountain, of a uniform gray color, seems to
rest in a narrow basin of frozen snow and then to mushroom into a number
of towers and spires that appear to get lost in the distance. Far away lies
the peak, invisible to the naked eye. A woman who lives in the mountain
shelter says, almost with contempt in her voice, “A lot of people go up
there. One evening they brought down somebody who died. Another time
they brought back a man with a broken leg. They go up there by them-
selves, and then, almost always, the mountain guide has to go up there and
bring them back down.”

The woman seems to be talking to herself; she leaves as if none of this
is her concern. I spontaneously recall the saying, “Men come and go, but
the mountain remains.” | look at the spires bathed by the twilight, seeming
to ask me a mute question.

The following morning at seven o’clock I leave the shelter. Dense
clouds at the horizon dim the light of the rising sun but the sky above is
free and clean and the mountain is the color of lead. | patiently climb the
scree; this is a task that requires my concentration because I often lose my
balance with the frequent slides. I head toward the place where, accord-
ing to the map, my assault on the mountain face should begin. I have to
move to the left because the wall before me is totally vertical. Starting
from the left, I need to assault the rock and then travel diagonally toward


63


Expentences


a little valley located higher up. I press on. For the first few meters I pro-
ceed blindly, constantly shifting my four limbs in search of invisible holds.
When, after going around the first smooth, protruding boulder, I finally
succeed in finding a foothold, I feel I have reached a great vantage point.
The rock becomes easier to handle and now I am able to climb it verti-
cally. Farther ahead there is another succession of diagonal ups and downs
that leads me to the little valley in the middle. One and a half hours have
gone by and we are just a few dozen meters from the base, which looks
very distant despite being directly below me, because in between is the
very steep wall.

Here I am, on the narrow depression spotted with snow, but we still
need to reach the real base of Mount Langkopfel. An icy canal to the left,
between the vertiginous mountain walls, seems to be the only possible
way. Luckily Ihave an ice axe with me; it takes strength to carve niches,
so I engage in short runs, at the risk of losing balance, in order to gain
space and save energy. However, the more I climb the more the ice canal
seems to grow longer. Having finally succeeded in reaching another sec-
tion of pure rock, a new sight unfolds before my eyes: a series of boulders,
comers, towers, and pinnacles criss-crossing on top of each other. Every
pinnacle seems a goal, every boulder a way. After a brief rest we move on
(once again I experience the strange feeling from the depths of my being
of an almost automatic impulse urging me on), relying on our arms’ strength,
from rock to rock. The rocky perspective becomes wider and more com-
plex as | ascend. When I think I have finally arrived at the top, there is yet
another boulder to climb, The towers begin to look thinner, grouped to-
gether, far away. Now, as I follow a hypothetical route, they group to-
gether on the side, becoming an airy and evanescent thing resting in the
sky. Suddenly, I emerge on the crest.

The wind is raging, the horizon is round. Beneath me the valley is
covered by clouds: only the peaks and the glaciers, suspended in the sky,
are clearly visible. Mount Langkopfel is still before me as a tangle of
vertical peaks. What should I do? I descend a little, on the opposite side of
the line of the crest. Following providential scratch marks of spiked shoes
along a twisted rock face made easy to climb by many rocks on the ground,
Isuddenly ascend again. The grips multiply, the mountain walls become


Tue Ascent oF Mount LawGKopree


lower. I feel an influx of new strength and the fervor of conquest. Here [
am, alone on top of the last rock. There is nothing else around me. The
wind is raging, but the open sky is engulfing me.

When I look down again at the valley below, the view is far from
promising. The clouds have reached my position and from the botiom va-
pors are rising very fast, one wave after another. I look at my watch. By
God! Seven hours have gone by. It is time to go back.

I travel again on the ledge, but during the descent the rocks become
increasingly steep and the grips less reliable. From the vaporous and phan-
tasmagoric appearance of the rock forms and pinnacles that by now have
been reached by the fog, I move into a colorless, dim, and treacherously
humid atmosphere that hides everything from sight. I proceed slowly, but
to no avail; there is a chance I may get lost. I put on my snow jacket and
eat something; crouching in a ravine, I wait.

It is hardly a pleasant surprise when I realize it is already six o’clock
pm, when [finally manage to enter the ice canal after a difficult passage.
Ironically, the air clears up just as the sun begins to set behind the high
peaks! Without wasting a second I slide down the ice, digging the ice axe
into it with all my strength in order to slow my descent; with the same
speed I enter the small valley. Icannot find the road, however. The rock is
slippery because of the humidity and every move requires careful exami-
nation, attention, and patience. Finally I see the spots of snow. Good. I
move on. But where the descent begins I can no longer see anything and I
can barely orient myself. I am uncertain about the way back. A new state
of mind sets in: anxiety and boredom.

After a few meters I realize I have made a mistake. I must go up
again. On the right side it seems better. I move on, yet I wonder where I
am going to end up. There is only a little light on the peaks and down
below I cannot distinguish anything clearly. The rock has become a uni-
form, ice cold, indifferent mass. At this point it doesn’t seem to matter if I
go in this or that direction; I have the feeling of going toward the void, as
if with every step I am about to fall and be hurled into it. The fingers
instinctively and nervously clasp the holds; the feet are unsteady, tired of
the same position, and try to reach out to the void, but when they do not
feel anything but the flat mountain wall, they return to the spot they were


65


Experiences


occupying. I need to find a way out, but Ido not seem to have many choices.

It is not possible to stop here. I could find again the small valley and
spend the night there but finding it again is easier said than done because
of the total darkness. I cannot find my way back with just my hands; I do
not know what is awaiting me even if I were to overcome this or that
immediate obstacle. I must keep my cool, control my nerves, and main-
tain my intense concentration. I have to make it down, one way or an-
other. And so I begin this incredible descent into the darkness and the
void, trusting only the nimbleness of my limbs, crawling very slowly along
the mountain wall, with a heightened sense of touch and of awareness.
My foot keeps searching and sliding downward while holding the body in
balance, no matter how unstable, until it stops and takes a risk; it is an
adventure to let go with the hand without knowing whether the body will
hold. I am greatly relieved each time I feel a new hold and I am able to
Testore my balance. My body has become one thing with the rock, and it is
animated by an instinctive dexterity and by an unexpected and supernor-
mal lucidity. The experience of not knowing where I am is continuous—
the darkness has become something permanent, material, dense, into which
Iseem to constantly move.

All of a sudden, J think I see a flash. Can it be? Yes! It is a light
oscillating and coming toward me. I can hear somebody shouting in my
direction. | answer with a voice that hardly sounds like my own. The light
approaches rapidly, almost leaping; how can it be, even if the guide were
tunning? And yet, after only a few minutes, ] can make out the contour of
Franz Broschek's face in the darkness. He yells to me, “This way! You
have made it!” With a jump the Austrian guide climbs up to me and offers
me the end of a rope. “Tie this around you. We are on the scree, I didn’t
think I would be able to find you. Let’s go now.”

Now I realize there is a second light on the rock. It is carried by the
Italian mountain guide Carlo De Netz. “Where the hell are you going?” I
ask them. “Do you think that the two of us came all the way up here just to
pick up a nut like you?” says De Netz. “We need to find six more people
who are about to spend the night on the glacier, for God’s sake!”

A little later my feet touch the ground after sixteen hours of adven-
ture, High up the two lights continue their march along the great dark


Tue Ascent oF Mount Lanoxopret
silhouette of Mount Langkopfel, which solemnly emerges against the back-


ground of a starry sky. Down below, the lights of the refuge yield the
promise of a well-deserved dinner and a nice bed.


67


ee


Ice and the Spirit


rtler. Last night was a stormy one. At dawn, looking out from the

‘mountain shelter Payer, gaps of blue sky, visible through waves of
rapidly moving clouds, gave us hope. We take off toward the glacier in
order to reach the highest peak of the Ortler massif. On top of Mount
Tabaretta (where we found a skeletal signpost and the remains of a hut
crushed under the weight of ice), the fog, the wind, and the storm are back.
We go ahead despite all because there are other groups nearby that are
accompanied by guides who, thanks to quick sightings of crevices and
seracs, are able to orientate themselves and find the right direction in this
white mass in which the sky and the snow are fused together.

And so we continue slowly but steadily, at times pausing when the vio-
lence of the wind threatens to blow us away and to take our breath away.
We wear heavy clothes, big gloves, and ski masks, which, after being hit by
thousands of whirling particles, have almost become stiff crusts of ice. We
proceed at a tired pace through the fresh snow in which our legs sink up to
our thighs, struggling to find a solid foothold on the steeper slopes.

Finally we see the top—or what must be the top; not only can we
barely see in this weather, but every part of the glacier looks like every
other. Our tracks in the snow have already disappeared, a few minutes
were enough for the storm to erase them. Even the three guides in the
other parties cannot find their way; we can barely make out their silhou-
cttes as they test the ground here and there with their ice axes trying to
avoid falling into a hidden crevice.

But suddenly, a transformation occurs—a view that can never be for-
gotten or described with words. After a strong gust of wind a clarity is


6


Experiences


manifested all around; although itstill does not reveal the sky or the ground,
itcreates an ethereal and immaterial atmosphere. This milieu is pervaded
by silent waves of light, resembling breaths or shivers, as if it were a living
organism. The shapes of the members of the other groups look as if they
are suspended in air, shadowless, weightless. It looks as if amemory from
the Greek past has come alive and is appearing to us: as in the ancient
myth, ethereal bodies (pneusomata) are wandering through fields of light
on the immaterial lands of the blessed and the heroes.

That view lasts only a few seconds. After that, more fog and wind
gusts follow. Finally we retum to the earth, to the solid and infernal ele-
ments, to the things made of corruptible hardness and to forms subject to
birth and decay under the monotonous daily light.


Weiss-Kugel. To those who are familiar with glaciers, the ascent of Mount
Weiss-Kugel (3860 meters) is, in itself, no great feat. From a tiny Italian
mountain refuge built on the last rocks before the ice, we proceed onto the
glacier in a long, patient detour that enables us to avoid areas marked by
huge crevasses. We reach a pass; beyond it lies the road leading straight
to the peak. This road winds up a steep slope that is technically easy to
climb due to the favorable condition of the snow, which allows a firm hold
for iron soles as well as hooks and snow axes.

However, a new experience is the descent along the Austrian side,
which has occurred in an adventurous way, since in this white desert the
information gathered from our maps is not really helpful; gusts of fog hide
the peaks from our sight, depriving us of a valuable reference point.

After hours of ascending in a northem direction, we thought we would
find solid ground and a new path behind a group of rocks. What we find
instead is a sea of ice, a huge solidified current of ice, almost flat, not
white but gray—an almost-shiny, leadlike gray—laying between two banks
of boulders and sand, at times black, at other times a red color. All around
is a dead silence, a desertlike solitude, a total absence of any form of life,
of colors.

Often the mind derives instinctively an indefinite meaning from words
that is connected to mysterious analogies, The words that come to my
mind in this place are: “the valley of damnation.” I do not know why. This


70


Tce aND THE Spirit


area seems to be stricken with some curse or with something that cannot
be removed for all etemity. Itis as if these rocks were broken by lightning,
hurled down from high peaks, to finally lie down as tragic, gloomy, hope-
less shapes. It is as if this enormous stream of ice were once alive and had
now become a gray, nameless, and monotonous mass, or a brightness bur-
ied in a leadlike solidity.

These confused analogies applied to yet another element: endless-
ness, eternity. We have been walking for several miles on the gloomy ice,
hoping to see an end in sight; however, the same scenario continues be-
fore us, always the same, discouraging, without variations, We walkin the
same landscape between two cursed banks of rocks. We have been walk-
ing and climbing for about ten hours since we left the shelter. By now the
backpacks are “killing” our shoulders and our strength is dissipating. Yet
we can only press onward through this “valley of damnation,” automati-
cally, without any hope for inner or outer support before evening comes.

Around sunset we are half-delirious with exhaustion, but the gray ice
finally ends, generating a great current of yellowish and turbulent water
that seeks a way through the endless rocks and morainic debris. We fol-
low this river and finally, higher up on the rocks, we see the first and only
sign of human presence: a linear building, somewhere between a Bavar-
ian anda modem style, the color of white bones or bared nerves. Through
an absurd mental association, it reminds me of an 1845 tale by E. A. Poe,
The Fall of the House of Usher, about an accursed mansion. This building
turns out to be the Hochjoch-Hospiz, the first Austrian mountain shelter,
an excellent resting place staffed by cordial people and endowed with
good food. The experience of the “valley of damnation” slowly descends
into my subconscious.


Oberwalder-Hiitte (Gross-Glockner). The evening descends calmly upon
the glacier and the islandlike rock on which the shelter lies. From inside
come echoes of songs and reflections of light; I venture alone beyond
the rock, on the snows, following a track, in the direction of Mount
Weisbach-hom.

In this environment, a soul open to new experiences is likely to feel
an inexpressible nostalgia and a deep yeaming for the indefinite and the


va


Expentences


formless. This scene is a new type of desert and a new face of silence.
Behind me the evening yapors emerging from the valleys below allow
only the sight of the icy peaks. These peaks, illumined by the last reflec-
tions, stand tall and majestic; they are the only things in the sky that still
hold on to the light, looking disembodied, simultaneously close and far
away, like memories, like silent apparitions. Ahead of me lies a gray-
green color resembling seawater, in which the sky and the snow are
barely distinguishable. The barely visible path leading to the top is the
only rhythm; itis like the trace of the desert on one’s soul, a blessed and
painful solitude.

I yeam to keep walking. Everything is far away, healed, forgotten.
The blessed night descends upon me. I experience the simplification of
my soul and of all things.

And finally, the first stars begin to blossom in the sky above me.


2


—a |


The Valley of the Wind


fier much huffing and puffing, whistling and screeching along the
steep slopes, looking as if it could not have made one more meter,
no matter what the cost, the miniature train from Merano finally arrives
amidst a glorious white cloud of steam at Malles, the last stop on the
itinerary. We get off the train and my first sensation once outside the
heated compartment is like being suddenly plunged into ice-cold water.
The air is extremely dry and frigid. All around there are great mountains
covered by snow. Down in the valleys, great dense masses of trees, some
red-green, others—those farthest away—of a dark metallic color, al-
most deep blue. The peak of Mount Ortler emerges far away in the back-
ground; it appears to be more celestial and brighter than ice, almost of a
more precious quality.

The train station (if we may call this tiny Swiss kiosk a station) is
almost deserted. The few travelers quickly disperse. The town looks de-
serted as well, except that the chimneys send puffs of smoke into the livid
afternoon sky. Gigantic pictures and sayings in Gothic letters on billboards
in the main square remind us of a stage after the show is over. We stop a
hooded person who has just come out of the Unicorn Hotel: “Wie weit bis
Reschen?" “Drei guten Stunden,” he replies. We need a “good three hours”
to arrive at our intended destination, the lakes of Resia. It is two o’clock in
the afternoon. It is a waste of time to wait for tomorrow’s bus. We decide
to go on foot and to drink a well-deserved cup of tea when we arrive. We
follow a small road that starts at the last houses of the town and soon
merges into a large road that connects the Resia Valley to Austria. As
soon as we are in the open country, no longer sheltered by the lateral


73


Experiences


mountains above Malles, we are suddenly confronted by an unexpectedly
strong wind, the likes of which is experienced only in the very high peaks
on the Swiss borders. Usually winds blow in gusts, and with variations,
pauses, accelerations, and restarts; what we experience is nothing like
that. Imagine the continuous, immutable, constant stream of air produced
by a fan. Then if you multiply its intensity as muchas possible and think of
it as cruelly and painfully icy-cold, you will have an abstract idea of what
we are feeling, The valley of Resia is a pass totally open on its northern
side. No significant chain of mountains protects it farther up. The atmo-
spheric currents of the North, that might begin as far away as the Baltic
Sea, can rush in very swiftly. Amazingly, this mighty air mass rushing into
the valley is silent; there are no howls or whistles of wind because there is
nothing against which the wind breaks out there in the middle of the fro-
zen black ground under the big white sky. There are no traces of vegeta-
tion, no houses—only a harshness and a metallic definition of lines in the
very dry air. There is no water, only very white ice canals.

“A good three hours toResia.” I do not know exactly how many hours
it takes, It is not exaggerating to say that we struggle every inch of the way
against this unbelievable northern wind that crushes your chest, cuts your
breath, buns your eyes, and tries in every way to tear off your coat. We
have been in storms when climbing high peaks, but this is an altogether
different experience; we are walking on flat ground, without a storm, with-
out being engaged in any real action, with little or no visibility due to the
wild wind, in the middle of a static landscape that is desolate and charac-
terized by the absence of anything human, The insolent and paradoxical
aspects of this situation keeps us from tuming around, But in order to reach
our goal we need true concentration, a tenacity consisting not of physical
strength but of method, automatism, insensibility, and unshakability: itis a
real test. All things considered it is not any different from a march in the
desert, under an unforgiving sun, when nothing else is left in one’s mind
except the unbending will that keeps one going in an automatic way, Resia,
bathed in the sunset, looks like an abandoned town on the eve of a great
cataclysm, or like a town evacuated under the threat of a mysterious
scourge. There are no signs of life; it is truly a desolate sight. Once in a
while, gusts of snow and pieces of ice fly from the roofs of the houses into


4


Twe Vautey of THe Wino


the sky. We proceed with almost an attitude of a military patrol scouting
an area. Suddenly we see the main group of houses and the church; farther
ahead we see lighted windows under a hotel sign.

We see a short staircase outside the hotel and a massive door made of
black wood; finally we are inside a Nibelungen-like environment, charac-
terized by a warm mist made up of tobacco and stove smoke and alcohol.
It is difficult to tell the size of the room; it is crowded with people talking,
whispering, playing, drinking. The scene looks like a fantastic crowd of
shadows cither suspended or anchored in the smoky mist marked by lights,
slow bluish spires, saturated with all kinds of smells; it is warm and alive,
like an animal.

Inthe Valley of Wind people live barricaded inside during this part of
the year,


What else should I remember about this excursion on Italy’s borders?
Winter forests, skiing, the great white panoramas we viewed from the
peaks, the harshness of twelve degrees below zero Celsius under the shin-
ing moming sun. And yet none of these things were anything special.

Rather, I remember the experience of the lake of Resia at night. Be-
lieve it ornot, we built a small nightclub there. In a house that looked like
a cloister, built by noble French refugees at the end of the 1700s, one of us
found a gramophone, and lo and behold, the jazz records of Wunder-Bar.
Thus, the problem of what to do at night was resolved.

Somebody lights a big fire. Instead of drinking wine we drink rum and
kirsch. We dance, and when we are drunk we begin to discuss things.
‘Then we go out for a walk in the minus twenty-two degree night.

Somebody comes up with the idea of going to the lake. It is the middle
of the night. Try to imagine an immense sheet of black crystal, as levi-
gated as a mirror, extending for miles: that is what the frozen lake looks
like. The snowy peaks on the two sides of the valley and the incredibly
starry sky are reflected in this sheet with a magnetic neatness; this makes
us think we are caught between a double mirage or a double transparency.
Try to imagine, if possible, what it must be like to proceed toward the
middle of the lake without skates, attacked by the northern wind, and in a
physical and spiritual state of lucid intoxication in which alcohol, nature,


15


Experiences


and inner exaltation all play a role. However, it is not possible for those
who have not experienced it to know what the breaking of the underwater
ice is all about.

During the night, due to the rapidly falling temperature, it happens
that the deep layers of ice that are immersed in the waters of the lake
break up. When that occurs, one can hear a roar anda loud noise reverber-
ating frightfully across the entire icy crust of the lake, transmitted through
the valley by a powerful echo, This does not really pose any danger, since
these fractures do not reach the surface. However, to feel all of a sudden
under one’s feet a roar that grows into a loud booming noise, which is then
echoed by the mountain, is almost like hearing the voice of the earth itself.
It feels like an abyss is going to open up under one’s feet. This is truly a
very frightening experience that chills one’s blood the way an earthquake
does. It sparks the awakening of a primordial, marvelous, and frightening
sensation that is dormant in very archaic recesses of our nature, The de-
tails of that night are embedded forever in my memory: the incredible
cold; the wonderful starry night; the reflective, shimmering snow all around
us; the feeling of excitement mixed with lucid tension; a perfect mental
equilibrium; and the dreadfully primitive feeling that arises from the depth
of the Jake in the absolute silence of the valley. In these circumstances
one can understand how it is possible, without any rhetorical exaggera-
tion, to talk about such a moment as one that transcends ordinary life. The
Valley of the Wind and the night spent on the frozen lake will remain in
my memory forever.


76


The Ascent of Mount Gross-Glockner


he psychological motivation leading us to climb the highest
Austrian peak, the Gross-Glockner (3798 meters), by the most diffi-
cult route (the Pallavicini-Weg) was twofold.

First, my group was driven to this expedition by an inner impulse to
be different from everybody else, which regularly awakens in us every
time we visit the highest Austrian or German mountains. During the sum-
mertime these peaks become more or less rallying points for all kinds of
people who follow the ordinary route. For my part, I must admit to being
behind the times and the contemporary ideals; personally, I still uphold
and defend an aristocratic view of the mountain as the domain of a privi-
leged few. I believe that mountain climbing is more an ascetic exercise
and a path to spiritual liberation than a democratic sport available to the
multitudes. However, in this context I do not intend to argue about prin-
ciples. If we admit that it is a good and socially useful thing for people of
all social classes, ages, and genders to travel from the city to nature and
to experience in a natural way feats that were usually performed accord-
ing to a different meaning, then it is safe to assume that German people
are ahead of all other European nations. Leaving aside any evaluation of
this phenomenon, I just wish to explain the reason why we rejected out-
right the idea of ascending the mountain by the ordinary route (starting
from Mount Adlersruhe-Hiitte and crossing over Mount KIcin-Glockner).
We thought that the only thing this route lacked was a policeman to di-
rect traffic along a path that had become a sort of perpendicular trench
with the passing of time.

Thus, our first motivation, which set in almost as a natural reaction,


71


Expenvences


was the desire to be as little “in good company” as possible and to conquer
Mount Gross-Glockner by a new route that still retained the elements of
isolation, challenge, and risk. This is where our second motivation came
into play.

By flipping through the pages of the most famous and often-quoted
guide of this mountainous region, we found the description of the Pallavicini
Toute was written in almost alarming terms. First of all, it was graded as a
sixth degree of difficulty and it was said to be ausserst schwierige und
gefahrvolle (namely, extremely difficult and fraught with dangers). Sec-
ond, it was only attempted twice, once in 1889 and again in 1923. The
guide estimated the duration of the climb to be between ten and twelve
hours; this meant that one could possibly get caught at nightfall in the
middle of the vertical icy wall if there were a delay caused by unfavorable
atmospheric circumstances. Third, to complete this alluring scenario, the
guide warned readers that it would be necessary to carve in the ice no less
than twenty-five hundred steps!

Although at that time we did not know that this information was mis-
leading, we thought that these facts were intimidating enough to keep
away ordinary tourists who crowd the regular route and also to confer an
aura of apprehension on a very challenging ascent. For our part, we did
not take these wamings seriously, both because we knew the tendency of
guides—especially German ones—to exaggerate, and also because in an
ascent on pure ice the difficulties are always relative to the conditions of
that particular time. In this last regard we could refer to the personal and
specific experience of the ascent of the northern wall of the Eastern
Lyskamm (located on Mount Rosa’s massif) , which was extremely simi-
lar to that of the Pallavicini-Weg and was also regarded as extremely
difficult.

When we reached the massif of the Gross-Glockner the weather
conditions could not have been better. It had snowed for almost a week
above 2500 meters and beautiful sunny days had ensued. Our expecta-
tions were that, no matter how steep the mountain face was, we were
not going to be confronted by either ice ora layer of soft and inconsistent
snow covering ice (the worst possible scenario), but rather by snow that
had frozen over the ice. We were hopeful that this snow would not be


78


Tut Ascent of Mount Gross-Grockner


too hard. If it were, we would be forced to ascend by carving one step at
a time. If it were too soft, it would not be firm enough to support our
weight. On August 19, 1934, we began the ascent, which, in terms of the
difficulty and amount of time required, turned out to be notas difficult as
the guide had described it to be.

‘The ascent was attempted in a roped party consisting of three people:
an Italian gentleman, Carlo Rossi di Lauriano; a British citizen, Sir Edwin
Grant Duff; and myself. The day before, we traveled to the Oberwalderhiitte
to observe a small mountain refuge that was anchored on a black rock
jutting, like an island out of the icy Gross-Glockner massif, From there I
drew a sketch of the mountain and studied the route we were going to
follow with the help of a pair of powerful binoculars that we found in the
refuge.

Before we began our assault on the mountain face, we unfortunately
had to waste a lot of time in order to get there. We traveled across a sea of
ice that lay before the mountain and then across the Pasterzengletscher, a
crevasse glacier riddled with seracs. On one hand, wasting too much time
on this preliminary part causes one to be on the mountain wall just when
the sun begins to melt the snow, making it treacherous. On the other hand,
while crossing the so-called sea of ice can easily be done in the dark, by
leaving from the Oberwalderhiitte, or from the closer Hoffmannshiitte
(which is what we did), the same cannot be said about the part immedi-
ately under the mountain wall, especially in the above-mentioned circum-
stances. This is because the abundant snowfall poses a constant threat by
barely covering crevices and precipices; onc definitely necds at Icast a
minimum amount of light in order to proceed with a certain degree of
safety and without having to test the snow every step of the way.

We head toward the right where some rocks overlooking the sea of
ice and a hill of compact snow prove to be helpful to us. Then we proceed
longitudinally, moving almost parallel to the crevasse surrounding the
Glockner massif. We finally reach a point where, at the beginning of the
Pallavicini-Weg route, the crevasse is broken up because of avalanches.

As far as the technical aspect is concerned, there is not much to be
said about this ascent, as is the case with almost all climbs on ice as op-
posed to those on rocks.


9


Experiences


We find the first part after the crevasse to be in excellent condition; it
presents no serious challenge, thanks to the snow that has fallen from above
and piled up. As we proceed, the slope becomes very steep (sixty-five
percent, according to the guide we consulted); the ascent would require a
lot of time if we faithfully follow all of the required safety measures. For
our part, happy as we are not to have found the much-feared type of ice,
we begin our climb by assaulting the mountain, that is, by taking fast steps
supported rather riskily by the ice axes we dig in upward, We do this until,
having exhausted our agility and energy for these short races, we begin to
dig firm holds with our axes in order to be able to stand up and keep our
balance—or at least, leaning against the ice, to pause for a few seconds in
order to catch our breath for the next little run. This method allows us to
save a significant amount of time. On one hand, it is riskier than proceed-
ing at a regular pace (in which one adopts reciprocal safety measures), but
psychologically speaking it has the merit of retaining a tension anda spirit
of conquest, the influence of which on our nerves and physical faculties is
far from negligible.

The time comes when to proceed in this fashion is no longer possible
without being very reckless, since the mountain wall becomes increas-
ingly smooth. Having exhausted our energies in a single advance, we risk
lacking the strength to carve a resting place, considering that the ice by
now cannot be cut into with only the ice axe. The sun, whose rise in the sky
almost accompanies our ascent on the mountain face, gives us some help,
up to a certain point, by softening the outer surface of the ice. We try to
move more to the left, toward the rocks, in order to find again the favor-
able conditions of the snow. Unfortunately, beyond a certain point, we
find cxactly the opposite: fresh snow that has not frozen over and that,
considering the incline, threatens to slide and drag us along toward the
valley below. Thus, after two or three zigzags, we head back to the middle
duct. This is the most difficult and dangerous part of the ascent, at the
same time, this is the part that left indelible impressions on our souls.

By being suspended in the middle of the wall without any chance of
escape—held between light and blinding ice away from any diversion or
elan; forced into an iron lucidity, an absolute control of all the psychologi-
cal and physical factors required to create a balance that any unforeseen


Tut Ascent of Mount Gross-Guockner


element could easily jeopardize —we find the spiritual aspect of the expe-
tience of climbing, carried to the extreme. To feel alone in a free, merci-
less world with only one’s strength to rely on; engaged in an intimate
dialogue with the deepest and most mysterious forces of one’s being; awak-
ened to a pure, harsh dimension that almost enables us to partake of that
same transcendence over and indifference toward the human domain that
in the majestic and shining peaks seem to find their best symbolic
representation.

In conditions such as these ascending on ice may be a better experi-
ence than climbing rocks. In this kind of experience, aside from the above-
mentioned inner sensations, one has yet another peculiar sensation—that
of destiny or some kind of love of fate. The rock always presents an obvi-
ous face: it is solid, always the same. In order to conquer it, what isneeded
is strength, agility, and the ability to choose and use the right holds, which
can very rarely be tested beforehand. In contrast, ice can give way at any
time. Then it is impossible not to incorporate as a living element in one’s
thoughts the idea of surrendering oneself to destiny, becoming one with
one’s unknown destiny, considering that one does not take hundreds, but
thousands of steps in the steep wall of ice, which could slide or give way
for the slightest reason. If centimeters or even millimeters of ice give way,
that is enough to cause the foot to slide and the unfortunate climber to be
hurled into the abyss.

In this kind of ascent, itis not possible to climb step by step and to gain
a firm foothold (and not just the front part of one’s axe), without taking an
exaggerated amount of time. Nonetheless, the sense of security that is
manifested, accompanied by an extraordinary lucidity of thought and
movement, has an almost superhuman quality. If, in regard to any help
from the outside, ascents such as these leave us alone with ourselves, at
the same time, in regard to the inner dimension, they connect us with some-
thing that is greater than ourselves. This is an action that is connected in a
deep and transfiguring way with destiny, understood as a higher law that
prearranges in an opportune manner the relationships of the mysterious
powers of things with those of all living beings. We could almost say that
these meanings, as they arise from the experience of ice and of high moun-
tains, find an unconscious and silent expression in the image of the great


81


EXPERIENCES


cross that is planted on the peak of Mount Gross-Glockner: it is immov-
able, made of iron bars, encrusted with ice, almost the comprehensive
symbol of a cosmic hardness, of sacrificial dedication, of destiny and of
transfiguration.

At one point the ascension changes pace. Because of the particularly
hot midday sun we cannot continue to approach the center of the ice canal
without serious danger. Fragments of ice and rock begin to fall from above,
piercing the air like bullets; moreover, there are small snow slides that
might precede bigger ones capable of dragging us downward. After some
zigzagging we decide to move toward the left, toward the line of the so-
called Nord-Grat, a ridge of black rocks,

Here we encounter the same problem, that is, areas of very smooth,
hard ice, close to the rocks, but with the advantage of reliable hold offered
once in a while by the rock itself. This ridge leads us directly to the Obere
Glocknerscharte, a small saddle that can be seen between the two highest
peaks. The Pallavicini route ends here, merging with the ordinary path in
a crest of ice one foot wide, with the abyss yawning to the right and left,
and yet bearing very deep and reliable traces created by the continuous
passage of people. After this crest we rapidly reach the peak by climbing
some slabs of rock on which have been secured metallic cords and stakes.
On the peak we find the usual crowd found in mountain refuges: people
equipped with guides, ropes, cameras, and binoculars, The latter are help-
ful in detecting the traces we left on the snow along the incredible path we
followed all the way up here.

After leaving Hoffmannschiitte at four a.m., we finally made it to the
top at four p.m. However, we spent a good part of that time descending
from that refuge to the level of the sea of ice and then crossing the glacier
up to the last crevasse. Considering the conditions we faced, I donot think
that the label “extremely difficult” applied to this ascent is correct, even
though it is indeed dangerous and steep. To carve steps in the ice is really
necessary only in some parts, provided the climber is endowed with agil-
ity, courage, and the capability to measure his moves, and also provided
that on this basis one does not intend to turn the ascension into an extenu-
ating work in order to have a maximum amount of safety. Again, safety on
this kind of mountain face, exposed to the elements from start to finish, is
always a relative thing.


82


Meditations on the Peaks


Me Blanc, July. We ascend for several long hours from the
darkness of the valley to the light of the peaks, We travel from
the dark and dense Nibelungen-like fir woods pervaded by a thick fog,
through the higher region covered with rocks and desolate moraines.
Finally at dawn we reach the edge of the lower glacier. From afar, this
area, as its name (Mer de Glace) suggests, resembles an immense
body of water that has frozen over and tumed into a flat and uniform
mass. From up close, being continuously crossed with crevices and
seracs, it resembles a tumultuous criss-crossing of bluish-white and
grayish-white waves, the dynamics of which have been magically
halted and solidified. We pass this strange white sea, out of which
emerge peaks and dark ridges of broken rocks resembling fjords, leav-
ing behind the last fog that still covers the valleys. We go over bridges,
abysses of ice, and up mountain walls, working with our ice axes, us-
ing ropes and crampons, while a bright radiant light starts to spread all
around us. We walk over some brief, steep walls of rock and then over
some icy curves. Finally we reach the peak.

We are standing at the border. Around us, a circular horizon: a sea
composed of many successive mountain chains, now rocky, now icy, which
due to their variant qualities and to the different distances, assume every
gradation of color until they become lost in the distant horizon, melting
away and giving the sense of the infinite. Immaterial as apparitions, the
forms of yet more peaks emerge very far away as if they were floating in
a pearly atmosphere. It is the time of solar heights and of great solitude.

After these long hours, during which our tenacious will overcame


83


EXPERIENCES


fatigue, inertia, and the subconscious fears of the body, the memory of
every concem and activity of the life of the plains fades away like an
echo. Moreover, a different sense of self sets in and it becomes increas-
ingly difficult to identify oneself with that hard, closed, and ephemeral
shell, which for most people is the empirical “ego.” However, this expe-
rience is not a mystic shipwreck or a sentimental sense of abandonment,
Even lyricism is something that finds its proper place in literary circles
rather than up here.

Here, where there is only the sky and pure, free forces, the soul par-
ticipates in an analogous purity and freedom, and in this way one begins to
understand what the spirit truly is. The soul perceives all this, and before
the calm and triumphant greatness, all sentimentalism, utilitarianism, and
human rhetoric disappear. Here, that which in the world of the soul has the
character of purity, impersonality, and power finds its equivalent in icy
heights, deserts, steppes, and oceans. We experience the breath of every-
thing that is wide as an inner force of liberation.

Itis up here on these peaks, beyond which lies another country—and
from similar experiences—that one can truly perceive the secret of that
which is imperium in the highest sense of the word, A true imperial tradi-
tion is not forged through particular interests, through a narrow-minded
hegemony, or through “sacred selfishness”; such a tradition is formed only
when a heroic vocation awakens as an irresistible force from above and
where it is animated by a will to keep on going, overcoming every mate-
rial or rational obstacle. This, after all, is the secret of every type of con-
queror. The great conquerors of the past have always perceived them-
selves as children of destiny, as the bearers of a force that had to manifest
itself and before which everything clse (starting from their own selves,
preferences, pleasures, and tranquillity) had to be sacrificed. Up here, all
this becomes evident, immediate, natural. The silent greatness of these
dominating peaks, reached at the risk of great dangers, suggests the si-
lence of a universal action, an action that through a warrior race spreads
throughout the world with the same purity, the same sense of fate, and the
same elementary forces as the great conquerors; thus, as from a blazing
nucleus, a brightness radiates and shines forth.

I believe that the strength behind the miracle of the Roman Empire


84


Menirartons OW THE PeaKs


was not any different from this, In the silent premeridian brightness, the
slow and very high circumvolutions of the hawks above us evoke the sym-
bol of the Roman legions—the eagle—in its highest and most noble repre-
sentation. I am also reminded of the most luminous passages of Caesar’s
writings in which one finds no traces of sentimentalism, no eloquent com-
ments, no echo of subjectivity, but rather a pure exposition of facts, plain
language to describe things and events, and a style thats like shiny metal,
just like the military conquests of this legendary hero of the Roman world.
1am also reminded of the words attributed to Constantius Chlorus, words
which greatly reveal the occult and maybe unconscious impulse of the
Roman expansion. It is said that this military leader, gathering enigmatic
traditions, journeyed with his legions as far as Britannia, not so much to
perform military feats or for loot, but rather to discover the place where
“the light never goes out” and to “contemplate the Father of the Gods,”
thus anticipating the divine condition which, according to an ancient Ro-
man belief, awaited emperors and military leaders after their deaths. F,
Nietzsche wrote, “Our lives and happiness lie beyond the ice, the North
and death.”

Through the symbol and in terms of obscure forebodings, this tradition
leads us to comprehend the latent meaning of what can be called the Ro-
man legionary spirit. These cohorts of men of iron, impassible, capable of


any discipline, spread through the world without a reason and not even
with a truly preordained plan, but rather obeying a transcendent impulse.
‘Through conquest and through the universal realization they achieved for
Rome, they vaguely perceived a foreboding of that which is no longer
human, of that aetemitas (etemity) that became directly connected with
the ancient imperial Roman symbol.

Such thoughts occur to me with a strange power at this time and in this
place. And just as at night, from an elevated place, the lights scattered in
the plains can be seen all the way to the most distant horizons, likewise
what surfaces in my mind is the idea of a superior, incorporeal unity of the
invisible front of all those who, despite all, fight in different parts of the
world the same battle, lead the same revolt, and are the bearers of the
same intangible tradition. These forces appear to be scattered and iso-
lated in the world, and yet they are inexorably connected by a common


85


Exrenvences


essence that is meant to preserve the absolute ideal of the imperium and
to work for its return, This will occur after the cycle of this dark age closes,
through an action that is both deep and not evident, in virtue of being a
pure spiritual intensity unaffected by human restlessness, passions, lies,
illusions, and divisions. This intensity is symbolized by the calm and irre-
sistible power of this light that shines over icy peaks. At these heights,
symbols become alive and deep meanings are revealed. There are al-
ways moments (rare as they are, they still exist) in which physical and
metaphysical elements converge and the outer adheres to the inner, form-
ing a closed circuit: the light that momentarily comes out of it is certainly
the light of an absolute life.


86


|


A Storm on Mount Rosa


A the time the cable connecting Mount Cervino to the glacier of the
Plateau Rosa (3500 meters) was inaugurated, the conditions for those
who really love the mountain and resent its tourist contamination were
ideal. Since this is an area bordering with Switzerland, one could access
the terminal station of the cable only with a special visa. Back then, the
mundane, vacation, and pseudosportive refuge of those towhom the moun-
tain has been made readily available as if it were a cheap elevator ride,
did not exist. I was accompanied by a guide and that cable only helped us
to reach a starting point and not our final destination, since our intention
was to go across glaciers and rocks from Plateau Rosa to Mount Rosa’s
mountain group.

This crossing is a very long one, butt isnot very difficult if the weather
is fine and as long as one knows how to orient oneself. This going along in
the midst of a primordial nature scene acts upon one’s soul as a liberation;
here the view reveals alternately snows and black or greenish broken rocks,
with immense arcas of slabs and rocks piled up as if they were the remains
ofa primordial cataclysm, We descend for a while along a high path on the
tim of a valley; our eyes contemplate again the welcome and unusual sight
of green fields and trees. Then we ascend again, reach a pass where foot-
prints and red marks on the stones indicate the direction to the mountain
refuge Sella on Mount Rosa. I know this direction very well. Thus I am
puzzled when alll of a sudden, almost magically, the path ends; there are no
signs, only high rocks and landslides toward the glacier below.

It is evening already, we are at about 3000 meters and we have been
walking since dawn. It is pointless to try to look for traces of the path.


87


Experiences


Finally, we barely make out a path on the lower glacier. We descend to
that spot, then we decide to follow the path, trusting our good luck. Soon,
in the darkness, cach next trace becomes our only reference. It is approxi-
mately ten p.m. when we reach the shelter. There we discover the reason
for our bewilderment. Last year huge sectors of the mountain had slid.
During the night we spend in the refuge, which is anchored on rock, we
are very apprehensive: it feels as if the refuge is shaking with the rock.
‘The old pathway has been destroyed.

The next moming I still want to cross the so-called Gemini (Castor
and Pollux) one more time. These are two peaks about 4200 meters high,
united by crests of ice. In itself this crossing is nota difficult one, although
itmay become so due to the weather and the conditions of the ice. Leav-
ing Sella, we have to cross what could be called without exaggeration a
“white infemo” (when the sun shines at full strength). This is a vast valley
of snowy ice at a slight incline, surrounded by crevices, where the reflec-
tions of the sun and the heat are often unbearable in this very thin air.
Then, after tackling the steep side of the peaks, we reach the crest of the
peaks, What follows is a couple of hours of icy crests, with many crevices
tothe right and left; these crests are sometimes sothin that one has to walk
without anything to lean on, balancing oneself on the middle part with the
void on both sides. There are some difficulties only when, due to the north-
em wind, sections of very hard ice are formed. Then we have to carve
small steps with the ice axe, taking tums so as not to run out of energy.
Regardless of whether one is going alone or with another person, any
safety measure is a pure illusion. The usual method, which consists of
stopping, digging in the ice axe as far as it will go, and running a rope
through it so that one’s companion can be safely hooked on, cannot be
used, This cannot be done on pure ice; to be attached toa rope represents
only a perception of safety, the truth being that if one were to fall, he
would drag the other unfortunate person along, But usually the Gemini are
not that horrible. The reward for the tough ascent is a truly magnificent,
indeed glorious, panorama of a sea of alps and peaks of the Swiss canton
of Berne.

Our excursion does not present major difficulties. By the first hours of
the aftermoon we have already made it back to the refuge. A little later the


A Story on Mounr Rosa


weather changes. The lines of the peaks disappear amid gusts of fog. Dur-
ing the night the weather tums definitely nasty. However, the following
morning a new radiant clarity shines on. In that light we sce in the dis-
tance, on the lower part of the glacier, a man moving in a zigzag, falling
down and getting up again like a drunkard, It does nottake us long to catch
up with him. He is bloodied in various parts of his body and he looks like a
person having hallucinations. This is what we leam.

The previous day, two young men, two young ladies, and himself had
attempted to cross the Gemini a few hours after us. The bad weather caught
them on the group of peaks. Due to the lack of visibility the situation soon
became desperate because everything depends on locating the only point
that leads to the descent on the lower part of the glacier, on the Italian side
of the border. They could not find that point and the five of them were
stuck up there at 4200 meters. One can imagine what a night spent there
mustbe like, with bad weather and the wind blowing from the north, with-
out finding any shelter. These five tried to find shelter behind a piece of
jutting slab, huddling together ona small slippery surface, with the void on.
both sides. By the early daylight one of the two girls had died (they had
climbed in shorts!). Before the weather cleared up, the two young men
left, desperately trying to find a way down. The third young man stayed
behind with the second girl. As she slipped into a semiconscious state, he
thought she was going to die. There must have been some sentimental
connection between the two of them; the young man resolved to take his
life and hurled himself over the precipice. However this move proved to
be his salvation. His fall caused a small avalanche of soft snow that took
him all the way down, almost unscathed, to the lower glacier. This was the
man zigzagging in the snow, bleeding. The second girl up there did not
die. She was taken to the refuge half delirious, but luckily for her she
made it alive. As for the two men, one fell into a crevice and broke his leg,
the other managed to get to the valley and called for help.

On this occasion I cannot help but think how much, in these high peaks,
everything is in the hands of fate. Two hours later, and it could have been
usin that kind of predicament. And what should] say when someone climbs
almost vertical icy walls, where if two or three centimeters give way that
is enough for him to fall to his death? And yet this may be one of the


89


Experiences
deepest aspects of the experience of mountain climbing: a kind of amor


fati, to unite the excitement of the adventure with danger, to give in to
trusting that which in our destiny is beyond human control,


90


een, PART THREE om


Appendices


ee Appendix A


An Artist of the Heights:
Nicholas Roerich


he art of Nicholas Roerich has become famous worldwide. In the

United States, a country where there are trusts even in the intellec-
tual domain, certain people have monopolized the greatest part of Roerich’s
artistic work; through a Roerich’s Society Museum, conferences, and a
luscious review (The Archer), they attempt to create a “movement” around
the personality of this artist.

In fact, Roerich, who is a painter, does not intend to limit himself to
painting alone. Through his paintings and his wider activity (he has also
composed poems, written articles, and published accounts of his travels in
Asia), he first and foremost aims at spreading the sense of a higher order
of reality in the modem world.

In considering his paintings, we must conclude that their main charac-
teristic is the portrayal of nature—through relatively simple means, al-
though not lacking a certain decorative style—in terms that awaken a
strange sense of interiority and almost of liberation.

This should not be explained through something subjective and fan-
tastic that Roerich’s art adds and superimposes onto reality, but rather,
and foremost, through a power that is intrinsic in the very nature of the
subjects he deals with. This canbe clarified as soon as we say thatRoerich’s
recurrent theme is the Himalayas; the titanic and transfigured nature of
the Himalayan range, with its heights, its vertiginous peaks, its abysses, its
nameless silences, its celestial clarity.

Roerich, whois Russian by birth, has repeatedly traveled to the passes


93


Arrennices


of the Himalayas and Westem Mongolia, both by himself and at the head
of an expedition; he often lived there in the company of lamas, in order to
penetrate as deeply as possible into their magical and metaphysical tadi-
tions, in which the physical and the metaphysical, the real and the unreal,
begin to merge in the same pattern. Therefore, it is the spirit of the
Himalayas that talks to us through Roerich’s paintings; this spirit, as I said
previously, succeeds in awakening in those who can truly receive it, an
ancient sensation of oneself and of things; a primordial and powerful sen-
sation that has been buried in the subconscious due to the restless and
prisonlike life of the modern Wester world.

Thave hinted at particular conditions in which the real and the unreal,
the inner and the outer, the objective and subjective begin to merge into
one reality. This happens spontaneously at great heights (above 4000
meters), both on the peaks and, provided one has a certain power of spit
tual concentration, on an airplane. It may happen that, given a certain
disposition of one’s consciousness, the perceptions may begin to demate-
tialize; they acquire characteristics of weightlessness, immateriality, and
morning light that cannot be adequately described to someone who has
never experienced this.

In a state of semi-intoxication, which does not induce dullness but
rather a higher lucidity, things talk to us in a way we never suspected
before. Later on, what occurs is a dynamic unfolding of the imaginative
faculty, which reacts upon the senses, translating perceptions here and
there into images that have a symbolic chasacter, like that of dreams; these
form myths that find their place in the pattem of the waking conscious-
ness. It seems that in Tibet this happens in a prominent way: there is a
mentality that may effectively be said to be the permanent domain of
similar states, which contain the secret of many strange traditions and which,
when seen from the outside, appear as pure superstition.

To be able to understand this, as odd as it may appear, is essential to
understand Roerich’s art in all its elements: this is an art of snowy and
rarefied heights, where sensibility and the air become dematerialized and
convey at all times the sense of transparency and of alpine silence. In
almost a constant fashion we see in his landscapes the emergence of myths
and symbols: figures of ascetics in deep meditation; magic fires; shapes of


94


Appenpix A


idols; elemental apparitions; strange, unnatural inner reflections of light
emerge in his paintings in the background behind seas of valleys and alps;
alps everywhere, as far as the eye can see. This does not have the value of
a fantastic overlapping with reality. In a setting such as the Himalayas we
may say that myth becomes part of reality. In a way myth continues real-
ity, it interiorizes and completes with a purpose that transpires immedi-
ately out of those forms, symbols, and lights about which one can no longer
say whether they are inside or outside of oneself; or whether they are
lights of things or illuminations of the spirit, or both at the same time.

Those who have been in the great plateaus of Tibet, without being
concerned with exploring or being part of an expedition with specific goals,
can testify to this sense, which comes to life when the soul of the Tibetan
religion, the forms of its spirituality and its traditional magic, are pen-
etrated. Roerich is the first Westerner (provided we may call a Russian a
Westerner) who has been able to pick it up and to express it through paint-
ings, while at the same time feeling itas something that goes beyond mere
art and beyond the simple and private aesthetic sensation, because it tends
to become realized as a sense of life itself. This is why his paintings have
essentially the character of a way: a way toward something transcendent,
in the integral meaning of this word, and with reference not to an abstrac-
tion but to a real experience. I believe that something may truly be called
art only when it rises to assume such a value.

The Himalayas lead us to a nonhuman purity, to a nonhuman breath:
“Many meters above sea level—but how many more above ordinary men!”
wrote Nietzsche about Sils-Maria. This peak, just like the highest Italian
mountain (I remember the nocturnal view of the white desert from the
Capanna Margherita on Mount Rosa) reconnects us to our natural and
cosmic nature, which is the same as that of the elemental forces of the
earth, the powerful purity and calm of which is impressed upon the icy and
shining peaks as if they were absolute and immaterial peaks, or magnetic
thythmical knots in the great plot of the Whole.

This is the reason why we can detect in Roerich’s art a ray of libera-
tion, of the truest liberation.


95


ee Appendix B am


Art and Symbol
in the Seat of the Snows


he specific traits of any great traditional civilization are cooperation

and oneness. In this type of civilization the various manifestations of
life are not fragmented into separate domains but are gathered around the
same axis and are permeated, to different degrees, by the same spiritual
and transcendent meanings. The external becomes a symbol of the inter-
nal; the visible becomes a symbol of the invisible. The world of action
itself acquires a ritual meaning and can only be justified in this fashion.
“Culture” in the traditional world did not possess the autonomous and purely
secular character it has acquired in relatively recent times; in that context,
culture appeared as a system of approximations that were meant to propi-
tiate the virtual or real shift of that which in man goes beyond himself.
This applied to thought as well as to the traditional heroic ethos, to the
various sciences, and to art itself. In a civilization of a traditional type, art
cannot be anything but religious art, in the superior, not merely devo-
tional, sense of the word, The psychologism and aesthetical narcissism of
a so-called author (much less naturalism or profane realism) cannot find
any room in such a civilization.

I was reminded of these things when going through the pages of a
wonderful publication of the Italian Academy that dealt with some as-
pects of the art of one of the most traditional types of civilization, namely,
Indo-Tibetan art (see G. Tucci, Indo-Tibetica, Rome, 1933). This publica-
tion is a study devoted to the me’od rten and the ts'a ts’sa. The former are
monuments of the awesome “seat of the snows” (the meaning of the word


97


Alppenoices


Himalaya) that are lined up along the paths of Tibet. These monuments
are sometimes isolated, sometimes found in groups or connected to cach
other by low stone walls bearing sacred inscriptions. Ts’a ts'sas are small
images made of clay, representing divine figures and symbols, which are
meant for the most part to be ritually offered by the wayfarer as a substi-
tute for the mc’od rten themselves, or to be taken in to them, since, in last
analysis, mc’od rten literally means “receptacle, or support, of the offer-
ings.”

Mc’od rien of the “descent from heaven,” of the “great enlighten-
ment,” of “victory,” and of the “great wonder” are some of the very ex-
pressive names of the main examples of such strange Tibetan monuments.
More than mere expressions of servile adoration and human piety, the
symbols and formulations which they, or the stone walls by which they are
connected, carry, suggest the gift of Dharma (the “law” or “way”). This
way, revealed and actualized by such eminent beings as the Buddha, will
always remain the principle of vairagya and of udvega, the disgust and
inner turmoil that tear away the “noble ones” from mere living, arousing
in them the sensation and the nostalgia for a truer, freer, more powerful
reality. In this way, to erect a mc’od rten or to shape a ts’a ts’sa almost has
the meaning of adding a new ring to the invisible chain of the “law” and of
the “awakening.” Since in the rigorous ritual that accompanies the edifi-
cation of such monuments there is the sense and precise intention of at-
tracting and of magically linking to them a divine life and presence, the
act of he who makes an offering before the mc’od rten, recites a formula,
and deposits a small clay image on that spot (with the intent of ritually
materializing an intention and a faith) is going to signify participation in
that invisible life, and at the same time an addition of a new vital germ to
it, which will bear a hidden fruit in the life of he who has deposited it.

‘The author of the monograph I am talking about correctly remarks
that in the paintings of the most characteristic traditions of India and Tibet,


Everything which is related to faith is expressed in a colorful
language of lines and forms which elevate the believer or the
initiate to planes of superior experiences and therefore be-
come efficacious vehicles of mystical realizations. The In-
dian art has never been characterized by technical precise-


98


Appewoix B


ness or by the faithful reproduction of invi
construct, to paint, to sculpt means to translate into the hiero-
glyphics of line, form, or color, those experiences, truths, and
intuitions which are present in everybody's spirit, though in
different degrees.


le things. To


This criterion is mirrored even by the mc’od rten, in which given symbolic,
analogical, and even magical intentions inspire and influence the erection
of the monument even in its minutest details, according to a specific form,
At this point it is necessary to underscore the difference between this type
of symbolic art and the type of religious art appearing in Christianity. That
which to the Christian believer are deities in the form of persons or of
supematural beings that are distinct from him, in the metaphysical tradi-
tions of the East (as well as in many ancient esoteric traditions of the
West), are merely symbols for transcendent states of consciousness and
for mystical energies, both of which can be realized sub specie interioritatis
along the way to the “awakening,” Theology is thus replaced with a tran-
scendental psychology. Here, that humanization and hypostatization of
the divine (which is so frequently encountered in Christian religious art,
until it gencrates a naturalism sui generis) is absent. The grotesque char-
acterization of certain images, endowed with many limbs and heads, sug-
gests that what is being represented is not remotely or even analogically
related to nature, but is only as a symbol.

Moreover, the single parts of the small Tibetan monuments shaped
like pyramids are meant to represent the stages or the hierarchical de-
grees of a journey toward “awakening” and inner realization. On the bot-
tom, and acting as the foundation, the first step of the mc’od rten, accord-
ing to Tibetan tradition, will help the wayfarer to recall the Four Founda-
tions of Mindfulness, namely, the precepts of a clear consciousness of
body, feeling, mind, and mental objects. From this step, proceeding up-
wards, we encounter the next element of the construction, which witness
to the Four Perfect Exertions; then we find the elements symbolizing the
powers of determination and the virtues propitiating enlightenment; then
the elements symbolizing the Eightfold Path, which consists of right view,
resolve, speech, conduct, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, and concentra-
tion. At its higher levels, the edifice hints at the transcendent forms of


9


HPPENDICES


consciousness, at the capability of having visions that go beyond the limits
of birth and death, and at the powers of courage and victory confronting
the dark forces of nature and eros. Finally, at the top of the building, a
triple ornament often expresses the supreme triad of sun, moon, and fire.
The sun is the divine male energy; the moon, the realizing instrumental
force, is the feminine dynamis; and the raging fire, which is the synthesis
of the other two (often portrayed through the symbolism of the coupling of
the solar god with his bride or “power”—the Sanskrit term shakdi having
this double meaning), is the principle of every activity and awakening.
In the entire above-mentioned hierarchy these elements, according
to the Indo-Tibetan doctrines, are real as superconscious facts, as objec-
tive elements of the world, and, finally, as dormant powers lying in the
deepest recesses of the human being. In fact, in some mc’od ren the
symbolism establishes a correspondence between the various elements
of the votive monument and the various mystical centers or “wheels of
life” (chakra), which the knowledge of ascetics localizes in specific ar-
eas of the body. Thus, the sun and the moon are said to correspond to two
mysterious energies at work in inner realization: their synthesis is that
fire that arouses or causes such mystical centers to blossom and lead the
ascetic to that supreme realization described in Buddhist texts through
the symbolism of high mountains, of a victorious lion, or of the dorje (the
mystical “thunderbolt-diamond body”). A Buddhist text says of these
symbols, “Now there is no longer a here or there, no coming or going, no
life or death, but only calm and enlightenment as in an infinite ocean,”


I remember participating in a mountain climb this past summer, in a re-
gion that is among those that better preserve the echo of the most tradi-
tional Catholic Middle Ages: the Austrian Tyrol. Starting from the edge of
dark and almost Nibelungen-like forests, and going all the way to the top,
through scrub and huge boulders, following an uncertain path that winds
amid moraines until it reaches the perennial glaciers, there were small,
coarse sanctuaries made at those heights, more for things than for men.
These sanctuaries followed a sacred format (the various stations of the
Via Crucis, from the Passion to the Resurrection) but marked at the same
time the stages of an exhausting ascent, from the fogs of the valleys to the


Appeworr B


shining and incorporeal brightness of the peaks. Up ontop, atthe peak of
the Gross-Glockner, out of the glaciers stood a great cross made of iron
bars, chained on the rocks, in the middle of a circular and vast horizon; on
it we could read some verses, of intonation between the sacred and the
heroic. This was a physical reality which, in moments of correspondence
between the inner and outer self, carried at the same time some meta-
physical element.

Maybe experiences like this introduce us ina direct way to the mean-
ing of (in a region of similar heights, and yet impregnated with myth and
symbolism, as Tibet is) the series of mc’od rten, the little stone walls, and
the strange ritual stones covering deserted areas and remind the wayfarer
of the ascetics who live in those silences and in that solitude.


101


ees Appendix Cosa


Religiosity of Tyrol


[ the Dolomite mountains appear consciously arranged, the Tyrol is an
elemental world. Between them is the same difference that exists be-
tween the airy architectural structure of St. Peter’s Cathedral in Rome,
and the Gothic splendor vibrating toward the sky from the black pinnacles
of St. Stephen’s in Vienna.

Despite all this, the Dolomites are like the Mediterranean world, a
world of lights, colors, and air. Here, the third dimension of things is
barely perceived, as if in a phantasmagoric landscape. During the night,
its realm of clear apparitions emerging out of impeccable vegetation, is
transformed into enigmatic, threatening, and elaborate silhouettes. This
change invites the necd to shift from contemplation to action, namely, to
direct contact with the rock: challenging its resistance, its altitude, and
its inviolable accessibility.

Conversely, the world of the Tyrol is a symbolic one. Its realm is not
that of rocks but of ice. It is not even like the purely white world of the
great westem glaciers. It is as if nature itself prepared to be transfigured
with pure icy light, with a sort of asceticism of silence and desolation.
Elementariness is its main feature; the distance from man is much greater.
This is the symbolism of Tyrol. Its counterparts are fragments of a tradi-
tional, closed, and deep religiosity, as if the inhabitants were still living in
the Middle Ages, found among the sparse population. I have confused
memories of a long traverse of the Gross-Venediger: from the Defregger-
Haus to the Badwer-Hiitte, and then, after following a high path, toward
the so-called Innere Geschoss, all the way to the Tauem-Haus.

I will not talk here about the quality of the ice that is found on the


103


Alvpenoices


higher path and is unmatched anywhere else in the world; nor will I talk at
length about the path on the great spiked moraine crowned with clouds;
nor about the serpentine paths unwinding amidst a chaotic and almost
Poisonous vegetation, taller than one’s head; nor about the very sharp,
wet, treacherous serpentine paths almost suspended over the abyss. Down
below, the high valley and the stream. We press onward with the state of
mind that usually comes upon climbers during the last hours of daylight.
All of a sudden, the valley gives way toa gorge and becomes transformed.
In the background there is only the peak. All around are jumbled yellow
and black rocks that look more like wood than stone, lacking, so it seems,
the cold and heavy quality of stone. There are rocks and then houses; we
see the beginning of a village, but there is no trace of life. The dwellings
are small wooden huts of all one color, the doors are open, the windows
have fallen off; there are no people or animals in sight. The only sound is
that of the invisible waterfalls coming from the glaciers.

On the side of the path there is a great cross with a date anda worn out
sign. I do not recall exactly the German words but their meaning was
approximately this: “Wayfarer, stop for an instant; look at the glaciers and
also at the sign of He who died for our redemption and who taught us that
death is the gateway to life.”

According to an enigmatic legend, the sacred grail, the mystical stone
of light that symbolized the living spiritual tradition of the medieval West-
em world, was transferred from Spain (beginning with Montsalvat of
Salvatierra) to Bavaria and finally to Tyrol. In Innsbruck, in the Silver
Chapel, among the statues of the legendary ancestors of the “last Euro-
peanknight,” Maximilian], there is also a statue of King Arthur of Camelot
and of the Knights of the Round Table. Something of this obscure legacy
seems to be preserved in Tyrol, even though in isolation. The origins of
the Northem races, which are prevalent there, are unknown. Christianity
must have revived this race and provided it with a deeper creed, thus giv-
ing itthe opportunity of extending into a later historical period, although it
changed in the process.

The presence of some primordial symbols in a Christianized—not
simply Westernized—form must be attributed to this race. For instance,
in the valleys of Tyrol and even in cities like Innsbruck and Lienz, we


Appenoix C


often find a strange variation of the crucifix that is erected upon hunting
trophies and that displays around Christ a solar aura of the radiating type
seen in primitive religions. On top of country houses, which always re-
flect the same characteristic style, there are interesting combinations of
the crucifix accompanied by synthetic animal figures, differing from
valley to valley, and still preserving a great degree of similarity to ar-
chaic totemic symbols.

In any event, there are frequent signs of a religion that rises above
the usual sentimental or conventional plane and that leads directly to the
plane of spiritual synthesis. In a previous essay of mine, entitled “Art
and Symbol in the Seat of the Snows,” I give an example of this. In the
Oetztal a path leading to the glaciers is marked by images of the Via
Crucis. The various stations are separated by long intervals. At the last
Station of the Cross, the rocks end and the glacier begins. This trail is
found in an area outside the most traveled alpine paths, as if it were
placed there for a solitary and silent rite, yet it is filled with living mean-
ing. On the Gross-Glockner, in a gorge in which the stream starting at
the top of this mountain turns into a roaring waterfall, there is a small
chapel with various ex voto. One of these is represented by medals of
military valor with this sign underneath: “I owe to God the courage which
bestowed this honor upon me.”

Iremember a ceremony celebrated in the church of Pragrateen, al-
though Ino longer remember the occasion. The church looked like a mili-
tary parade ground: the men were on the right, the women on the left, all
perfectly lined up, wearing their traditional costumes. In the middle stood
a military delegation holding flags and insignia. They all sang a tune ac-
companied by an organ and reinforced by trumpets; despite some lack of
harmony, it created a singular effect that did not lack a certain greatness.
In the Tyrol there is no group of houses, no matter how remote and small,
that does not have its own chapel. There is no alpine pass or panoramic
view that does not have its own crucifix, which is always put back in place
every time the wind or a storm knocks it down or sweeps it away. This is
almost a silent invitation to transfigure and to integrate that which, as mere
aesthetic emotion, may derive from the contemplation of nature in the
superior form of a spiritual meaning and an enlightening symbol.


105


Appenpices


These are fragments of a lost world that will probably not endure much
longer against the passing of time. Together with the Salisburg area, the
Tyrol has become a fashionable resort area. An intemational public, com-
posed of tourists and mundane guests, crowds these areas in the winter
and in the summer, reaching even the most remote valleys, where new
hotels are being built while the existing ones are undergoing renovation.
The towns themselves take on the look of vacation sites or ski resorts. The
local traditions and popular costumes have recently come to be seen as
objects of exhibition, which amounts to their uprooting. Thus, the exotic
public becomes “‘Tyrolized”; more and more people enjoy wearing the
lederhosen and dirndl. All this marks the beginning of the end. One more
generation and maybe the bourgeois swamp of the modern world will to-
tally submerge and absorb even these last traces ofa life that could truly
be called authentic and normal.


106


ee Appendix: D am


The Kingdom of the
Demon of the Peaks


lan Martino di Castrozza. The town of Feltre marks the end of the

domain of the trains slowly being pulled up these first spurs of the
Dolomites. Here begins the kingdom of the rapid and barren paths that
wind among gorges and woods.

Calm and gathered in a solemn chorus, in the evening light the moun-
tain group of Feltre is left behind us. But shortly after passing the little
villages of Fiera di Primicro and Agordo, the majestic nature of the alpine
landscape can clearly be perceived. The speed of the cars decreases and
constant shifting of gears becomes necessary. The sound of the rolling
riveris no longer a gentle whisper but a roar. The vegetation, in which the
spruce fir is predominant, becomes thicker, forming masses of green of an
increasingly metallic and deep color as the sunlight begins to dim. Be-
tween the fog and the vapors rising from the valley and the high and pale
sky, the high peaks of the Pale Massif emerge one by one, in the changing
game of perspectives created by the speeding car. There they are, Sass
Maor, Cresta of Madonna, Peak of Bal, Rosetta, Cimon of Pala; they are
barren, tragic and elemental forms, of a titanic purity. It looks as if the
earth itself expressed its surreal and sovereign nature, without compro-
mises or contamination by anything human.

We continue. The peaks, now that the sun is setting in the westem
valleys, become covered with shadow. They take on a glorious and an-
cient look. They are golden and purple, in a sky that looks even higher
and farther away. The vapors discharged by the valleys and forests in the


107


Alppennices


evening slowly rise up to them, becoming hidden from our view as the
road plunges into the forest. We can see them again only when our cars,
emerging from the woods after several switchbacks, enter San Martino di
Castrozza.

From there the view is breathtaking: it is as if the peaks floated be-
tween the sky and the vapors. Disembodied brightness, they look like
memories, or as immaterial echoes. The air is becoming cold, dry, and
stinging.

The cars come to a stop. We see the sign for the Grand Hotel of the
Dolomites. It looks like a large transoceanic ship anchored in the dock.
The lights coming out of it are lined up, bright, regular. It is a sudden
transformation: the mountain no longer exists. It is like a piece of me-
tropolis at 1500 meters. The environment is elegant. We wear tuxedos for
dinner. Inside it is warm, and the wild rhythm of jazz fills the room.


From San Martino di Castrozza the road to the Dolomites continues, lead-
ing to the passes of Rolle and Colbicon, the site of a glorious World War I
memory for the Italian people. In San Martino, a town consisting only of
great hotels, tourist groups stop before leaving on excursions to the peaks
of the Pale Mountains. Then, all the expedients of modern technique, which
prevails over distances and tiredness, fall short and man is finally left to
himself, to his strength, his boldness, surrounded by things and by the forces
of this wild and uncontaminated nature.

The alpine paths, starting from the area wooded by firs, lead to the
area populated by juniper trees, and finally to the naked Dolomite rocks,
fragmented and filled with gorges and screes of a blinding white-lime
color. At2400 meters the paths converge on the plateau of the Pale, which
marks the point beyond which one is not likely to encounter daring young
men wearing beautifully colored jackets with golden butions a Ja Pitoeff
or ladies with socks folded over a Ja tennis. In the middle of the plateau
(there is a small mountain hut, where it is possible to spend the night around
a nice stove, surrounded by an immense silence); this plateau is only a
starting point for the real climbs.

In any event, the sight of this plateau is itself a matchless, unique, and
impressive experience; it resembles a lunar, immobile, uniform desert. In


Appenoix D


it there is nothing for miles but raw smooth rocks of the same color, be-
tween pumice-white and opaque-silver, without reflections, arid, lifeless,
soundless, motionless. Spots of snow appear here and there, sometimes
blinding, sometimes precious-looking, of the transparency and brightness
of quartz. In the background is the glacier of Fredusta.


This sight is likely to impress upon the soul an ineffable and indelible
sense of dismay and of greatness. And, during the night, what absolute
silence, and what bright heavenly vault, so powerful, dazzling, and
sublime!

The plateau is the base camp of those who are possessed by the de-
mon of the peaks; not all those who leave come back. Yesterday they
found two from the “tent city” of a group from Milan; they were found
smashed on the slopes of Mount Cimone.

Days ago it was the tum of a German man, at the Sass Maor.

Their bodies were transported to San Martino by mountain guides,
adomed with a few alpine flowers and buried not far from the war cem-
etery that contains the remains of the heroes of Colbricon, a theater of
fierce military operations during World War I. And yet, others have left
and continue to leave on the same paths, toward the same walls on the
same glaciers, with the same contempt for the danger found in every pass
and in every move, and with the same self-confidence that makes them
reject the assistance of guides and of roped parties.

‘There is some insanity in all this, but also a flame that flickers higher
than all the small values cherished by ordinary people. In this there is
something compared to which the mundane cosmopolitan life that con-
taminates the Dolomitic purity with its tennis matches, its tea, and its jazz,
pales and appears cadaverous,

Everything in modern society tends to dampen the heroic sense of
life. Everything moves toward mechanization, to the regulated and pru-
dent community life of beings who are constantly in need of something,
and not self-sufficient. Everything today tends to be reduced to the lower
two of the four castes (the heroes, those who are initiated into wisdom, the
merchants, and the workers) upon which the rational and integral organi-
zation of ancient Eastem societies was based.


Aprenoices


War itself, having been mechanized, no longer knows warriors—in
the ancient, classical, and medieval sense of the word—but only soldiers.
Having been suffocated, the heroic will seek other paths, other outlets
beyond the network of practical interests, passions, and cravings that is
becoming tighter everyday. Maybe the popular enthusiasm for sports that
our contemporaries exhibit is a deviated manifestation of this. Still, the
struggle with the heights and the mountain precipices is the purest and
most beautiful form, freed from everything mechanized and from every-
thing that rarefies the direct and absolute relation between the self and
phenomena.


The deep nature of the spirit that perceives itself as infinite and free, al-
ways beyond itself, beyond all forms and greatness found in or outside
itself, awakens and shines forth in the “insanity” of those who, without a
reason or purpose, climb peaks and crevasses with an indomitable will
that asserts itself over fatigue, fear, and to the voice of the animal instinct
of prudence and self-preservation.

To feel abandoned to oneself, without any help or way out, clothed
only in one’s own strength or weakness, with no one to ask for help; to
climb from rock to rock, from grip to grip, inexorably, for hours; with the
sense of height and of imminent danger, and the sense of solar solitude;
the sense of unspeakable liberation and the cosmic breathing at the end of
the climb, when the struggle is over and the apprehension is finally over-
come; the sight of boundless horizons, for miles, and everything else be-
neath one’s feet—in all this there is truly a catharsis, an awakening and a
rebirth of something transcendent and divine.

‘Those who retum at night to the valley below, and whom San Martino
reabsorbs in the lighted and warm gardens of the great hotels where hand-
some men wearing colorful jackets and ladies devoted to tennis matches
and tea parties gather—these individuals, without knowing it, carry in their
eyes and in their tanned faces something that sets them aside as people of
another race.

For my part, after becoming acquainted during World War I with the
vertigo of heights (which I love and regard as the best experience of my
life) understand and justify this “insanity,” whereby, from time to time,


110


Appenoix D


broken bodies covered by a few alpine flowers are taken through gorges
of a white-lime color, all the way to San Martino. Having attempted the
same experience and risked the same danger, motivated by a nostalgia
and by a passion stronger than myself, I feel that these short periods of
time spent during the summer in the Dolomites give me the strength to
stand up to, without compromise to my ideals, another struggle and a dif-
ferent effort, that of the demon of the metropolis.


Ml


eee Appendix Em


Height


hile, on one hand, the lower states of being have been symbolized
by the earth, which in Wester symbolism has been related to the
human condition in general (see the classical derivation of homo from hu-
mus), on the other hand, the image of height, or of an alpine peak, which is
a joining of earth and sky, is yet another natural expression of the states of
being that in ancient times characterized the regal nature. Thus, in the Ira-
nian tradition, a mountain—the mighty Ushi-darena, which was created by
the god of light—was believed to be the seat of the hvareno, the mystical
regal power. Moreover, according to both this tradition and to the Vedic
tradition, the symbolic haoma or soma, which is thought of as a transfigur-
ing and divining substance, is believed to grow on the mountains.
Moreover, “Your Highness” or “Most Serene Highness” are titles
bestowed upon monarchs and princes as late as the modem era; their
original meaning goes back to ancient symbolic connections, in virtue of
which “mountain” or “pole” were different expressions of the same idea
or function. The region elevated above the earth is the “mountain of health”
or of “salvation” (the Montsalvat of the Grail saga); itis also Mount Rudra,
conceived as a universal monarch. The Sanskrit expression paradesha,
which is obviously related to the Chaldean pardes (hence, the Christian
derivation of term paradise), has precisely and literally the meaning of
“height” and of “high land.” In this context I think it is legitimate to make
a reference to Mount Olympus or to the westem mountain that leads to
the Olympian region and is the “way of Zeus”; to all the other mountains
in various traditions that are the dwelling places of the gods, who per-
sonify the Uranian states of being; to Mount Shinvat, on which the “bridge


113


Appenpices


which connects heaven and earth” is located; to the solar and polar moun-
tains, such as the symbolic Mount Meru, which serves as the center of the
world. These are all mountains that are related to myths and symbols of
sacred regality and supreme rule.

Aside from the above-mentioned analogy, the visible psychological
bases of this traditional symbolism are the primordial, wild, and nonhu-
man greatness and the inaccessible and dangerous character of high
mountains.

More specifically, in the Nordic-Aryan tradition, the idea of the moun-
tain is often associated with Walhall, the seat of heroes and of deified
kings, as well as with Asgard, the seat of the gods (Ascn), situated at the
center or pole of the earth (in Mitgard), which is referred to as “shiny”
(glimir), as “sacred land” (helakt land) but also as “heavenly mountain”
(himinbjorg): this is a very high, divine mountain on the peak of which,
beyond the clouds, shines an eternal clarity, from where Odin observes
the world, The divine Nordic-Germanic kings attributed their origin and
their primordial residence to this mountain.

As a complementary motif, we may examine the theme of the moun-
tain as a place into which those who have achieved spiritual enlighten-
ment disappear. Such, for instance, was the Mountain of the Seer, which
was inhabited, according to early Buddhism, by subterranean inhabitants,
those who are said to be “further-men, victorious, and untouchable beings,
self-awakened, free from all bonds.” This motif is also connected with the
regal and imperial idea. We should also remember the famous medieval
legends, according to which Charlemagne, Frederick J, and Frederick II
disappeared into the mountain from where, one day, they will return. But
this mountainous subterranean residence is just an image of the mysteri-
ous seat of the universal ruler, which is an expression of the idea of the
supreme center.

Inthe oldest Hellenic beliefs, the heroes are stolen from death and taken
into a mountain onan island, which, even in consideration of itsname (Leuke),
corresponds to the “white island of the North,” which the Hindu tradition
regards as the symbolic dwelling place of the blessed and the land of the
“living”: a land ruled by Narayana, whois “fire and splendor.” It also corre-
sponds to another legendary island, where, according to some Chinese tra-
ditions, there is a mighty mountain, inhabited by transcendent men (cheng


114


Appenoix E


Jen). By traveling to it, princes like Yu, who thought of themselves as good
rulers, learned the art of government. It is important to recall that such mar-
velous lands, “cannot be reached by land or sca, but only by a flight of the
spirit.” The image of the island symbolizes stability, being detached from
the continents and surrounded by waters.

In the exegesis of the writings by the emperor Fo-Hi, the notions of
“transcendent men” who inhabit the “island” are often synonymous with
the notion of “king.” Thus, an excursion among the myths of the mradi-
tional world confirms again the doctrine of divine regality through these
convergences and equivalences between the symbols of the regal func-
tion and those which, in various ways, allude to the transcendent states of
being and to an eminently initiatory dignity.


1s


——_ Index


Andreis, Emanuele, 49

Anguissola, Carlo, 37-38

Art, Indo-Tibetan, 97-101

Arthur, King, 13

Aryan races
mountain environment and trait selection, 31-33, 35-36
mountain legends, 10-11, 13, 14

Asgard, 15, 114


Bon, Luigi, 49
Broschek, Franz, 66


Caesar, Julius, 85

Chiara from Alagna, 49

Chlorus, Constantius, 85

Civilizations, traditional traits, 97

Comici, Emilio, 38

Conquerors, tradition of the, 84-86

Crucifix symbols, in the mountains, 101, 104-5
Culhuacan, 12


Daumal, Rene, xii

David, Eugenio, 49-53
David-Neel, Alexandra, 55-56
De New, Carlo, 66


N6


INDEX


Destiny, 81-82, 89-90

di Lauriano, Carlo Rossi, 77-82
Dolomite Mountains, 103, 107-11
Duff, Sir Edwin Grant, 77-82


Eastern Lyskamm, 49-53, 78


Falling, fear of, 45
Fortina, Carlo, 49


Himalayas, 11,93-95
Hochjoch-Hospiz, 71
Holy Grail, 104


Indo-Tibetica, 97-100
James, W., 58
Kehl, W., 49


Manaresi, S.,9

Marimonti, P., 38

Messner, Reinhold, xii
Milarepa, 25-30

Monuments, Tibetan, 97-100
Mount Blanc, 83-86

Mount Cervino, 87

Mount Gross-Glockner, 71—72, 77-82, 100-101
Mount Kuen-Lun, 12

Mount Langkopfel, 63-67
Mount Mer, 11, 23, 114
Mount Monsalvat, 13, 104, 113
Mount Olympus, 113

Mount Rosa, xiii-xv, 87-90


7


Mevitarions on Tue Pents


Mount Rudra, 113
Mount Shinvat, 113
Mount Tabaretta, 69-70
Mount Ushi-darena, 14
Mount Weiss-Kugel, 70-71
Mountain climbing
and camaraderie, 34-35
and communication, 33
and destiny, 81-82, 89-90
as fitness builder, 19-20
and psychic abilities, 57-62
and reflexes, 33-34
and the “second wind,” 58-60
as self-mastery, 45, 46
and solitude, 34-35
and spirituality, 5—6, 9-10, 21-23, 38-40, 77, 83-84, 109-11
as technical achievement, 37-38, 40-41
as thrill-seeking, 20-21
Mountain climbing, experiences
the Dolomites, 107-11
Easter Lyskamm, 49-53, 78
Mount Blanc, 83-86
Mount Gross-Glockner, 71-72, 77-82, 100-1
Mount Langkopfel, 63-67
Mount Rosa, 87-90
Mount Tabaretta, 69-70
Mount Weiss-Kugel, 70-71
the Tyrol, 103-4
Mountain of the Seer, 114
Mountains
ecological preservation of, 6
and naturalism, 18-19
and racial development, 31-33, 35-36
Moonntains, mystica] legends about, 10-11, 17-18


118


Inoex


Aryan, 10-11, 13, 14, 114
Aztec, 12

Buddhist, 12, 114
Dionysian, 13-14
Egyptian, 12

Germanic, 12-13, 114
Hellenic, 11-12, 22, 113, 114
Hindu, 11, 13, 113, 114
Iranian, 13, 14, 113
Islamic, 12

Mount Rosa, xiji-xv
Nordic, 14-15, 114
Taoist, 12, 114-15


Neruda, Norman, 49
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 7, 53, 85, 95


Odin, 14-15, 114


Pietrasanta, Nini, 49
Psychic abilities. See also
Spirituality

and breathing, 58, 59-60
and heights, 61
and mountain climbing, 57-62
and Tibetan training, 55-56
and the vital force, 57-58, 61


Reflexes, and mountain climbing, 33-34
Resia Valley, 73-76

Roerich, Nicholas, xii-xiii, 93-95
Roman Empire, 84-86

Rousseau, Jean-Jaques, 19


San Martino di Castrozza, 107-8


ng


Mepirarions on THe Peaks


“Second wind,” 58-60
Self-mastery, and mountain climbing, 45, 46
Seth Amentet, 12
Shiva, 11
Skiing
and fear of falling, 45
as metaphor for society, 43-45, 46
Song of the Essence of Things, The (Milarepa), 29-30
Song of Joy, The (Milarepa), 27-29
Song of the Snow, The (Milarepa), 26-27
Spirituality, and mountains. See also Mountains, mystical legends
about; Psychic abilities
and art, 97-101
divinity of mountains, 10-18
mountain climbing and, 5-6, 9-10, 21-23, 38-40, 77, 83-84,
109-11
obstacles to, 3-5
and the Tyrol, 103-6


Thus Spoke Zarathustra, 7
Trenker, Louis, 41

Tucci, G., 97-100

Tyrol, the, 103-4


Vital force, 57-58, 61
Wagner, Richard, 14
Walhalla, 14-15, 114
Welf, Augusto, 49


Yudhisthira, 11


BERSERKER


BOOKS
