SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES


No. 23. — October Term, 1956.


Clinton E. Jencks, Petitioner,

v.

United States of America.


On Writ of Certiorari
to the United States
Court of Appeals for
the Fifth Circuit.


[June 3, 1957.]

Mr. Justice Brennan delivered the opinion of the
Court.

On April 28, 1950, the petitioner, as president of Amal-
gamated Bayard District Union, Local 890, Interna-
tional Union of Mine, Mill & Smelter Workers, filed an
“Affidavit of Non-Communist Union Officer” with the
National Labor Relations Board, pursuant to §9 (h) of
the Taft-Hartley Act. 1 He has been convicted under a
two-count indictment charging that he violated 18
U. S. C. § 1001 2 by falsely swearing in that affidavit that
he was not on April 28, 1950, a member of the Commu-
nist Party or affiliated with such Party. The Court of
Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed the conviction, 3


1 61 Stat. 143, as amended, 65 Stat. 602, 29 U. S. C. § 159 (h).

Section 9 (h) provides that processes of the National Labor Rela-
tions Board will be unavailable to a labor organization “. . . unless
there is on file with the Board an affidavit executed ... by each
officer of such labor organization . . . that he is not a member of the
Communist Party or affiliated with such party, and that he does
not believe in, and is not a member of or supports any organization
that believes in or teaches, the overthrow of the United States Gov-
ernment by force or by any illegal or unconstitutional methods. . . .”

3 62 Stat. 749.

3 226 F. 2d 540.


1


'


JENCKS v. UNITED STATES.


and also an order of the District Court denying the peti-
tioner’s motion for a new trial . 4 This Court granted
certiorari.®

Two alleged trial errors are presented for our review.
Harvey F. Matusow and J. W. Ford, the Government’s
principal witnesses, were Communist Party members
paid by the Federal Bureau of Investigation contem-
poraneously to make oral or written reports of Commu-
nist Party activities in which they participated. They
made such reports to the F. B. I. of activities allegedly
participated in by the petitioner, about which they testi-
fied at the trial. Error is asserted in the denial by the
trial judge of the petitioner’s motions to direct the Gov-
ernment to produce these reports for inspection and use
in cross-examining Matusow and Ford. Error is also
alleged in the instructions given to the jury on member-
ship, affiliation, and the credibility of informers . 8

Former Party members testified that they and the peti-
tioner, as members of the Communist Party of New
Mexico, had been expressly instructed to conceal their
membership and not to carry membership cards. They
also testified that the Party kept no membership records
or minutes of membership meetings, and that such meet-
ings were secretly arranged and clandestinely held. One
of the witnesses said that special care was taken to con-
ceal the Party membership of members, like the peti-
tioner, “occupying strategic and important positions in
labor unions and other organizations where public knowl-
edge of their membership to non-Communists would


4 226 F. 2d 553.

8 350 U. S. 980.

* Because of our disposition of this case, it is unnecessary to con-
sider the alleged errors in these instructions.

f


-^v;vv;Va\v p .v^>


mm


• 4 ‘*


’ ■ . ■


ippi


jeopardize their position in the organization.” Accord-
ingly, the Government did not attempt to prove the peti-
tioner’s alleged membership in the Communist Party on
April 28, 1950, with any direct admissions by the peti-
tioner of membership, by proof of his compliance with
Party membership requirements, or that his name ap-
peared upon a membership roster, or that he carried a
membership card.

The evidence relied upon by the Government was
entirely circumstantial. It consisted of testimony of con-
duct of the petitioner from early 1946 through October 15,
1949, and of Matusow’s testimony concerning alleged con-
versations between him and the petitioner at a vacation
ranch in July or August 1950, and concerning a lecture
delivered by the petitioner at the ranch. The Govern-
ment also attached probative weight to the action of the
petitioner in executing and filing an Affidavit of Non-
Communist Union Officer on October 15, 1949, because
of the events surrounding the filing of that affidavit. The
Government bridged the gap between October 15, 1949,
and July or August 1950 with the testimony of Ford that,
during that period, the Party took no disciplinary action
against the petitioner for defection or deviation, and did
not replace the petitioner in the Party office which Ford
testified the petitioner held as a member of the Party
State Board.

The first alleged Party activity of the petitioner pre-
ceded his union employment. A witness, who was a
Party member in the spring of 1946, testified that, at that
time, he and the petitioner were present at a closed Party
meeting at the home of the Party chairman for Colorado,
where the petitioner, a veteran of World War II, led in
urging that veterans who were Party members spread out
into several veterans’ organizations and not all join the
same one, the better to further Party work.

t


k


C . ••vfrsV.'V. •


v‘V* •*^ J v , AV;'

• ■ ■ m


‘.v : 'j


•. Vr.sM .AV-1.1


M


V T ‘-V.?o •


4 JENCKS v. UNITED STATES.

Later in 1946 the petitioner was employed by the
International Union of Mine, Mill & Smelter Workers as
business agent for several local unions in the Silver City-
Bayard, New Mexico, area. It was testified that one of
the petitioner’s first acts was to meet with the Interna-
tional Union’s then Regional Director for the Southwest,
a Communist Party member, and with the Communist
Party organizer for the area, to develop plans for organiz-
ing a Party group within each of those locals, which later
merged to form Amalgamated Local 890 under the
petitioner’s presidency.

J. W. Ford was a member of the Communist Party of
New Mexico from 1946 to September 1950 and, from

1948, was a member of the State Board and a Party secu-
rity officer. He said that in 1948 he became a paid
undercover agent for the F. B. 1/ and reported regularly
upon Party activities and meetings. He testified that
the petitioner was also a Party and a State Board mem-
ber, and he related in detail occurrences at five closed
Party meetings which he said the petitioner attended.

At the first meeting, in August 1948, Ford said the
Party members worked out a plan to support the peti-
tioner’s candidacy for Congress on the ticket of the
Progressive Party. At the second meeting, in February

1949, Ford said that the petitioner and other Communist
Party members were appointed delegates to a meeting of
the Mexican-American Association in Phoenix, Arizona,
to further a Party plan to infiltrate that organization and
to use it for the Party’s purposes. At the third meeting,
m April 1949, Ford said that the Party’s state organiza-
tion was completed, ancT the petitioner was appointed to
the State Board and the Party leader in the southern half

.. 7 ^ rom 1948 through 1953, Ford was paid $7,025 for his services
Qf that, sum, approximately $3,325 covered the period to which his
testimony related.


' •. » ■* ; ..svV*V 7/» . y/.vY "V" ? } v%y* V>> •* •;


l.V. *^ s ' ‘‘.Vx** 1 ." r.>'-\\i*. <v» ‘ ' ' /''V\iv ‘ **' »v,* ♦Vs/*’. •*• ,, 'VA' 1 - '<*’«.•; ■ " • \V? v ‘ •' • '’n'-Vftt w'iV •.' '• V.V4* V >?" • '■*,• .*•• t*

^ -j •:


JENCKS v. UNITED STATES. 5

of the State. At the fourth meeting, in May 1949, Ford
said that the petitioner gave a progress report upon his
success in recruiting Party members among labor groups,
and offered to use Local 890’s newspaper, “The Union
Worker,” which he edited, to support issues of Party
interest. At the fifth meeting, in August 1949, Ford said
that preparations were made for another meeting later
in that month of the Mexican-American Association in
Albuquerque, and that the delegates, including the peti-
tioner, were instructed to give vigorous support to the
meeting but to take care not to make themselves con-
spicuous in the proceedings.

Ford’s duties as a Party security officer were to keep
watch on all Party members and to report “any particular
defections from the Communist philosophy or any pecul-
iar actions, statements or associations, which would
endanger the security of the Communist Party of the
state.” If any defection reported by a security officer
were considered important, the member “would be called
in and would be either severely reprimanded or criticized,
or disciplined. If he refused to accept such discipline he
would either be suspended or expelled.” Ford testified
that between August 1949 and September 1950, when
Ford ceased his activities with the New Mexico Party,
there was no disciplinary action taken against the peti-
tioner and, to his knowledge, the petitioner was not
replaced in his position on the State Board of the
Communist Party.

The events leading up to the petitioner’s execution and
filing, on October 15, 1949, of an Affidavit of Non-Com-
munist Union Officer were testified to by a former Inter-
national Union representative, a Communist Party
member during 1947 to 1949. He said that, about 17
months before, in May or June 1948, a meeting of Party
members, holding offices in locals of the International
Union of Mine, Mill & Smelter Workers, was held in


:«m v


.

•V*?.' "V '


mm;®


■


't'i.


JENCKS v. UNITED STATES.


Denver to formulate plans for combatting a movement,
led by non-Communists, to secede from the International
Union. He said that the Party members, including the
petitioner, were informed of Party policy not to sign
affidavits required by § 9 (h) of the then recently enacted
Taft-Hartley Act. There was no testimony that that
policy changed before October 15, 1949.

The affidavit was filed shortly before a C. t. O. conven-
tion was scheduled to expel the Mine-Mill International
and other unions from its membership. After filing the
affidavit, the petitioner and other Local 890 officers pub-
lished an article in “The Union Worker” charging that
the contemplated C. I. O. action was part of a program of
“right-wing unions . . . gobbling up chunks of militant
unions. . . . Our International Union and its officers
have swallowed a lot of guff, a lot of insults. But that is
not the point. . . . Now that our Union has signed the
phony affidavits we can defend ourselves ... in case of
raids. We do not fear attack from that quarter any
longer.”

Matusow was a member of the Communist Party of
New York and was a paid undercover agent for the
F. B. I. before he went to New Mexico. 8 In July or
August 1950, he spent a 10-day vacation on a ranch near
Taos, New Mexico, with the petitioner and a number of
other people. He testified to several conversations with
the petitioner there. He said he twice told the petitioner
of his desire to transfer his membership from the New
York to the New Mexico Party, and that on both occa-
sions the petitioner applauded the idea and told him,
“we can use you out here, we need more active Party

8 Other activities of Matusow are described in Communist Party
of the United States v. Subversive Activities Control Board, 351 U. S.

• 115, and United States v. Flynn, 130 F. Supp. 412.


.


;


. .... r.- : -.v *. :• • : •. .•


i' i' ‘ ‘ \' »*} \.ySv


JENCKS v. UNITED STATES.

members.” On one of these occasions, Matusow said,
the petitioner asked him for suggestions for a lecture the
petitioner was preparing for delivery at the ranch, par-
ticularly as to what the New York Communists were
doing about the Stockholm Peace Appeal. Matusow
described to the petitioner a “do-day” program adopted
in New York when the Party members were doers, not
talkers, and performed some activity, such as painting
signs around a baseball stadium urging support for the
Peace Appeal. He testified that the petitioner showed
great interest in the idea and said he might bring it back
to his fellow Party members in Silver City.

Matusow testified that the petitioner delivered his
planned lecture, informed his audience of the “do-day”
idea, praised the Soviet Union’s disarmament plan,
referred to the United States as the aggressor in Korea,
and urged all to read the “Daily People’s World,” identi-
fied by Matusow as the “West Coast Communist Party
newspaper.” Another witness, an expelled member of
Amalgamated Local 890, testified that petitioner, during
1950, 1951 and 1952, repeatedly urged at union meetings
that the union members read that paper.

Matusow also testified that, in one of their conversa-
tions, the petitioner told him of a program he was develop-
ing with leaders of the Mexican Miners Union to negotiate
simultaneous expiration dates of collective bargaining
agreements, to further a joint action of Mexican and
American workers to cut off production to slow down
the Korean War effort. Matusow also testified that
when he told the petitioner that he had joined the Taos
Chapter of the Mexican- American Association, the peti-
tioner told him that this was proper Communist work
because the Association was a key organization, con-
trolled by the Party, for Communist activities in New


!.'• ,V-V,V


’


8 JENCKS v. UNITED STATES.

Mexico and that he, the petitioner, was active in the
Association in the Silver City area."

Ford and Matusow were subjected to vigorous cross-
examination about their employment as informers for the
F. B. I. Ford testified that in 1948 he went to the F. B. I.
and offered his services, which were accepted. He there-
after regularly submitted reports to the F. B. I., “some-
times once a week, sometimes once a month, and at
various other times; maybe three or four times a week,
depending on the number of meetings . . . [he] at-
tended and the distance between the meetings.” He
said that his reports were made immediately following
each meeting, while the events were still fresh in his
memory. He could not recall, however, which reports
were oral and which in writing.

The petitioner moved “for an order directing an inspec-
tion of reports of the witness Ford to the Federal Bureau
of Investigation dealing with each of the meetings which
he said that he attended with the defendant Jencks in
the years 1948 and 1949.” The trial judge, without
stating reasons, denied the motion.

Matusow, on his cross-examination, testified that he
made both oral and written reports to the F. B. I. on
events at the ranch, including his conversations with the
petitioner. The trial judge, again without reasons,
denied the motion to require “the prosecution to pro-
duce in Court the reports submitted to the F. B. I. by this
witness [Matusow] concerning matters which he saw or

9 Matusow recanted as deliberately false the testimony given by
him at the trial. On the basis of this recantation, the petitioner
moved for a new trial, while his appeal from the conviction was
pending, on grounds of newly discovered evidence. After extended
hearings, the District Court denied the motion.


JENCKS v. UNITED STATES.

heard at the . . . Ranch during the period that he was a
guest there . . . 10

The Government opposed petitioner’s motions at the
trial upon the sole ground that a preliminary foundation
was not laid of inconsistency between the contents of the
reports and the testimony of Matusow and Ford. The
Court of Appeals rested the affirmance primarily upon
that ground. 11

Both the trial court and the Court of Appeals erred.
We hold that the petitioner was not required to lay a
preliminary foundation of inconsistency, because a suffi-
cient foundation was established by the testimony of
Matusow and Ford that their reports were of the events
and activities related in their testimony.

The reliance of the Court of Appeals upon Gordon v.
United States , 344 U. S. 414, is misplaced. It is true that
one fact mentioned in this Court’s opinion was that the
witness admitted that the documents involved contra-
dicted his testimony. However, to say that Gordon held
a preliminary showing of inconsistency a prerequisite to
an accused’s right to the production for inspection of
documents in the Government’s possession, is to mis-
interpret the Court’s opinion. The necessary essentials
of a foundation, emphasized in that opinion, and present

10 During the hearings on the motion for a new trial, the petitioner
made several requests for the production of documents in the posses-
sion of the Government, relating to the testimony given. These
motions were denied. Because of our disposition of this case, it is
unnecessary to consider these rulings.

11 In upholding the refusal to require the production of the reports,
the Court of Appeals said:

“. . . Upon a proper showing that the Government has possession
of such inconsistent statements and the presence of the other requisite
conditions, a person charged with crime would be permitted to
examine and use them. But no such showing was made here . , . .”
226 F.. 2d, at 552.


"■ . " ■ -4 ■ ' 'T‘


mm

y:i,


10


JENCKS v. UNITED STATES.


here, are that [ t] he demand was for production of . . .
specific documents and did not propose any broad or blind
fishing expedition among documents possessed by the
Government on the chance that something impeaching
might turn up. Nor was this a demand for statements
taken from persons or informants not offered as wit-
nesses.” (Emphasis added.) 344 U. S., at 419. We
reaffirm and re-emphasize these essentials. “For produc-
tion purposes, it need only appear that the evidence is
lelevant, competent, and outside of any exclusionary
rule . . . .” 344 U. S., at 420.

The crucial nature of the testimony of Ford and Matu-
sow to the Government’s case is conspicuously apparent.
The impeachment of that testimony was singularly
important to the petitioner. The value of the reports
for impeachment purposes was highlighted by the admis-
sions of both witnesses that they could not remember
what reports were oral and what written, and by Matu-
sow’s admission: “I don’t recall what I put in my reports
two or three years ago, written or oral, I don’t know what
they were.”

Every experienced trial judge and trial lawyer knows
the value for impeaching purposes of statements of the
witness recording the events before time dulls treacherous
memory. Flat contradiction between the witness’s testi-
mony and the version of the events given in his reports is
not the only test of inconsistency. The omission from
the reports of facts related at the trial, or a contrast in
emphasis upon the same facts, even a different order
of ti eatment, are also relevant to the cross-examining
process of testing the credibility of a witness’ trial
testimony.

Requiring the accused first to show conflict between
the reports and the testimony is actually to deny the
accused evidence relevant and material to his defense.
The occasion for determining a conflict cannot arise until


. ■

••-r.Vv.v.V^ •**-’'* •’ --v-; • v- ; -CCv •••>». *•:' *V > • ' •' •/ ..Vv.% -s *' /. _• . .\ - ' ‘ f •- / \vy‘ > : r-:. G

.


... ,v •• V % ■■■•. y. •./•••• ’

■ r i. ‘ ‘ • -


JENCKS v. UNITED STATES.

after the witness has testified, and unless he admits con-
flict, as in Gordon, the accused is helpless to know or
discover conflict without inspecting the reports. ,s A re-
quirement of a showing of conflict would be clearly incom-
patible with our standards for the administration of
criminal justice in the federal courts and must therefore
be rejected. For the interest of the United States in a
criminal prosecution . . is not that it shall win a case,
but that justice shall be done. . . .” Berger v. United
States, 295 U. S. 78, 88.’ 3

This Court held in Goldman v. United States, 316 U. S.
129, 132, that the trial judge had discretion to deny
inspection when the witness “. . . does not use his notes

or memoranda [relating to his testimony] in court . . . .”

We now hold that the petitioner was entitled to an order
directing the Government to produce for inspection all
reports of Matusow and Ford in its possession, written
and, when orally made, as recorded by the F. B. I., touch-
ing the events and activities as to which they testified at
the trial. We hold, further, that the petitioner is
entitled to inspect the reports to decide whether to use
them in his defense. Because only the defense is ade-
quately equipped to determine the effective use for


12 Cf. United States v. Burr, 25 Fed. Cas. 187, wherein Chief Justice
Marshall, when confronted with a request for the inspection of a
letter addressed to the President and in the possession of the attorney
for the United States, stated:

“. . . It is objected that the particular passages of the letter which

DeUabonda, 265 Mich. 486, 251 N. W. 594; see Canon 5, American
Bar Association, Canons of Professional Ethics (1947).


■


JENCKS v. UNITED STATES.

purpose of discrediting the Government’s witness and
thereby furthering the accused’s defense, the defense must
initially be entitled to see them to determine what use
may be made of them. Justice requires no less. 14

The practice of producing government documents to
the trial judge for his determination of relevancy and
materiality, without hearing the accused, is disap-
proved. 15 Relevancy and materiality for the purposes
of production and inspection, with a view to use on cross-
examination, are established when the reports are shown
to relate to the testimony of the witness. Only after
inspection of the reports by the accused, must the trial
judge determine admissibility — e. g., evidentiary ques-
tions of inconsistency, materiality and relevancy — of the
contents and the method to be employed for the elimina-
tion of parts immaterial or irrelevant. See Gordon v.
United States, 344 U. S., at 418.

In the courts below the Government did not assert that
the reports were privileged against disclosure on grounds
of national security, confidential character of the reports,

Chief Justice Marshall also said in United States v. Burr, 25
Fed. Cas. 187:

“Let it be supposed that the letter may not contain anything
respecting the person now before the court. Still it may respect
a witness material in the case, and become important by bearing
on his testimony. Different representations may have been made
by that witness, or his conduct may have been such as to affect
his testimony. In various modes a paper may bear upon the case,
although before the case be opened its particular application cannot
be perceived by the judge. . . ." 25 Fed. Cas., at 191 .

What is true before the case is opened is equally true as the case
unfolds. The trial judge cannot perceive or determine the relevancy
and materiality of the documents to the defense without hearing
defense argument, after inspection, as to its bearing upon the case.

15 See, e. g., United States v. Grayson, 166 F. 2d 863, 869; United
States v. Beekman, 155 F. 2d 580, 584; United States v. Ebeling,
146 F. 2d 254, 256; United States v. Cohen, 145 F. 2d 82, 92; United
States v. Krulewitch, 145 F. 2d 76, 78.


raw


JENCKS v. UNITED STATES.


13


public interest or otherwise. In its brief in this Court,
however, the Government argues that, absent a showing
of contradiction, “[t]he rule urged by petitioner . . .
disregards the legitimate interest that each party — includ-
ing the Government — has in safeguarding the privacy of
its files, particularly where the documents in question
were obtained in confidence. Production of such docu-
ments, even to a court, should not be compelled in the
absence of a preliminary showing by the party making
the request.” The petitioner’s counsel, believing that
Court of Appeals’ decisions imposed such a qualification,
restricted his motions to a request for production of the
reports to the trial judge for the judge’s inspection and
determination whether and to what extent the reports
should be made available to the petitioner.

It is unquestionably true that the protection of vital
national interests may militate against public disclosure
of documents in the Government’s possession. This
has been recognized in decisions of this Court in civil
causes where the Court has considered the statutory
authority conferred upon the departments of government
to adopt regulations “not inconsistent with law, for . . .
use ... of the records, papers . . . appertaining” to his
department. The Attorney General has adopted regu-
lations pursuant to this authority declaring all Justice
Department records confidential and that no disclosure,
including disclosure in response to subpoena, may be
made without his permission . ,T

But this Court has noticed, in United States v. Rey-
nolds, 345 U. S. 1, the holdings of the Court of Appeals

16 R. S. § 161, 5 U. S. C. §22; United States v. Reynolds , 345
U. S. 1; cf. Totten v. United States , 92 U. S. 105.

17 Atty. Gen. Order No. 3229, 28 CFR, 1946 Supp., § 51.71 (1939) ;
Atty. Gen. Order No. 3229, Supp. 2, Pike & Fischer Admin. Law (2d),
•Dept, of Justice 1 (1947) ; Atty. Gen. Order No. 3229, Rev., 18 Fed.
Reg. 1368 (1953).


v • ■ •• •. V: - *•. •*"' ‘ V- v -y >*• .y- .y. •” . v v •" ‘ v

-

• ■ yiy-- A- v/ • • - ■. •• ' •• ' ■ ' • , ■

-r : ' ; .*. •• ” . .* h *i v,/ . . • . /... v.-.;


JENCKS v. UNITED STATES.


for the Second Circuit 18 that, in criminal causes . . the
Government can invoke its evidentiary privileges only at
the price of letting the defendant go free. The rationale
of the criminal cases is that, since the Government which
prosecutes an accused also has the duty to see that justice
is done, it is unconscionable to allow it to undertake prose-
cution and then invoke its governmental privileges to
deprive the accused of anything which might be material
to his defense. . . .” 345 U. S., at 12.

In United States v. Andolschek, 142 F. 2d 503, 506,
Judge Learned Hand said:

. . While we must accept it as lawful for a
department of the government to suppress docu-
ments, even when they will help determine contro-
versies between third persons, we cannot agree that
this should include their suppression in a criminal
prosecution, founded upon those very dealings to
which the documents relate, and whose criminality
they will, or may, tend to exculpate. So far as they
directly touch the criminal dealings, the prosecution
necessarily ends any confidential character the docu-
ments may possess; it must be conducted in the open,
and will lay bare their subject matter. The govern-
men must choose; either it must leave the trans-
actions in the obscurity from which a trial will draw
them, or it must expose them fully. Nor does it
seem to us possible to draw any line between docu-
ments whose contents bears directly upon the crim-
inal transactions, and those which may be only
indirectly relevant. Not only would such a distinc-
tion be extremely difficult to apply in practice, but
the same reasons which forbid suppression in one
case forbid it in the other, though not, perhaps, quite
so imperatively. ..."

18 United. States v. Beekman, 155 F. 2d 580; United States v.
Andolschek, 142 F. 2d 503.


• ■ *' • •*, . • , . » * *.» «»•;' v * i»V .*?*•,

’. •/ >\ • • . * , ’ .'


JENCKS u. UNITED STATES.


15


We hold that the criminal action must be dismissed
when the Government, on the ground of privilege, elects
not to comply with an order to produce, for the accused’s
inspection and for admission in evidence, relevant state-
ments or reports in its possession of government wit-
nesses touching the subject matter of their testimony at
the trial. Accord, Roviaro v. United States, 353 U. S.
53, 60-61. The burden is the Government’s, not to be
shifted to the trial judge, to decide whether the public
prejudice of allowing the crime to go unpunished is
greater than that attendant upon the possible disclosure
of state secrets and other confidential information in the
Government’s possession.

Reversed.

Mr. Justice Frankfurter joins the opinion of the
Court, but deeming that the questions relating to the
instructions to the jury should be dealt with, since a new
trial has been directed, he agrees with the respects in
which, and the reasons for which, Mr. Justice Burton
finds them erroneous.

Mr. Justice Whittaker took no part in the consid-
eration or decision of this case.


•/ v,


v., -vr.
