JFK Files: Revelations from the Covert Operations High Command

Published: Apr 7, 2025 | Briefing Book # 890 | Edited by Arturo Jimenez-Bacardi and Peter Kornbluh

Special Group and PFIAB Meeting Minutes Provide Dramatic View of CIA Operations
Top Secret Briefings Describe Clandestine Operations in Brazil, Chile, British Guiana, Haiti, Italy, Japan, and Congo, Among Other Targeted Countries

[In 1975, NSC staffer Robert Johnson revealed to members of the Church committee that President Eisenhower ordered the assassination of Patrice Lumumba during an NSC meeting in early August 1960. Other members of the Eisenhower administration disputed Johnson’s account. The minutes of this Special Group meeting from late August 1960 suggest that such an order was in the minds of the CIA high command. Amid discussion of “operational lines” then being followed “in mounting an anti-Lumumba campaign in the Congo,” national security adviser Gordon Gray “wondered whether the plans as outlined” by the CIA were sufficient to unseat the Congolese prime minister, saying that “his associates had expressed extremely strong feelings on the necessity for very straightforward action” against Lumumba. “It was finally agreed that planning for the Congo would not necessarily rule out ‘consideration’ of any particular kind of activity which might contribute to getting rid of Lumumba,” according to the summary.]

Edited by Arturo Jimenez-Bacardi and Peter Kornbluh

CIA Director John McCone with President Kennedy

CIA Deputy Director for Plans Richard Helms

Cheddi Jagan, Prime Minister of British Guiana

Patrice Lumumba, Prime Minister of the Republic of the Congo

The CIA funneled several million dollars into the 1964 presidential campaign of Eduardo Frei Montalva in Chile to ensure his election.

James R. Killian, Chairman of the PFIAB under President Kennedy until April 1963

Clark Clifford, PFIAB Chairman, April 1963-1968

Washington, D.C., April 7, 2025 - Just six months before the 1964 military coup that overthrew the government of João Goulart in Brazil, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence for Plans Richard Helms briefed the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board (PFIAB) on CIA clandestine operations in South America’s largest country. “[CIA] is carrying out covert action in the labor movement and CIA believes that Communist control can be weakened,” he advised board members who monitored intelligence operations on behalf of President Kennedy, according to a fully declassified summary of the September 10, 1963, Top Secret briefing posted today for the first time by the National Security Archive.

Helms and his deputies also updated the PFIAB on the status of covert actions and regime-change operations in other targeted countries. In Cuba, the CIA was shifting “from external raids to internal sabotage operations,” running ten “black” operations per month, and targeting “dissident Cuban elements,” among them Cuban military officers. In British Guiana, the CIA secretly financed a 79-day general strike to destabilize the elected government of Cheddi Jagan, funneling money for the strikers through the AFL-CIO. CIA plans to organize an exile force against Haitian dictator François “Papa Doc” Duvalier were foiled when Juan Bosch, president of the Dominican Republic, refused to let the agency use his country as a base of operations.

The Top Secret White House memorandum titled “Board Panel on Covert Action Operations” was declassified, uncensored, as part of the 80,000 pages of Kennedy assassination records released in March. Numerous other PFIAB records were included in the release, along with the unredacted minutes of the “Special Group”—the elite interagency committee that vetted and approved U.S. covert operations around the world. The National Security Archive is posting a special selection of these unique records today.

New Details and Revelations

Unredacted, the documents add considerable detail to the history of previously reported covert programs, including intelligence sources and methods, specific expenditures, agent identities, and the names of collaborating nations, intelligence agencies and foreign officials. In some cases, the declassified documents reveal operations that were not previously known. Among the key details and revelations contained in the documents:

** In Cuba , the CIA listed 108 covert agents and assets on the island in 1963, including “friendly diplomatic personnel” in foreign embassies in Havana. Sixty agents targeted Cuban shipping, and there were “31 penetrations of Cuban installations abroad,” according to a report to the PFIAB. CIA staff in Washington and Miami devoted to overthrowing the Castro government totaled 384 individuals. Among the other assets were 83 contractors, 525 foreign nationals (the majority of them Cuban exiles), 45 agents in overseas posts, and 12 analysts in the Agency’s intelligence division working on Cuba.

** Regarding British Guiana , the documents confirm CIA collaboration with the British intelligence service, MI6, to finance and sustain labor unrest and a protracted general strike to undermine the elected government of Prime Minister Cheddi Jagan.CIA staff in Washington and Miami devoted to overthrowing the Castro government totaled 384 individuals. Among the other assets were 83 contractors, 525 foreign nationals (the majority of them Cuban exiles), 45 agents in overseas posts, and 12 analysts in the Agency’s intelligence division working on Cuba.

** Regarding British Guiana , the documents confirm CIA collaboration with the British intelligence service, MI6, to finance and sustain labor unrest and a protracted general strike to undermine the elected government of Prime Minister Cheddi Jagan. Minutes of an April 25, 1963, Special Group meeting noted that “CIA was instructed to look into this and jointly with MI6 take such action as might be indicated as desirable to ensure the continuation of the strike.” At a PFIAB meeting at the White House after the strike ended, CIA Deputy Director for Plans, Richard Helms reported that the Agency had “worked out with [AFL-CIO union leader] George Meany a program of CIA financial support ($435,000) to the strike under the cover of ‘AFL-CIO contributions’” and that “A CIA cover representative ran the strike program.” The documents also strongly infer that CIA director John McCone met with MI6 official James Fulton in Paris to discuss this joint operation to overthrow the Jagan government.

** In Chile , the CIA provided Christian Democrat candidate Eduardo Frei with $750,000 in March 1964 and another $1.25 million in May 1964 to finance his campaign for the presidency. At a June 5, 1964, PFIAB meeting at the White House, Deputy Director for Plans Richard Helms warned the board that “the coming Presidential elections there on September 13 are viewed with serious concern” given the prospects of a victory by Socialist candidate Salvador Allende.Minutes of an April 25, 1963, Special Group meeting noted that “CIA was instructed to look into this and jointly with MI6 take such action as might be indicated as desirable to ensure the continuation of the strike.” At a PFIAB meeting at the White House after the strike ended, CIA Deputy Director for Plans, Richard Helms reported that the Agency had “worked out with [AFL-CIO union leader] George Meany a program of CIA financial support ($435,000) to the strike under the cover of ‘AFL-CIO contributions’” and that “A CIA cover representative ran the strike program.” The documents also strongly infer that CIA director John McCone met with MI6 official James Fulton in Paris to discuss this joint operation to overthrow the Jagan government.

** In Chile , the CIA provided Christian Democrat candidate Eduardo Frei with $750,000 in March 1964 and another $1.25 million in May 1964 to finance his campaign for the presidency. At a June 5, 1964, PFIAB meeting at the White House, Deputy Director for Plans Richard Helms warned the board that “the coming Presidential elections there on September 13 are viewed with serious concern” given the prospects of a victory by Socialist candidate Salvador Allende. Helms stressed that it was essential to act; if Allende won, he warned, “the constitutional-minded Chileans would accept a regularly elected Communist as President and would not take coup action to put him out of office.”

** Regarding Congo , the Special Group meeting minutes add new details on the CIA role in the overthrow of Patrice Lumumba. Five months prior to Lumumba’s assassination, CIA officer Thomas A. Parrott informed the Special Group that the agency had developed “broadly three (or as Mr.

** On Haiti , the Special Group meeting minutes reveal that CIA plans to depose dictator François “Papa Doc” Duvalier, whose dynastic regime was energizing the rise of the left, were compromised by resistance from the new president of the Dominican Republic, Juan Bosch. The CIA had been building an exile force to invade Haiti from the DR, but Bosch, according to one document in mid-1963, “has now decided that he is unwilling to allow such an [Haitian] exile force to use his country as a base for military operations against Duvalier.” The CIA’s chief for Western Hemisphere operations, Colonel J.C. King, then informed members of the Special Group that “everyone concerned with the project agrees that Duvalier must be removed in some manner or other” but that the current plan is “unworkable.” (Bosch subsequently became the target of Lyndon Johnson’s decision, in April 1965, to invade the Dominican Republic and install a compliant regime through U.S.The CIA had been building an exile force to invade Haiti from the DR, but Bosch, according to one document in mid-1963, “has now decided that he is unwilling to allow such an [Haitian] exile force to use his country as a base for military operations against Duvalier.” The CIA’s chief for Western Hemisphere operations, Colonel J.C. King, then informed members of the Special Group that “everyone concerned with the project agrees that Duvalier must be removed in some manner or other” but that the current plan is “unworkable.” (Bosch subsequently became the target of Lyndon Johnson’s decision, in April 1965, to invade the Dominican Republic and install a compliant regime through U.S. military force.)

The selection of documents posted today also includes a series of intriguing PFIAB recommendations and proposals, among them:

That the CIA consider the proposal (made to the PFIAB by representatives by the Israeli Intelligence and Security Service) “extended CIA-Israeli coordination of intelligence activities in Latin America, Africa, the Middle East and elsewhere.”

That the CIA explore the feasibility in Japan “of intensifying covert actions against the sizeable and effective influence of Communists among Japanese intellectuals, educators, and students.”

“That the National Security Agency make an on-the-scene technical review of CIA’s covert Communications/Electronics Intelligence collection efforts in Behshahr, Iran, to ensure maximum technical use of this strategically-positioned activity against Soviet missiles and satellite operations.”

The PFIAB and Special Group

Among the documents posted today is a lengthy chronological compilation of memoranda and minutes of PFIAB meetings during President Kennedy’s 1000 days in office that includes a short history of the special board of White House advisors on intelligence matters.King, then informed members of the Special Group that “everyone concerned with the project agrees that Duvalier must be removed in some manner or other” but that the current plan is “unworkable.” (Bosch subsequently became the target of Lyndon Johnson’s decision, in April 1965, to invade the Dominican Republic and install a compliant regime through U.S. military force.)

Among the documents posted today is a lengthy chronological compilation of memoranda and minutes of PFIAB meetings during President Kennedy’s 1000 days in office that includes a short history of the special board of White House advisors on intelligence matters. The impetus for the board was a recommendation by the Hoover Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch to create a “Watch Dog Committee” on intelligence matters, made up of members of Congress and “public-spirited citizens.” To preempt the creation of an outsider supervisory committee, in February 1956, President Dwight D.military force.)

Among the documents posted today is a lengthy chronological compilation of memoranda and minutes of PFIAB meetings during President Kennedy’s 1000 days in office that includes a short history of the special board of White House advisors on intelligence matters. The impetus for the board was a recommendation by the Hoover Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch to create a “Watch Dog Committee” on intelligence matters, made up of members of Congress and “public-spirited citizens.” To preempt the creation of an outsider supervisory committee, in February 1956, President Dwight D. Eisenhower issued an Executive Order creating the President’s Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities.

In the wake of the Bay of Pigs fiasco, President Kennedy issued a new directive designating the committee as the President’s Foreign Intelligence Board, and empowering it to advise the President “with respect to the objectives and conduct” of covert actions, including “highly sensitive covert operations relating to political action, propaganda, economic warfare, sabotage, escape and evasion, subversion against hostile states or groups and support of indigenous and anti-communist elements in threatened countries of the free world,” according to a Top Secret December 1, 1963, report on PFIAB’s genesis, prepared for Lyndon Johnson after the Kennedy assassination.

Among the PFIAB’s duties was to monitor the efforts of the “Special Group,” a senior interagency committee made up of representatives of U.S.The impetus for the board was a recommendation by the Hoover Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch to create a “Watch Dog Committee” on intelligence matters, made up of members of Congress and “public-spirited citizens.” To preempt the creation of an outsider supervisory committee, in February 1956, President Dwight D. Eisenhower issued an Executive Order creating the President’s Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities.

Among the PFIAB’s duties was to monitor the efforts of the “Special Group,” a senior interagency committee made up of representatives of U.S. national security agencies which acted as the high command for the Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson administration’s secret foreign policy. Between January 1961 and the fall of 1962, the Special Group—which was also known as the 5412 Committee for the room number it met in—approved approximately 550 covert operations, most of which were shared with the PFIAB in some detail.

According to Arturo Jimenez-Bacardi, Associate Professor of Instruction in international affairs at the University of South Florida and a research fellow at the National Security Archive, the PFIAB and Special Group minutes provide a distinct and unique history of covert operations: “These documents shed light on the inner workings of the U.S. government’s covert action high command: their motivations, priorities, frustrations, and determination to employ political violence, economic sabotage, and large sums of money to intervene in the internal affairs of countries the world over.”

National Archives, JFK Assassination Records, 2025 release, Doc ID: 206-10001-10016

This revealing record of the September 10, 1963, PFIAB meeting summarizes CIA Deputy Director for Plans Richard Helms’ briefing on covert operations in British Guiana, Haiti, Italy, Bolivia, Brazil, Cuba and Vietnam. In Cuba, CIA operations were undergoing “a shift from external raids to internal sabotage operations,” running ten “black” operations per month, and targeting “dissident Cuban elements,” among them Cuban military officers. In British Guiana, the CIA has secretly financed a 79-day general strike to destabilize the elected government of Cheddi Jagan, funneling money for the strikers through the AFL-CIO. In Italy, the CIA has clandestinely financed the Christian Democratic party “to the tune of $1 million in the campaign leading up to the June elections (plus $600,000 to other political elements in Italy).” The CIA planned to continue such covert funding to foster “the establishment of a center-left government coalition.”

Part 1: Declassified JFK Assassination Files Expose Covert CIA Operations from the Vatican to Latin America Democracy Now! Mar 21, 2025

Part 2: Peter Kornbluh on JFK Files & Trump’s False Pledge to Run “Most Transparent Administration in History” Democracy Now! Mar 21, 2026

Documents

CIA, Minutes of Special Group Meeting, Top Secret, August 25, 1960
Aug 25, 1960 | Source National Archives, JFK Assassination Records, 2025 release, Doc ID: 157-10014-10100

White House, “Minutes of Meeting of January 30, 1964,” [The President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board Meeting with President Lyndon B. Johnson], Top Secret, January 30, 1964
Jan 30, 1964 | Source National Archives, JFK Assassination Records, 2025 release, Doc ID: 206-10001-10002
This lengthy compilation of records about the PFIAB was prepared for the benefit of President Johnson who met with the board chairman on January 30, 1964. The document includes a brief history of the PFIAB, a full chronology of the minutes of PFIAB meetings during the Kennedy Administration, and a list of the 170 recommendations that the PFIAB had made to President Kennedy

CIA, “Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group, April 25, 1963,” Secret/Eyes Only, April 25, 1963 [with April 26 Memorandum for the Record attached]
Apr 25, 1963 | Source National Archives, JFK Assassination Records, 2025 release, Doc ID: 104-10306-10024
This memorandum reveals previously unknown details of the joint CIA-MI6 covert regime-change operation against Cheddi Jagan in British Guiana. Among other new information is that the CIA estimated it would need $10,000 per day to sustain a general strike against the Jagan government and that U.S. officials believed it would be worth the price if Jagan were eventually overthrown. Covert political action programs in Italy and the Congo are also discussed.

CIA, “Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group, 20 June 1963,” Secret, June 20, 1963
Jun 20, 1963 | Source National Archives, JFK Assassination Records, 2025 release, Doc ID: 104-10306-10024
CIA, NSC and State Department officials at the Special Group meeting discuss a series of programs and proposals on intelligence operations in Southeast Asia and covert action in Cuba, Haiti and elsewhere. The Special Group agrees on a political action program to overthrow Haitian president François Duvalier, even though the chief of the CIA’s Western Hemisphere division, J.C. King, voices his concern about who will replace him after he is deposed. “Colonel King, in support of the paper's recommendations, said that in his opinion we have no feasible alternatives but to cooperate with [Dominican Republic President Juan] Bosch in attempting to unseat Duvalier, and that if this is not done, we are likely to end up with a far worse situation.”

CIA, “Minutes of Special Group Meeting, July 18, 1963,” Secret, July 18, 1963
Jul 18, 1963 | Source National Archives, JFK Assassination Records, 2025 release, Doc ID: 104-10306-10024
In this meeting, the Special Group grapples with major obstacles in its covert plan to overthrow the Duvalier regime. Agency officials have been trying, but has so far failed, to convince Dominican Republic President Juan Bosch to allow them to use that country as a staging ground for an exile force that would invade Haiti and depose Duvalier—the same modus operandi used against the Arbenz government of Guatemala in 1954, when the CIA organized a small band of rebels in Honduras. CIA officials say the plan is not working in Haiti because, “It has been demonstrated that these exiles are of very little use, because of insecurity, lack of cohesive purpose or of adequate leadership, etc.” Another newly revealed detail in the 2025 declassification of this record are U.S. efforts to leverage U.S. military aid to persuade “the Pakistani government to go along with expansion of special intelligence facilities in that country.” It was agreed that the “best approach” was to make clear that U.S. military assistance was dependent on “the maintenance and expansion of U.S. intelligence facilities at Peshawar.”

White House, PFIAB, “Board Panel on Covert Action Operations,” Top Secret, September 10, 1963

White House, PFIAB, Covert Action Panel Meeting 6/5/64 (Discussion with Secretary, Special Group, et al.),” Top Secret, June 5, 1964
Jun 5, 1964 | Source National Archives, JFK Assassination Records, 2025 release, Doc ID: 206-10001-10014
At what appears to be a special meeting between Special Group representatives and the PFIAB, the board members are not only briefed on specific operations in Cuba, Chile, Laos and elsewhere, but also on the general work of the Special Group. According to the minutes, “most of the covert actions considered by the Special Group are CIA proposals, although other members suggest actions; for example, State Department brought up for discussion the matter of supplying arms in Tangayika. “The State Department is considered to serve as the ‘conscience’ of the Special Group in its consideration of proposed covert actions,” the PFIAB members are told. The document also reveals that around half of all the covert actions they considered by the Special Group pertained to overhead reconnaissance missions: “During the current year some 23 of 39 proposals were favorably considered by the Group. About 50 per cent of the covert actions coming before the Special Group are carried out by the Joint Reconnaissance Center (JRC) of the JCS, in the aerial reconnaissance field. Since January 1, the Group has approved actions with respect to Cuba, Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Panama; Chile, Congo, Angola, Tibet, Zanzibar, and China, among others. For example, the April 29, 1964, meeting included discussions of the Chilean elections; Cuba; a JRC forecast of peripheral missions; and reconnaissance coverage from India of a Chinese Communist test range.”
