

FDOOJ |R«i. J-3-S9)


Parkland Moraorial Hospital, Dallas, Texas, advised that the
Death Certificate and Statements of Medical Treatment relating
to President JOHN F, KENNEDY had been taken by GEORGE G.

BURKLEY, KD, White House, Washington, D.C. , and Secret Service
Agents. Mr. PRICE* stated , however, that a summary had been
prepared by Dr. KEMP CLARK, Director, Service of Neuh'blog’idhl
Surgery at the request of GEORGE G. BURKLEY, MD, and was transmitted
to Dr. BURKLEY by letter dated November 23, 1963.

Mr. PRICE made available reproduced copies of the
summary and letter furnished Dr. BURKLEY.

The following are the contents of the summary prepared by
Dr. KEMP CLARK, verbatim:


» ummary v -

"The President arrived at the Emergency Room
at 12:43 P.M. , the 22nd of November, 1963. Ho was in the
back seat of his limousine. Governor Connally of
Texas was also in this car. The first physician to
see the President was Dr. James Carrico, a Resident in
General Surgery.

"Dr. Carrico notod the President to have slow,
agonal respiratory efforts. He could hear a heartbeat
but found no p^lse or blood pressure to be present.

Two external wounds, one in the lov/er third of the
anterior neck, the other in the occipital region of the
skull, were qoted. Through the head wound, blood and
brain were extruding. Dr. Carrico inserted a cuffed
endotracheal tube. While doing so, he noted a ragged
wound of the trachea immediately below the larynx.

"At this time, Dr. Malcolm Perry, Attending
Surgeon, Dr. Charles Baxter, Attending Surgeon, and
Dr. Ronald Jones, another Resident. in General
Surgery, arrived. Immediately thereafter. Dr. M.T.

Jenkins, Director of the Department of Anesthesia and
Doctors Giesecke and Hunt, two other Staff Anesthesiologists,
arrived. The endotracheal tube had been connected to a


11-25-63


Dallas , Texas


-Commission Ho.

DL 89-43


. at


SA JAMES W. SWINFO;
by Special Agent


File #


md


11-25-63


Data dictated .


This document contain* neither recommendations nor conclusion* of th* FBI. It 4* the properly of the FBI and 1* loaned to

