The following official statements of President Lyndon B.
Johnson, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, and Ellsworth Bunker,
U.S. Ambassador to the Organization of American States, outline
U.S. policy on the situation in the Dominican Republic and
describe how the crisis was met.


Cover;

Inter-American Peace Force — the first such force in the history
of the Western Hemisphere. From right are soldiers of the United
States, Costa Rica, and Honduras. The letters OEA are the Spanish
abbreviation for Organization of American States.


CONTENTS


1 DECISION

2 ACTION: United States

3 COMMUNIST SUBVERSION

4 ACTION: Organization of American States (OAS)

5 CEASE-FIRE
S PEACE FORCE


WAYS TO PEACE


There are times in the aflFairs of nations when great principles
are tested in an ordeal of conflict and danger. This is such a time
for the American nations.

At stake are the lives of thousands, the liberty of a nation,
and the principles and the values of all the American Republics.

That is why the hopes and the concern of this entire hemi-
sphere are on this Sabbath Sunday focused on the Dominican
Republic.

In the dark mist of conflict and violence, revolution and con-
fusion, it is not easy to find clear and unclouded truths.

But certain things are clear. And they require equally clear
action.


President Lyndon B. Johnson


May 2, 1965


DECISION


The United States Government has been informed by military
authorities in the Dominican Repubhc that American hves are in
danger. These authorities are no longer able to guarantee their
safety, and they have reported that the assistance of military
personnel is now needed for that purpose.

I have ordered the Secretary of Defense to put the necessary
American troops ashore in order to give protection to hundreds
of Americans who are still in the Dominican Repubhc and to
escort them safely back to this country. This same assistance will
be available to the nationals of other countries, some of whom
have already asked for our help.

President Lyndon B. Johnson
Apnl 28, 1965


For 2 days American forces have been in Santo Domingo in
an eflFort to protect the hves of Americans and the nationals of
other countries in the face of increasing violence and disorder.
With the assistance of these American forces, over 2,400 Americans
and other nationals have been evacuated from the Dominican
Repubhc. We took this step when, and only when, we were
officially notified by pohce and mihtary officials of the Dominican
Republic that they were no longer in a position to guarantee the
safety of American and foreign nationals and to preserve law and
order.

President Lyndon B. Johnson
AprxZ 30 , 1965


Our decision to send troops to the Dominican Repubhc was
aimed at saving hves. The situation in the Dominican Repubhc
was one of anarchy; there was no authority able to accept respon-
sibility for law and order and the protection of foreign nationals.


U.S. Marines escort a family to safety.


Police and military authorities normally exercising such functions
told us that they were unable to carry them out. They asked for
our assistance. Under similar circumstances governments from
time immemorial have been recognized to have not merely the
right but the obligation to take whatever action is necessary to
save the lives of their nationals.

Secretary of State Dean Rusk
May 8 , 1965


DECISION


Over the years of our history our forces have gone forth into
many lands, but always they returned when they were no longer
needed. For the purpose of America is never to suppress Hberty
but always to save it. The purpose of America is never to take
freedom but always to return it, never to breach peace but to
bolster it, and never to seize land but always to save lives.

One month ago it became my duty to send our Marines into
the Dominican Republic, and I sent them for these same ends.


President Lyndon B. Johnson
June 3 , 1965


Women and children run to board a Marine rescue helicopter.


ACTION: UNITED STATES


ACTION: United States


I thought that we could not and we did not hesitate. Our
forces, American forces, were ordered in immediately to protect
American lives. They have done that. They have attacked no one,
and although some of our servicemen gave their hves, not a single
American civihan or the civilian of any other nation, as a result of
this protection, lost their lives.

PREsmENT Lyndon B. Johnson
Matj 2, 1965


As presently organized, the OAS [Organization of American
States] does not have standby forces or the pohtical machinery
for the immediate decisions required to deal with such urgent
contingencies. As soon as the action was taken, ambassadors to
the OAS were informed and a meeting was called to enable the
OAS to take jurisdiction.

Secretary of State Dean Rusk
May 8 , 1965


The first action taken by the United States was indeed a
rescue operation, and there is voluminous evidence to indicate
that the Marines arrived just in time to avoid a major calamity.
The mission of the U.S. forces did expand in keeping with the
necessities of the changing situation and to support the decisions
of the OAS. For example, the rescue of American and foreign
nationals proved to be a larger problem than was at first antici-
pated; the OAS requested that an international neutral zone of
safety be promptly established; a major eflFort was required to
provide food and medicines to sustain the elementary public
health of the country; and the OAS committee arrived and needed
support. In short, after the initial emergency, United States forces
were necessary to preserve the situation in the Dominican Re-


itLCBB


A Domlnlcn boy ducks behind . M.rine Icep lor proteebon [rom snipe, fire.


ACTION: United States


public until the OAS could take charge. Meanwhile the evidence
was mounting that the Communists had captured the revolution
according to plan, and the danger of a Communist takeover was
established beyond question.

Secretary of State Dean Rusk
May 8 , 1965


... we had to give very serious thought to the needs, the daily
needs, of some 3V6 million Dominicans. It was very important
that the essential structure of the country not disintegrate despite
the anarchy and chaos that existed in and around Santo Domingo
itself, and so very large quantities of foodstuffs and of course
smaller quantities of medicine had to be made available, regard-
less of political problems, regardless of political sides or orienta-
tion, in order to keep the essential structure of the country going
during this period.

Secretary of State Dean Rusk
May 26 , 1965


Both food and medical supplies have been distributed all over
the country by nine food teams of Spanish-spealdng Americans
working to relieve need on a straight humanitarian basis. These
teams have cooperated fully with private charitable agencies like
Catholic Relief, CARE and the Church World Service. . . .

It is entirely natural that while the shooting continued, public
attention focused heavily on the fighting. But it is time now for
us all to pay tribute to the work of these peaceful representatives
of our country. They have saved uncounted fives, and they have
taken the lead in the first steps toward the peaceful reconstruction
of the Dominican Republic.

PREsmENT Lyndon B. Johnson
June 1, 1965


OMMUNIST SUBVERSION


COMMUNIST SUBVERSION


there are signs that people trained outside the Dominican
Republic are seeking to gain control. Thus the legitimate aspira-
tions of the Dominican people and most of their leaders for
progress, democracy, and social justice are threatened and so are
the principles of the inter-American system.

PnEsroENT Lyndon B. Johnson
ApriZ 30 , 1965


The American nations cannot, must not, and will not permit
the establishment of another Communist government in the
Western Hemisphere. This was the unanimous view of all toe
American nations, when, in January 1962, they declared, and I
quote:

‘‘The principles of communism are incompatible with the
principles of the Inter-American system.”

This is what our beloved President John F. Kennedy meant
when, less than a week before his death, he told us: We in this
hemisphere must also use every resource at our command to
prevent the establishment of another Cuba in this hemi-
sphere. . . ^

PREsroENT Lyndon B. Johnson
May 2 , 1965


♦ The American Republics gave even greater precision to the problem
subversion at a meeting of the Foreign Ministers in Washington in July 1964. ^^eferr^
to the issue of Cuban intervention in Venezuela, the Foreign Mmisters warned the

Government of Cuba that: . . r t

“ if it should persist in carrying out acts that possess characteristics of aggression
and intervention against one or more of the member states of the Organization, the
member states shaU preserve their essential rights as sovereign states by the use ot
self-defense in either individual or collective form, which could go so far as resort to
armed force, until such time as the Organ of Consultation takes measures to guarantee
the peace and security of the hemisphere.**


The revolutionary movement took a tragic turn. Communist
leaders, many of them trained in Cuba, seeing a chance to increase
disorder, to gain a foothold, joined the revolution. They took
increasing control. And what began as a popular democratic
revolution, committed to democracy and social justice, very
shortly moved and was taken over and really seized and placed
into the hands of a band of Communist conspirators.

Many of the original leaders of the rebellion, the followers of
President Bosch, took refuge in foreign embassies because they
had been superseded by other, evil forces, and the Secretary Gen-
eral of the rebel government, Martinez Francisco, appealed for a
cease-fire. But he was ignored. The revolution was now in odier
and dangerous hands.

Presldent Lyndon B. Johnson
May 2, 1965


What began in the Dominican Republic as a democratic
revolution was taken over by Communist conspirators who had
been trained for, and had carefully planned, that operation. Had
they succeeded in establishing a government, the Communist
seizure of power would in all likelihood have been irreversible,
thus frustrating the declared principles of the OAS. We acted to
preserve the freedom of choice of the Dominican people until the
OAS could take charge and insure that its principles were carried
out. It is now doing so.

Secretary of State Dean Rusk
May S, 1965


I don’t know how one draws the line between overreaction
and underreaction and exactly what is right under tlie circum-
stances. There is no question at all in our minds that there was a
very serious threat for a period that elements of the extreme left
had in a very professional and highly organized way seized control


Dean Rusk, Secretary of State.


of mobs who had been armed, and some of these elements were
not under the discipline of any of the recognized political leader-
ship of the Dominican Republic on either side, and that there was
a very substantial threat.

And I am not impressed by the remark that there were several
dozen known Communist leaders and that therefore this was not
a very serious matter. There was a time when Hitler sat in a beer
hall in Munich with seven people. And I just don't beheve that
one underestimates what can be done in chaos, in a situation of
violence and chaos, by a few highly organized, highly trained
people who know what they are about and know what they want
to bring about.

Secretary of State Dean Rusk
May 26, 1965


ACTION: Organization of American States


It is very important that representatives of the OAS be sent
to the Dominican RepubUc, just as soon as they can be sent there,
in order to strengthen the cease-fire and in order to help clear a
road to the return of constitutional processes and free elections.
Loss of time may mean that it is too late to preserve freedom,
vi^hich alone can lead to the establishment of true democracy. This,

I am sure, is what the people of the Dominican Republic want.
Late action, or delay, in such a case could mean a failure to
accomplish the agreed objectives of the American states.

President Lyndon B. Johnson

April 30, 1965

The United States will give its full support to the work of
the OAS and will never depart from its commitment to the preser-
vation of the right of all of the free people of this hemisphere to
choose their own course without falling prey to intemaUonal
conspiracy from any quarter.

President Lyndon B. Johnson

April 30, 1965


The Organization of American States has demonstrated why,
as Franklin Roosevelt said, it is the oldest and most successful
association of sovereign governments in the history of the world.

Today, faced with a threat to the principles of the inter-
American system and the peace of the hemisphere, the OAS acted
decisively.

A committee made up of five member states will soon be on
its way to the Dominican Republic. Its mission is to reestablish
peace and normal conditions in that strife-weary island.

President Lyndon B. Johnson

May 1, 1965


I continue to hope that the OAS mission presently in the
Dominican Republic will rapidly find a solution that will at the
same time assure for the Dominican people the principles of a
democratic constitution and a government of national unity able
to maintain economic and political stability. If the good offices
of the OAS succeed in achieving this solution, the United States
Government will render all available assistance toward rapid
economic development.

President Lyndon B. Johnson

May 15, 1965


OAS Special Committee; Ambassadors Frank Morrice, Jr., of Panama,
Ricardo Colombo of Argentina, Carlos Garcia Bauer of Guatemala,
Alfredo Vazquez Carrizosa of Colombia, and Umar Penna Marinho of
Brazil.


ACTION: Organization of American States


We are members of an inter-American system in which large
and small nations are partners in the defense of freedom and in
the progress of economic welfare and social justice.

That partnership must be constantly strengthened. Our com-
mon aim and our combined ability must increase — in crisis as well
as in calm. The tragedy of the past 4 weeks in the Dominican
Republic renews our common resolution to accept common respon-
sibility in dealing with common dangers.

President Lyndon B. Johnson
May 28, 1965

Any of those of us who were in Punta del Este in January 1962
will recall the moving occasion in which the Dominican repre-
sentative rejoined the family of the Western Hemisphere, and I
think all of us have been grieved that the events of the past several
weeks have inflicted so much suffering upon the Dominican
people, but now we have a chance to help them and end this great
undertaking, not by imposing anything upon them but as friends
to help them find their way to the full promise of the democracy
which lies at the heart of the mter-American system.

Secretary of State Dean Rusk
June 2, 1965

The countries of this hemisphere must devise new mechanisms
for cooperative action in the Dominican situation and for any crises
which might arise in the futiu*e. And all of us in the Alliance for
Progress must demonstrate our deep and lively interest in the
welfare of the people of the Dominican Republic. For they want
what the rest of us want for ourselves; representative constitutional
government, economic and social progress, hope that their chil-
dren’s lives will be happier and more fruitful than their own.

One of our jobs in this hemisphere is to help the Dominican
people to attain these objectives. The machinery of the Alliance
for Progress should set to work to build as rapidly as possible on
that island the foundations for a modem, democratic life.

Secretary of State Dean Rusk
June 10, 1965


CEASE-FIRE


We have appealed repeatedly in recent days for a cease-fire
between the contending forces of the Dominican Republic in the
interests of all Dominicans and foreigners alike.

PREsroENT Lyndon B. Johnson
AprU 28, 1965


By an outstanding effort of mediation the Papal Nuncio has
achieved an agreement on a cease-fire which I have urged all those
concerned to take. But this agreement is not now, as I speak, being
fully respected. The maintenance of the cease-fire is essential to
the hopes of all for peace and freedom in the Dominican Republic.

PREsmENT Lyndon B. Johnson
AprU 30, 1965


The Papal Nundo, Monsignor Emmanuel Clarizio, worked tirelessly
for a cease-fire. Shown with him are Dr. Jose A. Mora, Secretary
General of the OAS, left, and John Bartlow Martin, special U.S.
Envoy, right.


CEASE-^FIRE


And we once again join in the common appeal to put an end
to violence. For only when shooting and bloodshed stop will it
be possible to work toward the aspirations and hopes of the
Dominican people. Progress and justice do not flourish at the
point of a gun.

PREsroENT Lyndon B. Johnson

May 1 , 1965


In the Dominican Republic in tlie last 2 days there has been
renewed, repeated, and heavy firing on the In ter- American Force,
in flagrant violation of the cease-fire. . . .

In these actions 3 Americans have lost their lives, and 37
more Americans and 5 Brazilians have been wounded. These
unprovoked attacks on the Inter-American Force appear to have
been premeditated by elements which seek to prevent the estab-
lishment of peace in Santo Domingo, Our forces there have no
other mission, and they will continue to observe the same soldierly
restraint they have shown for 7 weeks in the face of more than
900 cease-fire violations, and they have already suflFered almost
200 casualties.

Presu)ent Lyndon B. Johnson

June 17, 1965


PEACE FORCE


The United States forces that are there have been employed
to help carry out the resolutions of the Organization of American
States. I mentioned this morning the sentiments expressed by the
Papal Nuncio, by Secretary General Mora, and by members of
the diplomatic corps there as to die usefulness of this force and
the functions they were performing. We are anxious ... to create
a multilateral force. We would hope that member countries would
supply forces so that we might withdraw some of our own. We
would hope that all forces could be withdrawn at the earliest
possible moment.

Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker
May 3 , 1965

. . . the pace of events in this case does indicate that the
OAS should consider standby forces and political arrangements
that would enable that organization to make decisions and to take
action in any future emergency with a speed required by the
course of events.

Secretary of State Dean Rusk
May 8 , 1965

Mr. President [of the Tenth Meeting of Consultation of
Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Organization of American
States], I welcome the announcement of the distinguished repre-
sentative of Brazil that his Government is sending an important
contingent of 1,250 men to become part of the Inter-American
Force set up by a resolution of this meeting of May 6th.

This will gready enlarge the number of troops from other
countries, and I am very happy, Mr. President, that I am author-
ized to say that, upon the arrival of these troops, my Government
will withdraw a number of troops equivalent to the total number
from other countries in the Dominican Republic and that we hope-
fully look forward to contingents coming from other countries and
to a further withdrawal of the United States troops.

Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker
May 21, 1965


In times past large nations have used their power to impose
their will on smaller nations. Today we have placed our forces
at the disposition of the nations of this hemisphere to assure the
peoples of those nations the right to exercise their own will in
freedom.

President Lyndon B. Johnson
May 28, 1965


For the first time in history the Organization of American
States has created and sent to the soil of an American nation an
international peacekeeping military force.

That may be the greatest achievement of all.

President Lyndon B. Johnson
May 28, 1965


Ellsworth Bunker, United States Representative on the Council of
the Organization of American States.


WAYS TO PEACE


The United States obviously has no candidate for the Gov-
ernment of the Dominican Republic; this is a matter for the
Dominican people themselves. It is for the OAS to find the means
to assist the Dominican people to constitute a government which
reflects their wishes and a government which can undertake the
international obligations of the hemisphere.

Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker
April 30, 1965


Our goal in the Dominican Republic is the goal which has
been expressed again and again in the treaties and agreements
which make up the fabric of the in ter- American system. It is that
the people of that country must be permitted to freely choose the
path of political democracy, social justice, and economic progress.
Neither the United States, nor any nation, can want or permit a
return to that brutal and oppressive despotism which earned the
condemnation and punishment of this hemisphere and of all civil-
ized humanity. We intend to carry on the struggle against tyranny
no matter in what ideology it cloaks itself. This is our mutual
responsibility under the agreements we have signed and the com-
mon values which bind us together.

PREsroENT Lyndon B. Johnson
May 1, 1965


We hope to see a government freely chosen by the will of all
the people.

We hope to see a government dedicated to social justice for
every citizen.

We hope to see a government working, every hour of every
day, to feeding the hungry, to educating the ignorant, to healing
the sick — a government whose only concern is the progress and
the elevation and the welfare of all the people.

PREsroENT Lyndon B. Johnson
May 2, 1965


It is quite obvious . . . that there is today no effective national
government in the Dominican Republic. There are contending
forces, each in control or perhaps quasi-control in separate areas,
but no political grouping or faction can lay a well-founded claim
to being the government of the country. ... It seems to me that
it is of the greatest importance that the OAS should endeavor to
assist patriotic and outstanding citizens of the Dominican Repub-
hc . , . to establish a provisional government of national unity,
which could eventually lead to a permanent representative regime
through democratic processes.

Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker
May S, 1965


Dominican first-graders get new textbooks under a program of the
Alliance for Progress.


WAYS TO PEACE


Already, under the distinguished leadersliip of Secretary Gen-
eral Mora, the broad outlines of a reasonable settlement are be-
ginning to emerge — outlines which meet the needs and respond
to the desires first of the Dominican people themselves and then
of all the people of this hemisphere.

First, the Dominican people — and the people of their sister
Repubhcs — do not want government by extremists of either the
left or right. That is clear. They want to be ruled neither by an
old conspiracy of reaction and tyranny nor by a new conspiracy
of Communist violence.

Second, they want — as we do — an end to slaughter in the
streets and to brutality in the barrios.

Third, they want — as we do — food and work and quiet in
the night.

Fourth, they want — as we do — a constitutional government
that will represent them all — and work for all their hopes.

Fifth, the Dominican people know they need the help of
sympathetic neighbors in healing their wounds and in negotiating
their divisions — but what they want ultimately is the chance to
shape their own course.

Those are the hopes of the Dominican people. But they are
our hopes, too. And they are shared by responsible people in
every nation of this hemisphere.

Out of the Dominican crucible the 20 American nations must
now forge a stronger shield against disaster.

President Lyndon B. Johnson
May 28, 1965


I have been meeting this morning with the Secretary Gen-
eral of the Organization of American States, Dr. Jos^ Mora, to
express my very deep appreciation and the gratitude of the people
of the United States for the very important contributions that


were made by the OAS, the Organization of American States, to
the agreement reached last night on a new government in the
Dominican Republic.

I want to take this special opportunity now to thank Dr.
Mora for his own very excellent and fine work as well as the per-
formance of his fine organization. Special thanks must go to Am-
bassador Penna Marinho, Ambassador Clairmont Duenas, and
our own Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker.

There are still grave problems facing the Dominican people.
But the way has finally been opened for an end to strife and for
the choice of leaders through the process which all free men
cherish. I am certain that the hopes of men who really love peace
and the democratic process have taken new strength from these
developments and these events.

In a very short time there will be a provisional government
in the Dominican Republic. This government will need the ener-
getic support of the whole Western Hemisphere as it sets about
the work of restoring peace and trying to rebuild the entire Do-
minican economy. The United States and the Organization of
American States will work together in these new tasks— shoulder
to shoulder — as we have worked together in these recent months.
We all have the same objective. We all seek the same goals
peace and prosperity for the hemisphere.

President Lyndon B. Johnson
September 1, 1965


This past week, Dominican leaders, with important assistance
from the OAS, agreed on the establishment of a provisional gov-
ernment under the leadership of Dr. Hector Garcia Godoy This
action marked the end of an impasse which had brought dan^r
and hardship to the Dominican people during four long and dilti-

cult months.

Last night the provisional government, ofiicially mstalled,
announced its adherence to the Dominican Republics interna-
tional obligations, pledged its allegiance to the high purposes of
economic, social, and democratic progress, and requested recog-


nition by the nations of the world. This action marked the begin-
ning of a new road to peace, freedom, and hope for the Dominican
people.

Today, after consultation with other OAS states, the U.S.
Government is extending recognition to the new provisional gov-
ernment. On behalf of the people of the United States, I extend
best personal wishes to the distinguished new President and to
the brave Dominican people.

President Garcia Godoy’s government will face many great
and hard tasks over the coming months — as he leads his country
to free elections and as he moves to rebuild his country's economy.

In the diflBcult but promising days ahead, I want President
Garcia Godoy and the Dominican people to know that they have
our full support.

We are already discussing on an urgent basis the resumption
of certain projects which have been interrupted since the tragic
days of last April.

We are ready to participate fully with the OAS, its committee
on the Alliance for Progress, and international financial institu-
tions in the important rehabilitation effort that hes ahead. We
earnestly hope that, on request of the Dominican Government,
the OAS will take the lead in this great enterprise.

Meanwhile preliminary discussions have established an im-
mediate need for approximately $20 million in assistance, and
we hope that arrangements can soon be concluded with the pro-
visional government to make this amount available. These funds
will help to defray some of the immediate needs of economic
reconstruction, which include the rehabilitation of private in-
dustry, a program of public works, and temporary financing of
some of the essential operating expenses of the Government and
key public enterprise.

While no one knows better than the Dominican people how
much work it will take to clear the road to peace, progress, and
democracy, they should also know that the whole hemisphere
shares their hope for a bright future and will work shoulder to
shoulder with them to make this hope a reality.

PREsroENT Lyndon B. Johnson
September 4, 1965


6fO » IMS O— 7VI-47S


Commanders of National ConHngents of the Inter- American Peace Force, left to right:
Col. Carlos de Meira Mattos of Brazil, Lt. Col. Alvaro Arias of Costa Rica,

Lt. Gen. Bruce Palmer, Jr., of the United States;

Maj. Policarpo Paz Garcia of Honduras; and CoL Julio Gutierrez of Nicaragua.

In the center, OAS Secretary General Jos^ A. Mora.


The might of America Ues in the morality of our purposes
and their support by the will of our people of the United States.

It was Jefferson who said that “Our interests . . . will ever be
found inseparable from our moral duties.’’ That standard guides
us still. For America’s only interests in the world today are those
we regard as inseparable from our moral duties to mankind.

PREsroENT Lyndon B. Johnson
June 6, 1965


o

m

TJ

> 5

z 5

3?

z o

? 11

O U )
• -J

p ^

PI

10

Si

o (n


m °

C (0


H

>


O 2
Ti m

(0 (0
-I

> T3
H >
m “
