RITUAL  SITES


> > GENERAL  SITES

D I I’NERAL  HOMES-One  prized  local  ion  for  traditional  secret  Satanism  art  mortuaries  oka  funeral  homes*
The  Tunenil  home  pic lured  below  is  ideal  because  an  eye-witness  has  seen  rooms  not  accessible  to  the  public,
and  the  mortuary  has  u large  crematorium  for  easy  disposal  of  bodies.  The  building  hits  underground  floors
lliat  don't  show  in  the  photo,  beside  the  (op  ernes.  The  name  of  the  immense  Mortuary  pictured  below  Is
withheld  because  although  some  people  believe  this  is  the  site  of  rituals  according  to  an  ex -participant  ill  said
rituals  i who  is  now  a Chr  istian  who  is  free  of  such  terrible  things),  this  site  has  not  hern  ronfirmed.  It  is  also
Interesting  that  the  logo  nf  this  mortuary  is  an  omilt  looking  sun.  I've  noticed  that  numerous  funeral  directors
are  also  Masons.  For  instance,  Richard  W.  Thorne,  33°  Scottish  Kile  Mason  plus  numerous  other  Masonic
positions,  lie  was  Grand  Master  of  the  (iX.  of  New  Mu.  C52-'53)  a lending  funeral  director  of  the
Southwestern  Stales  of  the  United  States,  he  also  was  on  the  hoard  of  trustees  of  the  1'irsl  Presbyterian  church
in  Albuquerque,  N.M.  Another  funeral  home  proprietor,  is  32*  Mason  Reynolds  who  bus  been  the  Tillauiock,
OR  l.od&f*s  librarian.

MORTUARIEK-FUNKRAL  HOMES,  ETC

The  original  article  on  ritual  sites  had  the  picture  or  a funeral  home/crematorium  which  a Christian  who
was  once  involved  with  Satanism  wits  at  during  a Satanic  ritual.  From  various  sources  It  lias  been  verified  (hat
bodies  are  being  shipped  across  state  lines  and  also  loaned  out  from  mortuaries  for  Satanic  rituals.  Even  more
startling  than  this,  certain  mortuaries  are  actually  replacing  dead  bodies  with  replicas  prior  to  burial,  and
Helling  the  uncmbalmed  bodies.  The  reports  about  Funeral  home  collaboration  with  various  evil  groups  comes
from  a variety  of  hide  pen  dent  sources.  I believe  that  tliv  sources  have  no  reason  to  lie.  or  misinform.  Ilow
much  tangible  proof  is  obtainable  beyond  testimonies?  Some  of  the  caskets  in  some  of  these  cemeteries  that
are  shipping  bodies  could  lx*  exhumed  and  shown  In  be  fake  bodies.  This  may  be  a greater  step  than  most
people  would  cure  to  do.  I don't  know  if  ultrasound  pictures  could  be  used  to  adequately  view  the  insides  of
u casket  without  opening  the  caskets  or  not.

Although  at  first  glance  the  funeral  home  involvement  may  seem  trivial,  the  selling  or  bodies  may  play  a
much  biggci  role  in  the  whole  scheme  ol  things  than  people  realize,  hi  the  book  oT  Revelations  (I8:V-13)  it
speaks  about  how  the  kings  of  the  earth,  who  have  committed  fornication  and  lived  deliciously  with  the  false
church  shall  bewail  ibe  false  church,  and  cry  for  her  when  she  is  destroyed.  The  great  Babylon,  l he  harlot
religious  system  is  pict  ured  as  being  judged.  "And  the  merchants  nf  the  earth  shall  weep  and  mourn  over  her;
fur  no  man  huyvth  their  merchandise  any  more:  The  merchandise  of  gold,  and  silver,  anil  precious  stories,  and
of  pearls,  and  fine  linen,  and  purple,  and  silk,  and  scarlet,  and  all  thyme  wood,  and  nil  manner  vessels  nf  ivory,
and  all  mnniicr  vessels  id  most  precious  wnnrl,  and  of  brass,  and  iron,  mid  marble.  And  riuiuimou,  mid  odors,
and  ointments,  and  frankincense,  and  wine,  and  oil,  and  fine  flour,  and  wheal,  and  beasts,  and  sheep,  and
horses,  and  chariots,  and  slaves  ( THAT'S  US1,  AND  SOULS  OF  MEN."  fR£V  18:1 1-13)  The  elite  arc  selling
the  souls  of  men,  that  is  bodies  and  body  parts  of  people.  It  is  said,  and  I cannot  verify  Ibis,  that  children  an*
kidnapped  by  the  elite  (intelligence  agencies  and  other  groups  under  the  Illuminati  or  working  with  tlirir
approval)  and  taken  to  Florida,  where  they  urc  then  sold  inter uulionally  for  experiments  or  for  other  purposes.
It  Niems  that  India  would  lie  an  inexpensive  supply  or  people  parts,  and  I do  know  from  having  been  to  India,
etc.  that  slavery  continues  in  CulculUi,  where  people  still  continue,  even  in  present  limes,  to  be  sold.  The  Tup
13  bloodlines  with  their  committees  were  responsible  for  the  slave  trade,  and  many  of  America’s  elite  families
today  gut  their  wealth  iri  part  from  running  slaves.  But  if  you  thought  lliai  Hie  elite  quit  dealing  in  human
bodies  when  slavery  was  abolished,  they  didn't.


> > > GENERAL  WEST  COAST

The  spring  equinox  is  held  in  forests  and  Hr  fall  equinox  is  held  near  water  for  the  Satanic  hierarchy  covens.
However,  Ibis  rule  doesn't  apply  to  WKrcan  groups,  some  of  them  will  be  found  near  water  or  on  the  coast  for
Spring  equinox.

> > > GENERAL  east  coast


-9-


The  Masons  have  at  least  15  ancient  spiritual  site*!  in  Eastern  UJS.  starting  in  Maine  and  t unning  south  into
the  southern  Atlantic  seaboard.  These  sites  are  preserved  for  rituals.  The  New  Lowland  area  has  2W)  stone
Druid  ritual  chamber  sites,  where  the  Druids  lived  prior  to  the  New  World  being  found  by  Columbus,  el.  sd.
Modern  Druids  like  to  use  I he  ancient  sites  for  ritual.  There  is  a secret  Templar  settlement  dating  back  prior
to  Columbus  hidden  by  the  Masons  in  Arcadia  National  I 'ark.


REPORTED  OCCULT  RITUAL  SITES  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  (&  CAN.)
(REPORTS  RECORDED  & COMPILED  BY  FRITZ  SPR1NGME1ER)

> > ALABAMA

Prior  to  1500,  the  Indians  in  the  area  belonged  to  what  is  called  by  archaeologists  as  "'The  Southern  Death
Cult-'  The  cult  built  mounds,  and  performed  human  sacrifices  which  were  cxutcricaUy  associated  with  Fire-sun
worship.  (Where  have  we  seen  this  before?)  Rattlesnakes  with  wings  and  eagles  were  common  motlfis  among
the  Southern  Death  Cull.  (Where  are  we  seeing  this  today?)  The  leathered  serpent  represented  the  union  of
heaven  mtd  earth.  Around  1500,  the  Southern  Death  Cult  abandoned  their  strict  class  structure  and  broke  up
into  what  are  known  as  the  "civilized  tribes  "--the  Cherokee,  Choctaw,  Creek  and  Chickasaw.  The  Cherokee
developed  their  own  alphabet,  and  built  cities  like  the  white  men,  and  learned  the  technology  und  ways  of  the
white  man.  Adopting  the  white  man's  culture  did  nut  protect  them,  and  the  civilized  trihes  were  removed  to
Oklaliouiu.  Descendants  ol  these  tribes  have  married  into  Illuminati  bloodlines.  Another  contribution  is  that
the  sites  of  the  Southern  Death  Cult  are  used  today  us  ritual  sites  in  Alabama.

in  the  area.

n young  coven  of  Sutunic  dabblers  were  observed  holding  a Satanic  ritual  in  a lot  used  for  Faster  sunrise
service.

camping  facilities.  The  mounds  that  the  Southern  death  cult  built  arc  used  in  modem  time  Tor  ritual,  due  to
the  belief  tliut  the  mounds  contain  great  .spiritual  energy.  The  largest  mound  (Temple  Mound)  looks  like  a
pyramid  and  lias  a reconstructed  building  on  its  top.  Smaller  sites  arc  also  in  that  area  of  Alabama,  hut  the
Moundville  site  (with  its  2(1  mounds)  was  apparently  the  ceremonial  center  for  the  Death  Cull  for  a large
geographic  area  and  had  a population  around  3, (1(1(1.

D Russell  Cave,  AL— South  of  Tennessee  in  eastern  Alabama)  is  Russell  Cure.  It  is  8 miles  west  of  Bridgeport,
and  directions  to  it  are  well  marked.  Ik  cave  is  high  on  the  wooded  side  of  Montague  Mountain  and  overviews
Doran's  Cove.  The  rave  k under  the  protection  of  the  National  Park  Service.  The  opening  of  the  cave  is  107
feel  wide  and  it  extends  back  270  tlL  into  the  mountain.  A sister  cave  to  the  north  connects  to  it.  The  cave  has
uncharted  arras.

>>  ALASKA

> > ARIZONA

D Montezuma's  Castle*  North  of  Phoenix  on  1-17  beyond  Camp  Verde  is  Montezuma's  Castle  and  Montezuma’s
Well.  These  are  consider  magic  spots  and  are  used  for  rituals.

D Mount  Lemmon,  Art z.— The  top  of  ML  Lemmon  is  used  for  witchcraft  rituals.

Canyon,  which  is  also  the  site  of  rituals.

O tn  Phoenix,  and  family  claiming  to  lie  generational  pagan  Celtics  has  their  Annwu  Temple  of  C.wynfyd  at  5102
N.  16th  Dr.,  Lot  #3,  Phoenix.  AZ  85015.

with  cacti.  One  heavy  cacti  area  lies  to  the  west  and  the  other  lies  to  the  east.  Both  areas  of  cacti  are  used  by
witch  covens.

Q Southeastern  Arizona  bus  been  greatly  used  by  the  secret  elite  to  build  at  least  5 underground  UFO  buses
(one  near  Green  Valley,  one  at  Gales  Puss  Base,  one  at  the  north  side  of  Rincon  Vita,  one  near  SafTord,  one


-10


ill  Ml.  Lcuunun,  and  one  near  l*age).  It  is  also  thick  with  New  Agers,  Witches,  Native  American  wilcbcrafl  and
Shamanism,  and  some  Satan  is  ni.  High  level  Su  turns  Is  from  other  areas  travel  to  'southern  Arizona'  once  a
year,  possibly  to  contact  "alien”  bases.

At  Sunset  Crater  is  an  ice  cave  where  red  cinders  and  Ice  meet  In  the  same  cave,  lids  rnre  mingling  of  fire  and
ice  hasn't  escaped  the  attention  of  occultists.

hexagram  which  haven't  escaped  the  attention  or  the  witches.  Also  the  outline  of  a faugh  south  west -llying  bird
has  been  traced  out  over  the  landscape  in  the  same  area.

>>  ARKANSAS

D Juneboru,  AR--  Tlie  witchcraft  store  The  Magic  Moon  opened  recently  in  this  small  town  to  provide  ritual
paraphernalia  got  a story  on  it  done  hy  Inside  Edition  TV.

D Rogers,  AR  -A  Satanic  cult  operates  in  this  area.  It's  sacrifices  have  been  discovered.

>>  CALIFORNIA

To  describe  California  Is  to  try'  tn  describe  a state  that  is  a modern  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  This  review
of  ritual  sites  in  California  will  be  condensed  in  comparison  to  Washington  & Oregon.  The  feel  for  what  I have
experienced  from  getting  acquainted  with  the  enemies  of  our  Lord  is  that  their  distribution  in  California
follows  the  following  general  pattern  that  I will  now  go  on  to  describe.

In  the  south  the  climate  is  more  dcsert-like.  and  |Ik  harshness  of  the  environ  incut  makes  it  more  ideal
for  those  groups  needing  total  secrecy.  Also  the  large  sums  of  money  that  are  generated  at  Hollywood,  Berkeley,
the  Silicon  Valley  etc.  is  pumped  into  the  Satanic  system.  The  beaches  in  southern  California  creates  an  area
which  attract  nudists  and  semi-nude  people,  which  in  turn  creates  an  environment  that  is  an  all  out  spiritual
war.  For  Christians  to  keep  their  morality  they  must  be  strong  in  the  Lord.  Southern  California  is  where  the
hard-core  Satanlsls  are  strong,  hard-core  Satanic  gangs  are  thriving  in  L.A*,  and  So.  CA  is  where  the  Illuminati
do  much  of  llieii  mind -control  programming  working  with  the  CIA  and  the  demons  or  whatever  you  want  to
call  these  evil  beings  that  arc  associated  with  UFOs,  The  Illuminati,  working  with  the  highest  levels  of  the  U-S.
govern  i ii  cut,  has  quite  a number  of  underground  secret  UFO  bases,  they  also  have  one  of  their  extensive  secret
occult  libraries  in  southern  CA.  In  short*  southern  Californio  is  lull  of  hard  core  SuUinic  evil.  It  is  an
appropriate  place  lor  Hollywood.  In  southern  California,  the  spiritual  war  is  so  intense  that  if  yon  become  a
new  Christian  you  are  put  on  the  front  lines  immediately  and  cither  become  a casually  or  you  arc  continuing
in  some  type  of  spiritual  warfare.

Central  California  is  where  the  Satanic  groups  that  are  for  public  consumption,  the  Homosexuals,  the
niclaphyricaJ  Hippies,  the  Newr  Agers,  and  the  visible  YViccan  (witchcraft)  groups  thrive.  The  climate  in  Central
California  is  nice.  The  secrecy  for  these  groups  is  not  such  a high  priority  so  they  thrive  better  in  the  Central
California  area.  There  seem  to  be  an  abundance  nf  ritual  sites  with  significance  in  this  area.

Northern  California  has  been  an  area  for  the  mm  mills  of  the  Hippies,  the  New  Agers,  and  the  milder
Wicca  groups.  Perhaps  the  tack  of  urban  center  and  money  have  helped  keep  northern  California  from
degenerating  into  the  terrible  situation  Ilia  I pervades  much  of  southern  California.  Some  of  the  police  forces
In  northern  California  have  been  under  orders  to  deny  publicly  that  any  occult  activity  goes  on  in  their
counties,  which  is  contrary  to  what  they  know  is  happening  on  a large  scale.  This  may  also  help  contribute  to
the  better  image  of  the  north  than  the  other  parts  of  California.  The  Bohemian  Grove  has  been  used  for
decades  for  Sataiuc/llluiniiiuti  rituals.  FEMA  has  a secret  base  near  the  Grove.

Finally,  a word  should  he  mentioned  that  because  the  Wizard  of  Oz  books  and  movie  is  such  an  important
part  of  satanic  mind-coiilnd,  that  it  is  self-explanatory  that  thr  house  of  Baum,  the  author  of  the  Wizard  of
Oz  series,  built  in  California  & named  Ozcut  is  u shrine  to  some  people.  Disneyland  has  hern  a favorite  ritual
& programming  site  lor  the  Illuminati  on  its  off  hours,  A many  of  Disney’s  stuff  arc  into  the  occult.

□ Atascadero,  CA  - In  Apr.  7*5  sutunic  rituals  were  reported  in  the  area  which  inch  human  sacrifices.

□ Bakersfield.  CA  -George  Patterson  started  the  Wicca  group  at  Bakersfield,  CA  (address  Georgian  Church,
1908  Verde,  Bakersfield,  93304).

□ Berkeley,  CA.  Across  the  bay  from  San  Francisco  is  Berkeley.  The  Reformed  Druids  of  North  America
(Rl)N A)  operate  out  of  tlrinda,  CA.  Other  Druids  operate  in  the  Berkeley,  CA  area.  The  Covenant  ut  the
Goddess  which  represents  a federal  ion  of  about  70  covens  in  15  states  has  its  headquarters  at  Berkeley.


-II-


D Bohemian  Club.  North  of  San  Francisco  in  Sonoma  ( ounty  are  a number  r>l'  large  tracts  of  land  belonging
to  the  Bohemian  Club.  Tlie  Bohemian  Club  is  a retreal  center  fur  the  elite.  Some  uF  Ihe  people  who  are
members  are  Satan  is  Is  like  <iov.  Edmund  Brown.  Other  members  appear  to  be  working  Tor  the  visible  branches
of  the  Illuminati  anil  are  nut  all  Satanists,  some  of  them  are  merely  people  contributing  to  llie  creation  of  the
New  World  Order.  The  membership  is  by  invitation  only  and  costs  $8,501)  initially,  and  $100  per  year  fees.
Examples  of  members  are  Henry  Kissinger,  Mikhail  Gorbediev,  William  Buckley  la  Kji.  of  Malta,  and
llluminatus),  Earl  Warren,  and  Herman  Wouk  (the  Jewish  author  of  novels  about  WAV.  III.  The  Bohemian
Club  started  in  1880,  & a benefactor  of  the  group  gave  8 trncls  of  lund  in  Sonoma  County  to  Ihe  Club.  The
Bohemian  Club  Carp,  later  obtained  more  tracts  of  land.  The  yearly  retreat  is  held  on  a 1,000  plus  tract  of
forest  laud  (big  redwoods).  OcculL  rituals,  sex,  and  networking  go  on  at  the  Bohemian  Club  secret  retreat.  It
is  obvious  lliat  the  Bohemian  f>rove  is  Important  enough  for  the  elite  to  pay  the  high  membership  and  fly
around  the  world  to  participate.

O At  Burbank  a number  of  small  Egyptian  groups  merged  in  197(1  in  Burhank  to  form  the  Church  or  the
Eternal  Source,  Remember  that  Egyptian  magic  k Is  what  modern  Satanism  is  bused  upon.  Just  cast  of  Burhank
are  hills,  and  in  these  hills  was  a bam  that  satanists  used  for  rituals.

D Catalina  Island,  CA-Among  the  viators  to  these  Islands  have  been  satanisLs.  There  lias  been  a re  port  of
rituals  held  here,

O Chinn  Lake.  CA  -Inyokern  A < hlna  l.akf  Naval  Test  grounds  are  the  sites  of  several  Important  things.  Mind
control  programming  for  the  Satanic  Hierarchy  is  done  here.  A secret  CEO  base  is  also  in  the  urea.  (Fur  more
details  on  this  area,  several  other  works  of  Fritz  .Springmeier  are  suggested  to  the  reader.)

□ Death  Valley,  CA  * Charles  Mnnson,  a Mason  and  Satanist  and  member  of  the  unauthorized  O.T.O.  Solar
Lodge  of  L.A.,  operated  his  satanie  family  in  southern  California.  They  used  Death  Valley  a great  deal,  as  do
numerous  Satanic  groups.  Some  of  the  members  of  Munson's  family  were  rich  witli  lies  lu  the  Satanic  elite.
The  Mason  family  were  in  the  area  northeast  of  Trona,  CA  at  die  Myers  ranch,  and  the  Barker  ranch  and
Willow  Springs.  The  Barker  ranch  was  so  isolated  that  it  was  necessary  to  go  up  an  incredibly  rugged  dry  wash
with  a four-wheeled  vehicle  with  someone  clearing  boulders  out  of  Ihe  way  as  the  vehicle  moved  forward.

D Golden  Galt*  National  Recreation  Area,  CA-uorth  of  San  Francisco  is  a stretch  of  nutioiiul  parkland  which
alTords  small  Satanic  covens  a place  to  practice  rituals.  One  site  was  an  abandoned  bunker  at  the  Ft.  Miley
West  locution  of  die  Recreation  Area.  There  also  happen  lo  he  several  active  Torts  near  the  national  parkland.
Although  there  is  nothing  special  about  the  areas  used  in  Ihe  Golden  Gate  National  Recreation  Area  often  the
National  Parks  and  National  Forests  protect  sacred  ritual  sites.  Army  bases  are  ravnrite  places  for  Saianlsts
to  try  to  recruit  nun  into  covens.

□ In  Hollywood  all  types  of  Satanic  activity  goes  on.  One  of  Ihe  Disco's  near  Hollywood  Hlvd.  is  Satan’s  A Go-
Go.  The  Compleut  Enchanter  is  an  occult  supply  shop  in  Hollywood.  Three  oilier  stores  supplying  goods  for
witchcraft  rituals  include  I ..A.’s  Bodhi  Tree  (reported  by  people  as  the  largest  Satanic  store  fin  the  area-1  know
people  from  the  O.T.O.  buy  there),  Ctr  id  wen's,  and  the  Sorcerer  Shop.  Long  Beach  lias  Mermade  and  Eye  of
the  ( at  stores.  1 mention  these  just  lo  show  that  wltere  heavy  trafficking  or  rituals  oils,  and  Satanic  rituals
items  occurs,  it  is  obvious  there  are  lots  of  rituals  being  performed.

□ l aguna  Nigel,  CA  -Just  east  of  Lagunu  Nigel  1ms  been  an  active  suUtrific  recruiting  site.

□ Los  Angeles,  CA-The  Mothers  nf  Darkness  (Illuminati)  also  have  a castle  in  the  I ..A.  area  where  their  high
level  rituals  are  secretly  conducted.

D Malibu,  CA  — This  Is  the  stomping  grounds  of  the  rich  and  famous  elite,  many  of  whom  are  pail  of  nr  work
with  the  llluniiiniti.

O Manhattan  Beach,  CA  - This  is  the  place  that  the  McMartin  Pre-school  was  located.  Of  course  this  case  has
gotten  lots  of  media  misinformation  and  u movie  of  the  rase  has  been  made  with  more  misinformation  brum
Hollywood,  live  McMartin  Pre-school  was  used  to  program  and  commit  ritual  abuses  to  hundreds  of  children
lor  decades.  Hundreds  or  victims  complained.  The  victims  revealed  that  they  had  heen  taken  out  of  Ihe  daycare
center  via  tunnels.  The  police  never  found  Ihe  tunnels,  and  Hollywood's  movie  doesn’t  tell  us  that  the  tunnels
were  found  after  the  case  was  dosed.  The  area  was  definitely  a major  ritual  site  for  years,  that  has  fortunately
been  closed  down.

a ML  Shasta,  a vortex  point  that  draws  all  types  of  occultists.  It  also  has  a mind-control  programming  center
near  the  lake  which  can  be  reached  by  helicopter.  A L HJ  base  is  nearby  and  another  UFO  base  is  east  of
Chico,  <_  A.  The  occultists  in  the  area  have  interacted  with  the  UFOs  and  the  aliens.  It  appears  to  me  that  Ihe
llluiiiiuuli  are  using  their  UFOs  to  bolster  occult  beliefs.


O Mr.  View,  CA.  -Southeast  of  San  Francisco  is  Mi.  View.  The  Church  of  the  Dragon  with  its  Coven  of  the
Dragon  which  is  a hereditary  wicca  group  b in  I he  Ml.  View,  CA.  area.

P Newport  Beach.  CA—  Teenage  Satamsts  have  used  an  island  in  the  upper  back  bay  of  Newport  Beach.
Newport  Beach  is  soul  It  of  LA  In  Feb.  W,  five  people  stole  human  bodies  from  mausoleums  in  Newport
Beach.

O Northern  California.  Calif.  Wicca  ns  hold  u Summer  Solstice  Ancient  Ways  Festival  each  year  in  northern
t alifornia's  wilderness.

O At  Oakland,  CA  is  the  a coven  of  witches  named  Susan  B.  Anthony  Coven  no.  I,  whose  priestess  is  Z
Budapest  who  wtoIc  the  Feminist  Bonk  of  Lights  and  Shadows.

Q Al  Pasadena,  is  the  Temple  nf  Truth,  a group  of  Adept  magicians.  There  are  also  other  witchcraft  groups
in  Oakland.

D Pasadena  Freeway-Some  of  the  I ionic  made  Satanic  covens  use  flic  drainage  ditches  that  drain  into  the
arroyo.

D Pinnacles  National  Monument,  so.  of  San  Francisco  near  Solcdad,  is  a set  of  interesting  rock  formations.
Pinnacles  Rocks  within  the  park  have  the  Tulvus  caves  which  are  considered  spiritually  significant.  Hear  Gulch
t'ave  Is  a phtce  where  Underworld  ceremonies  take  place.

O Place  alia- 1 nine  Lake  urea  - east  of  LA.  is  Riverside.  As  one  drives  west  from  Riverside  on  Riverside  Hwy.
SF  of  Placentia  is  a girl  scout  ramp.  The  woman  who  ran  the  girl  scout  camp  is  a salaniM  and  the  wile  or  a
High  Priest.  Satanic  rituals  were  often  done  al  the  girl  scout  camp  in  the  trees.

□ Presideo,  (A  —This  long  time  military'  base  was  used  for  trauma-based  mind  control  program  in  ing  s atonic
slaves  for  over  40  years.  The  hospital  was  used  for  rituul/lorture/progi  iiimning.  Several  churches  on  the  base
have  been  used  for  Illuminati  rituals,  one  or  the  more  obscure  churches  had  an  Illuminati  library  on  the  second
floor  and  a torture  dungeon  in  llic  basement.  A lung  list  of  buildings  Inch  Fori  Point  were  used  In  the
programming.  Near  the  Presideo  are  Illuminati  homes,  and  some  beautiful  buildings  used  for  rituals.  The
military  is  turning  the  base  over  to  ex-KGB  director  Gorbechev  and  his  environ  mental  group.  I'Hiis  author  has
visited  the  various  satanic  sites  in  the  Presideo.

D Redding,  CA  * an  old  amphitheater  on  Lost  Lune  in  11  mi  hern  Redding  was  frequented  by  a Satanic  cult  hack
in  the  TMfs.

O Redwood  Valley,  just  north  of  Ukiali.  is  the  home  of  llie  Church  of  All  Worlds  (CAWt  the  umbrella
organization  that  tries  to  network  all  the  various  Wicca  coven  groups.

D Sacramento,  capital  of  California,  is  home  of  the  New  W'iccan  Church  which  practices  various  traditional
hritish  witchcraft.  There  is  also  a group  nf  Sntanists  in  the  government  who  have  a coven  in  the  urea.

O San  Bcrnadinn.  Perhaps  the  best  place  to  start  is  at  the  top,  San  Bcrnadino.  This  has  been  the  center  of  the
Illuminati  on  l lie  West  Coast.  The  Siui  liemadino  County  has  numerous  Satanic  covens  operating  in  secrecy.
Ted  Gunderson  found  a spot  near  Sari  Kcmndinu  that  can  only  be  seen  from  (he  air  because  it  is  remote  on
the  side  of  a mountain.  The  ritual  site  was  about  250  by  81V  and  bad  a 9'  circle  with  the  seal  of  asmoday.  The
Seal  of  Beliel  was  also  at  the  site.  After  the  Mr  Martin  School  scandal  made  the  headlines,  the  house  burned
d i>wii— a pj ni rrn I ly  to  hide  any  evidence.  The  mansion  on  the  site  was  used  for  rituals  by  fixe  salanisis  who  were
involved  with  the  Mr  Mart  In  Preschool  SR  A.  The  site,  was  a very  popular  ritual  site.  Tlir  children  hud  been
flown  to  llie  site  via  airplane.  A concrete  bunker  (dungeon)  about  2()'x20*  was  on  the  site  to  hold  victims  until
they  were  sacrificed.  A small  room  was  found  on  the  site  with  steel  hooks  embedded  in  the  concrete  walls  to
assist  with  torture.  From  other  informants,  this  author  lias  learned  that  the  McMurtiii  children  weren't  the
only  ones  who  used  this  secret  and  popular  Satanic  torture/ritual  site.

O Him  Francisco.  CA— The  Mothers  of  Darkness  of  Satan's  Illuminati  Hierarchy  have  u castle  in  the  arcu,  which
has  red  carpeting  in  the  main  room.  They  conduct  their  titanic  rituals  within  this  castle.  San  Francisco  has
long  hail  an  occult  heritage.  Hit  name  they  gave  to  its  largest  bridge -the  Golden  Gale  has  occult  significance.
Indeed,  according  to  occult  tradition,  San  Francisco  lies  on  top  of  an  ancient  Atlantean  city  called  Tlumcu.
Supposedly  the  city  looked  likr  the  city  Atlantis.  The  seven  hills  of  San  Francisco  arc  said  to  have  formed  a
map  of  the  Pleiades.  According  to  occult  tradition,  the  center  of  lltc  city  had  the  Temple  vl  the  Suii,  and  the
Temple  of  Saturn  was  located  where  the  south  side  of  Buena  Vista  Park  is  today.  Just  of  Point  l olios  Ate.  Is
a rood  I hut  leads  down  lt>  the  seaside  and  to  a man-made  tunnel.  The  tunnel  allows  people  to  see  a cave  which
is  said  to  have  occult  significance.  Sail  Francisco  area  is  the  headquarters  fur  LuVeyN  Church  of  Satan,  and
it  in  also  host  to  many  other  Satanic  groups  including  the  C hurch  of  Set,  Otic  of  the  principle
Hcrmctic/MaMinir/M^fii:,il  journals  called  Gni>sis  is  published  in  San  Francisco.  Many  Satanic  groups  call


-13-


ilieir  beliefs  Gnosticism.  'Hip  llaight-Aslibury  section  i>r  Sun  Fmodsco  Is  un  urea  that  abounds  with  drugs,
witchcraft  and  the  black  mass.  Anton  LaVey’s  house  has  been  used  lor  rituals  where  cannibalism  took  place.
Michael  Aquino’s  house  at  2450  Leavenworth  St.  San  Francisco  hits  also  been  used  lor  rituals*  The  last
information  I got  was  that  the  house  (a  3-level  fourplex)  is  still  Aquino's  hut  that  he  rarely  stays  there.

D San  Jose.  CA  -Just  south  of  San  Iran  cisco  at  San  Jose  is  the  Center  for  the  Divine  Istar,  a wiirhcraTt
organization.

D San  Pedro*  CA.  The  Green  movement  of  Europe  was  created  by  the  Satanic  hierarchy  through  their  agencies
and  was  especially  originally  strong  in  West  Germany.  An  anicrkuii  newsletter  that  reports  on  the  Green
movement  comes  out  of  Berkeley,  CA.  .Although  environmental  groups  such  as  the  Green  movement  are  not
occult  religious  movements  they  urc  tied  bach  to  the  Illuminati,  so  thut  those  who  monitor  these  movements
may  notice  the  connections.  I he  Elysium  Institute  at  Topanga,  CA  would  tie  one  of  these  environmental  groups
with  witches  making  up  its  staff.  Another  group  is  tlic  League  for  Ecological  Democracy  whose  journal  is  the
Synthesis.  The  LEI)  is  In  Nan  Pedro,  southern  CA.

D Scotty's  Castle,  CA— an  Illuminati  site.

Scotty's  Castle  has  been  confirmed  as  a ritual  site  by  a number  of  ex-Satanisls.

Scotty's  Castle  is  a castle  located  in  Death  Valley,  CA.  It  lias  a Yeiy  interesting  history.

To  rrarh  the  castle  one  is  required  to  drive  through  many  miles  of  ilesert.  If  one  drives  to  Inyo  County,  CA.
the  Mime  county  that  lias  China  Lake  Naval  Testing  Grounds,  and  liiyokcrn,  mid  then  you  drive  un  tlwy.  J90
into  Death  Valiev  National  Monument  lit  is  not  a park  or  forest,  dead  valleys  are  railed  monuments),  next  you
go  north  un  a road  niter  Stove  Pit  pc  for  55  miles,

I he  man  wlio  built  Scotty's  Castle  was  Walter  Perry  Scott  (1872-1954).  Waller  P.  Scott  was  the  son  <it  an
alcohol  distiller  and  horse  breeder  in  Kentucky*  Waller  did  not  get  any  lorimil  education.  He  left  home  and
went  west  where  lie  worked  as  a mule  driver,  and  a water  boy.  From  there  he  became  a horse  wrangler.  Because
oT  his  talent  with  horses  Buffalo  Hill  made  him  the  feature  rider  along  with  Annie  Oakley  in  Buffalo  Bill  s
family  show.  The  show  travelled  and  Scotty  was  with  it  eleven  years.  During  this  lime,  Scotty  made  many
import;* nl  friendships  with  men  of  power  and  wealth.  In  19V0,  Walter  married  and  left  the  show,  lie  got  a loan
from  Julian  Gerard,  a NY  banker,  to  go  prospecting  for  gold  which  he  failed  to  pay  hack.  Julian  Gerard  was
repeatedly  sending  people  to  hassle  Scotty  to  gel  his  money  back.  In  19(15,  Walter  Sc  oil  ("Scotty")  scattered  gold
nuggets  and  $101)  hills  from  N.Y*  to  L.A.  Where  he  got  all  this  gold  and  $1(141  hills  is  a mystery,  but  it  wasn't
from  prospecting.  Ihc  idea  «r  Finding  a secret  mine  was  very  obviously  u cover  for  however  Scotty  managed
tu  get  his  money.  Scully  as  well-known  for  his  penchant  to  throw  aw  ay  $20  gold  pieces  as  if  they  were  candy
wherever  he  went.  Nobnrly  believed  he  had  a mine,  strangely  the  IKS  never  got  interested  in  Scully.  Why?

The  IRS  went  utter  Charles  Cuughlin  who  was  exposing  the  elite,  the  bankers,  the  Freemasons,  etc.  in  the
early  1930's  on  his  radio  show.  There  was  no  reason  to  suspect  ( auglilin  of  any  cheating  on  his  Income  Tux,
and  the  audits  found  the  IRS  actually  owed  Caughlin  money.  However,  the  national  papers  printed  front  page
Stories  of  the  IRS  in  vest!  gar  I on,  and  practically  Ignored  that  the  man  was  exonerated.  Yet,  the  IRS  fell  Scotty
alone.  Ilnimm.

Although  Scotty  was  married,  he  became  intimate  friends  with  Albert  Mussry  Johnson  (1872-19 1H),  a Chicago
millionaire,  who  was  v.p.  from  1906  to  1926  of  the  National  life  Insurance  Co.  Albert  M.  Johnson  was  burn
in  Ohio,  mid  lived  in  Arkansas  and  Missouri  before  moving  to  Chicago.  Johnson  came  out  and  stayed  In  Death
Valley.  The  stay  helped  his  health,  and  he  and  Scotty  remained  dose  friends.

In  I924t  construction  secretly  began  on  a castle  in  Death  Valley.  Hie  best  of  materials  were  used  and  the
materials  had  In  lie  hauled  clear  out  in  the  desert  by  truck  to  Grapevine  Canyon  where  the  castle  sits.
Hundreds  of  workers  were  hired.

The  castle  got  ils  kitchen  tiles  from  Spain.  Special  rugs  were  made  on  the  European  island  of  Majorca  lor
the  castle.  Tiles  Tor  the  incomplcted  pool  came  from  the  Mediterranean.  Many  uf  the  furnishing  of  the  castle
came  from  cathedrals  and  palaces  in  Spain  and  Morocco*  Draperies  made  for  the  castle  were  hand-tooled  in
selected  sheepskin  leather.  Sixty  hand-carved  panels,  each  of  a different  design,  were  installed  in  (he  music-
room  ceiling.  A Write  Mignon  organ  reported  to  have  cost  $160,000  --tlie  Finest  of  its  kind  in  Western  Gutted
States  was  placed  in  the  music  room,  even  though  Scotty  could  not  play  the  organ.  Twelve  bathrooms  were
installed.  Several  kitchens  were  ills  lulled.  Funnels  and  secret  rooms  were  buill  under  the  buildings.  Around
$2  million  (dollars  of  that  time  period)  were  spent  on  building  I he  castle,  supposedly  from  Sc  otty’s  "gold  mine."
The  castle  became  known  us  Scotty +s  Castle*  It  is  ideal  as  u Satanic  ritual  site.  It  can  accommodate  numerous
people.  It  is  remote.  It  has  hidden  rooms  and  areas,  and  tunnels*


-14-


D Southern  Cali torn ia,  CA  -The  Illuminati  has  recognized  the  importance  of  people  who  use  their  heads*  Tlie
Jason  Group  which  was  formed  from  their  top  scientists  is  one  example.  Many  of  the  Jason  Group  have  lived
in  the  Southwest  or  California.  Marvin  Gnldberger,  pres,  of  Caltech,  and  a physicist  at  UCIA  was  the  Jason
Group's  first  chairman.  Supposedly  his  wife  Mildred  came  up  willi  tlie  name  Jason’ . However,  the  Jason
Group  works  with  the  Jason  Society  and  the  Golden  Fleece  has  Item  a reoccnrring  and  special  theme  with  the
high  level  occult/  & Masons.  John  Cornwall  at  UCLA  is  n Jason  member*  Gordon  McDonald,  at  the  Univ.
of  CA,  San  Diego  (UCSIl)  is  another  Jason  member.  {The  list  could  go  on.)  Another  group  is  the  Witchcraft
Special  Interest  Group  of  Mcusa  which  brings  together  members  of  Mensu  (you  him*  to  be  a genius  Co  be  in
Mensa)  for  collective  witchcraft  and  magic  work.  Their  headquarters  are  at  San  June,  CA,

El  Torrance,  CA-  reports  of  heavy  satanic/ Illuminati  activity  in  area

IlTrahiica  Canyon,  CA  —About  30  miles  up  El  Toro  Rd  from  San  Juan  Capistrano  Is  I nborn  Canyon.  If  you
get  there  and  then  follow  in  3 1/2  miles  on  u dirt  road  then  at  tlie  lop  of  a hill  arc  a group  of  caves  which  have
been  used  For  rituals  and  programming.

O Treasure  Island,  San  Francisco  bay  area -This  is  a site  that  the  Satanic  hierarchy  uses  for  rituals.

> > COLORADO/ ROCKY  MOUNTAINS

The  Rocky  Mountain.1;  has  it  share  of  occult  activity,  but  it  is  not  as  intense  as  the  west  coast  Oregon  and
Washington  are  the  in"  places  to  move  to  if  you  are  a Naum  1st  or  a New  Age  leader.  Satanlsts  and  New  Age
leaders  are  being  encouraged,  asked  or  even  ordered  to  go  to  the  Northwest,  California  is  already  very  intensely
caught  up  in  demonic  wickedness.  In  states  like  Montana  which  have  small  towns  which  are  largely  native
Indian  descendants  (here  will  be  active  Masonic  Lodges,  This  is  because  occult  fraternal  organizations  have
made  an  effort  In  tap  into  the  occult  spiritual  powers  of  the  Indian  people.  Various  cull  groups  like  Church
Universal  & Triumphant  in  Montana,  and  Arum  da  Marga  in  Meambout  Springs,  Cub  have  chosen  the  Rocky
Mountains  as  the  place  to  build  their  cult  head  quartets.  Another  interesting  connection  is  that  recently  the
U-S.  moved  most  of  its  own  LHJs  to  Groom  Lake  in  Nevada,  and  the  LI' Us  that  arc  llown  jointly  with  both
demons  (aliens)/  and  humans  are  being  placed  at  bases  in  Colorado.  Those  who  have  been  following  this
newsletter  know  I have  been  trying  to  stress  an  unknown  fiict-tlte  UFO  plienuiucim  is  purl  of  wliut  Satanism
Is  doing.  The.  Satanic  hierarchy  works  willi  these  "aliens."  Sources,  which  are  totally  separate  from  the  source
that  passed  on  about  the  UFOs  transferring  to  Colorado,  arc  telling  of  a Large  new  rash  or  cattle  mutilation
this  year  in  Colorado.

I have  included  Colorado  because  much  of  Its  activity  is  closely  related  to  New  Mexico's  activity.  C olorado
is  une  of  the  up  and  coming  new  centers  for  many  of  tlie  Illuminati's  new  activities.  Colorado  hosted  the
UNCED  meetings  at  Estes  Park, CO  where  the  Earth  Conservation  Rank  rvf  the  elite  was  quietly  being  pul  In
place.  Estes  Park  is  named  alter  the  Estes  family  which  in  the  Freeman  article  you  will  find  is  tied  to  the
Prieure  de  Sion  and  the  Merovingians.  Colorado  is  home  is  a great  deal  of  New  Age  and  Satanic  activity.
Considering  the  spa  re  ness  or  population  of  NM  and  CXI,  they  arc  the  home  of  a lot  of  activity  for  the  Illuminati
and  the  New  Agers  and  Witchcraft.

D Arvada,  CO  -On  tlie  west  side  of  Denver  is  Arvada,  CO  which  has  a witch  coven  which  is  militant  against
churches.

□ Aspen,  Ct ) - As  one  goes  west  from  Denver  on  Interstate  70  one  comes  to  a small  town  Idaho  Springs,  which
lias  u witchcraft  coven.  Continuing  on  leads  to  Vail,  a popular  place  for  tlie  elite,  and  depending  on  which
roods  one  lakes  alter  a while  one  may  get  to  Aspen.  Aspen  is  one  of  the  elite's  stomping  grounds.  There  is
certainly  high  level  occult  activity  that  takes  place  in  this  town.  Aspen  is  where  George  Bush  met  with  Margaret
Thatcher  before  announcing  the  decision  to  go  into  Saudi  Arabia  with  Desert  Storm.

□ Near  Aspen,  is  an  approx.  I JMW)  acre  ranch  callrd  Wind  star,  created  hy  New  Agers  John  Denver  aurl  Thomas
Crum.  This  is  another  place  that  the  world’s  elite  arc  attracted  to.  Men  like  J. Peter  Grace  I head  or  the  Knights
of  Malta)  and  Ted  Turner  (CNN  founder)  have  gone  to  the  ranch  for  conferences.

D Bukna  Valley,  CO  -As  lias  Ixen  previously  reported  the  Itakna  Valley  is  being  used  hy  Maurice  Strong,  friend
of  some  of  the  Illuminati  Olympians,  for  some  elite  scheme  to  create  u new  world  religion  center.  All  types  of
religious  groups  arc  being  gathered  in  the  area.

□ Credence  Creek,  CO  --Although  Munitou  Springs,  CO  is  u ritual  site,  the  creek  that  runs  in  the  area  is
important  for  rituals  also.  The  name  of  the  creek  is  believed  to  have  been  what  the  rock  band  Credence
Clearwater  Revival  is  named  after.

Din  Denver,  (he  situation  is  like  in  most  urban  areas.  One  new  group  that  is  doing  riluah  in  tlie  Denver  area


-15-


Is  the  Daughter*  of  ihr  Nw  Moon,  1525  Sherman  St*  On  the  east  si de  of  Denver  is  Avrora,  Satanism  is  so
hail  in  Aurora,  that  the  Smoky  Hill  High  School  initiated  a program  to  counsel  young  Sulnnists  in  the  school.

□ Greeley  is  north  of  Denver  and  not  far  from  Ft.  Collins.  Greeley  has  at  least  six  Satanic  covens  in  the  area.
The  covens  use  abandoned  building  in  the  countryside.  The  various  coven  leaders  have  meetings  together  to
coordinate  activities.

a vhmilou  Springs,  CO  -Look  for  witches  to  make  use  of  any  old  Indian  spiritual  site  such  us  Pike's  Peak  und
the  nearhy  Mu  niton  Springs,

D Each  year  during  summer,  a group  of  "pagans"  holds  a festival  up  in  the  Colorado  mountains  called  l ront
Range  Pagan  Festival.  Attendance  is  by  invitation  only.

> > CONNFrTHTJT

Cl  Dunhurry,  CT  - megalithic  druid  cltuvnbcrs

□ Gunjiwaump,  IT  Giant  stone  rings  known  to  archaeologists  as  Druid  circles

Q New  Haven- Headquarters  of  the  Church  of  Satanic  Liberation  of  Paul  D.  Valentine.  Rituals  are  held
regularly  l>\  the  1 ira rtq Barters  group.  It  is  possible  the  headquarirrs  group  has  relocated.  I was  unable  to  locate
an  address  for  the  group  in  New'  Haven,  hut  west  of  New  Haven  there  is  a Paul  Valentine  listed  in  the  ph.  hook
at  Seymour,  mid  then  up  the  rond  (liwy  67)  ul  South  bury  li*Ju  Hie  interested  person  could  find  nut  more  from
tlic  Magick  Child?  mtore  in  New  York.(See  N.Y.  section}

□ Norwalk,  CT—  Norwalk  is  near  the  southern  end  of  Conn,  near  NY,  The  Foundation  for  Slmiunnic  Studies
located  here  in  Norwalk  teaches  native  spiritism  and  witchcraft.  The  foundation  was  headed  by  Michael  Hamer.

□ Sleeping  Giant— This  is  a large  rock  formation  that  is  now  protected  us  a park.  From  l-95's  Exit  38  go  north
toward  Hartford.  Take  exit  61  from  the  Wilber  Cross  to  Whitney  Ave.  (Rt.  HI),  then  turn  right  toward  Cheshire
oft  Hie  ramp.  Then  go  straight  on  Whitney  2 miles,  the  Sleeping  Giant  rock  formation  is  visible  from  Hew
Haven  harbor.  Wieeans  use  the  area  fur  rituals.

D VVesteheMer,  CT— East  of  Middletown, ( I lies  the  village  of  Westchester.  There  the  weekend  homes  of
businessmen  who  vrork  in  NYC  have  been  the  sites  of  upper  class  witchcraft  rituals.

D Wilton,  IT—  A Satanic  cult  in  Wilton  has  been  desecrating  churches  and  threatened  people.

> > DELAWARE

□ Dover,  & Wilmington,  DEL  -This  is  the  home  stale  of  the  DuPont  Illuminati  bloodline.  Their  estates  haw
hern  ritual  sites.  Both  Dover  and  Wilmington  have  .Satanic  activity.  In  Nov.  '86,  parents  in  Dover  learned  that
college  kids  were  in  danger  by  a Satanic  cult  in  the  area.

>>  FLORIDA

A .Satanic  cull  Master*  of  Lucifer  with  a teenage  branch  Teens  of  Lucifer  operates  in  Florida.

D Crystal  River,  FL—  This  site  has  undent  pyramid  mounds  built  by  Hie  Indians  in  44ft  AJXThe  Crystal  Riwr
State  Archaeological  Site  is  north  of  the  town  of  Crystal  River.  The  witches  believe  the  site  has  spiritual  power,
and  is  worthwhile  lor  rituals.

ID  Everglades.  FL-TIte  Satanic  group  Hands  of  Death  ran  a training  camp  in  the  Everglades.

□ Madina  lliekel  Mound,  I I. -This  site  Is  still  relatively  secluded  and  is  used  by  tiir  Wiccan  groups  for  rituals.
It  is  located  on  Terra  Ceia  Island.  The  mound  consists  of  the  Greater  and  Lesser  Temple  Mounds.  The  Temple
mounds  were  raised  by  the  Indians  to  the  Sun  God  and  the  Rain  God.  Solar  holidays  such  as  the  vernal
equinox  wen1  important  in  uncienl  times  to  the  Indians.  The  site  is  south  of  Tampa  Bay.  On  Hwy  19  headed
fur  Palmetto  is  a small  road  named  Terra  (Viga  Rd.  t in  down  this  rnnd  and  turn  left  on  Center  Rd.  Then  turn
righl  at  Buyshorc  Rd,  and  then  fallow  Hie  signs.

D Miami,  FI^-  Miami  Is  a Santana  and  Palo  Mayombe  (which  uses  human  remains}  stronghold.  4OTb£0%  of
the  hull  million  Cubans  in  greater  Miami  are  said  to  participant  in  Santana,  and  only  5ev  of  t hr  Cubans  arc
against  Snularia.  As  you  cun  guess  the  entire  area  is  one  big  occult  center,  with  thousands  of  rituals  going  on
daily.

O New  Pi>rl  Richey,  FL  —Lev crock's  Altar  Slone  is  located  at  Leverock’s  sea  food  restaurant  in  this  town.  The
stone  is  considered  to  have  great  spiritual  significance.

□ Palm  Springs,  FL

□ Tampa,  FL—  Various  Satanic  cults  operate  in  this  area.


-16-


> > GEORGIA

ITtc  Association  of  Cynimry  VVicca  holds  rituals  in  the  state.  The  First  Humanist  Church  ol  Atkmtu  luis
sponsored  a Pagan  festival  in  September  at  a camp  site  with  cabins.

D Atlanta-A  witch  craft  coven  which  started  under  CAW  (called  a nest)  operates  here.  Years  ago,  attention  was
centered  on  the  Raven  wood  Church  of  Wkca  in  Atlanta  when  they  wire  licit!  responsible  for  a 23  year  teenager
getting  shivL  The  Grove  of  the  Unicorn  carries  out  its  rituals  outside-  The  Grove  also  give  13  week  courses  in
Wirca.  and  if  people  stay  with  the  grove*  then  they  take  a year's  training  before  the  Inner  Circle  decides  if  they
are  prepared  Tor  initiation.  One  of  the  wieca  groups  has  their  own  private  land  in  Hie  country  for  rituals.

D Helen.  GA—  There  have  been  large  Wieca  gatherings  here.

> > HAWAII

Almost  all  of  Hawaii  is  sacred.  All  the  ancient  Kahuna  sites,  and  (he  volcanoes  are  sacred.  Anywhere  Ihut  the
ancients  buried  people  are  sacred.  Hie  ancient  sites  continue  to  be  honored.

> > IDAHO

D Rupert,  ID  - (This  description  gets  graphic,  if  you  don’t  want  to  read  a brief  description  of  ritual  murder
you  may  want  to  skip  this.)  In  this  particular  instance,  1 called  the  county  sheriff  to  get  some  informal  ion
about  the  ritual  site.  I believe  the  police  nre  set  up  to  serve  the  public,  and  yel  they  refused  to  give  me
information  that  both  local  and  national  newspapers  had  already  printed  on  the  case.  Many  people  in  Hie  town
are  concerned  that  the  sheriffs  office  is  not  Irving  hard  enough  to  solve  the  case,  when  they  believe  there  is
a great  deal  of  evidence  of  Satanic  cult  activity  in  the  area.  Just  south  of  the  Minidoka  County  Laud  Fill  in
desert  land  and  not  far  from  the  city  of  Rupert,  a baby  girl’s  body  was  found  with  the  hands  nit  otT,  organs
out,  and  skinned.  Someone  hud  attempted  to  burn  the  body  in  a metal  drum.  Local  people  have  had  repented
problems  with  cattle  mutilations,  and  an  old  abandoned  bam  was  found  with  candles.  This  ritually  sacrificed
body  of  a baby  girl  found  in  May,  '92  brought  the  Issue  of  Satanic  cults  in  the  area  before  the  community1!,
attention,  although  the  police  have  said  to  the  press  they  think  some  parents  may  have  simply  abandoned  an
unwanted  baby.

>>  ILLINOIS

Q Borough's  Cave— this  cave  is  owned  by  uitc  of  the  Elite  who  uwus  half  of  southern  Illinois.  It  is  LSOtT-  The
whole  story  was  secret,  but  was  revealed  in  Oct.  1993  in  my  newsletter  to  my  subscribers,  bred  Boroughs  was
an  Indiana  Jones  type  who  found  the  cave.  He  and  l red  Ridlione  (I'm  mil  sure  about  the  spelling  of  their
names)  haw  m itteu  a book  called  The  Secret  Cave  of  Maiiv  Faces.  The  cave  has  gold  artifacts,  13  crypts,  *»nd
miry  pits  (man  traps)  similar  to  what  protects  sites  in  The  Valley  of  Kings  in  Egy  pt.  This  elite  billionaire  ujs
I understand  in  the  Illuminati)  now  lias  total  control  over  the  land  and  the  explorer  Borough  is  not  allowed
onto  the  property.  Hie  billionaire  is  trying  to  get  an  exemption  to  the  Illinois  archeological  laws  so  Mint  he  can
get  out  of  the  siLe  what  lie  wants.  The  equipment  is  already  stockpiled  ill  cast  St,  lajuis  should  they  ever  get
the  exemption  from  the  State  legislature  that  they  want  with  3 miles  of  cyclone  fencing.  Tlie  billionaire  has  set
aside  $25  million  for  exploration.  If  the  site  is  for  real  it  will  upset  all  the  history  hooks.  Russell  Boroughs  may
have  brought  nut  already  3,000  stone  tablets.

DCalmkia  (Monk's  Mound) -Near  Granite  City,  this  site  is  off  1-55/70.  Tins  pyramid  is  the  largest  prehistoric
structure  In  Norili  America.  The  pyramid  is  thought  to  have  been  part  of  sun  worship  and  the  city  built  around
it  is  called  the  City  of  the  Sun.  t Various  evidences  exist  showing  that  sun  worship  around  the  world  was  often
(he  exoteric  side  of  wind  esotericly  was  Lucifcrian  worship.)  Tlic  base  of  Tlie  pyramid  is  larger  than  the  Great
Pyramid  in  Egypt.  the  New  Agers  had  a harmonic  eon  verge  nre  at  the  pyramid  in  19X7.  The  pyramid  had  a
Structure  on  top  of  it  in  ancient  times  which  is  thought  to  have  made  its  overall  height  150  feet  high.  An
ancient  Indian  of  importance  was  ceremonially  buried  at  the  site  with  3fHt  sacrificed  young  Indian  maiden*.
On  top  of  the  pyramid,  ancient  observers  could  use  a 2f)-fou4  high  circle  of  cedars  to  plot  such  things  us  the
movements  or  the  IMriades,  This  great  pyramid  then  was  a center  for  sun  worship  and  sacrifice  from  c.  9U0  A. Ik
U»  1100  A.D,  and  is  now  a modern  occult  spiritual  vortex".

□ Chicago- At  2237  West  Morse  Ave.  is  the  Heartland  Pagan  Assoc.  They  have  land  near  Chicago  where  they
have  mi  occult  library.  They  sponsor  all  types  of  events  and  rituals.  All  types  of  Satanism  are  practiced
throughout  live  city,  but  I am  not  aware  of  any  specific  locations.  In  a suburban  High  School  just  outside  of
Chicago,  school  officials  had  to  plate  in  the  school  handbook  "no  worshipping  Satan”  to  stop  activity  that  was


-17-


hiking  pi  it  ce  during  High  ScIhhi!  time,  in  Feb,  Mi5,  there  Hits  * casv  when  4 men  in  u Satanic  cull  killed  IH
people  for  rituals  ’ITk*  extensive  tunnel  system  built  under  Chicago  and  no  longer  in  public  use,  arc  used  by
S at  Allis  ts.  Hie  tunnel  system  was  designed  tr>  provide  a method  to  supply  all  the  down  town  area,  without
stores  and  factories  have  to  use  above  ground  transportation.  The  original  Ml  miles  of  underground  tunnels
Were  built  by  Chicago  Tunnel  Co,  in  1900  40’  below  ground.  They  were  ubuut  7 1/2*  Util  for  small  guage  It  inns.
In  1950,  tl>e  tunnels  were  abandoned  by  the  city.

□ Cold  Pyramid  House— situated  10  miles  south  ol  the  Wisconsin  border,  and  2 1/2  miles  north  of  sin  Hags
in  I turner,  from  Chicago  one  takes  1-91  north  to  Rf.  132,  exit  easlhntinrt,  arid  turn  Irf!  at  Dilley’s  Kd  flic  signs
will  then  direct  people  to  the  private  property  of  James  Onun  who  buill  this  100th  scale  replica  of  the  Great
Pyramid.  A -(Ill-Ion  40*  statue  of  a pharaoh  greets  people.  A burial  chamber  identical  to  King  'Jut’s  has  been
built  into  the  pyramid.  The  walls  an.  pain  led  identical  to  the  actual  ones  in  Egypt  In  various  putts  of  I he  site
ailn.il  gold  has  been  used  to  cover  various  items.  The  occult  have  been  building  a new  magical  tradition  around
the  site.

□ Gorham  Petroglyphs— IF  you  can  get  to  Grimsby,  go  south  on  3 toward  Gorham.  Go  west  (right)  on  the  first
road  past  the  bridge  before  the  bluff,  lorn  left  I south  I at  the  first  road  west  of  the  Muff.  Stay  on  this
unmarked  road  leading  to  the  last  house  (while).  Park  500'  past  the  Uoiim  and  head  on  fool  due  east  until  you
reach  the  bluff*  Walk  along  tin*  bluff  until  you  find  the  sacred  petroglyphs.  The  surrounding  Shawnee  National
Forest  also  has  some  i uteres  ting  sites  for  rituals  for  witchcraft.

D Kocklord,  IL  - Someone  in  Ibis  area  has  talked  about  rituals  there,  and  indeed  oik*  satanisl  Ims  been
convicted  of  murdering  for  Salim.

O Wheeling— The  Gardnerian  Coven's  journal  comes  out  of  Wheeling,  IL.

> > INDIANA

Several  sources  from  Indiana  have  mentioned  how  rampant  Satanism  and  Witchcraft  are  in  Indiana,  Many
or  the  churches  are  used  as  fronts.  In  general,  the  popular  ritual  sites  are  abandoned  coal  mines  and  sacred
ancient  Indian  sites.  Let  us  discuss  now  one  practice  und  u rum  in  on  technique  of  it  that  was  reported  for
Indiana,  and  is  probably  a widespread  practice1  throughout  the  Midwest  and  the  rest  of  the  United  Stales.  This
is  the  practice  of  getting  the  either  the  participation,  cooperation  or  acquiescence  of  the  local  police  in  Satanic
hi iiiils.  When  n local  sheriff  is  elected,  (und  many  of  these  elections  are  shady  and  get  in  some  shady
characters)  lie  will  be  contacted  by  the  Satanic  cult  and  wurned  that  he  can  either  lose  bis  life  wr  cooperate.
There  are  various  ways  to  coerce  und  hoy  the  sheriff,  if  he  hasn’t  already  been  elected  by  SaLinisl'h  money.  In
some  areas  of  Indiana,  votes  are  openly  sold  to  whoever  will  pay  the  voter  money.  Many  local  sheriffs  are  busy
with  many  extracurricular  activities  besides  their  jobs.  Wien  a ritual  is  in  be  performed  the  sheriff  is  called
on  the  telephone,  and  the  hint  to  look  the  other  way  is  made.  The  call  might  sound  like  Hello  Sheri  11,  we  have
a parly  planned  on  lliis  farm  tonight,  ami  we  will  get  a little  wild.  Don’t  be  alarmed.  We  take  care  of  everything.
We  wit!  provide  our  own  security  • If  the  local  sheriff  wants  to  stay  alive  he  will  turn  a blind  eye  to  such  type
of  things.  Sometimes  certain  policemen  are  brought  into  the  scheme  of  things,  then  the  SaUtniMs  will
coordinate  the  lime  of  the  rituals  with  the  liming  of  the  shifts  of  these  policemen.

II  Angel  Mounds -The  site  is  near  Evansville  a I the  Angel  Mounds  State  Memorial  Park.  This  site  lias  u
reconstructed  temple  of  an  ancient  Indian  nation.  T he  site  was  a city  built  for  worship  of  the  sun  (they  believe)
and  included  a step  pyramid,

D lied  ford -Law  mice,  Co.  Indiana  is  in  the  sooth  central  part  of  Indiana  and  has  numerous  large  stone
quarries,  These  old  stonp  quarries  are  abandoned.  They  go  underground  for  miles,  have  numerous  entrances,
mid  arc  (urge  enough  for  semi-trucks  to  drive  in  them.  They  arc  used  lor  Satanic  rituul.

□ lllnriiiiington,  —The  I If  lane  family  which  puts  on  4 networking  festivals  is  located  hurt.  A festival  on  a
Bloomington  campus  is  held  in  June.

□ Lvansville-Jusf  west  of  the  intersection  of  Hwy  41  & Li  rich  Rd  is  a Reid.  Chi  west  of  tlir  intersection  through
a field  and  there  is  an  abandoned  railway  yard  with  4 buildings  that  Satanists  have  used  fur  rituals.  A big  Iff
red  pen  Ingram  und  elaborate  Satanic  graffiti  were  painted  over  a period  of  time  around  llie  arm.  This  coven
was  (Is*  still?)  led  by  an  older  person,  but  it  is  mainly  made  up  of  young  people.

□ (.real  Circle  Mound-Northeast  of  Indianapolis  Is  the  (.rent  Circle  Mound.  Go  on  1459  und  get  off  at  Exit
2ht  go  north  on  9.  SotUerfirid  Rd.  to  232.  Turn  right  and  go  until  you  reach  the  site.  From  what  I understand,
the  entrance  was  shaped  likt  a frog  k\  the  Indians  who  hull  I v his  mound,  and  several  men  were  apparently
ritually  sacrificed  by  (be  Indians  ul  1 lie  site.  Other  mounds  in  the  ana  are  also  of  sacred  significance  for  occult


-18-


ceremonies,

□ Greene  Cu.--A  Satanic  group  left  traces  q[  Ihcir  rituals  ut  a stone  building  in  the  country  in  1986.

D Lakeville,  IN*-  Satanic  cults  are  in  the  Lakeville  area,  and  have  recruited  high  schoolers  at  the.  laVlIle  J.-S.
High  School.

D New  Harmony  Lahyr intli-Tlir  site  is  at  New  Harmony.  An  early  socialistic  experiment  by  the  occult  was
Isenrgc  Rapp's  Harmony  commune.  Robert  Owen  saved  the  piece*  of  the  experiment  and  built  a new
eo  hi  in  unity.  These  experiments  had  ties  to  what  the  Satanic  Hierarchy  was  setting  forth  to  accomplish,  and
were  promoted  by  the  secret  occult  fraternal  groups.  A mystical  labyrinth  called  an  outdoor  "church”  was  built
to  show  the  balance  (buriuoiiyl  that  man  is  supposedly  to  try  to  achieve  between  the  dual  fortes  of  the  world.
The  labyrinth  Is  also  related  to  Mother  Earth  worship.

> > IOWA

Q Daionporl,  Iowa  —a  pillar  erected  by  un  ancient  people  in  Iowa  who  worshipped  the  l)jed  I' estival  of  Os  inis
has  been  round  in  this  area.  The  Davenport  Calendar  Steele  was  found  in  1874  and  dated  to  the  9th  century
B.C.  from  the  3 ancient  languages  written  on  it  (Egyptian,  Iberian -Punic,  A an  ancient  Libyan  dialect.)  *l  he
Putnam  Museum  (note  the  Putnam  Family  Is  an  ofTshoot  of  the  Collins  Bloodline)  owns  the  ancient  site.

□ Hes  Moines,  Iowa  -Several  independent  reports  of  suluriic  cults  holding  rituals  in  Des  Moines.

>> KANSAS

It  goes  without  saying  that  Kansas  City,  KS,  Wichita,  and  Topeka  have  Satanic  covens.

D Ahiicnc,  KS—  Abilene,  KS  was  the  hometown  of  Eisenhower.  There  are  numerous  unknown  things  about
Eisenhower,  which  indicate  that  Abilene  has  some  Strong  Illuminati  connections.  Interestingly,  just  north  of
Abilene  (Abilene  lies  just  south  ol  1-70)  was  a Satanic  sacrifice  site.  To  get  to  the  site  go  just  2 miles  north  of
1-70.  and  I lien  one  mile  west  to  a forested  urea  which  is  near  a creek  and  a pit.  Within  this  forested  area  is
a small  clearing  about  MVx  341’  in  the  middle.  Dismembered  bodies  were  in  abundance  in  the  area,  including
children’s  bones.  Coyotes  were  cur Tying  away  human  parts  from  the  area.

□ Bus  hong,  KS— This  tiny  village  lies  west  of  Osage  City,  and  north  of  Emporia.  A series  of  missile  bases  were
built  by  the  government  in  this  county  and  abandoned.  A large  missile  base  wras  located  at  liushong  and
operated  from  1957-64.  After  it  was  abandoned,  the  people  who  owned  the  property  tried  to  keep  out  intruders,
but  nothing  they  did  could  keep  out  the  intruders.  Witnesses  who  would  try  to  clteck  out  what  w as  being  done
within  the  underground  tunnels  and  rooms  would  be  scared  oU  by  cult  people  guarding  the  urea.  Witnesses
could  see  bonfires  taking  place  within  an  airshaft.  Satanic  symbols  and  666  were  written  all  over  the  she.  666
was  written  on  the  big  entrance  door  to  the  underground  installation.  A 30’  waterpit  near  the  missile  silo  was
part  of  the  original  missile  base.  It  Ls  suspected  that  bodies  or  parts  may  have  been  deposited  down  the
water  pit.  It  is  speculated  that  the  people  who  bought  the  property  in  recent  limes  may  be  in  the  process  of
sanitizing  the  area  of  all  evidence.  There  was  a gun  emplacement  also  ut  the  site  and  at  that  gun  emplacement
n map  was  found  with  the  following  Kansas  towns  on  it,  llusltong,  Junction  City,  Kt.  Riley,  Burlington,
Burlingame,  White  City,  and  Plymouth.  Tills  is  very  interesting  because  those  places  have  had  independent
vil  ifications  of  Satanic  activity.  Most  of  the  sites  given  in  this  newsletter  on  Kansas  will  relate  to  this  Satanic
cult’s  ritual  sites  which  wrre  in  use  in  the  early  19841*  and  which  correspond  to  Lite  towns  shown  on  that  map.
At  the  very  least,  this  group  has  received  police  help,  but  it  may  go  farther,  the  group's  power  may  well  reach
quite  high.  This  is  not  a hierarchy  group,  but  it  can  be  speculated  that  they  may  work  with  the  hierarchy.

□ Dunlap,  KS— People  have  been  captured  and  taken  to  Dunlap  for  rituals  by  a group  wearing  lialloween  masks.

□ Ft.  Riley,  KS-Every  year,  the  MPs  and  the  army  find  bodies  on  the  reservation  -nol  where  the  shells  impact
Tor  testing  artillery  but  in  ail  adjacent  area.  Au  cx-M.P.  states  that  the  bodies  were  not  processed  for  proper
identification.

Q Junction  City,  KS-Nutanic  covens  operate  here.

□ HurUm,  KS.— Just  eusl  of  the  Kkluipoo  Indian  Reservation  is  Horton  where  a Satanic  coven  operates.  (WeVe
seen  connections  to  native  Indians  and  Satanism  before  in  ritual  sites.)

□ Plymouth,  KS— <ln  the  north  side  ol  I-541/hwy  57  is  Plymouth, KS  and  the  sou  Hi  side  is  the  Cottonwood  River
wrilh  wooded  area.  About  14  miles  west  of  Emporia,  and  it  ludf  mile  off  l-5ft/hwy57,  a Satanic  group  would  build
bonfires,  and  then  conduct  rituals.  Several  of  the  coven’s  men  would  he  sent  to  the  highway  to  tell  people  to
steer  dear  of  that  area  of  road  because  the  big  brush  pile  burning  was  causing  smoke.  In  Kansas  a gre.it  deal
of  land  and  brush  is  burned  during  the  year  especially  during  summer,  so  the  burning  had  a good  rover  story


-19-


and  kept  people  out  of  the  urea.  Between  two  poles  oo  the  ground  ritual  victims  were  whipped  amJ  tortured
with  their  arms  outstretched  on  the  ground  during  the  ritual  dates  about  once  a mouth.  During  Hie  winter
mouths,  witnesses  saw  a big  barn  near  there  being  used  lor  what  apparently  were  rituals.  A new  highway  is
now  being  constructed  over  the  area  that  was  used  for  these  open  air  rituals /bonfires.  Obviously,  another  site
is  in  use  now.

□ White  City,  KS--A  great  deal  of  animal  sacrifices  occur  here.  The  baseball  field  is  one  ol  the  site*.  A local
coven  is  responsible  for  much  or  the  activity,  which  is  interesting  because  Ft.  Riley  is  not  far  away.  One  man
wlio  stumbled  upon  a ritual  was  tortured  naked  there.  On  hallowmi  the  White  City  area  is  tom  up,  but  this
Ik  nothing  compared  to  what  the  Satanic  covens  do  that  night  in  secret  with  their  blood  ritual  and  sacrifice.

> > KENTUCKY

□ Wkkliffe  Mounds —This  was  the  bile  of  an  ancient  Indian  pyramid.  The  site  is  just  south  of  Cairo,  II.  Co  on
Route  51  lo  the  stoplight  at  60/62,  C.io  left  over  the  bridge  into  KT  and  keep  going  for  about  10  min.

> > I LOUISIANA

The  entire  state  uf  Louisiana  is  one  large  occult  center.  The  ritual  sites  in  this  state  must  number  in  the
hundreds,  however  we  will  make  a stab  at  giving  the  reader  some  of  these  sites.  The  origins  of  witchcraft  and
Satanism  in  Louisiana  go  hack  to  the  Indians  who  had  lived  in  tlie  urea  when  the  while  men  came.  The
Hopewell  Indians  lived  throughout  Louisiana  from  c.  HN1  ILL.  to  35(1  A.D.  They  carried  out  human  sacrifices,
and  |xrhap>  cannibalism.  At  least  14  Hupcwelt  sites  exist  around  the  state.  The  Mississippi*™  Indians  lived
in  Louisiana  from  KIM  In  1500.  Most  or  their  sites  are  in  northwest  Louisiana.  There  are  at  least  9 of  their  sites
in  the  state.  The  Encyc.  Brit,  shows  that  die  A taka  pa  language  was  used  in  Louisiana  at  the  time  when  the  early
white  settlers  began  coming,  t he  early  whites  were  French  and  Spanish  explorers,  trappers  and  settlers.  The
AUikupu  I have  been  told  were  the  only  cannibalistic  tribe  of  Indians  in  North  American  at  the  time.  (The
Shamans  of  the  Kwaklitfl  tribe  along  what  is  now  (Canada's  roast  had  rituals  where  the  highest  levels  i>r
Shamans  partook  of  ritual  cannibalism.  Further  south,  the  Aztecs  and  many  of  the  South  American  iribes  were
ran  nl  hall  stir  too.)  the  A taka  pa  Indians  apparently  built  mounds  out  of  oyster  shellv-Luuisiana  is  very  wet
swampy  territory*  These  mounds  are  near  waterways  because  that  is  where  the  oysters  were.  These  mounds
throughout  Louisiana  then  have  become  the  occult  ritual  sites  for  much  of  tiie  Witchcraft  rituals.  The  Alakapa
Indians,  when  raced  with  the  power  of  the  Catholic  church  around  1800,  mixed  with  the  incoming  Catholics.
The  Alukapas  who  were  into  witchcraft  and  cannibalism  were  accepted  into  the  ( athnlit  church  as  priests,  t hey
quietly  continued  In  practice  their  occultism,  which  has  evolved  into  much  uf  the  hard  core  generational
Satanism  in  the  state.  One  bund  of  Atakapu  were  homosexual  and  they  lived  in  the  area  that  is  now  New
Orleans.  As  they  mixed  with  the  incoming  settlers  they  created  Creoles*  Some  have  named  Louisiana  the  State
of  the  Creoles.  Bart  of  the  1 rentes  arc  a mixture  of  Blacks  with  Voodoo*  Atakapa  with  Witchcraft  and
Cannibalism,  and  while’s  practicing  Catholic  is  in.  This  mixture  has  created  an  occult  culture  among  the  Creole
people  that  is  generations  old.  Interestingly,  the  area  where  the  guy  bund  of  Atakapu  lived  became  New  Orleans
and  a homosexual  center.  In  the  French  quarter  and  Sat  City  there  are  many  gay  underground  bars  in
basements  called  ’’dungeons.*'  I still  Have  much  more  to  learn  to  see  Itow  it  all  fits  together,  but  Ibis  gives  a
good  idea  for  starters.  S a plena  and  Voodoo  are  very  strung  in  arcus  of  Louisiana*  Christian  hiker  Prlrr  Jensen
who  walked  across  America  on  foot,  in  his  second  hook  talks  about  his  exciting  blit  hair-raising  adventures
wilh  Voodoo  when  he  and  his  wife  crossed  Louisiana  on  fool.

D Carenero,  just  norlh  of  Lafayette  is  an  intense  Satanic  center  where  human  sacrifices  arc  regularly  made.

□ C hatham,  LA  area.  Edward  Wayne  Cox,  (l)OB  3-7-48,  SSN  435-74-8325,  Kt.  I,  Box  84.  -Jonesboro  Hwy.,
Chatham,  LA  has  led  a Satanic  coven  which  meets  in  tiie  swampy  woods  next  to  their  house  in  Chatham.  Cox
sacrifices  many  people,  and  dries  the  body  parts  and  sells  them  to  other  occult  groups.  He  sells  preserved  left
hands,  skulls,  and  infant  feet.  His  mother  who  lives  with  him  is  a witch,  and  Edward  Cox  is  a KKK  leader.  A
7(1  gallon  black  caldron  is  actually  used  tu  cook  human  flesh  over  an  open  lire.  ( ox  also  likes  tn  shrink  heads
which  be  learned  in  Barbados,

□ Moss  Bluirjusl  ninth  of  Lake  Charles  is  a heavily  used  area  for  Salanie  rituals  including  human  sacrifices.
Go  alilo  Rivera  was  in  lliis  area  Tor  Inti  excellent  special  on  Satanism,  Luke  Charles  has  Ssitanists  recruiting
children  in  the  schools.  I hove  also  been  told  that  a place  named  Martinsville  (or  is  ii  Marthaville?)  Is  also
a place  where  Satanism  is  strong  and  carries  out  human  sacrifices.

□ Lafayette  is  the  home  of  strung  Satanic  covens.


-20-


□ Pumly  Point  is  (lie  site  of  a large  Indian  dry-state  that  dates  hack  to  1,200  B.C.  New  Afters  and  witches
believe  there  are  connections  between  the  dly  and  Atlantis.  Some  start  their  Vision  Quests  at  the  20-ft.  high
manmade  Mound  B.  Apparently  the  center  of  the  city  was  designed  to  follow  the  sun's  movement,  and  so  the
ancient  city  center  is  also  considered  important.  AhuIIkt  site,  also  made  by  the  same  type  of  Indians  is  in
southern  Louisiana,  near  Lafayette  called  Beau  Rivage.

>>  MAINE

□ Hath,  ML  -Satanic  cults  ha ve  vandalized  a Bath  church.

D Portland,  ME  -It  is  believed  a teenage  Satanic  coven  is  responsible  Tor  defacing  numerous  churches  with
Satanic  slogans.  A feminist  wicca  type  group  meets  wrekJy  in  Portland,  ME.

>>  MARYLAND

A pagau/wicca  group  named  Arachue  conducts  outside  rituals  In  Ihe  state.  The  Temple  of  the  Silver  Crescent
also  holds  rituals  and  training  in  rituals.

D Baltimore,  MD-home  of  the  Earth  Song  Community.

□ Herhseda,  MI)--ThLs  is  the  home  of  a programming  center  used  by  the  Illuminati  and  intelligence  agencies.
They  have  suUinic  rituals  in  some  of  the  government  buildings  iu  secret.

O Blade  ns  burg,  MD-home  of  the  Fast  Kingdom  Soothsayer's  (mild.

□ Damascus,  MU  - The  town  had  a ritual  house  Tor  a teenage  Satanic  group.  In  Nov.  "86,  there  was  an  arson
at  rein  fed  to  this  house.  The  teenage  Salnnists  in  this  town  also  were  operating  iu  towns  near  Damascus,  such
as  (iatbersberg.

□ Littk  Falls  Parkway,  Montgomery  Co.-  From  the  RAO  railroad  tracks  there  was  a fool  path  up  a steep  hill.
At  the  lop  of  the  hill  a clearing  was  cut  in  the  woods.  The  site  was  used  by  Sulanists  in  Dec.  ’85.  The  site  Is
only  two  miles  from  the  Ur.ii -Secretary  of  Schultz's  house.

0 Ml.  Airy,  Ml)-  a teenage  Satanic  coven  was  operating  In  this  town  iu  the  late  J9#0s.

O Potomac,  MD—  An  occult  ritual  site  was  found  in  a wooded  sirea  in  Potomac,  MD.

0 Wheaton.  Ml)-  Satanic  ritual  sites  have  been  seen  in  the  urea.

> > MASSACHUSETTS

0 Boston -The  Unitarian  church  lias  sponsored  witchcraft  rituals.  In  fact,  there  is  a large  I niUirian  writchcmn
coven  called  CULPS  or  Coven  of  Unitarian  Universalis!  Pagans.  Witches  regularly  enroll  in  Unitarian
seminaries.  Near  Boston  each  year  on  Memorial  Day  is  the  Rites  of  Spring  Pagan  gathering  where  witches  from
various  types  of  covens  gel  together.

□ Falmouth,  MA— Lindisfame,  founded  in  1972,  was  started  to  foster  "the  emergence  of  a new  global  culture."
The  Land isfarne  Journal  (10  Shanks  Pond  Rd,  Falm«*ith)  and  staff  at  Falmouth  work  with  John  und  Nancy
Todd's  New  Alchemy  Institute.  The  Journal  ties  in  with  St.  John  the  Divine  Episcopal  Church  with  has
witchcraft  rituals  openly  at  its  site  in  New  York  City.

□ llingliam,  MA  - In  tlte  South  Shore  area  at  Wompatuck  Slate  Park  an  abandoned  munitions  bunker  which
lay  deep  in  the  wood  was  used  as  u temple  by  a local  Satanic  cull  For  rituals  in  the  1980s.

O Ipswich  <?),  MA  (somewhere  near  Salem  in  the  countryside  very  possibly  al  Ipswich)—  Bridget!  Bishop  is  a
high  level  Salamst  who  has  a house  near  Salem  which  looks  like  a barn.  Large  high  level  Satanic  meetings  have
been  held  (here.  Bridget!  Bishop's  ancestor,  who  bad  the  same  name,  was  put  to  death  for  witchcraft  in  colonial
Massachusetts  (the  courl  transcript  is  reprinted  in  the  privately  printed  hook  for  W.  Elliot  Woodward,
Roxbury,  Mass.  Records  of  Salem  Witchcraft  copied  from  I lie  Original  Documents.  VoL  I.  (1969)  pp.  135-172.)
Mure  is  a high  level  coven  that  operates  in  this  area.

0 Era  in  i ugh  a m,  MA—  West  or  lloslon  are  a number  or  Wicca  groups.

0 Mi  ll  or d.  MA— A local  coven  of  Wiccan  is  located  in  the  area.

□ Newburyporl,  MA-  A pagan  activist  group  called  the  TMA  is  located  here.

□ Salem -Hie  witches  al  Salem  are  not  afraid  to  parade  with  their  robes  and  pentagrams  on  out  iu  public.
Forty  witches  even  marched  in  Sairm's  Heritage  Day  Parade.  I -auric  Cabot  of  the  Cabot  family  has  led  the
wiccon  community  in  the  area.  Tlie  size-  of  the  wiccan  community  in  the  area  may  lie  in  the  thousands.  Sabbats
are  held  in  the  open  by  the  Council  of  Isis  Community.

0 Westport,  MA  - Druid  dolmen


-21-


> > MICHIGAN

□ Ann  Arbor,  Ml— The  Witchcraft  coven  and  Satanic  activity  is  strong  in  Ann  Arbor,  Ml*

□ Argentine,  MI—  the  cities  of  Lansing,  flint  and  PtonllaoDe troll  each  have  strong  satanic  covens.  These  cities
form  a triangle  and  sometimes  they  meet  in  the  center  of  that  geographic  triangle  at  a small  town  called
Argentine,.  V!l.  Argentine  has  several  lakes  In  its  area.  The  town  has  1,000  people  and  2 airfields.  Someone  from
Argentine  has  described  to  me  two  ritual  sites  within  the  town  that  were  discontinued  as  ritual  sites  and  then
the  sites  were  sanitized"  via  fires.  Evidently,  satanir  activity  in  lhe  Argentine  area  is  old.  There  were  5
buildings  built  in  the  early  Argentine  downtown,  of  which  only  one  had  a basement.  It  was  the  one  used  for
satanic  rituals.  The  house  had  a brick  basement  and  a cement  roof.  As  one  goes  down  Silver  Luke  Kd.  into
Argentine  and  crosses  the  river  into  town  tin*  old  boose  was  built  into  the  dstrn.  Tin?  building  was  turn  down
apparently  by  the  cult  and  the  inscriptions  were  washed  off.  Dogs  ami  cals  were  seen  cut  mg  on  exposed  human
skulls  before  they  were  cleaned  up.  Another  old  house  in  the  area  was  found  by  driving  through  Argentine  and
right  a I Cole  Trailer  Park.  At  the  end  of  the  trailer  park  was  a large  wouded  area  overlooking  the  rive.  This
house  also  had  a basement.  When  it  bumf  down,  it  had  an  intense  strange  smell  to  it.

O Detroit,  Ml— Detroit  has  had  a reputation  Tor  a long  time  as  being  a major  center  fur  witchcraft.  There  must
be  dozens  of  covens  at  least  in  the  urea.

□ Monroe,  Ml  -Satanlsts  got  teenagers  involved  in  Satanism  from  several  High  Schools  in  the  urea.

□ Oakland  County,  Ml  north  of  Detroit,  woods  are  used  for  some  Ivpe  of  coven  rilnals,

> > MINNESOTA

O Minneapolis -Home  of  The  Rowan  Tree  church,  and  (he  Rowan  Grove.  There  are  strung  Satanic  covens  in
(be  city,  including  Satanic  hierarchy  covens.

Q St.  Pa ii I -Llewellyn  Publications,  numerous  Wiccan  and  Satanic  covens  in  dly*

> > MISSISSIPPI

> > MISSOURI

The  caves  in  the  Ozarks  in  Missouri  & Arkansas  are  used  for  rituals.

D Lari  Junction,  Mo-A  teenage  satanic  group  convicted  of  first  degree  murder  was  a public  exposure  uf
Satanism  in  the  area.

□ fantastic  Caverns— These  caverns  are  located  in  the  Ozarks  near  Springfield.  This  is  Wiccan  ritual  sift.

□ Oak  Grove,  Mo— A small  .satanic  coven  operates  in  tbr  area.

□ Saint  Louis,  MO-TIn?  sewers  of  St.  Louis,  just  as  many  other  cities  are  being  used  by  Satanlsts.

□ Towosaghy— This  ancient  Indian  city  had  walls  and  was  well  protected.  It  is  believed  that  Indian  aristocrats
lived  within  the  city.  A conical  pyramid  is  within  the  city  remains.  Permission  to  visit  (he  site  must  be  received
Irom  the  Park  Superintendent,  Missouri  Dept,  of  Natural  Resources,  Division  of  Parks,  Rec.,  and  Historic
Preservation  014)  6490149.  Tlie  site  doesn't  receive  many  tourists  so  it  is  still  relatively  secret  Tor  rituals.  Take
1-55  to  SO.  Go  east  on  W>  past  East  Prairie  to  KF.  Then  south  post  AA.  Ilien  turn  left  least)  at  the  first
opportunity  on  an  unmarked  gravel  road  to  the  site.

□ Ml.  Vernon,  MO  -In  May,  *H5,  a group  of  20  young  Satanlsts  was  discovered  in  Hie  area.  Iky  were  .suspected
of  recruiting  children  and  teenagers  Into  satanism.

> > MONTANA

D ? Devil’s  Mtn,  Montano  is  a state  park  and  is  n ritual  site.

□ Glacier  Park,  Mont.  .South  of  Glacier  Park  are  thr  Hadger-Two  Medicine  Blackfect  Indian  sacred  grounds
which  are  a ritual  site.

□ Missouri  Headwaters  State  Park,  near  Logan,  Mont,  is  a ritual  site  for  Wiccan  groups

O Kiln- Kalis  pel  I urea,  Mon  tuna -just  cast  of  Kila  and  west  and  south  of  Middle  Fuy  Lake  is  an  area  where  a
Witchcraft  coven  carries  out  rituals,

□ Lewi?,  & Clark  Caverns  Stale  Park,  Mont.  This  park  is  found  by  going  west  of  the  town  of  Three  Forks  and
turning  left  when  one  gets  to  llwy  2.  The  caverns  are  west  of  Manhattan,  Mont.  Montana  has  many  bcaulifui
arcus  that  are  wilderness  that  the  public  has  access  to,  and  so  there  are  countless  places  that  could  be  used
lo  hide  an  outdoor  ritual.


-22-


>>  NEBRASKA

O Omaha— Hiiiuc  of  the  Coven  of  the  Saired  Oaks  (a  traditionalist  english  coven).  Henry  Gruver  in  his  talks
has  spoken  about  ritual  sites  in  the  sewers  of  Omaha  by  home-made  satanic  covens  who  carry  out  blood
sacrifices.  These  sites  are  rather  inconspicuous,  hrcaiise  people  don’t  normally  go  there,  but  cun  be  identified
by  Satanic  symbols  being  placed  upon  the  walls*

> > NEVADA

D Carson  City,  NV  -A  casino,  in  Carson  Chy(?l,  NV-one  of  the  casino’s  In  NV  is  used  for  Satanic  hierarchy
rituals.  The  children  are  kept  in  the  babysitting  areas  and  brought  into  the  ritual  area  through  one  of  the  side
doors  in  the  babysitting  room.  The  casinos  all  generally  have  rooms  where  children  can  be  left  anil  they  arc
babysat  and  shown  films.

Q Las  Vegas,  NV  ‘Although  Nevada  is  not  listed  within  this  particular  list,  the  Lns  Vegas  area  is  directly  pari
of  the  Southwest's  occult  activity.  Sunrise  Mountain  outside  of  Las  Vegas  is  a ritual  site.  Ims  Vegas  draws
people  from  the  entire  region,  nnl  to  mention  the  entire  world.  Dr.  Al  Carlisle  of  the  Utah  Slate  Prison  is
reported  to  have  estimated  that  600  human  victims  arc  killed  in  Satanic  rituals  in  Las  Vegas  every  year.

>>NEW  HAMPSHIRE

□ Mystery  Hill  ( America's  Stonehenge) -Hi  is  site  is  located  in  Southern  New  Humps  bin.  just  north  or  North
Salem,  NIL  If  you  are  on  1-93  & take  exit  3 onto  RL  II 1 and  go  east.  After  5 miles,  turn  right  onto  Island  Pond
road.  The  site  has  an  Oracle  Chamber  nud  other  places  that  the  occult  values  for  rituals.  A small  fee  is
charged  llie  public  to  visit  the  site.  Solstice  monoliths,  the  Beltane  Stone  with  inscriptions  and  a druid
observatory  ran  he  found  here  from  ancient  times,

□ Nashua,  NH— A wicca  seminary  is  located  here.  Sahbats  and  indoor  rfiual  meetings  are  held.

>>  NEW  JERSEY

□ Atlantic  City,  NJ—This  city  is  not  only  important  fur  the  Illuminati,  it  is  a stronghold  for  Satanism  and

Suntaria.

Q Yinland,  NJ-ln  1971,  this  town  discovered  the  leader  of  a local  30-tccnagcr  Satanic  coven,

Mike  Newell,  dead  in  a sandy  wash.

D Roselle  Park,  NJ— The  Order  of  Chorus  lias  weekly  meetings  and  rituals.

D Tripod  Rock,  NJ— This  site  is  called  New  Jersey’s  Stonehenge.  It  is  located  in  the  Pyramid  Mountain  Natural
and  Historical  area  under  llic  auspices  of  the  Morris  Co.  Park  Commission.  People  regularly  conn*  to  watch
the  summer  solstice.  The  site  is  in  northern  NJ  five  miles  north  of  the  intersection  of  1-80  & 1-287.

> > NEW  MEXICO

New  Mexico  has  been  an  important  area  for  the  Illuminati.  It  has  afforded  them  the'  secrecy  they  want  far  the.ir
projects,  and  a population  that  is  friendly  to  their  projects.  Part  of  the  reason  for  so  much  research  like  the
atom  bomb  project  being  done  there,  appears  related  to  the  high  level  of  witchcraft  in  the  population.  Perhaps
It  is  the  other  way  around?  One  of  the  Illuminati’s  men  Robert  Orville  Anderson  owns  1 million  acres  of  land
in  llic  Southwest  including  the  IJneoln  County  livestock  Company  of  Roswell,  New  Mexico.  Remember  Roswell?
the  site  of  the  most  publicized  CTO  crush  back  in  1947?  Knberl  Orville  Anderson  is  Chairman  of  the  Aspen
Institute,  an  important  Illuminati  organization,  and  lie  is  also  a member  of  (lie  CFR,  trustee  uf  Calif.  InsL  of
Tech,  founded  by  the  Unitariaiis  (sec  Ik*  Wise  As  Serpents  chap.  23  for  how-  the  Unitarians  tie  In  to  the
Illuminati  & Masons),  and  he  is  chairman  of  the  Lovelace  Foundation  of  which  Floyd  Odium,  a 6 II  luminal  us,
is  a lifetime  trustee.  Gaylord  Frcunan  was  also  a trustee  of  the  Aspen  Institute  of  Humanistic  Studies  and  also
owned  vast  amounts  of  land  in  New  Mexico*

□ Albuquerque.  NM  is  a hotbed  or  ever)'  kind  of  New  Age  group  or  store.  For  the  person  wanting  a legal
witchcraft  or  pagan  wedding  the  organization  CASHEW  (Children’s  Astral  Sanctuary  of  Healing  Earth
Wisdom  I was  providing  that  as  a service,  along  with  providing  an  occult  library  fur  the  area.  Whether  they  are
still  in  business  or  not,  I do  not  know.  I he  Southwest  Farlli  Festival  Assoc.  (SWEFAj  which  works  out  of
Albuquerque  puts  on  rituals  (Bel tune- dune  in  the  NM  mouutains.  Yule-lhe  weekend  day  before  Winter  Solstice,
and  their  Enchanted  Mountain  Cat  he  ring--#  4 to  5 day  festival)  in  New  Mexico.  Some  of  the  sacred  sites  in
New  Mexico  include  Chaco  Canyon  (125  northwest  of  Albuquerque),  and  Three  Rivers  I'etrnglyph  Parle

O ttandeiier  National  Monument,  is  32,000  acres  of  National  Park  land  that  has  some  important  occult  sites.


-23-


As  one  gets  ctarc  to  Los  Alamos,  Tallow  I Iwy  4 to  the  Park  entrance.  On  the  trails  beyond  the  amphitheater
and  a sign  to  the  Tyunonyi  Overlook  Trail  b the  Shrine  oT  the  Slone  Circle.  This  is  an  important  occult  Shrine.

□ I lopi  Indian  Reservation.  In  the  last  Issue  in  the  article  on  the  liopi  and  Southwest  Witchcraft  other  sites
oT  witchcraft  activity  are  given.

□ Ent  mington,  NM  —This  is  a strong  area  for  the  occult-  Many  high  ranking  Freemasons  are  in  the  area*  and
b teenage  Satanic  covens  were  in  the  area  when  I investigated  the  area  in  1993.  The  saUmists  use  the  Navajo
Reservation  to  carry' owl  tlieir  rituals  without  interference.  The  Navajo  have  their  own  occult  rituals  also.  There
w'ere  lour  rituals  sites  that  I found  in  the  area;  a.  Witches  Circle  (a  mountain  4-5  milts  north  or  the  college
at  Farmington,  b.  a secret  room  undei  the  mall  near  Dillards,  c.  a place  called  "steel  doors1’,  and  d.  Choke
Cherry  Canyon.  There  was  a Mtlnnic  group  posing  as  Christians  located  at  124  W,  Main  across  from  Allen’s
Theater  called  The  Door.  Some  or  The  Door's  core  group  are  Satan  is  Is  in  the  local  Satanic  covens.  They  had
a weird  halloween  parly  the  previous  year.  All  the  windows  on  their  building  arc  boarded  up  -similar  to  some
of  the  Masonic  Temples.  Witch’s  Circle  is  a mountain  lop  area  that  is  full  of  rocks*  cliffs  and  is  well  hidden.
On  Halloween  Night  198V,  a young  Christian  man  drove  his  pickup  out  to  Witch’s  Circle.  A coven  oT  about  21)
young  teenage  Satanisls  were  chanting  and  getting  ready  to  sacrifice  two  blond  children  they  had  tied  up  to
stakes.  Dead  aninmta,  goats  and  dogs  had  already  been  sacrificed.  They  were  dearly  getting  ready  to  sacrifice
the  children,  one  a boy  and  one  a girl.  The  Christian  scurried  down  the  hill  lu  his  pic  up  and  radioed  the
police  with  his  CB.  The  central  H(J TKs  of  the  Farmington  Police  is  no  the  NW  side  or  town  not  far  from  the
Witch’s  Circle  site.  The  police  arrived  quickly  and  immediately  deputized  the  young  man.  He  was  handed  a rifle
which  made  him  uncomfortable.  He  led  the  police  up  to  the  site.  When  the  coven  leader  saw  the  police  coming*
tip  tried  to  sacrifice  the  young  children,  but  the  police  shot  the  leader  mid  several  other  Satunisls  dead  before
they  could  sacrifice  the  2 children.  The  parents  of  the  dead  satanisls  were  thankful  to  die  Christian  for  what
he  had  done.  Hie  bottom  of  the  cross  that  the  Snhmisls  were  burning  that  night  was  Still  there  in  1993,  but
I he  sutanists  in  the  area  have  gone  underground.

Another  ritual  site  is  in  the  hills  in  an  abandoned  building  in  a cliff  which  has  sled  doors,  hence  the  name
Stcd  Doors."  Choke  Cherry  Canyon  is  another  satanic  ritual  site  in  the  area.  Occasionally,  the  cult  tries  to
pick  up  people  to  take  them  on  a trip  up  tu  the  hills.  These  are  one  way  trips.

On  the  cast  side  of  Farmington  is  a shopping  mall  which  has  a large  parking  lot.  Underneath  this  parking
lot  in  front  of  Dill  lards  dose  to  the  street  is  u man  hole  which  leads  to  an  underground  room  used  by  the
Salanists  for  meditation/rituaL  After  entering  rhe  man-hole  that  drains  into  the  street*  a person  follows  the
arrows  on  the  pipe.  The  tunnel  eventually  leads  a person  In  an  underground  area  close  to  Diftliards  containing
an  altar  with  a Itnphnniet  goals  head.  The  mall  also  has  u basement  which  is  strictly  off-limits,  which  may  well
connect  lo  the  room.

□ Santa  Ft.  NM  Is  considered  n spiritual  vortex  center,  and  groups  go  there  to  tap  into  that  vortex.

> > NEW  YORK

Police  in  N.Y.  have  said  that  as  many  as  1,1)00  groups  in  NYC  who  practice  animal  sacrifices.  All  the  major
U-S#  cl  lies  have  extensive  tunnel  systems  underneath  them  which  allow  fur  extensive  secret  activity.  1 have  been
investigating  these  secret  tunnel  systems  and  al  some  point  may  write  about  them.  I have  received  reports  from
around  die  country  about  these  tunnel  systems  being  used  for  Satanic  rituals.  A police  raid  in  June  of  1980
in  the  Bronx  saved  62  animals  which  a Satanic  cult  was  intending  to  sacrifice.

□ Brooklyn.  NY— The  FI ni. sis  foundation  at  85  Eastern  Parkway,  #2E,  Brooklyn  holds  seasonal  rituals/  public
events  in  the  New  York  area.

□ l lic  Hamptons  on  Long  Island  is  where  the  rich  live  and  have  houses  available  for  ritual.

O Newport,  NY  (Suffolk  Co.,  Long  Is.)— A young  teenage  Satanic  group  called  the  Knights  of  the  Black  Circle
were  involved  in  the  murder  of  a 17  year  old  in  1984.  The  papers  picked  up  the  story.

K3  New  York  City— New  York  has  reports  from  the  1920s  on  up  about  Satanic  rituals  being  performed  in  the
city.  David  Berkowitz  (Son  of  Sam > was  part  of  a Satanic  coven  in  NY.  Church  of  Set  operates  a Pylon  in  New
York.  Magical  Childe*  35  West  19th  St,  NY,  is  a famous  occult  store.  The  .store  is  a major  Satanic  recruiting
vise,  and  the  store  also  sponsors  a wiccan  festival.  Long  [stand  has  Gardneriun  witchcraft  covens.  An  cx-Bapiist
minister  W.  Ihilman  Keith  became  a notable  leader  of  the  taing  Island  Church  of  Aphrodite  after  its  founder
llolkin  filed.  Tlie  group  Enchantments,  341  L.  9th  St.,  NY,  sponsors  a witches  bull  on  All  Hallow's  Kyc.  I believe
the  Waldorf  School  rtf  Anthroposopliy  is  at  15  East  79th  St..  NY.  Antluoposophy  calls  itself  "Christian
occultism"  and  gut  started  when  the  A slurs  financed  Rudolf  Steiner,  who  was  a member  of  the  Theosophical


24


Society  and  a student  of  Ro^krucianisin.  The  serpent  In  a circle  with  its  tail  in  its  mouth  which  is  an  Illuminati
symbol  is  used  by  the  school.  The  Illuminati  also  have  established  tin?  Arcane  School  in  NVC.

Q Pomona,  NY-A  school  called  I he  Mystery  School  teaches  the  rituals  of  the  ancient  mystery  religion  s.

□ Thompson  Park  Light  lines,,  Watertown,  NY— This  is  believed  to  be  an  invisible  portal  to  llie  other  world.
Numerous  people  arc  supposed  to  have  disappeared  at  the  site,  along  with  ghosts  and  voices  appearing.
Wtecans  go  to  the  municipal  pork  or  perhaps  to  the  surrounding  groves  for  rituals.

D West  Point,  NY-A  scandal  involving  HI)  children  ritually  molested  by  the  Day  Care  center  on  the  Military
reservation  bn  ike  out  in  J986.  I,  this  newsletter's  author,  writ  to  West  Point  and  I util  believe  fully  that  some
of  the  military  men  were  involved  in  Satanism.

> > NORTH  CAROLINA

Cay  wiccans  hold  a Summer  Solstice  und  hull  Equinox  rituals  at  a camp  site  in  North  Carolina.  A new
age/wkean  rainbow  gathering  on  the  Summer  Solstice  also  takes  place  In  rural  NX\  organized  by  a group  in
Leicester,  NC.

Q Devil’s  Tramping  Ground,  N.(\— The  occult  views  this  as  a site  for  negative  energy.  In  other  words  supposedly
a great  site  to  visit  for  Salanists  wanting  evil  power.  The  site  Inis  u circle  on  it,  and  is  owned  by  Robert  Dowd,
Jr.  From  Siler  City,  NC  go  on  421  fnr  about  9 miles  until  road  902.  Turn  right  on  902  and  go  6 miles  to
Harper's  Crossroads,  Turn  right  mi  a rural  puved  road  1100.  Go  about  2 miles,  the  circle  is  on  tin;  left  in  the
woods.

□ Fort  Bragg,  NC— Green  Berets  art  stationed  here.  An  anny/CTA  group  of  satanists  with  contacts  with  the
.Satanic  hubs  was  importing  drugs  from  Vietnam  Through  the  base  for  sale  in  the  I averfeville  area.  The  other
military  base  was  also  used  for  by  these  military  SuUuiists.

D New  Ikrn.  N.C.  —A  rural-based  wicca  coven  In  the  area,  along  with  the  School  of  Wicra,

> > NORTH  DAKOTA

> >OHIO

D During  the  summer,  central  Ohio  hosts  the  Starwood  Festival.  A recreational  park  where  nudity  is  permitted
has  been  used  for  I lie  Festival  where  dancing  and  rituals  lake  place.  A winter  festival  is  held  at  a central
Ohioan  ski  resort.

D Howling  Green,  OH— Human  sacrifice  rituub  have  been  done  just  outside  of  Toledo,  in  a woods,  just  north
uf  Bowling  Green.

D I inrfiey,  Oil— site  of  the  Temple  of  Wicca

□ Fort  Ancient— This  is  but  one  of  numerous  similar  ancient  Indian  mounds  in  Ohio.  Hie  property  belongs  to
the  YMCA,  but  permission  can  be  obtained  to  go  on  the  property.  Visions  quests  are  sometimes  started  from
the  siLc.  The  area  is  north  of  Cincinnati  in  Warren  County,  and  about  a 40  minute  drive  from  Sharonville,

□ Great  Serpent  Mound -The  site  is  approx.  4tl  miles  due  east  of  Cincinnati.  The  undent  Indians  built
earthworks  that  from  the  sky  are  a snake  with  on  egg  coming  out  of  its  month.  From  the  town  of  Tranquility
go  north  on  770  to  73,  Tlien  go  right  on  73  to  the  Serpent  Mound  Shite  Memorial.  The  site  was  an  ancient
ceremonial  site,  and  the  occult  continue  to  use  it  that  way*

D Luredo,  OH --a  Satanic  coven  (possihly  with  hierarchy  connect  inns)  operates  in  the  area.

D Newark’s  Octagon  Earthworks—' These  uccult  site  was  au  enormous  earth-work  [lint  was  built  in  relation  to
celestial  objects,  such  as  Venus  and  the  IViades.  Hie  area  was  built  around  1200  ll.C.  according  to
archaeologists.

D Spencer  Township  15  miles  west  of  Toledo--  The  Lucas  County  Sheriffs  dept,  had  an  informant  within  a
coven  (in  Tidpdo)  that  wav  participating  in  Satanic  activity  in  western  Lucas  Co.  The  coven  celebrated  alt  the
regular  Satanic  holidays  and  had  Satanic  weddings,  elc.  They  had  observed  the  rituuh  at  night  on  two
occasions,  besides  hearing  from  numerous  witnesses.  The  puller  using  Ntartrons  watched  a ritual  a!  night  wilh
robes,  hoods,  armrd  guards,  etc.  near  Die  Michigan  border.  The  police  moved  into  the  urea  and  found  7
athames  i ritual  knifes),  seventy-two  left  shoes,  Satanic  symbols,  a sheet  or  tin  with  letters  written  backward,
etc.  rhey  dug  for  bodies  in  [lie  area  but  found  nunc.  The  press  in  June,  '85  ale  the  police  for  lunch  and  tried
to  make  the  investigation  look  like  a witch  hunt  because  the  police  failed  to  find  any  bodies*

D Toledo,  OH-The  citywide  coven  is  about  200  saUwisls,  which  break  down  into  groups  of  30  for  ritual
meetings,  A house  secretly  connected  to  a business  was  used.  The  group  has  police  helping  them.


-2b-


H Union  CiuOH  -Hundreds  of  animals  have  been  killed  by  Salanfcts  operating  in  the  county.

> > OKLAHOMA

The  various  Indian  tribes  that  populate  Oklahoma  have  made  the  state  an  occult  and  Satanic  center.  The
Satanic  hierarchy  has  interbred  important  Furopcan  bloodlines  with  Indian  occult  bloodllnes--fni  instance,  so
that  there  are  Rothschild  descendants  with  Cherokee  blood.  Other  hierarchy  bloodlines  arc  also  in  the  state.
The  wickedness  of  the  state  seems  to  spill  over  into  Kansas.  Two  cities  In  Kansas  across  the  border  from
Oklahoma  that  have  witchcraft  activity  arc  Liberal  and  Parsons,  Kansas.  I suspect  Ilia  I I lies?  towns  may  have
picked  up  their  wickedness  by  their  close  proximity  lo  Oklahoma.

□ Muskogee  is  un  area  ol  heavy  Satanic  coven  activity.  Many  of  the  Wheelers  who  are  Sutanists  live  in  lliis
area.  See  the  Iasi  newsletter  in  its  article  on  the  f reemans  Tor  previous  information  on  this  Satanic  bloodline.
D Oklahoma  City  is  the  site  of  Ihe  Abbey,  where  Satanic  practices,  Enoch  i mi  magic,  Sexual  magic  etc.  arc
taught  to  new  neophytes*  The  name  of  the  Abbey  is  reminiscent  of  the  Abbey  ihe  AWsler  Crowley  created,  and
perhaps  I Itul  is  where  the  idea  for  the  place's  name  came  from.  Oklahoma  City,  like  Tulsa,  except  tin  a smaller
scale  Is  a dty  run  hy  Satanism.

El  In  Seminole  County  and  Ciarvin  County  I believe  are  places  where  some  of  Hie  Satanic  section  houses  are
located.  These  section  houses  are  placed  in  remote  ureas  in  the  country  where  no  one  will  or  even  can  visit*
A section  bouse  may  have  in  tlic  neighborhood  of  15  to  20  families  living  communally.  Certain  women  serve
as  breeder?.,  and  most  of  the  child  sacrifices  come  from  the  section  houses  themselves.  Children  growing  up
in  such  environments  arc  totally  removed  from  a normal  life  and  grow  up  under  the  worst  type  or  abuse  and
generally  totally  under  bondage  fo  the  group.  Police  in  these  areas  are  infiltrated  with  Satan ists  so  that  it  is
not  likely  anything  will  happen  to  rock  the  boat  with  these  remote  Satanic  communities.  Rituals  are  held  uu
Fridays  and  Saturdays  at  the  Section  houses,  but  occult  activity  goes  on  constantly.  Some  of  the  members  of
the  section  houses  work  in  towns,  and  have  very  respectable  positions  as  lawyers,  doctors,  etc.

D Spiro  Mounds  b a site  that  Witches  claim  lias  n great  deal  of  spiritual  ene  rgy.  The  site  was  an  ancient  indlan
city  and  lias  mounds— like  little  pyramids  throughout  the  site.  Hie  Choctaw  Indians  and  their  black  slaves  who
discovered  the  site  around  1800  considered  the  ground  a powerful  occult  energy  source.  Local  blacks  hired  for
archeological  digs  have  shown  a great  deal  of  fear  about  what  they  do  at  the  site.  Craig  Mound  is  the  central
feature  of  the  site,  and  is  said  tu  have  great  power,  ghosts,  auras  etc.

□ Tulsa,  this  city  has  several  hierarchy  groups,  which  when  they  all  join  are  also  culled  "a  coven*,  t here  are
many  other  Satanic  and  wiccn  groups  in  tlic  city  also.  Tulsu  is  the  area  of  some  important  hierarchy  properties.
They  have  their  own  secure  houses,  within  which  they  have  a library  etc.  The  importance  of  Tulsa  to  the  Satanic
hierarchy  wits  mentioned,  but  some  more  uf  the  details  about  that  include  an  underground  Flying  Saucer  base
near  Tulsa,  and  that  Tulsa  is  the  headquarters  For  the  Sisters  of  Light.  Another  secret  IJFll  base  is  south  of
Tulsa  at  Ada.  OK.

> > OREGON

□ Tlie  Bend  area  has  an  extremely  strong  hierarchy  element.  Many  rich  people  have  gone  there.  Ritual  sites
are  numerous  in  the  area  east  and  north-east  and  north  of  Bend,  Bend,  OK  lias  several  suburbs  which  art
concent  ratio u points  for  where  Illuminati  members  live.  (Jne  of  these  is  Bowery  Lane  (actually  north  of  Rend
olT  the  main  liwy.  between  Redmond  and  Bend)  and  also  Broken  Top  Mountain.

Some  ritual  sites  in  the  area  are  Balancing  Rocks,  Castle  Rocks,  and  the  John  Day  Fossil  Beds.  T he  Satanic
hierarchy  In  Bend  keeps  their  very  secret  rituals  indoors  in  underground  locations,  except  during  tlic  Solstices,
flic  lali  solstice  fa  done  in  eastern  Oregon,  but  the  spring  solstice  is  done  ut  Coos  Buy.  Out*  site  for  satanic
rituals  which  is  no  lunger  used  was  a tornado-type  cellar  which  was  on  Bower ly  l ane  just  northwest  of  Ihe
Mortuary  /crematorium  north  of  town.

Another  ritual  site  close  to  Bend  was  the  Uiva  Tubes  /Skeleton  Cave  which  is  five  miles  south  of  Bead.
Apparently  about  100  llliiirbnali  men  gathered  there  in  their  tuxedos  in  their  merceries  and  rolls  royces  fur  a
meeting.

From  Bend  thr.  Illuminati  orders  have  been  verbally  transmitted  to  key  renters.  In  otir  area,  Ihe  Illuminati
orders  are  coming  into  City  Ctuh.  City  Club  Ls  a semi-secret  group  who  arc  the  city’s  political  insiders.  City
Club  secretly  runs  our  dl>  of  Portland.  Tlic  Illuminati  orders  are  verbally  given  about  weekly  lu  ihe  leading
witches,  salanisls  and  politicians.

□ We  will  start  with  the  Pacific  coast  mid  work  our  way  cast  fur  the  sake  of  covering  things  in  u systematic  way.


-2B-


I l»i‘  coastal  area  of  Oregon  is  a chain  of  houses  and  beach  ritual  areas  that  the  Satanists  employ.  In  the  norths
are  inside  rituals  at  Astoria.  Moving  south  along  the  coast  between  Manzanita  and  Rockaway  are  areas  used
for  Satanic  rituals.  And  both  towns  ait*  too.  Depot  Buy  and  Coos  Buy  are  also  ureas  of  intense  Satanic  ritual
activity.  Interestingly.  Dcpoe  Bay  is  the  site  of  a secret  submarine  base,  and  Coos  Bay  is  the  site  of  2 active
UFU  bases,  the  third,  east  of  Coos  Itay  lias  been  shut  down.  In  Depot*  Buy,  I lie  coven  uses  u while  bouse  on
the  rust  side  uf  the  main  drug  north  of  the  jetty.  South  of  Cooft  Bay  near  the  area  of  Seven  Devils  wayside  and
also  Big  Devil  Gulch.  high  level  Satanism  conduct  their  Spring  solstices.  Southeast  of  Coos  Bay  us  one  moves
into  the  forested  hills  and  small  towns  there  are  lots  of  drug  deals  and  witchcraft  rituals  being  conducted  in
the  urea.

O In  llie  eoustul  range  west  of  I’orlland  Is  another  secret  llFO  base,  and  at  Vernon ia,  the  Satanists  have  a
house  for  rituals.  In  between  Newbcgg  and  McMinuvillc  is  also  u big  house  where  a beautiful  basement  is  used
for  Satanic  rituals.

Q Eugene.  where  the  University  of  Oregon  is  situated,  is  a hotbed  of  Satanic  coven  activity.  Another  University
town  Corvallis,  OR  (Oregon  State)  Is  Ihe  center  of  a great  deal  of  New  Age  activity.  Oregon  has  been  the
recipient  of  a great  influx  of  hippies  and  New  Age  types  from  California  during  the  lust  few  decades.

O TIr  major  city  north  of  Eugene  between  Eugene  and  Portland  is  Salem.  As  might  be  expected  in  a Capital
city,  there  is  n great  deal  of  occult  and  Satanic  activity  in  Salem.  It  is  east  of  Salem,  where  wc  run  into  the  area
of  (tales,  OR  where  Jim  Cole  had  a ranch  for  a Satanic  cult.  Gates  was  an  appropriate  place,  and  the  people
of  the  Gate's  community  had  their  community  life  centered  around  Die  Independent  Order  of  Oddfellows.
Basically  the  community  life  centered  around  that  occult  secret  society  (IOF)  according  to  the  only  history  ever
writlen  of  the  village  ((talcs  Of  The  North  Sanliam.  by  Willis  Graft,  m2  reprint  of  the  19HH  copy,  p.  45)  .
Gates  is  in  between  Salem  and  Bend  on  Hwy  22.  This  is  significant  because  for  years  the  Illuminati  gave
instructions  for  a 3-state  urea  to  their  man  in  Bend  who  then  relayed  those  instructions  to  places  like  Salem.
Also  east  of  Salem  is  Siiverlon,  site  of  LaVcy’g  Oregon  headquarters  for  his  Church  of  Satan.  Knowing  that
waterfalls  often  are  allrihuted  til  have  special  powers,  1 would  expect  that  some  groups  are  using  Silver  Creek
Falls  near  Siiverlon  for  ritual,  just  like  they  use  Niagara  Knlls^NY  mid  Multnomah  Falls  in  Oregon’*  Columbia
Gorge.  Rituals  have  been  performed  at  Sliver  Creek  Falls  and  other  sites  in  the  mountains.

□ Wizard  Island  in  the  middle  of  Cotter  Lake  is  a sacred  site  lor  Pagan  rituals.

□ Farther  east  from  Bend,  is  Hums,  OR.  Ilk  1992,  in  the  Alvord  Desert  in  Harney  County  a dozen  people
constructed  a large  slur  in  the  desert  that  covers  6(1  acres  using  14 11  upright  logs,  at  an  overall  cost  of
thousands  of  dollars  and  the  donated  time  of  12  vulunleer  workers  who  helped  llie  designer  Bill  Witherspoon.
Bill  also  constructed  a large  Hindu  meditation  symbol  in  1990.  lliis  is  just  one  or  a number  of  examples  where
people  are  constructing  occult  sacred  sites  around  the  country.

O Portland,  OK-  Because  this  author  is  from  the  Portland  area,  he  is  very  well  informed  about  the  ritual  sites
in  this  area.  The  pattern  of  llie  ritual  sites  and  sutanie  stronghold  in  the  Portland.  OK  urea  is  very  typical  of
what  oik*  would  find  in  any  large  L.S.  Metro  area.  The  llhnninati/and  Satanic  covens  have  used  funeral  homes
for  rituals.  An  example  is  Finley's  Mortuary/Cremutorium  just  of  Hwy  2f>.  The  Illuminati  and  other  occult
groups  have  used  the  area  hospitals  for  programming  and  rituals,  for  example:  Freemasonry’s  Docniber her
Hospital  for  children  (ind.  secret  tunnels),  the  U.S.  Veteran’s  Hospital  Uriel.  secret  funnels),  and  the  Oregon
Health  Sciences  University  Hospital  (incl.  secret  tunnels).  The  Jesuits  who  are  also  satanists  liuw  used
Providence  Hospital  along  the  Bantield  Freeway.  Ike  Satanists  use  coffer  shops,  book  stores  and  hard  rock
concert  places  to  meet,  recruit  nnd  tench  at.  Examples  of  these  include  Panurge  Emporium  Store.  1005  NW
16  (satauic  ritual  paraphernalia,  robes,  athnnie#  etc.  and  book  store,  the  store  altendenl  waits  on  customers
w/  a python  snake  wrapped  around  her  ucck-llic  snake,  a demonized  familiar  is  quite  curious,  he  may  stick
his  head  close  to  yours  while  yon  try  lo  shop),  X-Ray  Cafe  (used  as  a Satanic  meeting  place  and  invites  rock
hands  willi  satanists  as  hand  members  lo  play),  the  Third  Eye  (a  witchcraft  store,  with  Grateful  Dead  material,
and  some  satanic  stuff  and  an  all-seeing  eye  over  its  front  door),  Atlantis  Rising  (witchcraft  store  w/  herbs),
Aurora  Books  (occult  book  store).  Jiffy-squid  (coffee  house  now  closed),  The  Howling  Frog  (a  coffee  shop  still
going  in  Ihe  6th  and  Everett  St.  area  uf  NW  Portland).  A movie  house  in  Portland  shows  satanic  movies  every
Fri,  Sul.,  and  Sun.  The  Ikeosopturnl  Society  in  NW  Portland  has  its  regional  headquarters  building  unci  its
public  occult  library.  Occult  rituals  go  on  in  homes  or  which  two  examples  are  2#<H  N.E.  42nd,  and  5931  S.E.
Bush.  The  C hurch  of  Satan,  who  local  leader  U Rex  Church,  is  located  in  a targe  spooky  house  used  for  riluuls
at  K9  N.F..  Thompson  St.  Portland.  Tin:  Illuminati  and  other  witchcraft  groups  like  to  use  the  large  forested
Forest  Park  near  St.  John's  bridge  in  Portland  for  ritual.  The  Illuminati  controls  Portland's  City  government


via  a club  called  City  Club,  Instructions  to  the  club  from  the  Illuminati  in  London  have  been  sent  via  c owners
such  as  llazel  E.  Billings,  who  would  go  to  City  Club  as  a speaker.  (Maze)  Billings  was  a descendml  of  the
generational  occult  family  of  Mary  Baker  Eddy,  Hazel's  husband  and  his  father  were  Freemasons.  Her
instructions  were  forwarded  via  l ind horn  In  .Scotland.)  Her  in  strati  ions  would  tlien  he  given  to  City  Chib
members  such  as  Robert  C-  Bailey  (Bohemian  Club  mmbr).  The  City  Club  bus  had  Satan ists  such  as  ex-Mayor
Bud  Clark  (a  lewd  bartender  who  became  mayor,  jus!  replaced  as  Mayor),  and  our  current  Mayor  Vein  Katz
(a  witch).

The  Northwest  tl.S.  occult  Area  Board  meets  in  Portland.  It  has  some  members  of  the  Illuminati  on  its
board  at  all  times,  a! though  nol  nil  members  are  Illuminati.  This  secret  Area  Board  represents  and  controls
all  the  occult  groups  in  this  area.  At  one  time  it  had  the  following  members:

• Mrs.  Wong  of  Salem—' This  woman  is  of  the  Li  family,  one  of  the  top  13  families.  The  U family  has  a 'proud*
occult  heritage  that  goes  luck  many  centuries.  They  are  expert*  in  palmistry'.  This  family  also  runs  the  Chinese
mafia-Triad  type  societies  in  this  area.  Their  mafia  group  is  called  The  Tong.

• Father  Bianco- ‘This  Jesuit  was  into  the  occult  and  has  lived  in  my  area  of  Portland,  lie  worked  with
Providence  Hospital  sit  one  lime.  During  the  1950s,  he  was  in  the  position  of  pastoral  care  at  Providence.

• Judge  Ringo-Thls  top  Inwyrr/judge  sat  on  the  area  board.

• The  minister  of  Ihe  Unity  church  on  Stark  Sr.,  Prlld.  Very  likely  a Freemason.

• The  woman  who  headed  up  the  Science  of  Mind  organization  which  lias  branches  on  Holgate  ill  Portland,
in  Salem,  and  in  California.

• Boh  Bartel  I (sp.?)-pnrl  of  Tektronics,  and  lived  in  Hazcldell.  Tliii  man  held  the  patent  for  holographic
images  and  was  doing  holographic  research  for  Tektronics.  Tektronics  is  tied  in  with  the  CIA.

• Dean  V -part  of  the  Bar  Association

• one  of  the  corporate  heads  of  OM  AKk

• Ben  Majes  la -employed  by  Tektronics.  was  skilled  in  TM,  taught  people  how  to  levitate,  and  Had  received  the
*TiM  Ascended  Master"  training.

Some  of  the  groups  that  they  manage  inch  a New  Age  School  in  Wilson ville,  Ihe  OTO,  Hie  Jesuits,  Alpha
Awareness  Seminars  which  were  given  at  Unity  Church  by  people  like  Wally  Vero  Men  to  of  Ml.  Shasta,  t'A,
Silva  Mind  Control,  and  Mormon  stakes.  New  Wicram  Church,  Sister  Spirit,  Ancient  Spirils,  Shadows  (in
Wilsonvlllf  j,  the  Thcosophical  Society,  The  Aquarian  Church  Universal,  the  Aquarian  Light  Center,  East-West
College.  Portland  Waldorf  School,  the  various  Masonic  groups  (who  have  80  special  tax-exempt  properties  here
in  Portland).  A group  which  calls  itself  Coi temporary  Christian  ILermettcsm  (isn't  Christian  magic  an
oxymoron?)  has  its  Temple  of  Wisdom  put  on  at  the  Catholic  Franciscan  Ctr.,  on  SW  Palatine  Kd.  in  Portland
The  young  people  lure  are  caught  up  with  Satanic  rock  hands  such  as  Grateful  Dead  (coke  distributors).
Iron  Maiden,  KISS,  YVr  Are  Satan's  People  (WASP),  and  King  Diamond.

Strange  activities  go  on  in  the  string  of  establishment*  of  Ihe  MeMenaniin  family.  Edgefield  is  just  one
ncculL,  drug  prostitution  establishment.  Other  strange  McMcnamin  establishments  with  occult  art  are  The  Blue
Moon  Tavern,  The  Baghdad  Theater,  and  ' I hr  Ham's  Head.

One  of  the  most  occultic  schools  is  the  public  school  in  NW  Portland  called  Metropolitan  Learning  Center.
There  teachers  do  occult  rituals  in  oflicial  teacher  meetings,  and  the  Winter  Solstice  play  which  re  placed  any
thing  lo  do  with  Christmas  about  14  years  ago  is  an  occult  ceremony  that  the  children  annually  participate  in.
Several  years  ago,  I exposed  Dial  Ihe  Winter  Solstice  play  liad  children  wearing  bar  codes  on  their  foreheads
during  an  extremely  occultic  emmony  Text*  Marrs  took  the  information  and  did  a front  page  story  about  iL
This  author's  writing  have  repeatedly  exposed  how  M nr  monism  has  a strong  contingent  of  satan  ists  in  its
leadership  and  membership.  Mormon  Bishop  Warehouses  are  used  In  store  cocaine.  Here  in  Portland,  three
ex-Illuminati  witnesses  liave  lold  me  about  thr  secret  Satanic  ritiial/prctgramming/entemiinnient  area  that  was
built  underneath  the  recently  built  Portland  Mormon  Temple  in  Lake  Oswego.  Entry  to  the  underground  site
is  accomplished  by  .iiilltorized  people  whose  retina’s  and  handprints  arc  scanned.  The  most  sophisticated
technology  has  been  used  to  blrle  this  underground  site.  However,  with  3 independent  witnesses  staling  that
Illuminati  rituals  go  on  underneath  the  Mormon  temple,  their  independent  stories  sound  credible.  Further
proof,  is  I hut  all  building  records  in  Lake  Oswego  are  to  be  public,  but  the  city  of  l^ake  Oswego  is  keeping  the
Mormon  temple  blueprints  secret  which  is  in  violation  nf  their  standards.  The  blueprints  were  also  changed
with  the  city  of  Lake  Oswego's  knowledge  to  hide  wfial  actually  was  built.  A Christian  witnessed  that  the
blueprints  got  changed  from  what  was  actually  built.  Marie  and  Donny  Osmund  are  public  examples  of
Mormon  Monarch  slaves.  Merrill  Osmond  works  with  the  Illuminati.  Ilic  Patriarchal  Blessings  arc  sometimes


used  by  adept  Satanic  Mormon  Patriarchs  to  hypnotize  Mormons,  or  to  cue  (base  who  arc  programmed.

A number  of  independent  witnesses  and  a court  case  have  provided  evidence  about  how  the  Satanisls  are
using  the  extensive  maze  of  tunnels  underneath  the  lieart  of  downtown  Portland.  This  is  a whole  subject  in
Itself,  but  needless  to  say  the  intelligence  agencies,  the  Illuminati,  the  Satanic  huh,  etc*  all  are  aware  of  how
in  get  into  I lie  tunnel  system.  Hie  (uiinel  system  was  a grid  until  the  city  turned  it  ini©  n maze  by  scaling  oft
portions.  Hie  original  system  was  built  for  shanghaiing  anyone  who  si  rayed  into  downtown  Portland  during
the  first  JUO  years  of  Portland’s  existence.  People  would  he  knocked  out  and  dragged  via  the  tunnels  to  ships,
to  provide  sailors  for  the  ships.  Any  disobedient  sailor  could  be  killed  by  his  ship’s  captain's  orders.  The
Chinese  Triads  also  built  extensive  additions  to  the  tunnels  for  while  slavery,  prostitution,  opium  dens,  and
illegal  gambling  dens.  The  city  government  was  in  cahoots  with  both  the  shanghaiing  and  the  Triads  during
its  curly  history,  (One  victim  of  Satanism  claims  that  a tunnel  line  has  been  run  from  the  Portland  tunnels
south  to  Eugene.  If  so,  the  tunnel  would  parallel  Interstate  S,|

Q Hull  Run,  near  Mt.  Hood.  Portland’s  drinking  water  relates  to  llluminali  activity  in  more  ways  that  one.
Portland  gets  purl  of  its  water  from  Bull  Run  reservoirs  up  toward  Ml.  Hood.  A large  area  up  around  the
reservoir  is  fenced  off  and  guarded,  supposedly  to  guard  our  water  supply.  Underground  near  the  reservoir
is  a good  size  complex  where  the  Illuminati  are  carrying  out  cloning,  or  at  least  were  (as  far  as  I know  the
complex  h still  operating.)  Interestingly,  a recent  Oregonian  [the  major  newspaper  in  this  ureal  news  article
said  that  cloning  of  animals  was  already  happening,  and  that  cloning  of  people  was  only  a short  time  into  the
future.  Of  course  they  didn't  mention  nor  even  livnt  that  this  is  already  being  done  only  20  miles  from  the
suburbs  of  Portland  in  a .secret  underground  complex.

D Ea.st  of  Portland  in  Ur,*  Mt.  Hood  area  is  a lake  called  Lost  Lake  where  rituals  are  carried  out  .Actually  there
art  several  sites  in  the  region  of  ML  Hood  which  are  used.  Not  only  that  but  in  the  Bull  Run  Reservoir  area
which  »s  closed  to  the  public  because  it  is  a major  source  of  Portland's  water  supply,  the  government  working
under  Illuminati  directions  have  built  a super-secret  underground  complex  to  do  biological  cloning.

□ Seaside,  OR  and  New  port  Beach,  Or.  have  also  been  sites  of  Satanic  activity.

D Yar lints,  OR  whlrh  Is  just  north  of  Devils  Elbow  St.  Pk.  ami  Neptune  St.  Pk.  is  the  area  that  the  Satan  L
hierarchy  is  now  using  for  their  Fall  equinox  rituals.

> > PLNNSLYYANNIA

a Indian  Echo  Caverns— These  caverns  are  considered  sacred  by  the  occult.  Ilir  caverns  are  located  one  mile
south  of  HummclstowiL  PA.  There  are  areas  near  the  caverns  where  people  camp.

□ Philadelphia-  Home  of  the  Pagan  Way,  u mystical  pagan  group,  which  became  Taoist s,

□ Slate  College-various  occult  groups  In  the  area.

> > RHODE  ISI  AND

> > SOUTH  CAROLINA
n Hilton  Head,  S.C.-

The  purpose  of  this  article  is  lo  help  reveal  to  Christians  how  the  real  political  process  works.  There  is  an
oft  quoted  quote  liv  Benjamin  Disraeli  (i80l-lH81J  who  was  Prime  Minister  of  the  world’s  greatest  empire  at
the  time,  the  British  Empire,  as  follows,  "So  you  see.„llral  the  world  b governed  by  very  different  personages
in  what  Is  imagined  by  those  who  are  not  themselves  behind  the  scenes.”  Another  insider  said,  "The  world  is
divided  into  three  kinds  of  people— a very  small  group  that  makes  things  happen,  a somewhat  larger  group  that
watches  things  happen,  and  a great  multitude  that  never  knows  what  has  happened.

One  big  part  of  the  process  for  the  Illuminati  in  their  selection  of  who  they  want  lo  make  president  of  the
l LK.  is  what  I will  call  ' meat  markets".  These  are  events  dial  the  potential  puppets  of  the  Illuminati  are  invited
Lo  so  llmt  the  Illuminati  talent  scouts  caa  compare  and  make  selections  about  who  they  want  to  place  into
certain  positions.  Of  course  they  hedge  tlicir  bets  by  running  their  people  in  all  the  parties  which  have  nuqor
candidates.

THE  STORY  BEHIND  IIILTON  HEAD

Renaissance  Week  ut  IliUon  Head,  South  Carolina  is  one  of  the  elite’s  meal  markets.  We  will  describe  how
Renaissance  Week  occurs  and  what  happens  during  this  week  after  a while.  Let’s  first  describe  Hilton  Head.


Hilton  Head  Island  is  convenient! % located  just  south  of  Paris  Island  along  the  southern  coast  of  South
Carolina.  Paris  Island  is  a major  .Marine  training  facility,  and  the  military  activity  hides  secret  intelligence
activity  for  the  elite.  Across  Port  Royal  Sound  lies  Hilton  Head  Island.  Just  a few  miles  further  south  is  the
Georgia  border  mid  the  city  of  Savannah.  Although  Hilton  Head  Island  is  located  only  about  20  miles  off  of
1-95  it  is  a rather  private  area,  while  still  close  to  some  iiu|>orUiiil  items.  The  island  lira  a nice  international
airport  to  laud  the  jets  ol  the  elite.  II  is  close  to  a labor  market  and  supplies  in  Savannah,  and  it  is  close  to
government  operations  at  Paris  Island.  The  building  on  llilton  Island  haw  been  hidden  on  purpose.  One  article
describes  this,  "Thanks  to  a painstakingly  crafted  tree  ordinance,  the  town  has  hren  uncommonly  successful
in  hiding  its  residential  and  commercial  buildings  behind  screens  of  green."  (Gale,  Rob.  "Hilton  Head:  The
Clumpy  View".  American  Forests.  Mar.-Apr.  199(1,  p.  *1)  The  city  of  llilton  Head  has  a very'  strict  complicated
set  of  laws  that  requires  city  citizens  to  bide  their  buildings  behind  and  under  trees  and  foliage.  Further,  the
process  of  getting  approval  Tor  any  building  requires  such  intense  planning  costs  to  a builder,  that  the  area
has  protected  itself  from  the  lower  classes  moving  in.  The  tree  ordinance  is  strictly  enforced  by  a Natural
Resources  Administrator.

Seclusion  is  one  of  attributes  of  llilton  Head  Unit  attracts  the  elite.  An  example  of  un  advertisement  plays
upon  this,  The  Westin  Resort,  Hilton  Head  Island,  has  a secluded  ocean  front  selling.  Each  of  the  410
graciously  appointed  guest  rooms  and  suites  at  the  AAA  Five- Diamond  and  rnotril  four-star- rated  property
features  its  own  private  balcony."  (Coon,  Peter  M.  "Westin  Resort,  Hilton  Head  Island"  World  Tennis.  May  ’91,

p.  261.)

Hilton  Head  Island  on  which  Hilton  Head,  Folly  Field  Beach,  and  Forest  Beach  are  on  is  an  Atlantic  Coast
barrier  island.  It  lias  beaches  un  the  east  and  tidal  salt  marshes  with  alligators  on  the  west.  It  has  a
subtropical  climate.

Until  (Ik*  early  l9S(Ts  the  island  was  undeveloped  with  second  and  third  growth  forests.  Early  in  the  1950s,
developer  Charles  Fraser  began  implementing  u plan  lu  develop  the  wilderness  island.  The  island  at  that  time
was  only  linked  by  ferry  to  the  mainland.  Fraser  began  developing  on  Hie  south  end,  where  a community  known
as  .Sea  I'ines  Plantation  was  developed.  That  happens  to  be  the  area  where  Ihe  Renaissance  Week  is  held.  Over
u 30  year  period  Ihe  island  has  been  developed  into  a world-class  resort  for  the  elite.  Many  of  the  elite  have
homes  on  hits  that  they  own.  A toil  road  was  being  built  in  1992  on  Ihe  island.  ("Hilton  Head  Island,  South
Carolina"  FNB  August  31,  '92,  p.  IK.)

Writer  Roger  Cox  described  die  island  as  "the  ultimate  resort  playground."  Roger  Cox  wrote  two  articles
on  Hilton  Head  Island  For  Tennis  magazine,  one  for  the  April  90  Issue  and  one  for  Ihe  March  199.1  Issue.  The
recent  issue  talks  about  how  the  island  has  300  tennis  courts,  a large  number  of  golf  courses,  shopping  malls,
campgrounds,  swimming  pools  and  ninny  other  tourist  attractions  for  the  elite.  The  island  even  lias  its  own
bank  tlie  llilton  Head  Bunk  and  Trust  Co.  N.A-'lliat  the  island  which  was  only  forest  in  1950  now  has  its  own
hank  shows  that  rapid  development  that  has  characterized  the  area  since  the  mid-1950s.

Another  writer  describes  the  Island  as  "an  riuhanleri  island".  (Simpson,  Eileen.  "One  Enchanted  Island"
Travel- Holiday,  Feb.  '90,  p.  111.)

Ail  advertise  in  rut  offered  honeynuioners  a 7-day  honeymoon  plan  at  Hie  Crystal  Sands  Holiday  Inn  Crnwne
Plaza  Resort  on  the  island  for  $908.

'There  is  a great  demand  for  skilled  people  to  service  the  elite’s  needs  and  the  magazine  Occupational
Outlook  Quarterly  . Winter  "90,  p.  2 plus  described  the  heneBts  that  went  along  with  working  the  long  hard
shifts  at  Hilton  Head's  various  hotels.  Although  the  work  days  may  often  12  hours  long,  apparently  the  pay
and  benefits  arc  Fine.  The  island's  hotels  are  open  365  days  a year,  and  work  goes  on  seven  days  a week.

About  20  of  (lie  business  on  the  isluud  comes  from  conventions.  The  major  corporations  use  Ihe  islund
u great  deal.

RENAISSANCE  WEEKEND

Perhaps  the  best  way  (o  describe  this  weekend  meat  market  is  simply  to  quote  an  article  on  Ihe  front  page
of  the  Wall  Street  Journal,  Monday  December  28.  1992.  The  article  is  by-lined  by  Wall  Struct  Journal  slalt
reporter  James  M.  Perry,  and  the  caption  Is  "SOME  BOOMERS  PLAN  TO  GREET  NEW  YEAR  FRETTING
OVER  POLICY -Two  Scheduled  to  Be  on  Hand  At  "Renaissance  Weekend’  Are  Named  Bill  and  Hillary"

"More  Ilian  500  earnest  baby  IxMiniers,  with  spouses  and  kids  in  tow,  are  descending  once  again  on  Hilton
Head,  S.C.  for  New  Year’s  Eve,  and  they  might  even  pop  a bottle  of  champagne.  Aflrr  all,  one  of  them,  a man
wliu  has  been  coming  to  these  "extended  house  parties"  for  eight  years,  is  the  next  president  of  the  United


-30-


Kiowa,  Apache  and  Omni  ache  nil  consider  the  Kuck  to  be  a source  of  spiritual  power.  Today,  Wiccans  and
Sataiusts  also  go  to  the  site  Tor  spiritual  power.  The  Comanches1  spiritism  had  Vision  Quests  which  were
connected  to  the  Enchanted  Rock  On  Aug.  16,  1987  a harmonic  convergence  day  was  held  by  New  Afters  and
Wiccans  at  the  Rock.  There  is  also  a large  granite  cave  called  Enchanlcd  Rock  Cave  at  the  site.  The  Park
Superintendent  believes  that  (lie  site  is  sacred.  His  name  was  Warren  Watson,  and  in  1985  he  slated,  "Now
Enchanted  Rock  is  a living  museum  with  both  historical  and  natural  attractions.  One  of  my  goals  is  to  educate
lint  public  into  an  attitude  about  Enchanted  Rock  State  Natural  Area  that's  different  from  any  other  state
park— to  develop  a special  reverence  for  this  place."  What  happened  to  separation  of  church  and  state?  As  I’ve
said  before,  it  appears  that  llie  I US*  government  has  been  taking  quiet  steps  during  this  century  to  protect  and
preserve  occult  spiritual  ritual  sites  that  arc  used  by  the  witches  mid  sutanists.

D Little  Cyprus,  a .suburb  of  Orange,  I X Is  a strong  point  or  Satanic  coven  activity.  Recruiters  are  going  into
the  public  schools  (u  recruit  children  into  Salmi  ism.  Interestingly,  there  is  a Mormon  temple  in  the  area.
Orange,  !X  sits  dose  to  the  Louisiana  border.

O Smilhville,  TX-TIiis  is  the  site  of  Wteean  gathering  on  the  weekend  prior  to  Valentine's  Day,

□ Waco,  TX  - Home  of  a satanic  c ult  The  Circle..  People  in  the  Illuminati  also  will  refer  to  it  as  The  Circle,

> > UTAH

D Bingham,  UT— This  ia  a hut  bed  area  lor  Satanism,  the  Illuminati  and  the  KKK.  A nd  brick  bouse  was  used
in  Hingham  liy  the  KKK  for  child  pom  production  and  Monarch  programming.  Their  midnight  ceremonial
site  wos  on  the  flat  below  Telegraph  Hill  near  t’opperHeid,  t.dtic  (Druidic)  holidays  are  celebrated  by  the  KKK
in  hooded  rituals.  Kennfcotl  Copper  Co.  (I tali  Copper  Co.)  in  the  area  is  run  by  the  Illuminati.

□ Huveitwccp,  Utah -1  lie  Hovcnweep  area  is  a series  of  6 ancient  ruins  that  attract  witchcraft  ceremonies.  To
gel  there  one  con  take  LLS.  highway  666  northwest  to  Pleasant  view  and  then  follow  the  unnumbered  county
road  2(1  miles  wrest,  There  is  a dirt  road  also  that  comes  in  from  Hatch  Trading  Post  which  sits  on  Hwy  262.

□ Morvnun  temples  in  L'lnh  and  California.  Oil  off  hours  Mormon  temples  are  the  scenes  of  Satanic  rituals
which  involve  both  Mormons  and  non-Mormon  Satan  ists.  Some  of  the  higher  Mormon  hierarchy  participate
arid  some  of  the  highest  Mormon  hierarchy  are  also  high  in  .Satanism.  Christians  ol  Jeremiah  films  were  led
to  entrances  to  the  tunnels  under  the  Salt  Lake  City  Temple  where  Satanic  rituals  are  carried  out

>>  VERMONT

□ South  Roy  alt  on,  VT  - Ancient  Druid  site  containing  the  Druids  Throne  with  Druid  menhirs,  Druid  Temple
with  the  Eye  of  Bel.

P South  Woodstock,  VT-  Ancient  Druid  Temple  of  Byunu  and  a Grotto  of  Venus  tire  at  the  site  with  a mother
goddess  temple  1(1  miles  north  of  South  Woodstock’s  temple.

> > VIRGINIA

O Charlottesville,  VA— The  Seax-Wiccu  Seminary' was  located  here.  (1  don’t  know  if  they  still  operate.)

□ Monlicello,  VA—  Ibe  buildings  al  Mnnticello,  the  home  that  Illuminatus/US  Pres.  Thomas  Jefferson  built  has
been  used  for  Satanic  rituals.

□ Richmond,  VA—  The  Satanic  covens  operating  in  this  city  have  some  of  the  Satanic  heavyweights  in  them.
Some  ol  the  covens  are  Illuminati  covens.  Barns  outside  of  Richmond  with  nearby  fields  with  bonfires  have
bee n one  of  the  types  of  places  ihe  Satan  is  ts  in  Richmond  have  used  for  their  rituals.  Human  sacrifices  are
regularly  performed.  I have  also  heard  of  Satanic  covens  in  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth.

> > WASHINGTON

Washington  is  lieavily  saturated  with  New  Age  leaders  and  New  Age  groups.  VYicca  groups  are  very  strong  in
the  state,  and  Satanism  is  very  strong.  Shops  like  the  Goddess  Rising  Wkca  Shop  on  4(106  1st  Ave  in  Seattle
supply  their  clients  with  the  needed  paraphernalia.  During  the  1950s,  the  West  Coast’s  Satanism  was  organized
into  a cohesive  organisation  with  its  own  hierarchy.  One  of  the  leading  men  in  Washington  Slate  was  a man
named  Peterson.  Major  meetings  of  the  Satanic  hierarchy  in  the  Washington  area  are  planned  and  organized
by  5 men,  who  have  their  uwn  top  secret  planning  meetings.  As  I understand  it  these  men  are  knighted  with
what  is  called  the  "5  star".  Satanism  is  so  secret,  that  meetings  are  not  even  announced  over  the  phone.
Many  of  the  covens  meet  on  every  Friday  or  Saturday.  The  O.T.O.  in  Washington  and  Oregon  also  meets  on
Friday.


-33


D Washington  Stale— one  of  the  renders  of  this  newsletter  read  about  the  Green  Berets  sacrificing  soldiers  and
then  remembered  a recent  clip  (about  3 wks.  ago)  on  Unsolved  Mysteries  where  the  establishment  media  did
a story  on  how  it  looked  like  the  Green  Berets  in  Washington  had  killed  an  army  man,  but  that  the  explanation
might  also  he  suicide.  It  looked  like  to  this  Christian  and  also  sounds  like  what  was  portrayed  on  T.V,  as  ait
investigation  was  a coverup.  Turning  our  attention  east  or  Seattle  in  the  Cascades  Mountains  in  Washington
is  a retreat  renter  for  a traditional  English  Wicca  group  called  The  Aquarian  Tabernacle  Church  which  goes
tv  the  Washington  seaside  at  a retreat  center  for  their  Spring  Equinox  Mystery  festival.

□ lielli  ngli  am.  \VA  -near  Canada,  al  Bellingham,  \VA  near  the  Alaska  Ferry  Terminal  south  of  some  monuments
Salanista  have  been  conducting  rituals.  Could  these  be  In  crMinectmn  with  future  movements  or  people?

O Boeing  -Satanism  is  practiced  lit  Boeing,  within  the  Green  Berets  stationed  in  Washington,  and  ten
"Christian*  churches  in  the  Seattle  area  are  used  for  Satanic  human  sacrifices  on  their  off  hours.  Satanism
is  infillraled  within  the  Mormon  church  in  the  area.

D Programming  of  Saianists  (mind  control)  is  carried  out  in  the  Hoeing  Complex  in  Washington.

D Clear  Lake,  WA  -North  of  Snohomish  near  Mt.  Vernon  is  Clear  Lake  llie  liunie  of  the  New  Mcmiu  Collective
of  Wicca  ns.

D Ft.  Lewis.  WA  A 5-6  year  power  struggle  between  Hermetic  niagick  and  riluaJ  niagick  was  recently  patched
up  hy  the  Satanic  hierarchy  by  bringing  in  someone  from  the  hierarchy  who  lived  In  the  Midwest.  This  man's
name  mils  Bryan.  He  is  approx.  4K  years  old,  5’6r,  speaks  English  with  a European  accent,  lie  is  a powerful
practitioner  of  Hermetic  rnagick.  Besides  unifying  Satanism,  a strong  program  to  develop  witchcraft  and
Satanism  within  the  military  has  been  pushed.  Satanic  activity  in  the  military'  was  discovered  by  M.P.S  who
found  out  that  the  Green  Berets  in  Washington  had  sacrificed  several  army  men  who  had  been  missing.  The
whole  situation  was  immediately  covered  up  hy  the  military'.  Elements  of  the  Green  Berets  have  been  connected
to  the  Illuminati  since  their  inception,  although  the  rank  and  file  Green  Berets  were  not  until  recent  times
brought  into  it.  In  other  words  they  have  been  slowing  turning  the  Green  Herds  into  a dangerous  Satanic
military  force.

□ Gilford  Pinchnt  Nat.  Wilderness  Area,  WA  -Witchcraft  rituals  have  been  seen  taking  place  in  the  Gifford
t'lnrhot  National  Forest  in  the  Indian  Heaven  Wilderness  Area  on  the  plateau  at  an  area  where  the  Indians
in  the  old  west  used  to  gather  once  a year  for  festivals  and  horse  racing.  This  type  of  place  is  representative
of  many  of  the  types  <>r  sites  UiuL  are  popular  with  witchcraft  If  you  know  of  any  old  Indian  sites  that  have  any
"Spiritual"  significance,  the  site  may  well  be  a place  used  for  wile  her  all  rituals.

□ Snohomish,  WA  -Two  strong  centers  for  Satanism  are  Snohomish,  WA  and  Yelnu  WA.  Yelm,  WA  is  also  a
New  Age  center,  where  the  J.Z,  Knight  who  channels  Ramtlia  has  her  heavily  guarded  international
headquarters,  and  1,300  followers,  ftamtha  (J.7..  Knight)  ham  told  her  followers  to  study  and  team  all  they  can
about  the  New  World  Ol  der.  I met  u Ramtlia  follower  who  was  interested  in  learning  what  I could  teach  on
the  NWO.  When  I tried  to  explain  how  five  Illuminati  uses  abusive  mind-control  and  conducts  human  sacrifices,
etc.  she  told  me  Hint  it  was  my  liias-Ut  quote  her,  she  said,  "It  is  only  your  opinion  that  these  things  are  abuse-
t hese  people  would  not  agree  that  these  sacrifices  are  abuse."  K could  not  get  her  to  agree  that  ritual  sexual
abuse  and  liintiau  sacrifice  are  evil  and  are  abuse.  She  had  been  taught  that  she  is  a god,  and  that  as  a god
she  ran  do  whatever  she  wants.  Without  any  proper  moral  frame  of  reference  people  like  her  in  the  New  Age
will  never  challenge  the  NWO.  She  is  a good  example  of  how  most  people  will  never  challenge  the  NWO  because
they  can  see  only  part  of  it,  and  they  then  go  nnd  attach  themselves  to  some  other  branch  ot  it.

J.Z.  Knights  fortress-like  New  Age  Yelm  community'  was  the  site  of  spiritual  warfare  this  last  year  by  a
two  busloads  of  Christian  young  people.  The  Christians  in  that  area  haw  been  under  heavy  spiritual  attack
from  the  heavy  concentration  or  anti-Christian  elements,  and  their  youth  director  invited  the  Portland  Youth.
Christians  have  been  dying  mysteriously,  frequently  getting  sick,  ect.  in  the  area.  The  Christian  young  people
prayed  mightily  at  one  site,  and  when  they  approached  it  gate  to  the  main  community  on  one  of  the  gravel
roads  adjacent  lo  the  land,  heavily  armed  guards  with  automatic  weapons  appeared.  Somehow  the  guards  at
the  commune  knew  they  were  coining.  The  people  did  their  spiritual  warfare  from  the  bus,  singing  mighty
worship  songs,  and  praying.  If  was  a wonderful  upbuilding  experience  for  the  Christian  youth.

□ La  Pagan.  WA-  A self-proclaimed  Wiccan  has  built  a large  occult  disneyland-like  complex  on  his  property
in  Washington.  Much  of  the  writing  on  the  properly  is  in  Gaelic.  The  place  is  called  La  Pagan,

□ Marysville,  WA  is  reported  to  be  the  home  of  7 Wiccan  covens-  up  the  road  is  Arlington  where  the  I ove
Israel  group  which  has  connections  to  the  Process  Church.  Area  mountains  & lakes  which  arc  sacred  Indian
sites  are  used  for  rituals,  A Maryville  witch  came  to  Christ  and  the  story  is  told  l names  changed)  in  a hook


-34-


on  Ml1!).

DStanchcnjic,  W A— just  1*1  nu  ihe  Stonehenge  in  Washington  near  Murvhill  Slate  Purk  (see  3/15 /93  newsletter)
in  a graveyard.  This  graveyard  is  used  by  the  Satan  ists,  because  it  is  far  more  private  than  the  Stonehenge,
which  is  used  by  some  Wirran  groups.  This  might  be  a site  that  someone  could  actually  get  some  photos  of
the  secret  middle  level  Illuminati  doing  rituals.  Tlic  cemetery  that  they  use  is  reached  by  going  south  on  the
road  that  (be  Stonehenge  is  just  west  of.  Just  a little  south  of  the  Stonehenge  is  a dirt  t oad  going  west.  Travel
about  600  feet  on  that  road  and  you  will  arrive  at  a cemetery.  Across  From  the  Dalles  in  Oregon,  an  exact  full
size  replica  of  Stonphenge  was  built  in  the  1920  and  lias  been  used  Tor  pagan  rituals.  To  get  lliere  cross  the
bridge  at  The  Dalles,  Or,  iulo  Washington,  hollow  US  97  until  it  crosses  Hwy  14  about  2 miles  east  of  Mary  hill
Museum.  Signs  will  direct  the  visitor  to  make  a right-hand  turn  onlo  a narrow  paved  road.  Near  this
Stonehenge  is  Maryhill  Museum  built  with  Samuel  Hill's  railroad  fortune  and  dedicated  by  the  Queen  or
Romania.  For  some  reason  the  Queen  of  Rumania  was  iuliiaalely  connected  with  this  site  mid  donuled  items
to  the  museum.  The  area  is  the  scene  of  rituals.  On  the  Fall  hquiook  a northwest  pagan  festival  takes  place
in  the  area.

D Tacoma,  VVA  - A house  In-longing  to  Dr.  & Rose  Wilson  (who  has  ties  to  Nazism)  is  used  for  Satanic  rituals.
Rose  gels  Instructions  from  lire  Rockefellers.  Dr.  Wilson  wits  ritually  killed.  Hie  house  has  a second  basement.
A small  room  is  used  lo  put  children  in  during  rituals.  An  altar  of'  stone  is  used  during  rituals.  A hospital  in
Tacoma  Is  also  used  by  this  group  for  rituals.

> > WASHINGTON,  D C.

Washington,  D.C.  lias  a large  his  panic  occult  underworld  and  Santaria.  The  Santarkins  were  at  one  time
getting  animals  from  Frederick,  VA.  The  political  world  and  the  government  agencies  arc  constantly  liaving
parties  and  other  occull  activities.  Some  of  the  monuments  around  Washington,  l).C.  have  occult  significance.

> >WEST  VIRGINIA

Although  1 know  that  Satanic  cults  operate  in  West  Virginia,  I don’t  have  specific  reports  of  ritual  sites*

D Mciundsville,  WV--  Grave  Creek  Mound  National  Historic  I jmdmnrk  is  the  site  of  2,01)0  year  old  69’  burial
mound.  Witchcraft  likes  to  draw  power  form  ancient  burial  grounds.

>>  WISCONSIN

1 have  been  informed  tluit  there  was  a community,  a whole  village  of  witches  in  Wisconsin.  I suspect  it  may  be
Circle  near  ML  lloreli.  The  community  may  number  around  200.  Circle  is  in  southwestern  Wisconsin.  It  is
about  30  miles  from  Madison,  and  has  200  acres.  It  is  near  Ml.  lloreb.  At  Circle  wiccans  have  their  own
community,  with  pagan  marriages.  Circle  publishes  various  newsletters,  a sourcebook,  and  helps  networking
among  Pagans.  Mt.  Horeh  also  has  a branch  of  the  New  Wiccau  Church.  About  400  puguus  participate  yearly
in  the  Summer  Solstice  festival  held  at  the  Circle.

O A/talan-* This  was  the  ancient  capital  of  an  Indian  culture.  The  site  has  the  Pyramids  of  the  Sun  and  Mihju.
In  honor  to  the  Sun -god  ritual  human  sacrifices  were  carried  out  hy  the  Indians.  After  the  sacrifices  ritual
cannibalism  was  participated  in  by  the  Priests.  The  site  is  between  Milwaukee  and  Madison  near  Lake  Mills.

□ lllue  Mounds --site  was  to  become  a Wtccai  seminary  to  teach  coven  leadership  skills  and  magic.  This  Wiccau
Resource  Center  is  named  Our  Lady  of  ll»c  Woods.

□ lizard  Mounds— This  is  believed  to  lie  a powerful  occult  site  built  by  the  Indians.  Large  earthen  effigies  of
things  such  as  lizards  abound  in  Wisconsin  and  Ibis  is  one  of  Ihe  beller  ones.  Get  on  Route  144  and  four  miles
northeast  out  of  West  Bend  to  County  Trunk  Highway  A,  then  follow  the  direct  markers.

□ Via  d is  on -home  of  several  Wiccau  covens,  including  Ihe  Re-formed  Congregation  or  Ihe  Goddess  fl'RCG)

□ Milwaukee- Avalon  is  a center  fur  leaching  paganism,  magic  and  rituals  hauled  in  Milwaukee

□ Mt.  Horpb—  Pagan  Spir  it  Alliance  Newsletter  comes  out  of  here.

> > WYOMING

□ Jackson  Hole.  WY  -Illuminati  elite  like  to  have  randies  in  this  urea.  The  Rockefellers  have  a ranch  in  the
area.  With  so  much  illuiniiiati  activity  in  the  arra,  it  is  a sure  thing  that  rituals  go  on  in  the  Jackson  Hole  urea.
D Rawlins.  WY— homemade  Satanic  covens  have  used  ureas  just  outside  of  the  town

□ Shirley  Ravin,  WY— near  Ihe  ghost  town  of  Shirley  Basin  in  n gulch  in  <in  area  culled  the  Shirley  Busin  .Area


-35-


a Satanic  group  lias  held  rituals.


CANADA— H ere  are  some  odds  and  ends  on  ritual  sites  in  Cunudu.

D Fruitvale.  B.C.-Guld  is  quietly  melted  & refined  near  here.

□ Montreal,  —Home  or  the  Satanic  group  C.A.S.H.  Continental  Assoc,  of  Satan's  Hope.

□ Quebec*  Que.-Some  of  the  Catholic  nuns  and  priests  are  secret  Sutanists  and  use  their  positions  to  aid  in
their  Satanic  activities.  The  Catholic  church  in  Quebec  Is  a major  player  in  the  acquisition  of  children  for
Satanic  programming  and  sacrifice.

□ Red  l>eer,  Alberta -This  ami  o!  Canada  has  intense  Illuminati  activity

□ Ion  into- Druids  among  others  groups  are  in  Toronto.  This  metropolis  is  truly  international,  mid  lias  many
different  types  of  occult  groups.

D Vancouver,  B.C.-This  area  is  considered  a spiritual  vortex  of  power.  High  level  Satanic  rituals  are  conducted
in  the  area.

D Windsor,  On  I— This  city  had  h strung  Satanic  coven  mack  up  of  high  schoolers  that  were  reported  going  18
miles  outside  of  the  city  in  a woods  to  conduct  rituals.


-36-
