sozry to pe so caray roaponding to your 12/31.ehich cane promptiy.Itisaconb
dnation of the phlebitis sloaing mo dewn,a trip I had to make and matters Icould not
fast aa in the paat and au etty tired by suppertime.Or, right now, after cating.

L aa Ln the amkvard positlon of wanting to be Infored and not being able to tr
take tims for roeponses....Thamke for hat you said about Pk..On editing,when I
can't get gny dnd of belp except occaaional transcortation whon I ahouldn't drive, no
chance.

Ie boea trying intoraitontly for eieht yeera.

hua corrcrclal oditine jobe
any more.The fapoasible la that and worrying about lt dooa ro ccrc then gonazate
frustrations.

It thare can be canaroial interagt in a book,that is dirferent.

The
pubiiebar suolfes it.butay izdlate proble Lo getting tiae to do any iting at
aLl.So,hile it Ls true that the ritingtends to aasuse a oertain aount ofcno-
ledge cn the part of the reader, a large mail is aingularly without cospiaint about t
Were sueh abcok pnblished co sarctally there woula ba a different resctlons.Partic
Larlyfroereviewara.

arriaon' belia that sth federal cars akad dn Mis ptace hs bnd be on the in.

I agree that t trve Albe's atatamont that ha helped afrix rlvets to the aling
would De impcrtent.

However,I doa't see any reaeon why Osld woult havs taan
rifle all that far when he could Bave rfvetted et how with virtually no expense and
ith rdveta Alba could have ctven htsI alao Pind ft hari to bolieve he woula not hava
told this to the Ful shd oredesparete aa they were for ny canflraton ol xariru fn
particalar,wg tho FH would notheve roported t.No auch docunento and Iye gome
not tho.

They nceded it too Mzod.

Anyoae wto worked for Reily and didn't switoh to tha Basa plants had rccka in
 p
file for when I can do It ayein, at thut writing tina, please send thes.eOn Ayeg-
worta and the cadia, agred.

And I1l take Hexinsrd over his aiy dey.

Golz 16 a
good raporter with not goad Juageent.

If it szies a stoxy he lius no furthor concern.Golz 16 a
good raporter with not goad Juageent. If it szies a stoxy he lius no furthor concern. Oald'sreceitafavelepea troa the Fcculd account for hlahavgdn aroumd in
Thet the driver ofthe vehlcie oula noceeerlly bave had hisback to L. Alba s
true cnly ifhe wore carelees end idn Lock.hey it woul have Doen hia right aide
until ho turaed to the drver'mindow....If you ant me to go ovar what you do not
say at the end of f12, Ill do it,But I do not believe ilixely than any taderal
asa wtlnesa..Aeaune that Osrald,Lse uoot youmgcen,had aone intereet La woapono
Jn itself thie acans nothing. Assume he was gooting ofi at Albe's. What else could they
talk about?.I don't pretend to cnos tio nswura ari I can't prove avy ol this ts
worth,vny not de soes rethdaking based ou to assuptions: he Lices aonay and hs had
Bfederal comnectioi of his oaf, Thaorize on the latter and beiiere the faruer. Bud
When Ajtesorth soved to Boustan, Eor Kouaeek, onnie bad Lef't.Aynesworth hnd taro
Cadizlncs, not par for reyortert. A doandale reporter troa Boustha is ny aource. more cazfly reomber irthay are conaectad wth a reality thai can stay Lnthe rind. would ftdoany good torveaone ofyour oboerattonsith tns1nzindy Would 1t
ired for abonb in aeconds,heexpLosdve and tuo spring clfpa?Orahoatsenal tv

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ation of vieh I know. One of tha koys to aualyals and underatanding io thore was a
diinvestigation rathey than an Inveetigation. Thig doos not make it eaaier.Ho
ever tis iy recoilectioa thatche Vkt wae avoicing soethingwith Alba Aaybe rhat 1
cant recall clearly had to do with sagazines. Iretenber the story of the tal or buy-
tine to co rect.tran tyydng snt osny. Have to adt with iogs up. To do thia I bad to do.
stoady grits strafdting zuch losa cufoaturtably. Butvit a fou bad even the neels
ot te hurting. hut Ie trying to io Lt y the boan, by End lsrgo; mnd axcept ror
yOvr
1/20/76 Airgren to Ian MacFrlane Aiba and Aynesworth statemonts in their files.
.2
.