as CHICAGO SU^.TIMSS. TSaurs., July 27. 19S 1

CHARLES BARTLETT


n

3 H h*.

,y 1 1


3 A


* Pf

pVa 5! * ,'4 £

^ hi ^ ^ W ^sflf


s


: ,' w

;! !l Mr> i •v s 7S

iUf f-i y *• *1 ?l ■?


fTSS*


r

t


WASHINGTON — Much of the past tragedy, and present
disillusionment of the Cuban exile movement is reflected in ^
the angry attack by Manuel Ray, the young liberal leader,
upon the Central Intelllgencd 1 A gSftcy. |

Ray, conceded to possess, at 37, a distinctive quality and
personal record which mark him as politically promising, has
come into the open with a bitter charge that the CIA is inter-
vening once more in Cuban exile politics. He is specifically

.aroused because he maintains he has been *'
ousted from the leadership of his party, the
extremely liberal MRP, through the pressures
of CIA agents working in Cuba.

The charge, according to the best infor- I
mation available here, is untrue. The fact is |
that Ray has lost his standing with the \
MRP underground in Cuba because he had j
not been able to deliver the sustenance — •

'money and explosives — on which an under- 1
ground must feed. He has not been able to
make these deliveries, because the regular
source, the CIA, is simply not in business

for the present.

Basic decisions regarding future policies toward Fidel
Castro and future relations with the exiles working to un- '
horse him are still under study by the Kennedy administra- :


Walter Lippmann is on vacation. His column will be
resumed on his return. Charles Bartlett is Washington S
correspondent for the Chattanooga (Tenn.) Times. •

tion. While the President is determining the most promising ■
approach to the Castro problem, the nourishment of fifth-
column activities has come to a halt. 1


CASTRO


THE RAY ATTACK is a classical instance of the dissi- ,
dence that develops among exiled politicians at moments ■ j
when their fortunes are particularly low. ,

Ey kicking at the CIA, obviously in low repute among
the Cuban people, he is thrashing against the unpopularity at ’
home that is slowly engulfing all the exiled politicians. But
he has further clouded the situation, diminished the prospects

c — — *• — -» 11.. — ..J , . _ ...


t


mji xciuiu ouu vmuau; cnmiuiXLcu me pusaiuuuy tuai nc wu;
be allowed to serve as a conveyor if the spigot of money and
•supplies is turned on again. He has, in sum, sealed his own
political fate, at least for the present. •

me relations between the CIA and Ray have been knotted
eve ‘ j ince he emerged in Miami from the Cuban underground
last November. He had been Castro’s minister of public
works prior to their break on the apparent issue of com-
munism, and many charged, as he assumed the leadership
of the MRP, that, he was a Communist. Ray, troubled by an
engineers imprecision in theJi articulation of political issues,
was not facile in shattering these innuendoes.

HE GOT ALONGJu£DI2f ?frojriytue start with the top
CIA man in Miami, and rumors began to

drift north that Bender was dealing only with conservatives
' and was determined to install a sharply rightist government
m ^avana. The MRP bristled particularly with reports, which
proved m the end to be true, that some professional soldiers
and policemen who served under Batista had been recruited
as tne core of the exile army.

Ray, . claiming that his underground was the most lively
on the island, made heavy demands upon the CIA for money
and supplies. He was unwilling to submit to the customary
checking procedures and a suspicion developed that he was
stocking the materials against the day when they would be
crucial m a struggle for power within the island.' These sus-
picions deepened after he accepted the assignment of several
sabotage targets and failed to perform against any of them.

MUCH OF THE SUBSEQUENT TRAGEDY of Cochinos
Bay was implicit in the November-to-April sparring that
transpired between Ray and the CIA. Many
of the constant criticisms which he and his
MRP associates developed against the CIA
preparations seem in retrospect to have had
validity. Certainly Ray’s disinclination to
associate his group closely with the venture
stands now as sound judgm'ent.

But this detached approach, with its con-
sequence of newspaper leaks and the shat-
tering of exile unity, was deeply damaging
to the anti-Castro cause. To his critics, Ray
looked often like a politician who wouldn’t
, , . , P la y unie ss he could be president, a liberal

who had become lost in the woods of his own issues. He was
clearly a force in the gradual reduction of the exile commu-
nity to a babble of political bickering.

The Ray story projects a deepening conviction among the
experts here that the successful .initiative against Castro will
derive from new leaders, fresh" faces who have stayed in
Cuba and fought the battle af home. The Miami exiles seem
at the moment to hold little promise of powerful leadership.


BARTLETT


•TV'V ••••.. -v
