|~TOE'iATION I


To Naziism, Fascism

Fight on New Deal More Important Than
Fight on Axis, He Says^ I ^ Y

Bt / Nathatt Robertson;


FM’s bureau

WASHINGTON, Feb- 2,-Martin Dies
told House yesterday that bureauciacy—
the anti’^New Deal Congressmen's descrip-
tion 'of the Roosevelt Administration— is tne
same as Communism, Fascism, and Naziism,
and that the light against it is more impor-
tant than the war.

Representing himself as the defender of
liberum, protector of minorities, and an
American Bghdng against un-American
groups, Dies attached most of tlie Nation's
foremost liberals and liberal movements. He
said they were building a united front of
radicals to destroy Congress,

"Conflict of Ideologies*

“More important than the conflict be-
tween rival armies ” Dies told the House,

*'is the struggle between rival ideologies of
government.

*The 19th Century liberahsm which ad-
vocated the protection of individual rights,
wl^h mrli^ in those g^t and eternal
beliefs and phiTosophies Vluch surioiiTid the
Individual with every possible protection in
the enjoyment of Ms rights, has been cbab
lenged for a long time by a new philosophy
which in one country calls iteelf Com-
munism, in another country Fascism, and
in another country Naziism, and in another
country bureaucracy. But the underlying
principle of all these philosophies is essen-
tially the same."

Later, Dies said, "Ve are rapidly ap-
proaching a period in America when the
real power and function of government will
not bo exercised in this chamber, but it will
be exercised by bureaucracy " He said Con-
gress was “the only bulwark of freedom in
America,^

Gets Rousing Applause

More significant than what Dies said was
the response he got from the best-attended
session of the House since President Roose-


velt's annual message was delivered. Hei
was frequently applauded* And when he]
concluded, all but a handful of the Congress- j
men on the floor stood and applauded himj
^ vigorously. |

Dies' audience included most of the Re-
publicans and many Democrats, though far
fewer Democrats than Republicans. He
^oke for more than an hour and a half, with
frequent sympathetic interruptions from
Reps. Eugene Cox (D., Ga*), John Rankin
(D„ Miss.), Hamiltoii Fish (R.,N. Y,) Qare
, , Hoffman (R., Mich,) and others Hke them. ■
Gissie Patterson— publisher of the Washing- '
-iTi" ton listened from the press

gMIery*

, iTie oMy reply came from a new member

of Congress-Rep. Will Rogers, Jr, (D.,'
Cal). In his maiden speech, Rogers said: I
*T would like it known that there is one “
of us here who disagrees with the flamboy- j
ant manner of expression used by Congress-
man Dies, and I object Co the use of this '

^ great public forum for— as we would say
in Hollywood— per^nal publicity,”

Dies got on the floor bn a question of
personal privilege-to reply to yesterday s at-
tack on mm by the National Lawyers Guild.
But he hardly mentioned tlie Lawyers
Guild, instead devoting himself to attack-
ing liberals in and out of the Government.

Dies pictured the liberals as engaged in a
"well-organized and highly financed con-
spiracy on the part of devotees of totali-
tarianism to discredit meu:ibers of Congiess^
and Congress as a whole,” He said there was
"no rnore insidious way to destroy democ-
racy than in discrediting Congress."

Into this “coalition of anti-parliamen-
tarians," Dies threw the Netv Republic^ and
its editors— Malcolm Cowley, Kexford Guy
Tugwell, and Bruce Bliven-PM and its pub-


AN EDITORIAL


lisher, Marshall Field; the Union for Demo-
oratic Actioii; the Citizens for Victoiy; tlie
Friends of Democracy, and many others ►

■ Dfef ends Anti-Semi tisirt ' ^

£>ies pictured these people as “people who
do not believe in America and never have
belieived in it/’ He described himse^ as
“ai:i outstanding advocate of the fundamen-
tal rights of every man, woman, and child
in America,’* who had fought the Klan in
Texas and defended the Jews, Negroes, and
other minority groups.

Rep. Rankin interrupted to say that one


>f the leaders of die “crackpots” was I. F.
^tone, of PM— "whose name, I believe, is
Feinstein— who now is trying to besmirch
Cordell HuU.”

Perhaps the most amazing section of Dies"
jpeech was the part in which he attempted
to defend his Committee against tharges
that it had failed to investigate tlie real
snemies of America— the Fascists. Hem he
defended anti-Semitism in the^e words:

“There have come repeated demands that
this person or tliat person be branded as
pro-Fascist or pro-Nazi simply because he
expressed anti-Jewish views. I do not hold
with those who condemn anyone on account
of the misdeeds of some people in that race,
but there is no law agsdnst a man's de-
nouncing the South.. God knows I have
heard Sbuthemers denounced as viciously in
certain quarters of this country as I have
ever heard Jews denounced. . . .

“When they say Fascists, what do they
roeari by Fascist? Most of them mean people
who have expressed anti-Semitio views; but
that is not Fascism, for Fascism is not anti-
Semitic; with all its faults, with all its sins
representing an- eyil-foRu of
one thing cannojbe charged to Fascism, and
that is that it was anti-Semitic at the time
of its origin.

"What do they mean by pro-Fascist?
They mean people who believe in simple,
fundamental Americanism, people who be-
lieve in preserving our Constitution, people
who believe that America shall not fall a
victim to the maudlin inteinationali^ which
characterizes a few people in this country.”


‘Hi)iiiniii[9RiitiidintiinmritiiM[iMhriniiinmt]iiiii]|

Dies Hoarse Opera

Martin Dies opened again yesterday hi
his annual revival of the Dies hoars©
opera. As usual, it was dirty in spots,
corny throughout and it rolled them in
tlie aisles. It can’t miss.

rhe show will net Dies the customary
$100,000, or perhaps even more this year.
He will use the gate to keep Dr. J. B,
Matthews, the professional former Com-
munist fellow traveler, and a group of
friends and relatives gainfully employed
for another year sitting in regional offices
scattered over the country and ruffing
through books in the Library of Congress.

I Tliese hiends and relatives wHI pre-
I tend to be looking for spies and other
’ malefactors. If they don’t' find any, as
tliey won’t, they will issue reports mak-
ing some up and telling of the risks they
took doing it. Then some enterprising
and shocked young Congressman wifi
again show up Dies and his Committee
as frauds.

Last year it was Rep. Tom Eliot of
Massachusetts who reveled that the Dies
YeDow Paper, purporting to disclose the
secret pLms of the Japanese inteUigenoe
services, was largely culled from a refer-
ence work in the Library of Congress,
More recently. Attorney General Fran-
cis Biddle, after consultation with J^ Ed-
gar Hoover, reported to Congress that
the Dies Committee’s list of alleged Com-
munists- in the government service was
strictly phony. Even more recently. Rep.
Jerry Voorhis of California, a member of
die Dies Committee, disolosed that the
Committee's methods of operation were
scandalously sloppy.

ft is true that this year’s show is, in
sot^ tcjipec4s,.-niswer:
ample. Dies has added “bureaucracy” to
'"Cbmrnunism,” 'Fascism,” and “Naziism”
as villais to be booed. Indeed, he has
given "bureaucracy” the heavy lead and
demoted “Fascism” to the status of a rela-
tively minor evil.

As for "Fascism,” Dies came up with
the announcement that it isn’t anti-
Semidc after all, "With all its faults ” he
said, "with all its sins representing an evU
t forin of government, one thing cannot be
: cliaiged to Fascism, and that is that it
I was anti-Semitic at the time of its origin."

It might be said in answer, perhaps, that
Dies was not a fool at birth.

\ But that’s the trouble with criticism of
I Dies" act. It defies serious answer most oJ
' the time because it is nonsensical iTies at
tacks bureaucracy - by which he meanf
the thousands of govenunent employe.'
viho are doing the hard, unspeetacula
work of tins war-in order to perpetual
! his own little bureaucracy— a nas^ httk
gumshoe bureaucracy that makes a busi
ness of prying into the affairs of Ameri
cans ana then lying about them.

„The Dies show is political burlesque
its worse and some time the Americar
pt^ople will rise up in their wradi and
close it. But tliat time is probably not yet.

—Kenneth G. Cbawtor©
