MEMORANDUM·
October 1,1968
TO:
JIM GARRISON,District Attorney
FROM:
ANDREW J. SCIAMBRA,Assistant District Attorney
RE:
Interview with JAMES J。PLAINE, l313 Bissonnet Place,
Houston,Texas-a/c 713-528-6531
I interviewed MR. PLAINE in his apartment in Houston, Texas, and
he gave me the following information.He is 54 years old and
comes originally from New York State.(He·appears to be well
educated,well read, and makes a very good impression.)Mr.
PLAINE said that he was involved with what he called the Cuban
situation for some years beginning around l96o..He said that he
had fought with FIDEL CASTRO when CASTRO was in the mountains
trying to gain power.He said later on when CAsTRo turned he
became involved with the anti-cAsTRo groups trying to recapture
Cuba from FIDEL.He said he had been contacted by the FBI in
regards to the Cuban situation around three years before the
assassination.
He said he traveled the country trying to help the Cuban cause
by soliciting money and arms and supplies. He said that he took
part in the Bay of Pigs invasion and was known by his code name
which was PLAINSMAN. Hesaid many of the guys in the Invasion
He mentioned RALPH cONOJO as a person that he had known with
FIDEL CASTRO and who was FIDEL's personal pilot:He also said
that he was with ERROL FLYNN.
He said the Bay of Pigs was a·disaster and that although the CIA
had sponsored it, it.completely failed because of lack of air
support.
However,he said that after the Invasion he was still
involved.with anti-cAsTRo groups who were still trying to
liberate Cuba.
He said that he used to hold meetings in his apartment in Houston
which.were attended by many anti-CAsTRo Cubans,some of whom came
up from New Orleans.They used to hold meetings and discuss
various plans concerning Cuba.The two predominant:themes of the
meetings were:.l)An assassination plot.to kill FIDEL CASTRO,
and 2).Another invasion,He said he had a shortwave radio set
and a code book which they would use.He said that he's talked
with many import and export people'from New Orleansand some
wealthy oil people from Texas who were interested in assassinating
he talked to some of the others at the Normandy club'which is a
rich,exclusive club in Dallas.
He said he cannot be sure but he may have.seen SHAW at one of
these places.
He said his face is.familiar and when he looks at
his distinguished·looks he automatically thinks of the people who
used to contact him about assassinating cAsTRo.He said he would
like to see a picture of him as he looked in 1962 and 1963.e looks at
his distinguished·looks he automatically thinks of the people who
used to contact him about assassinating cAsTRo.He said he would
like to see a picture of him as he looked in 1962 and 1963.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nguished·looks he automatically thinks of the people who
used to contact him about assassinating cAsTRo.He said he would
like to see a picture of him as he looked in 1962 and 1963.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Pags -2-
Interview with JAMES J. PLAINE
He said to be perfectly honest he was interested in the plot to
assassinate CASTRo. He said that he was told that money. was no
object and thatifhe could get the jobdone he would have all
the money he needed.He said a MR。WHITE from Freeport Sulphur
was one of the people who contactedhim about cAsTRo.He said
that thare were some young Cubans from New Orleans who came up
to talk to him.MR.PLAINE seemed very vague about names and
said that everyone was on a one-name basis and that he really
didn't want to get to know them and ha didn't want them to get
toknow him'toowell.
He said that he could probably recognize
some of the people who were at the meetings if he was shown
pictures of them.He said in addition to talking about cuba,
they would listen to records and drink and use the shortwave
radio.
He said that people were_always dropping over to his apartment
because he had thereputation of a man who could get in and out
of cuba.
He could fly and had flown in and out of Cuba as late
as1963.
When I asked him what was he doing flying in and out of
Cuba,he just replied that he.was doing things for some wealthy
people.
He said people contacted him for various reasons.He
said that one man from Texaco.even contacted him in regards to
blowing up some thing for Texaco.、
Mr. PLAINE said that he also found out about cASTRO moving money
to Czechoslovakia and about the communist planesin Cuba and also
the location of.the missile sites.He said·thathe gave this
information to the CIA in Houston.
He said the CIA man in Houston that he had contact with was an
agent named DULLES.
When I tried to press MR.PLAINE.further
about any cIA connection,or involvement,he seemed to not,want.to
make.any definite statements.
Mr.PLAINE said that the majority of anti-CASTRO Cubans that he
met at the meetings in his opinion were mercenaries and only
interested in money and not cuba.He said there were a lot of
pilots fxom Eastern Airlines and some from Delta Airlines that
used to drop in at the meetings.
He said that DAVID FERRIE attended a couple of dozen meetings at
his house and FERRIEgave him the impression that he was
interested only in the money.When I asked him if·FERRIE was
CIA, he said that FERRIE never mentioned it if he was.He also
said that he didn't think FERRIE was CIA because if he was CIA
he would have been down in Guatemala'with the rest of them.
MR. PLAINE said that around the Summer of 1963 Cuban activity
was almost nil as everyone considered cuba to be a lost cause.
He
said that ROBERT F.KENNEDY had really clamped down on the CIA
and everybody.was afraid to make a move regarding Cuba.He said
everyone feared Federal prosecution if they did anything.a lost cause.
He
said that ROBERT F.KENNEDY had really clamped down on the CIA
and everybody.was afraid to make a move regarding Cuba.He said
everyone feared Federal prosecution if they did anything.

--- PAGE BREAK ---id that ROBERT F.KENNEDY had really clamped down on the CIA
and everybody.was afraid to make a move regarding Cuba.He said
everyone feared Federal prosecution if they did anything.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Page -3-
Interview with JAMES·J.PLAINE
He said that during the Suimmer of l963 he received a "Fair Play
For.Cuba"leaflet.from New Orleans with a note attached.to'it
which said something to the effect of "I will be up to see you
soon", signed "LEE". He said that shortly thereafter two young
men in their twenties came to his apartment to see him and asked
him if he had received the leaflet and,the note.He told them
that he did.He said the two men asked him about rifles and
scopes and elevation and other things pertaining to an
assassination.He said he took it for granted that they were
referring to FIDEL CASTRO.He said that he put a scope on one
of his rifles and took them shooting and they were both terrible
shots.He said later on they just returned to New Orleans.He
said he doesn't remember the make or color of the car but it had
a Louisiana license plate on it.He said that he would stake his
life that one of the young men was LEE osWALD and the other man
looked a lot like him.He said that he told this to the FBI
and also the FBi picked up the leaflet and the note。
When looking through the pictures that I showed him,he.pointed
out that THORNLEY looked very much like OSWALD and that: THORNLEY
was on the same type of the other person with oswALD。
However,
he said it was hard to identify people from pictures.
Healso
said the picture of HAROLD SANDOz looks familiar.
He said that BRADLEY's picture looks familiar and that the name
"BRADLEy" rings a bell but he can't place from where。He said
hethinkshe remembers a BRADLEY who used to be in Cuba andalso
there may have been a BRADLEY involved with two Cubans who were
arrested by the FBI.for smuggling guns off Kemah Seabrook around
1962.
MR.PLAINE also said that he talked with JOHNCARROLL who.at'the
time was trying to buy supplies for the Cubans.
MR。PLAINE Said
that he was' contacted by the Fair Play for Cuba Committee out of
New York.as he originally had been with CASTRO before CASTRO
turned.
He said that when word got around that he was anti-CAsTRo now,
many Cubans dropped in to see him..He said that he couldn't
trust any of them since he did not know whether they were really
anti-cASTRO or pro-CASTRO...As a result,he kept a loaded
automatic pistolin his apartment.As I was talking to him, he
pointed to the pistol and said that he kept it loaded at'all
times.
MR. PLAINE said that he had.also talked to many Cubans who knew
of OSWALD or had heard of him and·they all said that OSWALD was
a terrible shot.He said this is what prompted him to make that
statement in the newspaper。
MR。 PLAINE. said that after the assassination, the FBI really got
on his back and'questioned him and many of his friends about the
assassination and also they searched the apartment looking for
rifleS。R。 PLAINE. said that after the assassination, the FBI really got
on his back and'questioned him and many of his friends about the
assassination and also they searched the apartment looking for
rifleS。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Page
viewwithJAMES
MR。 PLAINE said that he would look at any pictures that we may
want to show him.in an effort to idantify some of the Cubans who
may have been at his house attending these meetings.
Itold him we-would probably contacthim later on
itales
acudlthatl
Sie
HhstRuubtDawale
Hs puiel bu fuel Kvul ur.
mthhtehi
netnabenh5Ihmywhte.