FOR THE
DIOERICT OF COLUHBIA
76- 1185
CIVIL·ACTION FILE NO.
SOUERSRS CIRISTTAN LEADERSHIP
COATRrCE,（SCIC）.aGeOrgia
non-lofit cozporation,
nuul
uat3019%
Plaintim
SUMMONS
CIARPOBMKELIJY,CARTIA DOLOACH
WEIIV C.SULxVAN,JOH!DOE,ExeCutOx
ofthe Bstato of Clyde A.Tolson
deCOaSOd,nd·EN UKNOWN AGENTS
indivicually and as agents of tne Pederal
Buxeau of Investigationy
：
Defendant
S
Hatcey
To the above naned Defendant:
You arehereby summoned and required to serve upon
PATRICIA
WORTNy
CHAUNCEY ESRRIDGE
plaintiff's attorney , whose address
66-11
li0 S. Dearborn Street
Xut500
Sutte 1560
MWazhingtav,D.C:20001
Chicago,.1llincia
60603
202 01737-543 2.
summons upon you, cxclusivc of the day of service. If you fail to do so, judginent by default will be
taken against you for thc relicf demanded in the conplaint.
1970
of Gourt.
Loyeu....
:u U.S.LxTasX RAsH.I,.D.Cs.
1ate:
[Scalof Court]
NOTl:--This umons is issned pursuant to Rule  of the Federal Rules of Civil Iroedure.
AG#19B

--- PAGE BREAK ---he conplaint.
1970
of Gourt.
Loyeu....
:u U.S.LxTasX RAsH.I,.D.Cs.
1ate:
[Scalof Court]
NOTl:--This umons is issned pursuant to Rule  of the Federal Rules of Civil Iroedure.
AG#19B

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SOUTIIERN CIIRISTIAN LEADERSIIP
CONFERENCE, (SCLC), a GcOrgia
non-profit corporation,
334 Auburn Avcnue,N.E.
Atlanta,Gcorgia 30303
Plaintiff,
(0.
1185
VS.
Civil Action No.
CLARENCE M. KELLEY,CARTHA
DeLOACH, WILLIAM C. SULLIVAN,
JOHN DOE, Executor of the Estate
of Clyde A. Tolson, deceased, and
TEN UNKNOWN AGENTS,individually
and as agents of the Federal Bureau
of Investigation,
Jury Requested
Defendants.
COMPLAIN-Fouitlanl Foudeant
anenlnnentt-Prerlitlio)
Plaintiff-corporation alleges that:
Taper
1. This action arises under the First, Fourth and Fourteenth
Amendments to the Consitution of the United States; and 48 U.S.C.,
Section 605.  Jurisdiction is predicated upon 28 U.S.C., Sections 1331,
1343(4).·The matter in controversy exceeds, exclusive of interest and
costs,the sum of Ten Thousand Dollars.
2. Plaintiff-corporation was incorporated in 1958in the State of
Georgia as a non-profit corporation for the purposes of promoting greater
understanding in all efforts toward interracial development and good vill;
towork
 with other groups in the attainment of interracial unity, harmony
and understanding; and to conduct public forums on the obligations of
citizenship, among other purposes. Its president, the late Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr., was assassinated on April 4, 1968, and his succcssor
is the Reverend Dr. Ralph David Abernathy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---izenship, among other purposes. Its president, the late Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr., was assassinated on April 4, 1968, and his succcssor
is the Reverend Dr. Ralph David Abernathy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3. Defendant, CLARENCE M. KeiLEY,'is presently the Director
"!'the Fcderal Bureau of Investigation, (F.B.I.), an agency of
Defendant, CARTHA DeLOACH, WILLIAM C. SULLIVAN and TEN UNKNOWN
AGENTS, are or were agents of the F.B.I. Defendant JOHN DOE,
is the Fxecutor (or Administrator w/will annexed) of the Estate
of Clyde A. Tolson, deceased, who was Assistant Dircctor of the
r.B.I., at all times material.’ The TEN UNKNOWN AGENTS, are
F.B.I. agents whose names are not now known.
4. Since its incorporation, plaintiff-corporation has been
fundcd by foundation grants, and contributions solicited by mail
and public forum. Its reputation for advancing its corporate
purposes, by the use of said funds, was publically acclaimed when
its past President was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1964 for
his efforts; along with plaintiff-corporation's officers, directors
and servants, in promoting peace among the various advocates for
and against the civil rights of minorities; since the death of Dr.
King, those policies have been carried on by its successor officers;
directors, and 'servants who are directly .affected by any inter-
ruption or chilling of foundation grants- and other monetary con-
tributions.
5. On information and belief, in 1964, plaintiff-corporation's
offices in.New York and Atlanta were.gugged,by electronic eaves-
dropping devices, and its telephones were tapped by the defendants;
or some of them, for the purposes of adversely affecting its fund
raising and the reputation of its officers, directors and scrvants,
among other illegal purposes.
6. Said electronic surveillance and/or wiretapping were donc
surreptitiously, and without permission of the plaintiff-corporation,
and without warrant or authorization by any court.
-2一

--- PAGE BREAK ---id electronic surveillance and/or wiretapping were donc
surreptitiously, and without permission of the plaintiff-corporation,
and without warrant or authorization by any court.
-2一

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7。
Over the ycars plaintiff-corporation,its officcrs,
dircctors and servants werc adviscd,but did not belicvc,that
thcir offices were bugged and their telephones were tapped,but,
however,they lived in constant fear of the resulting harm
financial or otherwise that could arise from disclosure of over-
heard conversations; and they still fear disclosure of the contents
of any such tape recordings, transcripts,or memoranda made
therefrom.
'8.Plaintiff-corporation is now.informed and believes that
the resulting tape recoraings, transcripts, or memoranda, re-
sulting from the many illegal interceptions,by defendants, or
some of them,of oral and wire communications have been made
available and disciosed to selected persons outside the F.B.I.
for the aforesaid illegal purposes; as a result,plaintiff-
corporation's officers, directors and servants, and others with
whom they communicate, have suffered great financial loss and
emotional stress, embarrassment and mental discomfort from the
disclosures of said recordings, transcripts or memoranda. More-
over,plaintiff-corporation's officers, directors,friends and
associates have been greatly chilled,injured and damaged in their
right to raise funds; and to assemble and discuss the.different
of the rights of minorities.
9..Because of past leaks; plaintiff-corporation, its officers;
directors and servants, believe that tape recordings, transcripts
and memoranda made from their oral and wire communications may
in the future be leaked toits contributors,and to the public,
spokcn about, in. said oral or wire conversations will be

--- PAGE BREAK ---d memoranda made from their oral and wire communications may
in the future be leaked toits contributors,and to the public,
spokcn about, in. said oral or wire conversations will be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

inreparably harmcd and injured ifthis Court. docs not inunediat.ely
take possession'and impound all tapes,transeripts and memoranda
arising out of said illcgal activitics of the defendants,their
agents and other: operating in concert with them.
WllREroRE, plaintiff-corporation prays the Court to order,
adjudge,declare and dccrcethat:
1.The defendants， or one or all of them,bc mandatorily
enjoined,and required to produce,under protective order of
the Court,all of said lape recoraings,transcripts and mcmoranda
resulting from electronic eavesdropping and wirelaps of the offices
of plaintiff-corporation in New York and Atlanta, upon a special'
finding that said recordings'or oral and wire conversationswere
illegal and/or beyond the outer perimeters of defendants'line
of duty,and without good faith.
2. That plaintiff-corporation_have recompense in sum of
Five Million Dollars and costs, and such further relief as.Equity
deems meet.
CHAUNCEY ESKRIDGE
McCoy，Ming &Black
lloSoutiDearbornStreet
Suite 1500
Chicago,Illinois
60603
312/372-1106
MS. PATRICIA WORTHY
WILEY BRANTON,ESQ.
666 - llth Street, N.W.
Washington,D.C.2000l
202/737-5432
Local Counsel

--- PAGE BREAK ---

STATEOPGEORGIA
COUNTY(]JUTTON
RALPH DAVID·ABERNATIY and JOSEPH E. LOWERY, PreSident and
Chairman of the Board,respectively， of the SOUTHERN CHRISTIAN
LEADERSHIP.CONVERENCE,a Georgia Corporation,being first duly
sworn on oath,depose and state that they are the executive
officers of the plaintiff in the above entitled cause; that they
have read the above and foregoing Complaint by them subscribed;
that the matters and things.therein set forth are true,except
matters statcd upon information and belief，which they believe
to be true.
SUBSCRIBEUandSWORNtobefor
me
this
 day of May,
eie
NOTARY PUBLIC