Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
Roswell: Truth and Consequences
by
Martin Cannon
PART I
The 1947 ”UFO” crash at Roswell, New Mexico is the case which revitalized
and revolutionized ufology. The investigators have withstood many
attacks; ”Roswologists” (if I can be forgiven such a ghastly coinage)
have taken a drumming and kept on humming. Saucer fans fixate upon each
detail of the incident like mystics contemplating the stations of the
cross, and God helt the writer who hints at an explanation divergent from
the ”UC” (ufological correct) interpretation.
Until recently, my interests have focused not so much on the Roswell
inquiry as on its sequelae. Ever since 1979, when author William Moore
rediscovered the case, bizarre and elaborate deception operations
followed upon his find like boxcars after a locomotive engine. As we
shall see in the next chapter, a pattern emerged during the 1980s:
Mysterious sources boasting military credentials would meet with writers
and journalists and relate astounding tales about governmental
interaction with alien races – an interaction which, these sources
claimed, began with Roswell. While such fables intitially took in the
more gullible saucer buffs, most now agree that these sources were
feeding ufologists a steady diet of red herring.
The ”UC” explanation for these hoaxes holds that the Roswell testimony
constitutes the long-sought proof of alien visitation, which government
operatives have sought to bury under a barrage of disinformation. I
disagree with this view. The evidence proffered by Roswologists allows
for a possible terrestrial solution, one not-unrelated to the history of
MKULTRA. If this solution is correct, Roswell was indeed a scandal,
though not one of extraterrestrial origin.
I can hear the groans: Not another Roswell theory... Many have championed
their own explanatory scenarios, and, so far, none has triumphed over the
extraterrestrial hypothesis. But this entrant may prove a hardier
competitor, and deserves its day in the arena.
Page 1 of 23their own explanatory scenarios, and, so far, none has triumphed over the
extraterrestrial hypothesis. But this entrant may prove a hardier
competitor, and deserves its day in the arena.
Page 1 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---ry scenarios, and, so far, none has triumphed over the
extraterrestrial hypothesis. But this entrant may prove a hardier
competitor, and deserves its day in the arena.
Page 1 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
Although Roswell has received wide publicity, and has even inspired an
enjoyable made-for-cable film, many readers may not yet have the basics.
Therefore, I offer a precis, based on published and privately-distributed
materials, and on my discussions with various researchers.
The Roswell Catechism
According to the accepted wisdom, a wayward alien craft exploded during a
thunderstorm on either July 2 or July 4, 1947. Debris rained over a sheep
ranch belonging to W. W. ”Mac” Brazel, 10 miles northwest of Roswell and
30 miles southwest of Corona. The next morning, Brazel and his sons
discovered a field filled with shards of an extremely light-weight metal
and a foil-like substance surprisingly resistant to tearing or wrinkling.
A sledgehammer couldn't dent the stuff, and a cigarette lighter couldn't
burn it.
The ranch had no telephone, so Brazel did not report his find until he
made a trip to the city on July 6. After a quick chat with the local
Sheriff, the rancher briefed Major Jesse Marcel, chief intelligence
officer at the local Army Air Base – home of the 509th Bomb group,
specially trained to deliver atomic payloads. After consulting higher
authority, Marcel received orders to investigate the crash site; Captain
Sheridan ”Cav” Cavitt, a counterintelligence specialist, tagged along.
On July 7, at the ranch, Marcel found the inexplicable foil and a
flexible material similar to balsa wood, but much stronger, imprinted
with pink and purple ”hieroglyphics.” He also found scattered shards of
an unusually resilient substance like Bakelite or plastic. That evening,
Marcel took some of this material home, showed it to his wife and son,
and enthusiastically announced that he had found the remains of a crashed
flying saucer.
Later, a team of soldiers scooped up the wreckage, brought it back to the
base and loaded it aboard a B-29, which flew to Fort Worth, Texas. The
debris went on to Ohio's Wright Field (later renamed Wright-Patterson).
Apparently, the military used heavy-handed tactics to convince Brazel
that silence would be the better part of patriotism.
On July 8, the public information officer at Roswell base, Walter Haut,
issued a press release stating that the 509th had recovered a flying
saucer. Haut's superiors quickly squelched the report; his military
career didn't last much longer. To fend off reporters' inquiries, the
military needed to come up with a clever diversion, and fast. Thus, at
Fort Worth, Brigadier General Roger Ramey announced that the wreckage was
simply a downed weather balloon. He even allowed newsmen to photograph
Marcel and others posing with the recovered ”balloon” pieces. The unlucky
Page 2 of 23oger Ramey announced that the wreckage was
simply a downed weather balloon. He even allowed newsmen to photograph
Marcel and others posing with the recovered ”balloon” pieces. The unlucky
Page 2 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---that the wreckage was
simply a downed weather balloon. He even allowed newsmen to photograph
Marcel and others posing with the recovered ”balloon” pieces. The unlucky
Page 2 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
Marcel became a scapegoat – the Air Force intelligence officer who
couldn't even recognize a downed weather balloon.
Ramey's story held until the late 1970s, when researcher William Moore,
journalist Bob Pratt, engineer Stanton Friedman and the indefatigable
Leonard Stringfield gave the matter a fresh look. Marcel, still alive at
that time, admitted that the ”weather balloon” story was phoney, and
insisted that the debris came from somewhere other than Earth. Moore co-
wrote a book called the Roswell Incident with Charles Berlitz, whose
well-known name helped garner a sizeable advance. The book mixes solid
facts with silly rumors, a situation Moore blames on his former partner.
Still, the basic story got out, and other researchers became interested.
The Problem Photographs
According to Moore and his close associate, television producer Jaime
Shandera, the material photographed in Ramey's office back in 1947 was
the actual debris from Marcel's ranch. Most other ufologists believe that
the photographs actually depict an unrelated downed weather balloon,
which Ramey sneakily substituted for the real thing.
Moore backs his version of events with statements from Jesse Marcel and
then-Colonel Thomas J. DuBose, who both appear in the controversial
photos. If their assertions are true – if even one of those images
depicts the actual wreckage found on Brazel's ranch – then the Roswell
case receives a punishing (though not necessarily mortal) blow. The
silvery stuff in the photos simply doesn't look like saucer shearings:
The miraculous, ”invulnerable” substance appears very wrinkled and torn.
Air Force Captain Kevin Randle, who has written extensively about
Roswell, insists that the photographs depict a substituted weather
balloon. Unfortunately, Randle backs his version by citing an interview
with Walter Haut, who reportedly got the story from Jesse Marcel. Since
Haut was not in the room (or even in Fort Worth) when the photographs
were taken, the direct testimony of Marcel and DuBose should, arguably,
take precedence over Haut's recollections. When Randle and his former
partner Don Schmitt published their initial research into Roswell, Jaime
Shandera sent a harshly-worded reply, focusing primarily on the issue of
first-hand vs. second-hand testimony. While much of Randle's work is
admirable, Moore and Shandera have, on this score, raised a fair point,
and one can only wonder why Randle's books refuse to acknowledge the fact
that this dispute exists. Apparently, he has decided to ignore any and
all Roswell data collected by Bill Moore, who has become a controversial
figure due to his claimed involvement with a group of intelligence
operatives, as well as his suspected authorship of the ”MJ-12” documents.
(We will soon discuss these matters at greater length.) But does the
Page 3 of 23med involvement with a group of intelligence
operatives, as well as his suspected authorship of the ”MJ-12” documents.
(We will soon discuss these matters at greater length.) But does the
Page 3 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---a group of intelligence
operatives, as well as his suspected authorship of the ”MJ-12” documents.
(We will soon discuss these matters at greater length.) But does the
Page 3 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
Moore imbroglio justify tossing out tape-recorded testimony from key
witnesses Marcel and DuBose?
Oddly, one of the photographs depicts Marcel smiling, looking quite as
proud as a fisherman with a prize catch. If his superior had ordered him
to pose with substituted material as part of a cover story – one which
makes him appear rather foolish – then he would probably have worn a
different expression: dour, embarrassed, serious.
The Mogul hypothesis
While all now agree that something unusual fell on Brazel's ranch, not
everyone endorses the extraterrestrial explanation. In 1994, after
prodding from New Mexico Congressman Steven Schiff, the DOD came up with
a revised standard version of the Roswell incident: The crashed object
was constructed for a top-secret balloon project called ”Mogul.”
Project Mogul studied the phenomenon of atmospheric sound channels, at
one time a highly-classified subject. At a certain level in the
atmosphere, sound waves travel extremely far. The scientists involved in
Mogul hoped to use constant-level balloons to ”overhear” possible nuclear
explosions emanating from the Soviet Union (which did not yet possess the
bomb but was working toward that goal).
Many ufologists are under the impression that the Mogul theory originated
with the military. Actually, the idea was first explored in 1990 by
ufologists Peter Gersten and Robert Todd, who – after acquiring a number
of Mogul documents on microfilm – discovered that a cluster of ten
polythelene balloons was launched from Holloman Air Force Base on July 3,
1947. Did that experiment also launch the Roswell tale...?
To counter this suggestion, partisans of the extraterrestrial hypothesis
noted that the debris found on the ranch scarcely resembled polythelene
(which Moore, in a conversation with me, derisively called ”saran wrap”).
An April 19, 1949 document, sent to the Air Force's Project ”Grudge” (an
early UFO study) from Captain A. C. Trakowski of Wright-Patterson Air
Force Base, broadly addresses the question of whether secret balloon
launches could have caused UFO reports. While the analysis does not
mention Mogul by name, the June 3 launch is referenced. The balloons went
down shortly after take-off. Although the material was not recovered,
airplanes spotted it in a remote canyon, located many miles away from the
Brazel spread.
Thus ended the Mogul idea – until the Department of Defense revived it.
Their new, improved theory relies on the recollections of Professor
Charles B. Moore (no relation to Bill Moore) of the Langmuir Laboratory
Page 4 of 23a – until the Department of Defense revived it.
Their new, improved theory relies on the recollections of Professor
Charles B. Moore (no relation to Bill Moore) of the Langmuir Laboratory
Page 4 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---ment of Defense revived it.
Their new, improved theory relies on the recollections of Professor
Charles B. Moore (no relation to Bill Moore) of the Langmuir Laboratory
Page 4 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
for Atmospheric Research in Socorro, New Mexico. Professor Moore, now in
his 80s, was in charge of the 1947 Mogul balloon launches. No-one can
fairly call him a saucer debunker, since he reported a still-unexplained
UFO in 1949, and counted J. Allen Hynek among his friends.
In correspondence with iconoclastic researcher Jim Moseley, Professor
Moore has argued that the Brazel debris probably resulted from a July 4
balloon launch intended to test a new type of radar target, not used with
conventional weather balloons. ”The people who had previously found
radiosondes and weather balloon debris would not have recognized the ML-
306/AP targets because they would not have seen them before.” These
targets were composed of an unusual material which, according to one
balloon expert I spoke with, combined aluminum foil and wax paper.
Professor Moore reports that the reinforcement tape had designs printed
on it (consisting of squares, diamonds, flowers, circles, etc.), possibly
accounting for the ”hieroglyphics.”
Although the actual Mogul balloons were made of the then-new material
polythelene, the scientists decided to use standard balloons – composed
of neoprene, a rubber-like substance – for initial tests of this new
radar target. In June of 1947, an ML-306/AP device was attached to a
cluster of neoprene balloons and launched from Alamagordo Army Air Force
Base. As the balloons ascended, the neoprene expanded and burst; the
cluster descended, and dragged the ML-306/AP along the desert floor.
Brazel found the results.
Or so runs the theory...
The Roswell Daily Record of July 9, 1947 printed an interview with
Brazel, who described the substance as ”smoky grey in color.” ”That,”
said Professor Moore in 1994, ”is exactly how I would describe the color
of neoprene rubber balloons that have been stretched (as occurs in
ascending to high altitudes) and exposed to direct sunlight for several
hours.” Roswell proponents counter that military officers accompanied
Brazel during this interview (conducted on the evening of the 8 th),
indicating that the rancher recited a cover story under duress.
Initially, the Mogul theory seems quite attractive, since it explains the
debris, its shipment to Wright Field, and the ensuing cover-up. But
closer examination raises serious objections.
Could Jesse Marcel have mistaken Mogul material for a crashed saucer?
Proponents of the extraterrestrial hypothesis point out that he learned
all about the secret balloon launches in 1948, and therefore would not
have remained confused about the origin of Mogul balloon debris. Marcel
certainly should have recognized neoprene. Brazel's ranch became the
repository for a very large amount of material – more, surely, than one
shredded radiosonde (however novel the design) could account for. And
Page 5 of 23ecognized neoprene. Brazel's ranch became the
repository for a very large amount of material – more, surely, than one
shredded radiosonde (however novel the design) could account for. And
Page 5 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---Brazel's ranch became the
repository for a very large amount of material – more, surely, than one
shredded radiosonde (however novel the design) could account for. And
Page 5 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
according to Professor Moore, the rigid beams were made of ”balsa (or
other light wood),” which scarcely corresponds with Marcel's description:
”... solid members that you could not bend or break but it didn't look
like metal.”
The hieroglyphics pose a special problem: In his controversial interview
with the Roswell Daily Record, Mac Brazel reported that ”Considerable
scotch tape and some tape with flowers printed on it had been used,”
while Jesse Marcel Jr. (now Dr. Marcel) has recalled ”different geometric
shapes, leaves, and symbols.” These descriptions broadly accord with
Professor Moore's. The elder Marcel, however, reported that the writing
on the rigid struts seemed to represent a complex, unknown language
comparable to Chinese.
In 1995, the Air Force released a report arguing that the Roswell debris
resulted from the crash of Mogul balloon Flight No. 4, launched a month
earlier. But Randle has uncovered good evidence that this cluster carried
no array train, and thus could not have caused the debris.
Perhaps the most damaging argument against the Mogul theory derives from
the fact that great secrecy did not surround the materials used in the
Mogul balloon clusters. Launches connected to Mogul were photographed,
and pictures of the balloons were printed in local newspapers. The
Trakowski document cited earlier was never ”top secret,” even though it
describes a Mogul launch. Only the objective of the program was highly
classified.
Why, then, did military authorities throw up a cordon around the crash
site? Why was the debris at the Air Base moved to bomb pit number one,
which previously stored only weapons? Why did military personnel demand
the small amount of debris which Brazel had given to the Sheriff? Why do
we have so many credible reports that witnesses – including the Sheriff –
were threatened with death or imprisonment if they talked? Why was Brazel
detained for nearly a week? Why did paranoia about the recovered material
reach such outlandish heights?
And why, years later (in the summer of 1949) did the military demand a
few scraps of debris still possessed by Brazel's son? By this time, the
Soviet Union had detonated an atomic device, and the secret Mogul sought
to discover was secret no more.
The Mogul theory is fetching, and explains much – but not all. The origin
of the debris remains enigmatic. But was it extraterrestrial?
Page 6 of 23secret Mogul sought
to discover was secret no more.
The Mogul theory is fetching, and explains much – but not all. The origin
of the debris remains enigmatic. But was it extraterrestrial?
Page 6 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---to discover was secret no more.
The Mogul theory is fetching, and explains much – but not all. The origin
of the debris remains enigmatic. But was it extraterrestrial?
Page 6 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
Habeus Corpus
All terrestrial explanations would immediately fall to shreds if someone
could prove the nagging reports that searchers in 1947 found actual alien
bodies. After the telivision program Unsolved Mysteries aired a segment
on Roswell in 1990, a colorful yam-spinner named Gerry Anderson came
forward, claiming to have seen – when he was all of five years old – a
crashed ship and alien bodies on the Plains of San Augustin, over 100
miles away from Brazel's spread. He backed this tall tale with a ”diary,”
which analysis proved to be written with a pen and ink not produced until
at least 1970. Anderson's former wife and co-worker have labelled him a
habitual liar.
Anderson cribbed part of his fable from the already-published story of
Grady L. ”Barney” Barnett, a soil conservation engineer. Barnett died in
1969, before Roswell research began, but his friends L. W. Maltais and J.
F. Danley later stepped forward and maintained that, on July 3, 1947,
Barnett encountered a crashed disk, complete with alien bodies, on the
Plains of San Augustin, near Magdelena. A team of university
archeologists just happened to show up in this spot at that moment; they
too saw the wreckage. Soon thereafter, a red-haired military man
appeared, and swore all the witnesses to secrecy. Army personnel from
Roswell then scooped up the bodies and the wreckage.
So Barnett claimed – or rather, so Barnett's associates claimed he
claimed. But all this information arrives second-hand, and relies on
decades-old memories. Proponents ask us to believe that the military let
Barnett and co. go on their way with little more than a warning, even
though authorities placed rancher ”Mac” Brazel (whose find was, by
comparison, much less spectacular) in rough detention for nearly a week.
None of the archeologists have ever come forward. Kevin Randle has
uncovered a diary kept by Barnett's wife, which notes that he spent July
3-7, 1947 in the office. (The earliest proposed time for the crash was
the night of July 2.) Randle now discounts the entire tale of a second
crash site near Magdelena, since no reliable first-hand eyewitnesses have
come forward, and even the second-hand testimony has proven dubious.
However: According to Randle, there was a genuine second crash site much
closer to Roswell – specifically, some 35 miles northwest of the Army Air
field. At this site, the military discovered the bulk of the craft, as
well as a (varying) number of alien bodies. A number of witnesses have
come forward to substantiate this claim. Some of these witnesses are hard
to dismiss – although skeptics, needless to say, remain skeptical.
Debunkers point out that ufology is now a business in the city of
Roswell, NM, which boasts two museums attracting some 20,000 visitors a
year. All those tourists spend money on museum donations, books,
souveniers, gasoline, motel rooms, stuffed sopapillas, and so forth. That
Page 7 of 23ts two museums attracting some 20,000 visitors a
year. All those tourists spend money on museum donations, books,
souveniers, gasoline, motel rooms, stuffed sopapillas, and so forth. That
Page 7 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---cting some 20,000 visitors a
year. All those tourists spend money on museum donations, books,
souveniers, gasoline, motel rooms, stuffed sopapillas, and so forth. That
Page 7 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
sort of financial injection can mean a lot to the economy of a small,
isolated town – leading Phil Klass and others to argue that some UFO
crash witnesses may be motivated by something other than the quest for
truth.
Take, for example, the tale of Jim Ragsdale. Kevin Randle accepts his
story (corroborated by family members) that, on the night of July 4,
1947, he and a ladyfriend witnessed the crash and discovered alien bodies
and a battered spacecraft; the military immediately arrived, scaring the
couple off. Klass counters that Ragsdale has, in different interviews,
switched the main crash site by at least 50 miles. Moreover, this witness
now also reports finding 15 golden ”alien” helmets, which he buried in
the desert! (Tourists, bring your metal detectors...)
Ragsdale's major claim – that the military found alien bodies immediately
after the crash – contrasts sharply with the testimony of Glenn Dennis.
In 1947, Dennis was a young mortician employed by the Ballard funeral
home, which had an exclusive contract with Roswell Army Air Field. In the
first Randle/Schmitt book, Dennis claims that Roswell authorities wanted
three small caskets (or possibly one hermetically-sealed casket)
sufficient to preserve three bodies ”that had been out on the prairie for
a couple of days, maybe a week.” The former mortician has told differing
stories as to whether the military men actually took any child-sized
caskets.
Dennis, whom all Roswell researchers consider a key witness, tells an
even more interesting tale. He had befriended (and perhaps was engaged) a
nurse who worked at the base hospital, who asked to meet Dennis on July 6
at the Officer's Club. Demanding secrecy, she told Dennis that unfamiliar
doctors had autopsied an alien creature, who possessed four fingers (but
no thumbs) with suction-cup tips.
Shortly after this revelatory conversation at the Officer's Club, the
nurse was transferred to England. Dennis later received a notice that she
had died in the crash of a military airplane. At least, such was the tale
Dennis told investigators for the Fund for UFO Research. In another
interview, he said that he heard that the nurse did not die in 1947, but
became a nun and died later.
With just a smidget of rationalization, one can, I suppose, iron out
these discrepancies. But Dennis' story still has one basic problem: The
nurse is a phantom, bereft of traceable family or documentation. Dennis
has told some researchers the woman bore the unlikely name of Naomi Maria
Selff. The double-f in this name hints that Dennis may be an aficionade
of anagrams; possible source phrases include ”I'm a NASA life-form,” ”I'm
false, or airman,” ”Am I of alien farms?” or (my favorite) ”Affirm
Anomalies.” Whatever the onamastics of the case, no evidence indicates
that such a person ever existed; Roswell has had a Selff-less history. If
Page 8 of 23of alien farms?” or (my favorite) ”Affirm
Anomalies.” Whatever the onamastics of the case, no evidence indicates
that such a person ever existed; Roswell has had a Selff-less history. If
Page 8 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---(my favorite) ”Affirm
Anomalies.” Whatever the onamastics of the case, no evidence indicates
that such a person ever existed; Roswell has had a Selff-less history. If
Page 8 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
Dennis gave a phony name, why won't he divulge the true one?
Another concern: This witness happens to be a life-long friend of Walter
Haut, the Roswell public information officer who started it all (and who
now runs one of Roswell's UFO museums). Yet Haut told Philip Klass that
Dennis never mentioned any of this business until late 1988 or early
1989.
We will not even go into the case of one prominent crash eyewitness, a
former Air Force captain who gave his rank as ”General” to a Roswell
researcher. Problems of varying testimony and imploding witness
credibility have prompted Jenny Randles, Britain's premiere ufologist, to
offer the following observations:
Frankly, I worry that what is a credible story is in danger of being sunk
by an over-abundance of witnesses and testimony. There can be little
doubt that some jokers will have entered the fray once the case received
big publicity. It is certainly difficult to know these days who is being
sincere and who, to be blunt, is riding the bandwagon of publicity...
As you walk down the streets of Roswell, listen closely and you'll hear
the ghost of Jimmy Durante remind you that ”Evrabody wants ta get into da
act!”
Still, even a deck three-quarters filled with jokers might have an ace or
two left in it. And some of the ”second site” witnesses are difficult to
ignore. For example, Don Ecker (a careful researcher) interviewed a
witness named Thomas Gonzalez, who claims that he attended the retrieval
of alien corpses from the crash site. Another individual, Steve
MacKenzie, has reported in a sworn affidavit that he tracked the object
on radar, and later saw five dead aliens at the crash locale, including
one with a ”serene” look on its face.
Sergeant Melvin E. Brown, stationed at the base, guarded a truck carrying
items removed from the crash site. Reportedly, Brown pulled back a
tarpaulin and caught a glimpse of alien cadavers; their yellowish,
leathery epidermis resembled a beaded reptilian skin. Unfortunately, we
don't have this testimony from Brown himself, who died in 1986; the
reports come from his daughter Beverly Bean, who says that her father
gingerly began to discuss Roswell circa 1980, after the initial printed
accounts appeared. The Roswell literature does not clarify how much of
the Brown story comes from the period of his final illness.
Captain Oliver ”Pappy” Henderson, of Roswell's First Air Transport Unit,
reportedly flew UFO debris to Wright Air Field. Again, the primary
witness is deceased: The information comes to us by way of his wife,
Sappho Henderson, who reports that her late husband began to talk about
the subject when a tabloid mentioned the Roswell crash in 1980. Captain
Page 9 of 23information comes to us by way of his wife,
Sappho Henderson, who reports that her late husband began to talk about
the subject when a tabloid mentioned the Roswell crash in 1980. Captain
Page 9 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
Henderson told her that the tabloid's description of the bodies was
accurate. Randle accepts that Henderson saw the bodies himself, however,
Joe Stefula (a more skeptical investigator) believes that, regarding the
bodies, Henderson may have reported what he heard from another source.
Whitley Strieber and Kevin Randle set great store by the testimony of
Brigadier General Arthur Exon. More skeptical investigators wonder
whether Exon speaks of things he experienced personally, or whether he is
simply reporting what he heard from others – for example, from Captain
Henderson, who was Exon's good friend for a number of years. There's
difference between confirmation and repetition of witness testimony.
Page 10 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---– for example, from Captain
Henderson, who was Exon's good friend for a number of years. There's
difference between confirmation and repetition of witness testimony.
Page 10 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
PART II
The Problem of Marcel's Ignorance
Can we blithely discount all of the witnesses to the second crash site
and recovered alien cadavers? No. Individually, certain testimonials may
present problems; collectively, they are impossible to ignore. Neither,
alas, can we embrace these tales – not even the very best of them. All
are undercut by a significant flaw, a flaw which Randle, for reasons best
known to himself, never addresses in his books.
If, as the witnesses claim, Roswell personnel recovered bodies on July 4
or July 5, why didn't Jesse Marcel know?
He was, after all, the chief intelligence officer at the base. Surely, he
had need to know. Surely, any nearby crash (terrestrial or non-) would be
impossible to hide from him. If, as Randall believes, Roswell soldiers
went out by the jeep-ful on July 4 to gather flying saucer wreckage,
Marcel would probably have been out directing traffic. All the furious
activity described by the ”second site” witnesses – a massive retrieval
operation, special storage of debris, alien autopsies, perhaps the
capture of a live alien – undoubtedly would have come to the Major's
attention, and would have figured in the interviews he gave many years
later.
But Randle and other Roswell proponents would have us think otherwise. We
are supposed to believe that during all this extraordinary activity,
Jesse Marcel – the base's primary intelligence officer – stood by like
the proverbial potted plant, blissfully ignorant of his surroundings.
In point of fact, Marcel does not enter the picture until the afternoon
of July 6, when rancher Brazel spoke to him. The next day, July 7, the
Major and Cavitt examined the site, and Marcel became very excited to
discover what he believed to be the remains of a flying saucer. He showed
the material to his family, something he would not have done if high
security measures already surrounded such matters. Kevin Randle himself
tells us that, according to Marcel, the recovered wreckage became
classified after July 7.
Let us suppose that Marcel's superiors, for some inexplicable reason,
decided to keep the chief intelligence officer at Roswell ”out of the
loop.” Let us suppose that, throughout July 4-6, Colonel Blanchard kept
sending Major Marcel out for coffee and donuts while the boys back at the
base hauled in the crashed spaceship and the alien corpses. Why, then,
did the Colonel later allow – no, order – Marcel to examine the Brazel
debris field? If Marcel couldn't be trusted with this sort of information
on July 5, what made him trustworthy on July 7?
Page 11 of 23e Colonel later allow – no, order – Marcel to examine the Brazel
debris field? If Marcel couldn't be trusted with this sort of information
on July 5, what made him trustworthy on July 7?
Page 11 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
And if, on July 5, the highest secrecy surrounded the main crash site,
why was the unfortunate Haut ordered, on July 8, to announce the capture
of a flying saucer, accomplished with the help of a local rancher?

Why
did Haut's press release speak openly of the Brazel find, and not of the
more important discoveries which allegedly preceded it?

Kevin Randle, Donald Schmitt, and other Roswologists deal with this issue
by never raising it, in the apparent hope that readers won't notice the
omission.

That tactic simply won't do.

Even more troubling is the tactic
employed by the made-for-cable dramatization Roswell, and by the video
documentary UFO Secret: The Roswell Crash (which lists Schmitt and Randle
as the production's chief investigators).

These influential presentations
pretend that the second site was discovered after the Marcel crash was
reported.

Moreover, both the film and the documentary never allude to the
controversy surrounding the location of the second debris field, leaving
viewers with the false impression that the Barnett site is the same as
the one identified by the Randle/Schmitt witnesses.

When Roswell researchers are privately confronted with the problem of
Marcel's ignorance, they usually mutter something along these lines:
”Well, maybe Marcel kept the events of July 4 and 5 secret, even after he
decided to talk about the Brazel material.” But why?

Why would he reveal
the truth about the ”extraterrestrial” debris on Brazel's ranch, yet
withhold all information concerning site #2?

If the late Jesse Marcel was
less than candid in his interviews, do we even have a Roswell case left?

Indeed, ufologist Robert Todd – not a hard-core UFO skeptic – has made
the case that Jesse Marcel occasionally embellished the truth in his
interviews.

For example, Marcel claimed to have received five Air Medals
for shooting down five enemy planes during World War II combat missions.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Indeed, ufologist Robert Todd – not a hard-core UFO skeptic – has made
the case that Jesse Marcel occasionally embellished the truth in his
interviews. For example, Marcel claimed to have received five Air Medals
for shooting down five enemy planes during World War II combat missions. According to Todd, Marcel was never a gunner or pilot, and received only
two Air Medals – neither one for a shoot-down. Marcel also once claimed
to have written the statement which President Truman read on the air
after the USSR exploded a nuclear device. In fact, Truman did not take to
the airwaves on that occasion, which prompted only a written announcement
from the White House. Robert Todd has uncovered further evidence of Marcel's propensity for
exaggeration. Todd's report is, at this writing, quite new – and
undoubtedly his attack will prompt a brisk defensive strike from Roswell
partisans, who may yet win this particular battle. But even if we can
favorably resolve the issue of Marcel's honesty, the issue of Marcel's
ignorance remains a sticking point. If a second crash site existed close
to the Roswell base, why didn't the Major know? Until someone resolves that conundrum, we must put "on hold" all the
testimony from second-site witnesses, and all the testimony of recovered
ETs. The only proven wreckage remains that found on Brazel's ranch. The
Page 12 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---put "on hold" all the
testimony from second-site witnesses, and all the testimony of recovered
ETs. The only proven wreckage remains that found on Brazel's ranch. The
Page 12 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
first site is the only site.
Flying Saucer – or "Flying Cow"?
Back we come to the old question: Just what caused all that wreckage on
Mac Brazel's land?
We have already examined, and rejected, the Mogul explanation. Skeptic
Ron Schaffner has proposed that a wayward V2 rocket caused the debris,
while Fortean John Keel has speculated that a Japanese "Fugo" balloon
bomb somehow drifted over New Mexico two years after the war. Randle and
others have argued persuasively against the Fugo thesis, and there is no
need to recapitulate their points here. As for the V2: Schaffner's
opponents feel that descriptions of the recovered materials do not tally
with what one might expect from such a source. No known V2 launch
corresponds with the date of the Roswell crash. Besides, the press openly
reported other V2 rocket accidents, which makes the paranoiac secrecy
surrounding the Brazel find seem rather absurd.
In his book Revelations, computer scientist Jacques Vallee offered a
suggestion which at first struck me as rather too speculative. Now, after
further research, I feel that he came closest to the truth.
Vallee posits that the debris came from a special floating drone designed
to test radioactivity; these were, after all, the days of open A-bomb
tests. The technology of the time could have produced Roswell-type
material: "Aluminized Saran...was paper-thin, was not dented by a hammer
blow, and was restored to a smooth finish after crushing."
Did such drones exist? Indeed so.
The Navy possessed jet-type drone airplanes which took air samples during
the 1946 Hydrogen bomb tests on Bikini atoll. Some of these drones even
carried passengers – test animals, flown through the clouds rising after
an atomic explosion. We know that at least one such drone was lost in the
New Mexican desert in 1960, due to equipment failure.
None of this is very surprising. But few people know about the proposed
use of drone aircraft to deliver weapons of mass destruction.
Well before the first atomic explosion at Trinity, New Mexico, in 1945,
American strategists seriously considered the military uses of Plutonium
and other highly radioactive materials – not as key ingredients in the
bomb-maker's recipe book, but as weapons in and of themselves. Such
substances are so very toxic that a small amount can do severe damage to
a large city. All one needs is a means to deliver and disperse the goods.
Page 13 of 23t as weapons in and of themselves. Such
substances are so very toxic that a small amount can do severe damage to
a large city. All one needs is a means to deliver and disperse the goods.
Page 13 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---of themselves. Such
substances are so very toxic that a small amount can do severe damage to
a large city. All one needs is a means to deliver and disperse the goods.
Page 13 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
The proposed use radiaoactivity as a weapon of mass destruction is one
reason why American scientists were so intent on measuring the dispersal
patterns of airborne particles. Throughout the 1940s, Los Alamos National
Laboratories conducted a number of open-air radioactivity releases
throughout the late 1940 – perhaps as many as 250 – and the effects were
measured many miles away. Nor was Los Alamos the only New Mexican locale
chosen for such studies. That state's vast desert expanses – sparsely
populated, yet home to key military installations – provided an ideal
site for such tests.
Delivery remained a conundrum. Radioactive gases were all very fine, but
how could one get them over enemy skies?
A government report dated July 3, 1948 lists a number of options
(rockets, fragmentation bombs, sprays from aircraft, etc.), and rejects
most of them. But the final delivery option - "Use of Drone Planes" -
elicits the following commentary: "As a result of discussions with
representatives of the Air Corps, it is believed that the use of drone
planes to transport the radioactive materials, and dispersed by one or
more of the methods described above, may prove to be the most practical.
The main advantage lies in the fact that the shielding problems are
greatly simplified." This same report, under the heading "Method of
Delivery," notes that "It is now believed that high altitude missions are
the type that merit the most attention." (Italics added.)
For all weapons of mass destruction, the big problem wasn't creating the
parcel, but mailing it. Nowadays, most people tend to forget that
American bombers in 1947 were capable of only a limited penetration into
the vast Soviet territory, even when the planes were launched from bases
in Turkey; this is the primary reason why Stalin fought to surround his
country with compliant buffer states. An aircraft such as the Enola Gay
might not reach Moscow. But a high-altitude, floating drone - a helium-
filled craft, or a hybrid craft - could do the job. Moreover, such a
vehicle could deliver a payload which might prove fatal to a conventional
aircraft's crew members.
Interestingly, Professor Moore (of Mogul fame) once participated in an
effort which used lighterthan-air craft to penetrate "unfriendly" skies.
He has told one interviewer that he prepared a "balloon bomb" designed to
deliver propaganda leaflets to the people of Hungary, just prior to their
unfortunate 1956 uprising. Indeed, as far back as World War II, balloons
were used to deliver propaganda broadsides (as part of "Operation
Sykewar") over German cities.
If fairly conventional balloon clusters could rain leaflets fairly
accurately, deep within enemy territory, we can fairly deduce that more
advanced types of lighter-than-air craft could haul deadly substances
across national boundaries. We can also fairly presume that such a device
Page 14 of 23territory, we can fairly deduce that more
advanced types of lighter-than-air craft could haul deadly substances
across national boundaries. We can also fairly presume that such a device
Page 14 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---airly deduce that more
advanced types of lighter-than-air craft could haul deadly substances
across national boundaries. We can also fairly presume that such a device
Page 14 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
would have been tested on American soil, using unwitting human beings as
test subjects. In those days, tests involving radiation were considered
so important that the scientists involved took little heed of ethical
constraints. For example: In 1947, the same year as the Roswell crash,
government-funded scientists deliberately injected plutonium into the
left leg of an African-American railroad porter named Elmer Allen. A few
days later, the doctors removed the leg for study, having falsely assured
Allen that a bone cancer made amputation necessary. There are many, many
more such stories.
The craft which came down on Brazel's farm may thus have been a drone -
something akin to a miniature dirigible, or blimp - designed either to
measure or to deliver radioactive particles. Granted, the Roswell
literature reports that Jesse Marcel checked the debris field with a
radiation detector, and found no signs of radioactivity. But this fact
need not invalidate our hypothesis. If the drone carried a radiation
measurement device, it may not yet have reached its destination. If the
craft carried a delivery device, the radioactive "payload" could have
remained intact within its sealed container (a fortunate circumstance for
Marcel and Brazel).
Or - quite possibly - the payload was not radioactive at all.
The concept of Plutonium-as-weapon forces us to consider all the other
methodologies of "toxic warfare." Every schoolchild knows that the great
powers have experimented with chemical and biological warfare agents
since the infamous mustard gas attacks of World War I. During the 1950s,
CBW research went arm-and-arm with the drug experimentation conducted
pursuant to MKULTRA.
As always, the problem of delivery confronted the strategic planners.
During World War II, the British facility at Porton Down conducted a
massive research program into chemical warfare, and concocted an unmanned
"gliding bomb" designed to rain thickened mustard gas behind enemy lines.
This device - which, without stretching definitions too far, might be
considered an aerial drone - was jovially nicknamed the "Flying Cow." (A
similar device, which sprayed unthickened mustard gas, was called the
"Flying Lavoratory.")
Jeremy Paxman and Robert Harris fill many a chapter of their excellent
book A Higher Form of Killing with unnerving descriptions of mustard gas
launchers, anthrax bombs, radiation gas bombs, and even less pleasant
inventions. Most Americans do not realize the scope of this research. One
facility - the arsenal at Pine Bluff, Arkansas - spent half-a-billion
dollars on chemical and biological weaponry during World War II (when a
dollar went much farther than it does today), and Pine Bluff was scarcely
America's only research center dedicated to such grim studies. After the
war, the United States commandeered the results of the large-scale CBW
Page 15 of 23t does today), and Pine Bluff was scarcely
America's only research center dedicated to such grim studies. After the
war, the United States commandeered the results of the large-scale CBW
Page 15 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---ine Bluff was scarcely
America's only research center dedicated to such grim studies. After the
war, the United States commandeered the results of the large-scale CBW
Page 15 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
research programs undertaken by Germany and Japan, and by our British
allies.
Paxman and Harris describe how American and British scientists, often in
contravention of both ethics and common sense, sprayed disease-laden
clouds over populated areas. These mock attacks, which usually utilized
non-fatal germs such as brucellosis, were meant to simulate enemy attacks
using more deadly substances, such as sarin. The most infamous of these
mock attacks occurred in 1950, when minesweepers exposed all residents of
San Francisco to clouds containing two allegedly "harmless" bacteria,
Bacillus globigii and Serratia marcescans.
It was all very easy for the military to attack San Francisco, but how
(in 1947) could they hope to drench Moscow in clouds of toxicity? (The
reader will recall the problem posed by limited bomber range.) Drone
aircraft - particularly of the lighter-than-air variety - neatly resolved
this quandry.
Of course, officials needed to test such a delivery system - covertly.
The released documents on radiation testing repeatedly emphasize the
secrecy which surrounded all experiments involving unwitting subjects,
particularly civilian test subjects. As noted previously, the sparsely-
populated American desert provided an excellent environment for such
tests.
One can easily comprehend why test planners would want to target a
population under military control. Military physicians could track human
susceptibility to an airborne germ. "Coincidentally" or otherwise, the
Brazel ranch is located quite near Fort Stanton Mesa, an old military
outpost commanded by Kit Carson during the Indian wars. By the time of
the Spanish-American War, this facility was converted to use as an army
hospital. During World War II, soldiers suffering from combat fatigue and
other psychological ailments were remanded here. Researcher Kathy Kasten
visited Fort Stanton Mesa, and toured the facility's cemetery. She noted
with great interest the sharp increase in deaths in the 1947-51 period.
In short: The area northwest of Roswell Army Air Field was the ideal
location for secret aerial testing of health-impacting substances.
In my opinion, the craft which crashed onto Mac Brazel's field was a
drone, perhaps involved with airborne radiation tests, more likely
involved with CBW testing. The "Flying Cow" sired at Porton Down had
offspring, one of which probably ended up on a New Mexican ranch.
A drone of this sort would necessarily be constructed of the most durable
- yet most lightweight – materials available. The enormous world-wide
investment into CBW during WWII led to striking advances in materials
science, as researchers on both sides of the conflict constantly improved
Page 16 of 23terials available. The enormous world-wide
investment into CBW during WWII led to striking advances in materials
science, as researchers on both sides of the conflict constantly improved
Page 16 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---he enormous world-wide
investment into CBW during WWII led to striking advances in materials
science, as researchers on both sides of the conflict constantly improved
Page 16 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
designs for gas masks, protective clothing and other materials. The
results of this research would, in all likelihood, have struck many
members of the general public - and even many within the regular military
- as impossibly futuristic.
Even the "heiroglyphics" found on the lightweight struts are not without
explanation. Ironically, Kevin Randall and Don Schmitt touch on this
explanation in their book The Truth About the UFO Crash at Roswell, which
discusses the Japanese Fugo balloon bombs. Randall and Schmitt quote an
expert named Robert Mikesh concerning the markings on Fugo balloon
components: "While Japanese markings and stamps would normally be used to
facillitate assembly of components, alphabetical letters and figures were
used instead. No trace of the origin of the balloon was to be allowed...
[for fear] of disclosing the manufacturing location or launch site, which
would result in reprisal attacks by B-29s." Why wouldn't the American
manufacturers of a lighter-than-air "secret weapon" incorporate a similar
gambit? Imprinting drone components with an oriental language or a visual
code (as opposed to plain English) would have given such craft plausible
deniability, if ever one floated, intact, into the wrong hands.
Clouds of Secrecy
The "toxic drone" explanation elegantly resolves the problem of Marcel's
ignorance. If a drone craft were spreading Serratia marcescans - or worse
- over the New Mexican desert, Marcel would have no need to know the
truth. Once his superiors determined the actual cause of the debris, they
would certainly withold such knowledge from Major Marcel - and from
anyone else who touched the wreckage.
The reader will recall one important fact cited in a previous chapter: In
1947, the Supreme Court had not yet issued the Feres decision, and thus
had not yet ruled on the right of an American soldier to sue the United
States government. If Jesse Marcel ever learned the truth about the
debris, he might not have taken kindly to the idea of serving as an
unwitting test subject, especially if his wife and child were also within
range of airborne bacteria or radioactive particles. Had Marcel known
that the wreckage came from a craft which carried an infectious,
radioactive or otherwise toxic agent, he surely would have prevented
other soldiers from gathering up the material without protective
clothing, and he would have required the Brazels to vacate the property
temporarily. One can imagine the resultant publicity.
But the managers of the drone project encountered a stroke of luck:
Marcel - inspired by news accounts of flying saucer sightings - jumped to
the conclusion that the Brazel debris resulted from a wayward spacecraft.
His superiors had no motive to disabuse him of this notion. Not for the
Page 17 of 23s of flying saucer sightings - jumped to
the conclusion that the Brazel debris resulted from a wayward spacecraft.
His superiors had no motive to disabuse him of this notion. Not for the
Page 17 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---ightings - jumped to
the conclusion that the Brazel debris resulted from a wayward spacecraft.
His superiors had no motive to disabuse him of this notion. Not for the
Page 17 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
last time, "flying saucers" proved an excellent cover story.
Of course, those in the know would have insisted upon the collection of
every scrap of debris, even years later. Had even a tiny amount remained
in the hands of, say, Brazel's son, someone might have suggested that the
substance receive scientific testing. Analysis could have revealed some
hint of the drone's original bacteriological or radioactive payload.
One can easily imagine the international outcry and blow to American
prestige that would have resulted had the world learned, in 1947, of
plans to attack the Soviet Union using drones laden with plutonium and
other toxins. Friendly nations would have led the protest, since any
accident involving such drones could have placed allied countries at
risk. Indeed, the accident which caused the Brazel crash probably
convinced U.S. military planners that high-altitude drones were simply
too risky an option.
If my hypothesis is correct, the threat of scandal and legal challenge
hid, and still hides, the truth about Roswell. The military has never
wanted to become mired in any embarassing lawsuits resulting from their
open-air tests.
Keep in mind one important fact: Some activists in the San Francisco
still hope to sue the United States government over the 1950 germ
releases over that city. Many believe that the bacteriological clouds
were hardly so harmless as scientists then presumed; the experiments may
have unleashed carcinogens on an unwitting populace, resulting in higher-
than-normal cancer rates. Whether such concerns are valid or not is
outside the scope of this inquiry. The important point is that cancer
claims may yet lead to an expensive court battle, more than 45 years
after the event.
One can, therefore, easily understand why the Pentagon would continue to
hush up any similar releases in New Mexico. If newspapers suddenly
announced that what happened to San Francisco in 1950 also happened to
Roswell in 1947, the citizens of New Mexico would raise up a cry of
outrage. In all likelihood, the families of anyone in that area who
contracted cancer during the past half-century might come to believe -
rightly or wrongly - that they have legal standing to bring suit against
the government. The results could become expensive.
In their 1994 book The Truth About the UFO Crash at Roswell, Kevin
Randall and Donald Schmitt discount the notion that an experimental
aircraft caused the Roswell wreckage. "A craft classified as top secret
in 1947 would no longer be classified today," they write. Maybe. But what
about the crash of a drone aircraft involved with measuring or delivering
health-impacting substances? Such an event would, in all likelihood,
remain classified - for excellent reasons involving lawyers, dollars,
Page 18 of 23aircraft involved with measuring or delivering
health-impacting substances? Such an event would, in all likelihood,
remain classified - for excellent reasons involving lawyers, dollars,
Page 18 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---ith measuring or delivering
health-impacting substances? Such an event would, in all likelihood,
remain classified - for excellent reasons involving lawyers, dollars,
Page 18 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
headlines, and national pride.
Can I prove this proposed solution to the Roswell enigma? No. Despite
Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary's admirable efforts to release the files
on radiation test data, the documentary record concerning aerial delivery
systems remains sparse and frustrating. Interestingly, the Air Force and
the General Accounting Office specifically state that they did not
examine Department of Energy records during their re-investigation of
Roswell. No "smoking gun" document conclusively substantiates the Roswell
hypothesis outlined here, and I doubt that such an incriminating piece of
paper will ever come to light.
Which brings us, finally, to the question of standards of proof. Kevin
Randle has said of the Mogul theory (which, I agree, does not suffice)
that it will remain unproven until someone can produce a document
demonstrating that just such a balloon came down on Brazel's ranch. Fair
enough. On the other hand, neither Kevin Randle nor anyone else in the
ufological community has produced an authentic document demonstrating
that an extraterrestrial craft came down at Roswell. Thus, by his own
high standards, Randle declares the case unresolved. Roswell has not
transmuted the extraterrestrial hypothesis into an established fact -
despite the rather smug claims some have made - and the mystery therefore
remains open to other proposed solutions, such as the one outlined here.
The "drone warfare" theory outlined in the preceding pages does not give
us the final answer, but I consider it the most promising line of
inquiry. Admittedly, my analysis of the Roswell crash depends on
circumstantial evidence and a fair amount of (I hope) reasonable surmise.
'Too much surmise,' some will aver, and perhaps they are right. However,
we are within our rights to draw logical inferences from five
indisputable facts - five facts which ufologists should consider
carefully:
Secret, experimental high-altitude drones did exist in 1947.
Military planners considered such drones the best means to deliver toxic
agents.
Open-air tests involving decidedly unhealthful substances have occurred
in many locales, particularly in New Mexico.
Drones have crashed in New Mexico.
The military and the government have always greatly feared the legal
consequences of civilian experimentation, and have gone to great lengths
to keep their tests secret.
I believe that one such test came to a premature halt over a ranch near
Page 19 of 23red the legal
consequences of civilian experimentation, and have gone to great lengths
to keep their tests secret.
I believe that one such test came to a premature halt over a ranch near
Page 19 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
Roswell, New Mexico. Of course, if my reconstruction is accurate, the
Pentagon would have no reason to confirm it, and every reason to maintain
a cover-up.
Page 20 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---tin Cannon
Roswell, New Mexico. Of course, if my reconstruction is accurate, the
Pentagon would have no reason to confirm it, and every reason to maintain
a cover-up.
Page 20 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
PART III
Truth and Consequences
It should be noted that according to Peter Dale Scott's book Deep
Politics and the Death of JFK (pages 214-215), Colonel Philip J. Corso,
who appeared in Dateline NBC (6-24-97) as the author of a new book about
the Roswell UFO crash, was in 1963 disseminating stories linking Oswald
to Russia.
According to Scott, veteran of army intelligence Corso had work with C.
D. Jackson (LIFE propagandist) and relayed information stating that
"Oswald was tied to a Communist ring inside the CIA". Corso was a right-
winger and Shickshinny (Pennsylvania) Knight of Malta who developped an
anti-CIA paranoia apparently because he finds it not extreme enough!!!!
I haven't yet read Corso's book, although I will do so shortly. But,
having learned that at least one leading ufologist (previously
unsympathetic to the Roswell case) takes Corso at least semiseriously, I
decided to do a little preliminary checking.
The previous poster's information is correct. But there's more - as
anyone can confirm, using Scott and his (characteristically exemplary)
footnotes as a guide.
Corso has a history of disturbing ties to racists, fascist sympathizers
and nutball theories. He had worked with Reinhard Gehlen (formerly
Hitler's chief intelligence officer) and the BND in trying to set up
terrorist operations within Eastern Europe. Washington considered such
schemes risky in the nuclear age, so the plug was pulled. Corso soon
counted himself among that weirdo coterie of military intelligence
staffers who considered the CIA "soft" on communism, and most likely
heavily infiltrated by the KGB.
Similar beliefs were held by Corso's ally, General Charles Willoughby,
who had been Douglas MacArthur's intelligence chief. There's a lot of
published material on and by Willoughby, and it's all worth reading. In
short, Willoughby was an anti-Semite, and an extremist who saw the world
in conspiratorial terms. His politics leaned so far to the extreme Right
that one can only wonder why he served on the Allied side during World
War II. (MacArthur once called him "My little fascist.")
When Corso left military intelligence in 1963, he became a key aide to
Strom Thurmond, who helped lead the pro-segregation crusades of the
1960s. But he did not severe his ties to Willoughby.
Corso also became a leading member of a bizarre organization called the
Page 21 of 23Thurmond, who helped lead the pro-segregation crusades of the
1960s. But he did not severe his ties to Willoughby.
Corso also became a leading member of a bizarre organization called the
Page 21 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---lead the pro-segregation crusades of the
1960s. But he did not severe his ties to Willoughby.
Corso also became a leading member of a bizarre organization called the
Page 21 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
"Shickshinny" Knights of Malta. We had best be careful here; I know that
this is the sort of "link" that causes conspiracy buffs of a certain
stripe to go into wild conspira-gasms. This organization is apparently a
rather ineffectual breakaway from the better-known Knights of Malta.
(After Napoleon attacked the island of Malta, the story goes, a number of
knights migrated to Russia and joined the Czar's "inner guard;" after the
revolution, these staunch White Russians migrated to America - many going
to Shickshinny, PA, hence the name.)
I've seen some literature from these "Knights": To me, they have always
seemed more silly than sinister. But one fact deserves our respectful
attention: At the time Corso joined the exclusive sect, its leader was
one Colonel Charles Thourot Pichel. Pichel was an explicit, undeniable
Nazi. During the Third Reich, he had begged Hitler's government for the
job of representing Nazi political interests in the United States.
Willoughby had also joined the Shickshinny Knights at this time, and co-
published with the organization a periodical called the "Foreign
Intelligence Journal." This journal specialized in anti-Semitic theories
and the kind of extremist "enemy-within" anti-Communist blather we
associate with groups like the John Birch Society. Apparently, this
rather odd group had become, in the early 1960s, something of a dumping-
ground for military intelligence veterans who were so zealous they had
come to consider the CIA hopelessly "pink."
The darling of this Corso's "Knights" was a very strange man named
Michael Goliniewsky, whose name pops up in most hitories of the CIA
"mole-hunts" of the 1960s. Goliniewsky was a highranking Polish
intelligence officer who sympathized with "the West," and began feeding
information to the CIA. Apparently, his info was rather good at first.
The Soviets became suspicious of him, so he had to scuttle off to America
quickly.
It soon became apparent to the saner CIA analysts that Goliniewsky was,
to put the matter bluntly, out of his mind. He began to claim that he was
no less a personage than Prince Alexi, the Czar's son and rightful
heir...! Goliniewsky never really explained how he ("Alexi") cured his
internal bleeding, or the EXTERNAL bleeding he no doubt underwent at
Ekaterinberg. Nor did he explain how the Prince somehow became a leader
within the intelligence apparat of a Communist country. (You'd think
Polish spooks would do a better background check...)
At any rate, Goliniewsky (like other defectors) caused much mischief by
telling dark tales of KGB penetration of both the American and British
intelligence services and governments. His claims were baseless, but for
a while they did much harm. As is usually the case in these realms,
anyone in a Western government's service who espoused anything less than
a full-scale attack on the Soviet Union (never mind the nuclear
Page 22 of 23uch harm. As is usually the case in these realms,
anyone in a Western government's service who espoused anything less than
a full-scale attack on the Soviet Union (never mind the nuclear
Page 22 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---lly the case in these realms,
anyone in a Western government's service who espoused anything less than
a full-scale attack on the Soviet Union (never mind the nuclear
Page 22 of 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell: Truth and Consequences
Martin Cannon
consequences) was damned as a Soviet "penetration agent."
The CIA soon learned not to take Goliniewsky seriously. But his demented
world-view fit right in with the ideas held by the Knights, Willoughby,
Corso and co. So these "Knights" became the chief propagandists for
Goliniewsky in the United States.
I've read a few of Goliniewsky's latter-day screeds - he used to publish
a rag called "Double Eagle." It was filled with wild, quasi-fascistic
conspiracy theories, which usually had to do with occult powers driving
the inexorable Communist drive to world domination. A lot of what he
wrote struck me as thinly-disguised anti-Semitism, making use of the
usual euphemisms for "powerful Jews" (e.g., "the Dark Forces," the
"International Bankers," and so on).
And THIS was the man Philip Corso once thought possessed the key to
understanding world events.
As mentioned by the previous poster, Corso also was instrumental in
pushing disinformation about the JFK assassination, labelling Oswald a
tool of the alleged "KGB ring" within the United States. (I use the word
in its restricted sense, and not, as most internet posters do, merely as
a desciptor for any opinion one does not share.)
In brief: What do we know about Philip Corso, the man who now makes such
wild claims about what happened "The Day After Roswell"?
He is a right-wing extremist.
He was a close associate of Willoughby, a fascist sympathizer who led an
anti-Semitic crusade (and committed many other sins, as well).
He provided tireless help to Strom Thurmond in HIS viciously racist
crusade.
He joined an organization led by Pichel, an outright Nazi.
He helped promulgate the claims of Michael Goliniewsky, perhaps the most
dubious of all claimants to the Czar's fortune.
During the initial investigation into the JFK assassination, he
deliberately lied (there is no other word for it) about Oswald's
background.
Is Corso your idea of a credible source on matters ufological? He
certainly isn't MINE!
Page 23 of 23