Liturgical  Shipwreck:
25  Years  of  the  New

Mass

1969-1994

Michael  Davies


"The  real  destruction  of  the  traditional  Mass,  of  the  traditional  Roman  Rite,  with  a
history  of  more  than  one  thousand  years,  is  the  wholesale  destruction  of  the  faith  on
which  it  was  based,  a faith  that  had  been  the  source  of  our  piety  and  of  our  courage  to
bear  witness  to  Christ  and  His  Church,  the  inspiration  of  countless  Catholics  over  many

centuries."


Msgr.  Klaus  Gamber,  The  Reform  of  the  Roman  Liturgy,  p.  102


Part  1


ON  THE  third  of  April  this  year,  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1994,  there  occurred  an
anniversary,  an  unhappy  anniversary,  perhaps  the  unhappiest  anniversary  in  the
history  of  the  Catholic  Church.  On  that  date,  twenty-five  years  ago.  Pope  Paul  VI
announced  in  his  Apostolic  Constitution  Missale  Romanum  that  the  Missal
promulgated  in  1570  by  his  illustrious  predecessor,  St.  Pius  V,  was  to  be  replaced  by
one  promulgated  on  his  own  authority.  In  obedience  to  the  Council  of  Trent  and  as  a
rebuttal  of  the  Protestant  heresy,  St.  Pius  V had  codified  the  rite  of  Mass  celebrated
in  Rome  at  that  time,  a rite  of  Mass  that  had  developed  gradually  and  naturally  over
almost  a millennium  and  a half.  St.  Pius  V stated  specifically  that  he  wished  the
order  of  Mass  found  in  the  traditional  Catholic  Missal  to  remain  unchanged  in
perpetuity,  and  rightly  so,  for  by  1570  it  had  come  as  near  to  absolute  perfection  as
anything  upon  this  earth  can  ever  do.  It  was  with  good  reason  that  Father  Frederick
Faber  described  the  traditional  Mass  as  "the  most  beautiful  thing  this  side  of
Heaven."  1 It  was  with  good  reason  that  Cardinal  Newman,  who  possessed  perhaps
the  greatest  intellect  of  any  Catholic  in  the  history  of  the  English-speaking  world,
said  that  he  could  attend  it  forever  and  not  be  tired.  ?

In  issuing  a new  Mass,  Pope  Paul  VI  apparently  believed  that  he  could  improve
upon  the  Traditional  Mass  of  the  Roman  Rite,  and  he  indulged  in  an  effort  to  make
the  Mass  more  understandable  for  our  time.  But  in  the  process  he  broke  with  the
unbroken  tradition  of  all  his  predecessors  and  did  something  hitherto  unknown  in
the  history  of  the  Church — in  the  East  or  the  West:  He  appointed  a committee  to
concoct  a new  order  of  Mass,  a Novus  Ordo  Missae,  an  action  that  the  Fathers  of  the
Second  Vatican  Council  did  not  so  much  as  envisage,  let  alone  mandate.  The  only
precedent  for  a radical  reform  of  the  liturgy  is  found  among  the  sixteenth-century
Protestant  Reformers.  I have  mentioned  elsewhere  that  a principal  objective  of  the
Missal  of  St.  Pius  V was  to  act  as  a rebuttal  of  Protestantism — by  showing  that  in  the
public  manifestation  of  its  Eucharistic  belief  the  Catholic  Church  would  not  make
the  least  concession  to  the  Protestant  heresy.  On  the  contrary,  the  intention  of  Pope
Paul  VI  in  compiling  his  new  missal  appears  to  have  been  to  conciliate  Protestants.  In
a gesture  that  it  is  still  almost  impossible  to  believe  actually  took  place.  Pope  Paul
asked  six  Protestant  theologians  to  advise  him  on  the  composition  of  a new  rite  for
that  very  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass,  the  repudiation  of  which  is  a fundamental  axiom  of
the  Protestant  heresy.  5 The  extent  of  the  willingness  of  this  unhappy  pope  to
sacrifice  even  the  most  sacred  traditions  of  our  faith  to  placate  heretics  was  revealed
to  its  full  extent  for  the  first  time  in  an  interview  broadcast  over  French  radio  on
December  19, 1993  by  Jean  Guitton,  one  of  the  closest  friends  of  Pope  Paul  VI.
Guitton  made  public  the  fact  that  the  Pope  had  confided  to  him  that  his  purpose  in
reforming  the  liturgy  was  not  simply  that  it  would  correspond  as  closely  as  possible
to  Protestant  forms  of  worship,  but  with  that  of  the  Calvinist  sect,  one  of  the  most
extreme  manifestations  of  the  Protestant  heresy.  Guitton's  revelation  shows  how
perceptive  was  the  comment  by  Monsignor  Klaus  Gamber  that  the  drastic


curtailment  of  solemnity  in  the  liturgy  means  that  Catholics  "are  now  breathing  the
thin  air  of  Calvinistic  sterility."  i I must  make  it  clear  at  this  point  that  I do  not
believe  that  Pope  Paul  VI  was  in  any  way  unorthodox  in  his  personal  belief  in  the
Eucharist;  no  one  who  reads  his  Credo  of  the  People  of  God  or  his  encyclical
Mysterium  Fidei  could  allege  this.  His  motivation  seems  to  have  been  the  same
misguided  zeal  for  ecumenism  that  prompted  him,  while  Secretary  of  State  for  the
Vatican,  to  engage  in  clandestine  discussions  with  Anglican  clergy  that  he  knew  to
be  contrary  to  the  policy  of  Pope  Pius  XII.  5

Rather,  I intend  to  prove  that,  as  already  mentioned,  the  very  composition  of  a New
Order  of  the  Mass  is  a break  with  tradition,  that  the  changes  made  in  the  Traditional
Mass  of  the  Roman  Rite  since  Vatican  Council  II  go  far  beyond  what  that  Council
authorized  and,  in  some  cases,  actually  contradict  what  it  mandated.  I propose  to
show  that  we  have  been  the  witnesses  of  a revolution,  rather  than  a reform,  and  that
the  revolution  of  Pope  Paul  VI  has  produced  no  good  fruits  to  compensate  for  its
destruction  of  our  almost  2,000-year-old  liturgical  inheritance.

Before  discussing  this  revolution,  it  is  necessary  to  be  clear  as  to  what  is  meant  by  a
rite  of  Mass.  A rite  of  Mass  consists  of  the  words  and  ceremonies  surrounding  the
essential  elements  that  were  instituted  by  Our  Lord.  These  essential  elements  are  1)
the  matter:  bread  and  wine;  2)  the  form:  "This  is  My  Body"  and  "This  is  the  Chalice  of
My  Blood  . . .";  and  3)  a validly  ordained  priest  who  4)  intends  to  do  what  the  Church
does  in  confecting  this  Sacrament.  There  are  many  rites  of  Mass  [basically  9;  but  as
high  as  23,  if  derivatives  are  counted]  in  the  East  and  West  recognized  as  valid  by  the
Catholic  Church,  including  all  those  used  by  the  schismatic  Orthodox  Churches.  The
same  Sacrifice  of  Calvary  is  made  present  in  all  these  rites,  and  the  same  Sacramental
grace  is  obtained  through  them.  Christ  Himself  is  received  in  Holy  Communion.  He
cannot  be  received  any  more  or  any  less  perfectly  in  any  particular  rite,  and  the  grace
received  in  Holy  Communion  is  greater  or  lesser  according  to  the  devotion  and
dispositions  of  the  communicant.

Before  discussing  the  liturgical  revolution,  it  is  necessary  to  say  a few  words  about
whether  a loyal  Catholic  can,  in  fact,  criticize  any  teaching  or  legislation  emanating
from  the  Holy  See  and  still  claim  to  be  loyal.  At  the  time  of  Humanae  Vitae  [the
encyclical  condemning  birth  control].  Modernist  theologians  coined  the  term  "loyal
dissent."  They  claimed  that  it  was  possible  to  dissent  from  papal  teaching  on  faith
and  morals  and  to  remain  a loyal  Catholic.  Such  a claim  is  nonsensical.  There  can
never  be  a right  to  dissent  from  the  teaching  of  the  Magisterium  on  a matter  of  faith
or  morals.  The  Modernist  concept  of  "loyal  dissent"  in  respect  to  doctrine  can  in  no
way  be  compared  with  the  right  of  a faithful  Catholic  to  express  disagreement  with  a
strictly  "prudential"  decision  of  the  Pope.  This  distinction  can  be  made  clear  by
quoting  one  of  the  most  loyal  and  most  erudite  Catholics  of  this  century.  Professor
Dietrich  von  Hildebrand,  who  was  described  by  Pope  Pius  XII  as  the  twentieth-
century  Doctor  of  the  Church  and  who  was  honored  by  Pope  Paul  VI  for  his  fidelity


to  the  Holy  See.  In  a book  whose  title  expresses  perfectly  the  state  of  the  Church  in
the  West  since  Vatican  II,  The  Devastated  Vineyard,  a book  which  every  Catholic  who
loves  the  Church  should  own.  Professor  von  Hildebrand  reminds  us  that,  although
we  must  accept  everything  promulgated  ex  cathedra  by  the  Pope  as  absolutely  true.

In  the  case  of  practical,  as  distinguished  from  theoretical  authority,  which  refers,
of  course,  to  the  ordinances  of  the  Pope,  the  protection  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not
promised  in  tire  same  way.  Ordinances  can  be  unfortunate,  ill  conceived,  even
disastrous,  and  there  have  been  many  such  in  the  history  of  the  Church.  Here  Roma
locuta  [ est ],  causa  finita  [est]  does  not  hold.  The  faithful  are  not  obliged  to  regard  all
ordinances  as  good  and  desirable.  They  can  regret  them  and  pray  that  they  be  taken
back;  indeed,  they  can  work,  with  all  due  respect  for  the  pope,  for  their  elimination.  ^


Part  2


It  is  thus  evident  that  a loyal  Catholic  has  the  right  to  express  sincerely  held
reservations  concerning  certain  aspects  of  the  New  Missal.  Even  the  most  cursory
reading  of  the  conciliar  Constitution  On  the  Sacred  Liturgy  makes  it  clear  that  the
reform  which  it  authorized  was  to  be  based  on  pastoral  considerations.  In  his
Apostolic  Letter  Vicesimus  Quintus  Annus  of  December  4, 1988,  commemorating  the
twenty-fifth  anniversary  of  the  Liturgy  Constitution,  Pope  John  Paul  II  explained,
quoting  the  Liturgy  Constitution  itself,  that  these  pastoral  considerations  were:  "To
impart  an  ever  increasing  vigor  to  the  Christian  life  of  the  faithful;  to  adapt  more
suitably  to  the  needs  of  our  own  times  those  institutions  which  are  subject  to  change;
to  foster  whatever  can  promote  union  among  all  who  believe  in  Christ;  to  strengthen
whatever  can  help  to  call  the  whole  of  humanity  into  the  household  of  the  Church."
The  reform  was  intended  to  clarify  the  nature  of  the  Mass  for  the  faithful  and  to
enhance  the  quality  of  their  participation.

If  members  of  the  faithful  are  convinced  in  all  sincerity  that  the  New  Rite  obscures
rather  than  clarifies  the  sacrificial  ethos  of  the  Mass  and  makes  their  participation
each  Sunday  an  act  of  heroic  obedience,  rather  than  joyful  participation,  they  are
entitled  to  express  their  misgivings  to  the  universal  Lather  in  Rome  and  to  beg  him  to
give  them  "bread"  rather  than  stones.  It  might  well  be  objected  that  the  laity  do  not
possess  the  knowledge  or  competence  to  justify  their  criticizing  a Sacramental  rite
approved  by  the  Pope.  There  would  be  some  weight  to  this  argument  if  it  transpired
that  the  only  critics  of  the  New  Mass  were  laymen.  But  it  has  been  denounced  in  the
most  radical  manner  possible  by  an  ecclesiastic  whose  authority  in  matters  of
doctrine  was  second  only  to  that  of  the  Pope  himself.  I refer,  of  course,  to  the  former
Prefect  of  the  Congregation  for  the  Doctrine  of  the  Paith,  Cardinal  Ottaviani.  In
September  1969,  A Critical  Study  of  the  New  Order  of  Mass,  prepared  by  a group  of
Roman  Theologians,  was  presented  to  Pope  Paul  VI.  The  Study  itself  is  of  less
significance  than  the  letter  which  accompanied  it,  which  had  been  written  by
Cardinal  Ottaviani,  and  was  signed  by  him  and  by  Cardinal  Bacci.  At  least  a dozen
other  cardinals  had  agreed  to  sign,  but  experienced  a last  minute  failure  of  nerve. 1-
These  two  cardinals,  both  of  exemplary  orthodoxy,  explained  that  they  believed  it  to
be  their  duty  in  the  sight  of  God  and  towards  the  Pope  to  make  their  misgivings
known.  They  reminded  the  Pope  that:  "The  subjects  for  whose  benefit  a law  is
passed  have  always  had — more  than  the  right — the  duty,  if  it  should  instead  prove
harmful,  of  asking  the  legislator  with  filial  trust  for  its  abrogation."  This  is  precisely
the  point  made  by  Dietrich  von  Hildebrand  which  was  quoted  above:  "The  faithful
are  not  obliged  to  regard  all  ordinances  as  good  and  desirable.  They  can  regret  them
and  pray  that  they  be  taken  back;  indeed,  they  can  work,  with  all  due  respect  for  the
Pope,  for  their  elimination."  The  historic  judgment  of  the  Cardinals  was  that:

The  Novas  Ordo  Missae considering  the  new  elements  susceptible  of  widely

differing  evaluations,  which  appear  to  be  implied  or  taken  for  granted represents.


as  a whole  and  in  detail,  a striking  departure  from  the  Catholic  theology  of  the  Mass
which  was  formulated  by  Session  XXII  of  the  Council  of  Trent,  which  by  fixing
definitively  the  "canons"  of  the  rite,  erected  an  insurmountable  barrier  against  any
heresy  which  might  attack  the  integrity  of  the  Mystery.  2

1994  also  marks  the  twenty-fifth  anniversary  of  this  courageous  declaration,  which
was  dated  September  3, 1969,  the  Feast  of  St.  Pius  X.  The  very  Catholic  motto  of
Cardinal  Ottaviani  was  Semper  Idem — "Always  the  same."  The  Conciliar  Church  is
possessed  by  a frenzied  desire  for  change,  and  any  change,  it  would  seem,  is
perceived  as  a change  for  the  better.

One  of  the  greatest  liturgists  of  the  second  half  of  this  century,  perhaps  the  greatest,
is  the  late  Msgr.  Klaus  Gamber.  He  was  among  the  founders  of  the  Liturgical
Institute  of  Ratisbonne  in  1957  and  was  its  director  until  his  death  on  June  2, 1989  at
the  age  of  seventy.  His  book.  The  Reform  of  the  Roman  Liturgy,  was  published  in
English  in  1993.  However  many  books  and  pamphlets  on  the  Mass  that  one  may
possess,  he  should  buy  this  one.  Msgr.  Gamber's  exemplary  scholarship  prompted
the  Holy  See  to  name  him  an  Honorary  Member  of  the  Pontifical  Academy  of  the
Liturgy;  in  1965  he  was  appointed  a Chaplain  to  the  Holy  Father,  and  in  1966  a Private
Chamberlain  to  the  Holy  Father.  Cardinal  Oddi  wrote  a preface  to  the  book,  in  which
he  described  its  publication  as  "an  event  of  the  highest  importance,"  and  it  also
includes  tributes  to  Msgr.  Gamber  by  Cardinal  Stickler  and  Cardinal  Ratzinger.
Shortly  before  the  death  of  Msgr.  Gamber,  Cardinal  Ratzinger  remarked  that  he  was
"the  one  scholar  who,  among  the  army  of  pseudo-liturgists,  truly  represents  the
liturgical  thinking  of  the  center  of  the  Church."  2 Just  as  nothing  in  this  essay  will  go
beyond  the  criticism  of  the  New  Mass  made  by  Cardinals  Ottaviani  and  Bacci,
nothing  in  it  will  go  beyond  that  of  Msgr.  Gamber,  a few  examples  of  which  follow:

In  the  end,  we  will  all  have  to  recognize  that  the  new  liturgical  forms,  well
intentioned  as  they  may  have  been  at  the  beginning,  did  not  provide  the  people  with
bread,  but  with  stones.  12

Much  more  radical  than  any  liturgical  changes  introduced  by  Luther,  at  least  as  far  as

the  rite  was  concerned,  was  the  reorganization  of  our  own  liturgy above  all,  the

fundamental  changes  that  were  made  in  the  liturgy  of  the  Mass.  It  also  demonstrated
much  less  understanding  for  the  emotional  ties  the  faithful  had  to  the  traditional  rite.
11

Was  all  this  really  done  because  of  a pastoral  concern  about  the  souls  of  the  faithful,
or  did  it  not  rather  represent  a radical  breach  with  the  traditional  rite,  to  prevent  the
further  use  of  traditional  liturgical  texts  and  thus  make  the  celebration  of  the
"Tridentine  Mass"  impossible — because  it  no  longer  reflected  the  new  spirit  moving
through  the  Church?  1?


Part  3


WHAT  IS  THE  NEW  MASS?

The  first  point  that  I wish  to  make  concerning  the  liturgical  experiment  of  Pope  Paul
VI  is  that  the  very  compilation  of  a "New  Mass,"  a Novus  Ordo  Missae,  constitutes  a
break  with  historic  liturgical  evolution.  In  The  Holy  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass,  his  great
classic  study  of  the  Mass,  Father  Adrian  Fortescue  explained  that  The  Protestant
Reformers  naturally  played  havoc  with  the  old  liturgy.  It  was  throughout  the
expression  of  the  very  ideas  [the  Real  Presence,  Eucharistic  Sacrifice,  and  so  on]  they
rejected.  So  they  substituted  for  it  new  communion  services  that  expressed  their
principles,  but  of  course  broke  away  utterly  from  all  historic  liturgical  evolution.

How  precisely  did  the  Protestant  Reformers  "break  away  utterly  from  all  historic
liturgical  evolution"?  They  did  so  firstly  by  the  very  fact  of  composing  new
sacramental  rites  and  substituting  them  for  those  which  had  been  in  use  from  time
immemorial.  This  would  have  involved  a breach  with  historic  liturgical  evolution,
even  if  their  new  rites  had  been  totally  orthodox.  The  different  rites  of  Mass  had
evolved  gradually  and  naturally  over  the  centuries.  One  of  Britain's  greatest  living
historians.  Professor  Owen  Chadwick,  who  is  a Protestant,  noted  in  his  book.  The
Reformation,  that:  "Liturgies  are  not  made,  they  grow  in  the  devotion  of  centuries."  H
A consistent  pattern  can  be  discerned  in  the  development  of  every  ancient  liturgy  in
both  East  and  West,  a pattern  explained  very  clearly  by  Canon  G.  G.  Smith  in  his
celebrated  exposition  of  Catholic  belief.  The  Teaching  of  the  Catholic  Church:
Throughout  the  history  of  the  development  of  the  Sacramental  liturgy,  the
tendency  has  been  towards  growth — additions  and  accretions,  the  effort  to  obtain  a
fuller  more  perfect,  more  significant  symbolism.  15

In  1896  Pope  Leo  XIII  pronounced  finally  and  irrevocably,  in  his  encyclical
Apostolicae  Curae,  that  Anglican  Orders  are  invalid.  The  Anglican  bishops  attempted
to  answer  the  encyclical  with  their  Responsio,  published  in  1897,  an  attempt  which
was  refuted  by  the  Catholic  bishops  in  a vindication  of  the  Pope's  encyclical  and
which  they  published  later  in  1897.  A key  point  in  the  Catholic  bishops'
argumentation  was  the  following:

That  in  earlier  times  local  Churches  were  permitted  to  add  new  prayers  and
ceremonies  is  acknowledged  . . . But  that  they  were  also  permitted  to  subtract  prayers
and  ceremonies  in  previous  use,  and  even  to  remodel  the  existing  rites  in  the  most
drastic  manner,  is  a proposition  for  which  we  know  of  no  historical  foundation,  and
which  appears  to  us  absolutely  incredible.  16

It  is  incontestable  that  the  Consilium,  the  Commission  which  composed  the  New
Mass,  subtracted  many  of  the  prayers  and  ceremonies  in  previous  use  and  remodeled
the  existing  rite  in  a most  drastic  manner,  thus  breaking  away  utterly  from  all  historic
liturgical  evolution.  Please  note  that  I am  not  claiming  that  the  New  Mass  is
unorthodox  or  that  Pope  Paul  VI  did  not  have  the  strict  legal  right  to  approve  some


changes  in  the  Mass.  All  that  I am  claiming  is  that,  in  doing  what  he  did,  he  broke
away  utterly  from  all  historic  liturgical  evolution.  Incredible  as  it  may  seem,  there  are
those  who,  in  their  eagerness  to  defend  the  New  Mass,  put  reason  aside  and  actually
claim  that  no  drastic  remodeling  of  the  Tridentine  Mass  took  place!  A typical
instance  of  this  failure  to  accept  reality  occurred  in  an  article  by  Father  Peter
Stravinskas  in  the  February,  1992  issue  of  Catholic  News  and  World  Report.  Father
Stravinskas  claimed  that,  "Having  studied  the  old  rite  of  the  Mass  and  the  present
rite  with  great  care,  I fail  to  see  any  significant  difference  between  the  two."  This
reminds  me  of  a comment  made  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington  to  a gentleman  who
approached  him  and  said:  "Mr.  Smith,  I believe."  "If  you  believe  that,"  said  the  Iron
Duke,  "you'll  believe  anything!"  To  claim  that  there  is  no  significant  difference
between  the  two  rites  is  not  simply  unreasonable,  but  incredible.  Rather  than  quote
from  a traditionalist  writer  to  refute  Father  Stravinskas,  I will  cite  one  whose
credentials  for  commenting  upon  the  New  Mass  could  hardly  be  more  authoritative.  I
refer  to  Father  Joseph  Gelineau,  S.J.  Father  Gelineau  was  one  of  the  most  influential
members  of  Archbishop  Bugnini's  Consilium,  which  actually  composed  the  New
Mass,  and  who  was  described  by  Archbishop  Bugnini  as  one  of  the  "great  masters  of
the  international  liturgical  world."  CL  It  would  be  more  than  euphemistic  to  state  that
Father  Gelineau  does  not  share  the  opinion  of  Father  Stravinskas  that  there  is  no
significant  difference  between  the  Tridentine  Mass  and  the  New  Mass.  In  his  book,
Demain  la  Liturgie  [The  Liturgy  Tomorrow],  Father  Gelineau  commented  with
commendable  honesty,  and  not  the  least  sign  of  regret:

Let  those  who  like  myself  have  known  and  sung  a Latin-Gregorian  High  Mass
remember  it  if  they  can.  Let  them  compare  it  with  the  Mass  that  we  now  have.  Not
only  the  words,  the  melodies,  and  some  of  the  gestures  are  different.  To  tell  the  truth
it  is  a different  liturgy  of  the  Mass.  This  needs  to  be  said  without  ambiguity:  the
Roman  Rite  as  we  knew  it  no  longer  exists  [Le  rite  romain  tel  que  nous  Vavons  connu
n'existe  plus].  It  has  been  destroyed  [il  est  detruit ].  18


Part  4


Father  Gelineau  tells  us  that  the  traditional  rite  of  Mass  has  been  destroyed  and
replaced  by  one  that  is  different.  Father  Stravinskas  assures  us  that  there  is  no
significant  difference  between  the  two  rites.  An  impartial  examination  of  the  reform
in  which  Fr.  Gelineau  played  so  active  a part  will  prove  beyond  any  possible  doubt
that  his  assessment,  and  not  that  of  Father  Stravinskas,  is  correct.  But  before
examining  the  actual  reform,  it  is  necessary  to  be  clear  as  to  precisely  what  the
Liturgy  Constitution  of  the  Second  Vatican  Council  mandated.  It  is  indisputable  that
the  Second  Vatican  Council  was  followed  by  a reform  far  more  radical  than  that
envisaged  by  the  Council  Fathers  or  authorized  by  the  Liturgy  Constitution.  By  no
possible  stretch  of  the  imagination  can  Vatican  Council  II  be  interpreted  as  mandating
or  sanctioning  the  destruction  of  the  Roman  Rite!  It  contained  stipulations  which
appeared  to  make  any  drastic  remodeling  of  the  Traditional  Mass  impossible.  The
Latin  language  was  to  be  preserved  in  the  Latin  rite  [Article  36],  and  steps  were  to  be
taken  to  ensure  that  the  faithful  could  sing  or  say  together  in  Latin  those  parts  of  the
Mass  that  pertain  to  them  [Article  54].  All  lawfully  acknowledged  rites  were  held  to
be  of  equal  authority  and  dignity  and  were  to  be  preserved  in  the  future  and  fostered
in  every  way  [Article  4].  The  treasury  of  sacred  music  was  to  be  preserved  and
fostered  with  great  care  [Article  114],  and  Gregorian  Chant  was  to  be  given  pride  of
place  in  liturgical  services  [Article  116].  There  were  to  be  no  innovations  unless  the
good  of  the  Church  genuinely  and  certainly  required  them,  and  care  was  to  be  taken
that  any  new  forms  adopted  should  grow  in  some  way  organically  from  forms
already  existing  [Article  23].

These  explicit  commands  of  Vatican  II  have  been,  as  Hamlet  expressed  it,  "More
honour'd  in  the  breach  than  the  observance."  The  Latin  language  has  virtually
vanished  from  our  churches,  and  not  the  least  effort  is  being  made  in  99.9  % of
parishes  to  ensure  that  the  faithful  can  sing  or  say  together  in  Latin  those  parts  of  the
Mass  that  pertain  to  them.  Far  from  preserving  and  fostering  the  Roman  Rite,  that  rite
has  been  destroyed,  and  the  treasury  of  sacred  music,  Gregorian  Chant  in  particular,
has  been  all  but  forgotten  in  the  majority  of  parishes.  A long  list  of  innovations  can
be  cited  which  the  good  of  the  Church  did  not  genuinely  and  certainly  require  and,
in  almost  every  instance,  these  innovations  modified  the  Traditional  Mass  in  a
manner  that  made  it  more  acceptable  to  Protestants.  Examine  the  prayers  that  the
sixteenth-century  Protestants  removed  from  the  traditional  missals  in  their  own
countries  and  you  will  find  that  the  very  same  prayers  have  been  removed  from  the
Tridentine  Mass,  so  that  the  Mass  of  Pope  Paul  VI  could  and  did  win  Protestant
approval.  12  The  one  exception  is  the  Roman  Canon,  which  was  removed  from  the
Mass  by  all  the  Protestant  Reformers  and  by  Archbishop  Bugnini,  but  which  was
restored,  Deo  gratias,  thanks  to  a direct  command  of  Pope  Paul  VI.  20  It  is  true  that
the  Roman  Canon  is  not  often  used  in  the  New  Mass  today,  but  its  presence  in  the
New  Missal  guarantees  that,  although  the  reformed  liturgy  contains  many  parallels
with  Protestant  worship,  because  of  the  presence  of  the  Roman  Canon,  which  was


anathema  to  every  Protestant  Reformer,  the  New  Mass  cannot  be  described  as  a
Protestant  liturgy.  God  would  never  allow  a pope  to  approve  any  Sacramental  rite
that  does  not  contain  what  is  essential  for  the  validity  of  the  Sacrament  or  that
contains  anything  specifically  heretical.  Contrary  to  what  is  often  alleged.
Archbishop  Lefebvre  acknowledged  that  the  New  Mass  is  valid  and  contains  no
heresy.  ?!

When  the  Council  Fathers  voted  for  the  Liturgy  Constitution,  they  did  not  imagine
for  one  moment  that  their  actions  would  ever  be  interpreted  in  a manner  that
contradicted  their  explicit  intentions.  But  this  very  thing  occurred  because  the  periti
[experts]  who  drafted  the  text  had  inserted  ambiguous  passages  into  it  which  they
intended  to  use  after  the  Council  to  implement  a liturgical  revolution  which  they
knew  would  not  have  been  sanctioned  by  the  Council  Fathers  if  it  had  been  spelled
out  explicitly  in  the  Constitution  itself.  Lest  it  be  thought  that  this  is  no  more  than  a
wild  allegation  by  a layman  addicted  to  conspiracy  theories,  the  testimony  of
Cardinal  John  Heenan  of  Westminster  England  will  be  cited.  Cardinal  Heenan  was
one  of  the  most  active  of  the  Council  Fathers,  and  in  his  book,  A Crown  of  Thorns,  he
wrote,  concerning  the  first  session  of  the  Council  in  1962:

The  subject  most  fully  debated  was  liturgical  reform.  It  might  be  more  accurate  to
say  that  the  bishops  were  under  the  impression  that  the  liturgy  had  been  fully
discussed.  In  retrospect  it  is  clear  that  they  were  given  the  opportunity  of  discussing
only  general  principles.  Subsequent  changes  ivere  more  radical  than  those  intended  by
Pope  John  and  the  bishops  who  passed  the  decree  on  the  liturgy.  His  sermon  at  the  end
of  the  first  session  shows  that  Pope  John  did  not  suspect  ivhat  was  being  planned  by
the  liturgical  experts.  [Emphasis  added  by  the  author]  ??

What  could  be  more  clear  than  this?  Cardinal  Heenan  states  explicitly  that  experts
who  drafted  the  Liturgy  Constitution  intended  to  use  it  after  the  Council  in  a manner
that  the  Pope  and  the  Council  Fathers  did  not  suspect.  Most  of  the  Council  Fathers
would  have  dismissed  such  a possibility  as  incredible,  even  if  it  had  been  explained
to  them.  Commenting  in  1973,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight.  Archbishop  R.  J.  Dwyer
of  Portland,  Oregon  remarked  sadly:

Who  dreamed  on  that  day  that  within  a few  years,  far  less  than  a decade,  the
Latin  past  of  the  Church  would  be  all  but  expunged,  that  it  would  be  reduced  to  a
memory  fading  into  the  middle  distance?  The  thought  of  it  would  have  horrified  us,
but  it  seemed  so  far  beyond  the  realm  of  the  possible  as  to  be  ridiculous.  So  we
laughed  it  off.  ??


Part  5


Father  Louis  Bouyer,  an  outstanding  figure  in  the  pre-conciliar  liturgical  movement
and  one  of  the  most  orthodox  periti  at  the  Council,  was  able  to  see  the  direction  the
reform  was  taking,  even  before  the  promulgation  of  the  New  Mass.  He  stated  in  1968
that  "We  must  speak  plainly:  there  is  practically  no  liturgy  worthy  of  the  name  today
in  the  Catholic  Church."  24  And  that  "Perhaps  in  no  other  area  is  there  a greater
distance  [and  even  formal  opposition]  between  what  the  Council  worked  out  and
what  we  actually  have."  25  Msgr.  Gamber  made  the  same  point  when  he  wrote:

One  statement  we  can  make  with  certainty  is  that  the  new  Ordo  of  the  Mass  that
has  now  emerged  would  not  have  been  endorsed  by  the  majority  of  the  Council
Fathers.  25

In  1964  Father  Bouyer  wrote  an  enthusiastic  appreciation  of  the  Liturgy  Constitution
entitled  The  Liturgy  Revived,  which  predicted  the  flowering  of  a great  liturgical
renewal.  He  had  become  totally  disillusioned  by  1968  and  wrote  a scathing
denunciation  of  the  manner  in  which  the  reform  was  developing  in  practice,  entitled
The  Decomposition  of  Catholicism,  in  which  he  states  that  not  only  is  there  formal
opposition  between  what  the  Council  required  and  what  we  actually  have,  but  that,
in  practice,  the  reform  constitutes  a repudiation  of  the  papally  approved  liturgical
movement  to  which  he  had  contributed.  2Z

It  is  perfectly  legitimate  to  describe  what  has  taken  place  in  the  Roman  Rite  since
Vatican  II  as  a "revolution"  rather  than  a reform.  The  Concise  Oxford  Dictionary
defines  "revolution"  as  a "complete  change,  turning  upside  down,  great  reversal  of
conditions,  fundamental  reconstruction."  Is  this  not  precisely  what  has  taken  place  in
the  Roman  Rite  since  the  Second  Vatican  Council?  The  revolutionary  nature  of  the
changes  in  the  Roman  Liturgy  since  Vatican  II  have  been  apparent  even  to  non-
Catholics.  At  the  Harvard  Club  in  New  York  on  May  11, 1978,  Peter  L.  Berger,  a
Lutheran  professor  of  Sociology,  commented  on  the  post-conciliar  changes  within  the
Catholic  Church  from  the  dispassionate  standpoint  of  a professional  sociologist  and
insisted  that  the  changes  were  a mistake,  even  from  a sociological  standpoint:  "If  a
thoroughly  malicious  sociologist,  bent  on  injuring  the  Catholic  Church  as  much  as
possible,  had  been  an  adviser  to  the  Church,  he  could  hardly  have  done  a better  job."
2®  Professor  Dietrich  von  Hildebrand  echoed  these  sentiments  when  he  wrote,  "Truly,
if  one  of  the  devils  in  C.  S.  Lewis's  The  Screivtape  Letters  had  been  entrusted  with  the
ruin  of  the  liturgy,  he  could  not  have  done  it  better."  22

The  testimony  of  Father  Joseph  Gelineau  to  the  fact  that  the  liturgical  revolution
which  followed  the  Council  went  far  beyond  what  the  Council  Fathers  intended
must  surely  be  conclusive:

It  would  be  false  to  identify  this  liturgical  renewal  with  the  reform  of  rites
decided  on  by  Vatican  II.  This  reform  goes  back  much  further  and  goes  forward  far


beyond  the  conciliar  prescriptions  [elle  va  bien  au-dela].  The  liturgy  is  a permanent
workshop  [La  liturgie  est  un  chantier  permanent].  5°

So  there  we  have  it.  In  place  of  the  moderate  reform  sanctioned  by  the  Liturgy
Constitution  of  Vatican  Council  II,  the  Mass  of  the  Roman  Rite,  surely  the  Church's
greatest  treasure,  apart  from  the  Scriptures  themselves,  has  been  reduced  on  a
practical  level  to  "a  permanent  workshop,"  something  done  by  the  people,  rather  than
an  action  of  Christ,  an  actio  Christi.  This  is  a fact  accepted  by  Cardinal  Joseph
Ratzinger,  who  commented:

Today  we  might  ask:  Is  there  a Latin  Rite  anymore?  Certainly  there  is  no  awareness
of  it.  To  most  people  the  liturgy  appears  to  be  rather  something  for  the  individual
congregation  to  arrange.  21


Part  6


In  a forthright  editorial  in  the  February,  1979  issue  of  Homiletic  and  Pastoral  Review,
Fr.  Kenneth  Baker,  S.J.,  the  editor,  addressed  an  appeal  to  the  American  hierarchy.  He
complained  of  the  hundreds  of  changes  imposed  on  the  people,  which  they  hardly
had  time  to  digest,  and  begged  for  a halt  to  be  called  to  the  liturgical  revolution.  "We
have  been  overwhelmed  with  changes  in  the  Church  at  all  levels,  but  it  is  the
liturgical  revolution  which  touches  all  of  us  intimately  and  immediately."  There
appears,  alas,  to  be  no  hope  at  all  of  a halt  being  brought  to  the  liturgical  changes  or
of  effective  steps  being  taken  to  remove  any  of  the  abuses  which  had  become  so
widespread  by  1980  that  Pope  John  Paul  II  felt  obliged  to  make  a public  apology  to
the  faithful  in  his  Apostolic  Letter  Dominicae  Cenae :

I would  like  to  ask  forgiveness  in  my  own  name  and  in  the  name  of  all  of  you,
venerable  and  dear  brothers  in  the  episcopate,  for  everything  which,  for  whatever
reason,  through  whatever  human  weakness,  impatience  or  negligence,  and  also
through  the  at  times  partial,  one-sided  and  erroneous  applications  of  the  directives  of
the  Second  Vatican  Council,  may  have  caused  scandal  and  disturbance  concerning
the  interpretation  of  the  doctrine  and  the  veneration  due  to  this  great  Sacrament.

Has  ever  a pope  needed  to  speak  such  words  in  the  entire  history  of  the  Roman
Church,  the  Church  that  is  the  mother  and  mistress  of  all  other  churches?  And  have
matters  improved  since  this  astonishing  apology?  No,  they  have  worsened  with  every
year  that  has  passed!  The  liturgical  revolution  has  indeed,  as  Father  Baker  observed,
touched  the  faithful  intimately  and  immediately  and  in  a manner  which  has
disturbing  parallels  with  the  way  that  Thomas  Cranmer,  the  apostate  Archbishop  of
Canterbury,  destroyed  the  faith  of  English  Catholics — not  by  indoctrination  with
Protestant  teaching — but  by  forcing  them  to  worship  each  Sunday  with  a
Protestantized  liturgy.  He  used  a liturgical  revolution  to  implement  a doctrinal
revolution!  This  is  explained  clearly  by  Msgr.  Philip  Hughes  in  his  history  of  the
English  Reformation:

This  prayer  book  of  1549  was  as  clear  a sign  as  a man  might  desire  that  a doctrinal
revolution  was  intended  and  that  it  was,  indeed,  already  in  progress.  Once  these  new
Sacramental  rites,  for  example,  had  become  the  habit  of  the  English  people,  the
substance  of  the  doctrinal  reformation,  victorious  now  in  northern  Europe  would
have  transformed  England  also.  All  but  insensibly,  as  the  years  went  by,  the  beliefs
enshrined  in  the  old,  and  how  disused,  rites,  and  kept  alive  by  these  rites  in  men's
minds  and  affections,  would  disappear — without  the  need  of  any  systematic
missionary  effort  to  preach  them  down.

Does  this  seem  familiar  to  you?  It  is  an  illustration  of  a principle  long  enshrined  in
Catholic  theology.  Lex  orandi,  lex  credendi,  which  can  be  translated  roughly  as
meaning  that  the  manner  in  which  we  pray  reflects  what  we  believe,  and  that,
therefore,  if  the  way  we  pray  is  changed,  what  we  believe  will  change  also.  Is  this
happening  today?  Has  not  the  change  in  our  liturgical  rites  been  followed  by  a
dramatic  change  for  the  worse  in  the  beliefs  and  the  behavior  of  our  Catholic  people?
In  the  editorial  to  the  November  1991  issue  of  Homiletic  and  Pastoral  Review,  Father
Kenneth  Baker  wrote.


With  each  year  it  seems  that  we  get  closer  to  an  "American  Church,"  separate  from
Rome.  For  millions  of  Catholics  it  already  exists  in  fact,  though  not  yet  officially  [de
facto  but  not  de  hire].  Even  though  the  entrenched  bureaucracy  will  not  admit  it,  the
Church  here  is  in  bad  shape.  There  has  been  a loss  of  morale  and  elan.  But  what
should  one  expect  when  most  Catholic  children  do  not  know  the  basics  of  the  faith,
when  heresy  is  openly  taught  and  defended  in  "Catholic"  universities,  when
seminarians  have  declined  from  48,000  to  about  5,000,  and  when  [only]  14  million  out
of  55  million  Catholics  [i.e.,  25%]  go  to  Church  regularly  on  Sunday?  It  is  not  an
exaggeration  to  say  that  the  Church  here  is  in  a crisis.


Part  7


This  crisis  is  not,  of  course,  confined  to  the  United  States,  but  exists  with  precisely
the  same  manifestations  throughout  the  Western  World.  In  countries  such  as
Holland,  it  seems  reasonable  to  ask  whether  anything  substantial  exists  now  that  can
be  described  realistically  as  Catholicism.  Far  from  filling  our  churches  with  renewed,
revitalized  Catholics — many  of  them  previously  lapsed,  but  brought  back  to  the
Faith  by  an  inspiring  new  liturgy  that  they  can  easily  understand — we  have  instead
witnessed  a catastrophic  decline  in  Mass  attendance  in  every  Western  country.  We
are.  Father  Louis  Bouyer  assures  us,  witnessing  not  the  renewal,  but  the  accelerating
decomposition  of  Catholicism.  ^ Hundreds  of  millions  ...  I repeat . . . hundreds  of
millions  of  Catholics  who  went  to  Mass  in  the  "bad  old  days,"  when  the  liturgy  was
supposed  to  have  alienated  them  from  the  Church,  have  ceased  assisting  at  Mass  at
all,  and  yet,  according  to  those  in  authority,  the  liturgical  reform  has  been  a
tremendous  pastoral  success,  and  we  are  all  deliriously  happy  with  it.  Archbishop
Bugnini,  the  great  architect  of  the  liturgical  revolution,  commented,  in  all  seriousness
it  would  appear,  that  "The  renewed  Mass  was  received  with  joy,  with  enthusiasm,
and  in  a short  time  entered  into  the  practice  of  the  Christian  people  with  obvious
advantages  to  the  community."  ^ Well,  if  I may  quote  the  Duke  of  Wellington  again:
"If  you  believe  that,  you'll  believe  anything!"

It  is  only  to  be  expected  that  Archbishop  Bugnini  would  claim  that  the  reform
behind  which  he  was  the  moving  spirit  had  been  a success.  One  might  have  hoped
that  the  Pope,  the  Universal  Shepherd,  would  take  a more  objective  view.  One  might
have  hoped  that  when  faced  with  the  clear  evidence  that  his  flock  had  been  led  into  a
liturgical  wilderness,  that  its  numbers  were  declining  at  a catastrophic  rate  and  that
those  who  remained  were  being  starved  of  true  spiritual  nourishment,  he  would  lead
them  back  once  more  to  the  sound  pastures  of  tradition  that  had  nourished  their  faith
for  so  many  centuries.  But,  alas,  in  his  Apostolic  Letter  commemorating  the  twenty-
fifth  anniversary  of  the  Liturgy  Constitution,  he  appeared  to  have  forgotten  his
apology  to  the  faithful  made  in  Dominicae  Cenae  eight  years  previously  and  echoed
the  optimistic  and  totally  unrealistic  assessment  of  Archbishop  Bugnini,  while
accepting  that  "the  application  of  the  liturgical  reform  has  met  with  difficulties,"
including,  he  claimed,  the  fact  that  "the  transition  from  simply  being  present,  very
often  in  a rather  passive  and  silent  way,  to  a fuller  and  more  active  participation  has
been  for  some  people  too  demanding."  It  would  seem,  then,  that  the  lack  of  success
of  the  liturgical  reforms  lies  not  in  the  nature  of  the  changes,  but  in  the  inability  or
unwillingness  of  the  faithful  to  understand  how  beneficial  the  changes  really  were
for  them.  One  cannot  help  recalling  the  censure  passed  upon  those  Russian  peasants
who — after  the  1917  Revolution — were  unwilling  or  unable  to  accept  the  fact  that
the  collectivization  of  their  land  was  really  beneficial  to  them.  But  despite  the
difficulties  to  which  he  referred,  the  Pope  insisted  in  his  Apostolic  Letter  that:


The  vast  majority  of  the  pastors  and  the  Christian  people  have  accepted  the
liturgical  reform  in  a spirit  of  obedience  and  indeed  joyful  fervor.  For  this  we  should
give  thanks  to  God  for  that  movement  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Church  which  the
liturgical  renewal  represents;  and  for  the  fact  that  the  table  of  the  word  of  God  is  now
abundantly  furnished  for  all;  for  the  immense  effort  undertaken  throughout  the
world  to  provide  the  Christian  people  with  translations  of  the  Bible,  the  Missal  and
other  liturgical  books;  for  the  increased  participation  of  the  faithful  by  prayer  and
song,  gesture  and  silence,  in  the  Eucharist  and  the  other  Sacraments;  for  the
ministries  exercised  by  lay  people  and  the  responsibilities  that  they  have  assumed  in
virtue  of  the  common  priesthood  into  which  they  have  been  initiated  through
Baptism  and  Confirmation;  for  the  radiant  vitality  of  so  many  Christian
communities,  a vitality  drawn  from  the  well-spring  of  the  Liturgy.  These  are  all
reasons  for  holding  fast  to  the  teaching  of  the  Constitution  Sacrosanctum  Concilium
and  to  the  reforms  which  it  has  made  possible:  "The  liturgical  reform  is  the  most
visible  fruit  of  the  whole  work  of  the  Council."  For  many  people  the  message  of  the
Second  Vatican  Council  has  been  experienced  principally  through  the  liturgical
reform.  25


Part  8


The  respect  that  we  all  owe  to  the  Vicar  of  Christ  cannot  obscure  the  fact  that  the
renewal  he  is  describing  here  is  a fantasy.  When  the  Pope  comments  on  a matter  of
fact,  his  words  either  correspond  to  reality  or  they  do  not,  and  in  this  case  they  most
certainly  do  not.  Far  from  the  vast  majority  of  Catholics  welcoming  the  reform  with
"joyful  fervor,"  the  vast  majority  of  the  faithful  throughout  the  West  no  longer  assist
at  Mass  at  all.  Those  who  were  not  assisting  at  Mass  before  the  Council  have  not
been  brought  back,  and  in  country  after  country  many,  sometimes  most,  of  those  who
were  assisting  before  the  Council  no  longer  do  so.  In  countries  such  as  France  and
Holland,  the  percentage  of  Catholics  at  Mass  each  Sunday  has  declined  to  a single
figure.  In  the  U.S.A.  attendance  has  declined  from  71  % in  1963  to  25  % in  1993,  a
decline  of  65  %.  ^ If  we  consider  this  decline  in  terms  of  souls  rather  than  bare
statistics,  it  means  that  twenty-four  million  fewer  Catholics  in  the  U.S.  attend  Mass
now  than  was  the  case  before  the  Council.  During  that  period  there  has  been  a huge
increase  in  the  Catholic  population  of  the  United  States,  and  so  the  picture  is  far
worse  than  appears  to  be  the  case  from  these  bare  statistics.  The  March,  1994  issue  of
the  excellent  Australian  Catholic  journal,  A.D.  2000,  examines  the  manner  in  which  a
detailed  survey  of  Mass  attendance  in  the  diocese  of  Townsville  reflects  the  overall
picture  of  a collapse  of  Catholic  practice  on  that  continent.  The  official  survey
examined  in  the  article  was  actually  entitled  "Where  have  all  the  people  gone."  It
reveals  a figure  of  only  12%  in  1993,  which  is  likely  to  decline  to  about  6 % by  the
year  2000.  Commenting  on  the  survey,  the  A.D.  2000  columnist  remarked:

Nowhere  in  the  document  is  there  any  hint  that  the  "reforming"  policies  pursued
over  the  past  20  years  in  liturgy,  religious  education,  seminary  and  religious  life,
biblical  studies  and  moral  teaching  might  be  contributors  to  the  disaster  represented
by  the  Mass  attendance  statistics  . . . Just  how  much  further  Mass  attendances  must
decline  in  Townsville  and  elsewhere  before  botched  reforms  are  halted  and
admissions  of  failure  [are]  forthcoming  is  not  yet  clear,  but  we  should  not  hold  our
breath.

Is  the  Holy  Father  correct  in  suggesting  that  we  should  indeed  give  thanks  to  God
for  what  he  terms  a movement  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  which  A.D.  2000  correctly  terms
a disaster?  Facts  cannot  be  loyal  or  disloyal,  and  the  facts  concerning  the  collapse  in
Mass  attendance  are,  alas,  only  too  tmel  The  reform  was  supposed  to  be  of  particular
benefit  to  the  young,  but  in  Britain  nine  out  of  ten  young  high  school  Catholics  who
have  been  nourished  by  the  so-called  liturgical  renewal  have  lapsed  from  the  Faith
before  leaving  school,  and  I am  sure  that  the  same  dismal  story  is  true  of  other
countries.  This  is  hardly  an  indication  of  radiant  vitality.  It  would  be  interesting  to

learn  precisely  where  these  radiantly  vital  communities  are  located certainly  not  in

the  Pope's  own  diocese  of  Rome,  where  less  than  eight  percent  of  the  faithful  set  foot
in  church  on  Sunday ! Far  from  "the  whole  of  humanity  being  called  into  the
household  of  the  Church;'  as  the  Liturgy  Constitution  expected,  millions  of  Catholics


are  leaving  the  household  of  the  Church  for  heretical  sects.  In  Brazil,  for  example,  the
country  with  the  world's  largest  Catholic  population,  there  are  now  more  Protestants
worshiping  in  their  chapels  each  Sunday  than  there  are  Catholics  assisting  at  the
allegedly  radiantly  vital  new  liturgy,  which  hardly  indicates  joyful  fervor  on  the  part
of  the  Catholic  faithful  in  Brazil,  who  are  leaving  the  Church  for  Protestant  sects  by
the  millions.

The  only  factually  accurate  statement  in  the  Holy  Father's  praise  of  the  reform  is  his
quotation  from  the  final  report  of  the  1985  Synod  of  Bishops  that  "the  liturgical
reform  is  the  most  visible  fruit  of  the  whole  work  of  the  Council."  The  liturgical
revolution,  not  "reform,"  has  indeed  been  the  most  visible  fruit  of  the  Council,  and  it

has  been  a bad  fruit,  an  effort  that  has  failed  disastrously — a liturgical  shipwreck

to  the  detriment  of  many  millions  ofsoulsl

"By  their  fruits  you  shall  know  them" — Afructibus  eorum  cognoscetis  eos.  "Do  men
gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or  figs  of  thistles?  Even  so  every  good  tree  bringeth  forth
good  fruit,  and  the  evil  tree  bringeth  forth  evil  fruit.  A good  tree  cannot  bring  forth
evil  fruit,  neither  can  an  evil  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit."  [Matt.  7: 16-18].  The
assessment  of  the  liturgical  reform  made  by  Msgr.  Klaus  Gamber  is  radically
incompatible  with  that  of  the  Holy  Father,  but  does  not  the  experience  of  each  of  us
in  the  past  twenty-  five  disastrous  years  make  it  impossible  to  deny  that  Msgr.
Gamber  is  right  and  the  Pope  is  wrong?  It  is  a perverted  concept  of  loyalty,  to  which
no  Catholic  is  compelled  to  adhere,  that  would  make  us  deny  that  we  see  what  we
see,  hear  what  we  hear  and  suffer  what  we  suffer.  Msgr.  Gamber  insists,  and
correctly  so,  that  what  we  have  experienced  is  not  a renewal  but  a debacle — one  that
worsens  with  each  passing  year.  He  writes.

The  liturgical  reform,  welcomed  with  so  much  idealism  and  hope  by  so  many
priests  and  lay  people  alike,  has  turned  out  to  be  a liturgical  destruction  of  startling
proportions — a debacle  worsening  with  each  passing  year.  Instead  of  the  hoped-for
renewal  of  the  Church  and  of  Catholic  life,  we  are  now  witnessing  a dismantling  of
the  traditional  values  and  piety  on  which  our  faith  rests.  Instead  of  the  fruitful
renewal  of  the  liturgy,  what  we  see  is  a destruction  of  the  forms  of  the  Mass  which
had  developed  organically  during  the  course  of  many  centuries.  2Z


Part  9


Mention  was  made  earlier  of  the  astonishing  apology  made  to  the  faithful  by  our
Holy  Father,  Pope  John  Paul  II,  in  1980.  An  even  more  astonishing  admission  was
made  in  1992  by  the  highest  liturgical  authority,  apart  from  the  Pope  himself,  that  is
to  say,  the  Congregation  for  Divine  Worship  and  the  Sacraments.  In  its  official
journal,  Notitiae,  for  October  1992,  it  admitted  that  abuses  have  become
institutionalized.  An  editorial  to  this  issue  laments  the  fact  that

Thirty  years  are  too  many  for  an  incorrect  praxis,  which  in  and  of  itself  tends  to  be
already  fixed  in  place.  The  malformations  born  in  the  first  years  of  the  application
still  endure,  and  gradually,  as  new  generations  follow  one  another,  could  almost
become  a rule.

It  is  not  difficult  to  find  examples  of  the  many  abuses  that  have  been
institutionalized.  Communion  in  the  hand  is  not  so  much  as  mentioned  in  any
document  of  the  Council.  It  began  soon  after  the  Council  as  an  aping  of  Protestant
practice  in  Holland.  Communion  had  been  given  in  the  hand  in  the  early  Church,  but
as  the  German  liturgist  Father  Joseph  Jungmann  has  explained,  as  the  centuries
passed,  reverence  for  the  Blessed  Sacrament  deepened,  and  the  tradition  developed
that  only  what  was  consecrated  could  touch  the  Host,  and  this  awesome  privilege  was
confined  to  the  consecrated  hands  of  a priest,  which  had  been  anointed  for  this
purpose  at  his  Ordination.  Pope  John  Paul  II  has  observed  correctly  that  to  touch  the
Host  is  a privilege  of  the  ordained,  but  he  did  not,  alas,  consider  it  feasible  to  take  the
logical  step  and  forbid  the  practice  of  Communion  in  the  hand.  This  practice  had
been  resurrected  during  the  Protestant  Reformation  as  an  external  manifestation  of
their  belief  that  the  bread  received  in  Communion  is  ordinary  bread  and  that  the  man
who  distributes  it  is  an  ordinary  man.  In  our  time,  this  practice  in  the  Catholic
Church  soon  spread  from  Holland  to  neighboring  countries,  and  Pope  Paul  VI  polled
the  bishops  of  the  world  as  to  whether  the  practice  was  acceptable.  The
overwhelming  majority  replied  that  it  was  not,  and  the  Instruction  Memoriale
Domini,  published  in  1969,  gave  a superb  exposition  of  the  reasons  for  the  traditional
practice  and  the  threat  to  reverence  posed  by  the  abuse  of  Communion  in  the  hand.
Pope  Paul  made  a direct  appeal  to  the  bishops  of  the  world:

The  Supreme  Pontiff  judged  that  the  long'  received  manner  of  ministering  Holy
Communion  to  the  faithful  should  not  be  changed.  The  Apostolic  See  therefore
strongly  urges  bishops,  priests  and  people  to  observe  zealously  this  law,  valid  and
again  confirmed,  according  to  the  judgment  of  the  majority  of  the  Catholic,
episcopate,  in  the  form  which  the  present  rite  of  the  sacred  liturgy  employs,  and
out  of  concern  for  the  common  good  of  the  Church.


Part  10


Fine  words  indeed,  but  words  that  were  ignored  by  the  liberal  priests  who  were
breaking  the  law,  words  that  were  ignored  by  the  very  bishops  who  had  voted  to
uphold  the  traditional  practice.  In  country  after  country,  the  hierarchy  surrendered
abjectly  to  the  liturgical  rebels,  and  in  every  case  the  Holy  See  surrendered  in  an
equally  abject  manner  and  gave  legal  sanction  to  the  rebellion.  The  message  of  this
capitulation  was  clear,  defy  the  Pope  and  the  Pope  will  surrender,  and  surrender  he
did  on  the  practice  of  Communion  under  both  kinds  on  Sundays — which  was
specifically  prohibited,  and  then  later  legalized.  In  1994,  with  cruel  irony  and  within
a few  days  of  the  precise  anniversary  of  the  imposition  of  the  New  Mass,  the  Pope
surrendered  on  altar  girls,  the  one  instance  on  which  many  conservative  Catholics
were  confident  that  he  would  not  back  down.  There  could  hardly  have  been  a more
appropriate  commemoration  of  a quarter  of  a century  of  liturgical  anarchy  than  this
humiliating  capitulation  by  the  Holy  See  to  the  strident  harridans  of  the  feminist
movement.

While  on  the  subject  of  institutionalized  abuses,  one  might  add  that  almost  every
occasion  that  a woman  reads  a lesson  in  Church  constitutes  an  abuse,  as  this  is
permitted  only  if  male  lectors  cannot  be  found;  and  almost  every  use  of  an
extraordinary  minister  of  Communion  constitutes  an  abuse,  as  the  strict  conditions
for  their  use  are  rarely  if  ever  met  in  the  Western  World.  The  sight  of  an
extraordinary  minister  in  a Catholic  sanctuary  should  be  a truly  extraordinary  event,
but  it  is  now  extraordinary  to  find  a sanctuary  that  is  not  infested  by  them.  The
official  liturgical  norm  has  become  the  abnormal,  and  the  abnormal  has  become  the
norm.


Part  11


The  ICEL  translation  of  the  New  Mass — to  which  the  small  minority  of  Catholics
who  still  assist  at  Mass  in  the  Western  World  are  subjected  each  Sunday —
constitutes  an  abuse  of  the  most  outrageous  nature,  with  its  400  mistranslations  into
English,  including  the  mistranslation  of  pro  multis  as  "for  all"  during  the  sacred
words  of  Consecration.  52  Clowns,  dancing  girls,  balloons  and  banjos  . . . the  list  of
abuses  is  endless,  and  what  can  the  faithful  concerned  with  reverence  and  adherence
to  the  liturgical  law  of  the  Church  do  about  them?  The  answer  is  that,  as  is  the  case
with  heterodox  catechetical  instruction  or  immoral  sex  education,  they  can  do
nothing.  They  can  appeal  to  their  priests,  their  bishops,  the  Apostolic  Delegate  and
the  Pope  himself,  and  the  final  result  will  always  be  the  same,  the  abuse  will  either
be  tolerated  or  legalized.  We  are  living  in  what  Canon  Law  describes  as  a state  of
emergency.  But  if  we  are  to  be  realistic,  we  in  the  West  have  hardly  begun  to  realize
what  an  abuse  is.  If  you  wish  to  see  real  abuses,  go  to  India  as  I have  done,  and  you
will  witness  what  appear  to  be,  and  probably  are,  pagan  ceremonies  replacing  the
Mass.  The  broken-hearted  faithful  compiled  meticulous  documentation  of  the
paganization  of  Indian  Catholicism  under  the  guise  of  inculturation,  and  even  at  the
cost  of  great  financial  sacrifice  took  it  to  Rome  and  handed  it  in  to  the  Congregation
for  Divine  Worship  to  ensure  that  it  was  received  safely.  And  the  response  of  the
Congregation  to  these  fervently  devout  Catholics — who  did  no  more  than  beg  the
Congregation  to  uphold  its  own  guidelines was  a contemptuous  silence.

Not  only  does  the  Congregation's  editorial,  which  has  just  been  cited  [cf.  pp.  30-31],
accept  the  fact  that  abuses  have  become  institutionalized  and  are  accepted  as  the  rule
by  the  present  generation,  which  has  known  nothing  else,  but  it  included  another
admission,  the  importance  of  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  exaggerate:  It
acknowledges  that  "the  credibility  of  the  liturgical  reform  is  being  put  in  jeopardy"
[La  credibilita  della  riforma  liturgica  venga  posta  in  pericolo ].  I would  differ  from  the
assessment  of  the  Congregation  and  insist  that  the  credibility  of  the  liturgical  reform
has  long  passed  the  situation  of  being  in  danger.  Any  credibility  that  it  ever
possessed  has  long  been  totally  and  irrecoverably  lost.

Archbishop  Marcel  Lefebvre  once  observed  that,  in  the  midst  of  the  present  crisis,
the  future  of  Catholicism  lies  in  its  past.  This  is  certainly  the  case  where  the  future  of
the  Roman  liturgy  is  concerned.  The  imposition  of  an  artificially  concocted,
ecumenically  tainted  rite  of  Mass  in  place  of  the  Mass  of  all  ages  must  be  considered
as  an  historical  aberration  which  can  only  be  corrected  by  restoring  that  liturgy
which  developed  and  endured  for  more  than  nineteen  centuries  as  the  liturgy  that
will  form  the  basis  of  the  Church's  worship  also  in  the  twenty-first  century.

Is  this  an  illusion  or  just  wishful  thinking?  Far  from  itl  It  now  seems  likely  that  at
the  turn  of  the  century,  in  France  at  least,  the  majority  of  the  faithful  who  still  assist


at  Mass  on  Sunday  will  be  assisting  at  a Tridentine  Mass.  Where  the  Eldest  Daughter
of  the  Church  leads,  may  not  other  countries  follow?  It  would  be  less  than  honest  to
pass  over  the  fact  that  the  majority  of  French  Catholics  who  assist  at  the  Traditional
Mass  on  Sundays  do  so  in  chapels  of  the  Society  of  St.  Pius  X and  that  this  will  be
even  more  the  case  in  the  future  if  the  number  of  priests  ordained  from  its  seminaries
increases.  Despite  the  "excommunications"  of  1988,  the  Society  is  flourishing  more
now  than  ever  before  and  as  of  1994  has  six  thriving  seminaries.  The  judgment  of  the
Congregation  for  the  Doctrine  of  the  Faith  in  declaring  null  and  void  the  Honolulu
"excommunication"  of  six  Catholics  for  "schismatic  activities"  which  included
supporting  "the  Pius  X schismatic  movement"  and  procuring  the  services  of  an
"excommunicated  Fefebvre  bishop"  to  perform  Confirmations  ^ has  proved  what
those  with  a modicum  of  theological  or  canonical  literacy  have  always  known,  that  in
the  present  state  of  ecclesiastical  anarchy,  the  faithful  can  by  no  means  be  termed
schismatic  if  they  resort  to  the  Society  of  St.  Pius  X chapels,  because  they  know  of  no
other  means  of  obtaining  access  to  the  Traditional  Mass,  to  which  they  have  a right —
-or,  for  that  matter,  no  other  means  of  taking  part  in  any  other  form  of  reverent
Catholic  worship.  During  a state  of  emergency  in  the  Church — and  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  such  a state  prevails  throughout  most  of  the  Western  World  today —
Catholics  are  entitled  to  act  outside  the  normal  structures  of  the  Church  when  they
are  convinced  that  this  is  necessary  in  order  for  them  to  keep  their  faith,  and  such
action  cannot  in  the  furthest  stretch  of  imagination  be  considered  schismatic,
providing  that  they  recognize  the  authority  of  the  Pope  and  do  not  intend  to  separate
themselves  from  the  Church.  This  applies  not  only  to  the  Society  of  St.  Pius  X,  but  to
the  many  so-called  "independent  priests"  of  exemplary  orthodoxy.  Yet  at  the  same
time  we  must  pray  earnestly  that  it  will  be  made  possible  for  the  Society  and  these
independent  priests  to  work  within  the  official  structures  of  the  Church  at  the
earliest  possibility.  In  this  regard,  a great  deal  will  depend  upon  the  next  pontificate.


Part  12


It  would  also  be  dishonest  to  pretend  that  traditional  Catholics  do  not  have  good
reason  to  be  disillusioned  with  the  effectiveness  of  the  Ecclesia  Dei  Commission
established  in  1988  to  safeguard  their  interests.  It  would  be  euphemistic  to  state  that
the  Commission  has  been  reduced  to  the  status  of  a lame  duck.  But  nonetheless  we
must  rejoice  in  the  positive  results  derived  from  its  establishment.  The  number  of  so-
called  indult  Masses  now  authorized  is  pitifully  small  when  compared  to  the  total
number  of  parishes  in  the  U.S.A.,  but  is  nonetheless  a tremendous  improvement  on
the  situation  before  1988.  The  large  congregations  and  the  resurgence  of  faith
generated  in  some  of  the  indult  parishes  must  be  seen  in  order  to  be  believed;  among
such  parishes  are  those  of  St.  Agnes  in  New  York,  St.  John  Cantius  in  Chicago,  St.
Joseph's  in  Richmond,  Virginia  and  St.  Mary's  in  Washington,  D.C.  We  must  also
rejoice  in  the  growth  and  effectiveness  of  the  Society  of  St.  Peter  in  the  U.S.A.,
particularly  in  the  fact  that  it  now  has  an  American  seminary.  In  France  we  can
rejoice  in  the  spectacular,  almost  miraculous  resurgence  of  traditional  Benedictine
monasticism  in  the  Monasteries  of  Fontgombault  and  Le  Barroux,  which  I visited  this
year,  as  well  as  that  of  Randol.

In  1994,  the  unhappy  anniversary  of  a quarter  of  a century  of  catastrophic  liturgical
experimentation,  I had  the  privilege  of  participating  in  an  event  which  convinced  me
that  the  Tridentine  Mass  is  indeed  the  Mass  that  will  not  die.  You  would  also  have
been  convinced  of  this — and  convinced  too  that  the  future  of  the  Roman  Rite  lies  in
resurrecting  its  past — if  you  could  have  been  in  the  world's  most  beautiful  cathedral,
that  of  Chartres,  France,  on  Pentecost  Monday  and  seen  it  packed  to  the  doors  with
young  Catholics  for  a Solemn  High  Tridentine  Mass,  which  they  sang  with  one  voice,
cum  ima  voce,  and  with  tremendous  enthusiasm,  after  having  marched  there  in
pilgrimage  almost  seventy  miles  from  Paris  in  three  days,  camping  out  at  night,  and
if  you  had  seen  the  thousands  who  could  not  find  a place  inside  the  cathedral  and
who  sang  the  Mass  outside.  There  were  at  least  fifteen  thousand  present  in  all,  with  an
average  age  of  twenty!  This  was  not  an  illusion,  but  a reality.  Let  anyone  who  doubts
this  report  simply  join  the  pilgrimage  next  year,  or  in  succeeding  years.  It  has  been
held  now  since  1983.

The  critique  of  the  New  Mass  which  I have  presented  to  you  here  has  been,  I hope,  a
legitimate  exercise  of  the  right  accorded  to  every  Catholic  by  Canon  212  of  the  New
Code  of  Canon  Law  [1983]  to  manifest  to  the  sacred  pastors  his  opinion  on  matters
which  pertain  to  the  good  of  the  Church  and  to  make  his  opinion  known  to  the  other
Christian  faithful.  I am  absolutely  certain  that  I am  manifesting  my  love  for  and
loyalty  to  the  Church  by  suggesting,  with  the  utmost  respect  for  the  Holy  Father,  that-
— to  paraphrase  Cardinals  Ottaviani  and  Bacci  writing  in  1969  \The  Ottaviani
Intervention 1 — as  the  reform  has  proved  harmful  for  the  subjects  for  whom  it  was
promulgated,  we  have  the  right  and  the  duty  to  ask  him  to  abrogate  it.  The  New  Mass


is  something  which — as  Dietrich  von  Hildebrand  expressed  it — the  common  Father
of  all  Christians,  the  Holy  Father,  should  regret  and  take  back,  so  that,  as  Cardinals
Ottaviani  and  Bacci  requested,  we  can  be  given  "the  possibility  of  continuing  to  have
recourse  to  the  fruitful  integrity  of  that  Missale  Romanian  of  St.  Pius  V,"  which  is  as
certain  to  be  the  Mass  of  our  children  as  it  was  the  Mass  of  our  fathers  in  the  Faith.

Let  me  conclude  by  quoting  the  words  of  Msgr.  Klaus  Gamber,  whose  book  The
Reform  of  the  Roman  Liturgy  contains  written  endorsements  by  three  cardinals,  and
who  was,  it  is  worth  repeating,  considered  by  Cardinal  Ratzinger  to  be  "the  one
scholar  who,  among  the  army  of  pseudo-liturgists,  truly  represents  the  liturgical
thinking  of  the  center  of  the  Church."  With  his  unrivaled  knowledge  of  the  liturgy
and  with  the  pastoral  concern  of  a true  good  shepherd,  this  was  the  message  that  he
left  for  the  Church  that  he  had  loved  so  well  and  served  so  faithfully:

In  the  final  analysis,  this  means  that  in  the  future  the  traditional  rite  of  Mass  must  be
retained  in  the  Roman  Catholic  Church.  ..as  the  primary  liturgical  form  for  the
celebration  of  Mass.  It  must  become  once  more  the  norm  of  our  faith  and  the  symbol  of
Catholic  unity  throughout  the  world,  a rock  of  stability  in  a period  of  upheaval  and
never-ending  change.  ^
