/


MENT

THE STORY


ON SO RED FAS CISM
GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY!


By TABITHA PETRAN

— "The decay of spiritua
Reformation was res pc

PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT and Sec- i
JT retary of State Cordell Hull waxed
loudly indignant over Drew Pearsor
charges concerning the anti-Russian
policy and sentiments of the State .jDe-
partment. Anyone who has kept half
an eye on the comings and gojpgs in
the brownstone architectural monstros-
ity on Pennsylvania Avenue ^fhere the
, foreign affairs of the U. S. a/e directed
and followed the activities, tof the tight
little bureaucracy which ^ts behind its
doors can hardly question these
charges.

However, particularly concrete and
interesting evidence of the anti-Rus-
sian and anti-liberal mold in which our
foreign policy is greeted and in which
our post-war plans for Eur ope are
Hound in the, SchooI^oT:
foreign Service at GeorgetoWiTTJni-
verrity^Washmgton, D. C. This school
is a training ground for future U. S.
diplomats. The ranks of our foreign
service are staffed in good measure
from its ranks.

The nature of the training received
at Georgetown by future U. S. foreign
service men has never suffered the
glare of publicity. Georgetown is a
Roman Catholic University and its
Foreign Service School, also a Roman
Catholic institution.

At Georgetown there has now been
established also one of the some
twenty to twenty-five schools for mili-
tary government and occupation work
run by the Department of War. These


' values through the Renaissance and
isible for Fascism . .

schools, in the words of Maj. Gen.
Allen W. Gullion, Provost Marshal
General, train their students "both as
occupational police and as junior ad-
ministrators in military government.”
The military government that is to be
set up in each area, the Provost Mar-
shal General explained in a recent
article, "is a sort of superstructure
erected over the local government.”
Teachers of the military special
training courses at Georgetown Uni-
versity are drawn from the staff of the
School of Foreign Service. It can be
assumed that the teaching in these
courses is closely paralleled at the For-
eign Service School.

The principal lecturer at the George-
town military school is Fathe r Edmun d
A. Walsh w ho is also Vice Regent of
the Schoor of Foreign Service. Father
Walsh is a Jesuit priest who distrib-
uted papal relief in Russia in the early
twenties and who denounced as "a hol-
low mockery" and "cynical pretenses”
the statement of the Soviet spokesman
S. A. Lozovski, made on October 4,
1941, recalling that Article 124 of the
Soviet Constitution guarantees relig-
ious freedom to all.

Our future U. S. diplomats and oc-
cupational police and junior adminis-
trators in "liberated” territories are
being thoroughly indoctrinated at
Georgetown with anti-Russian, anti-
liberal and anti-scientific prejudices.

Among the courses given in the
Army Special Training program at


12


THE PROTESTANT


October


Georgetown is one on German Peoples
and Culture, In August Father Walsh
delivered several lectures at the con-
clusion of this course. These lectures
presented a broad interpretation of his-
tory which held scientific and liberal
progress since the Renaissance respon-
sible for the development of Fascism.
Walsh said:

"The high culture of the Middle
Ages has been destroyed by the Ren-
aissance. Through the Renaissance
men lost their form and substance. The
consequence of the Renaissance was
the Reformation which created the ter-
rible schism between religions. The
Renaissance and Reformation are re-
sponsible for the rise of industry. The
nemesis of the Reformation haunts us
today. Europe can never be rebuilt
without a regeneration of the spiritual
values of the Middle Ages. The decay
of spiritual values through the Renais-
sance and Reformation was responsible
for Fascism which couldn’t have hap-
pened without this decay."

These ideas are elaborated and ex-
panded by Father Walsh in an essay
on geopolitics, which was published in
1942 by the School of Foreign Service
in a Syllabu^jy,^^
in the rofitiatl Econ ^^o^ot^ ^' ar .

"USecf "as a textbook in
the Georgetown lectures. The essay
on geopolitics forms the basis for lec-
tures delivered by Father Walsh to
army officer schools throughout the
country.

This essay is in sum an elaborate
attack on progressive and scientific
thought since the Reformation and on
the ideas and accomplishments of the
French Revolution.

To understand the full meaning of
this attack one must know that the
Jesuit dogma tries to explain every


political and cultural development,
which is not favorable to the authori-
tarian Roman Catholic idea, as an evil
consequence of either Protestantism or
liberalism. Liberalism, in Jesuit opin-
ion is, according to the circumstances,
the mother of socialism. Communism,
Fascism, capitalism and every other
modern development, whenever the
Church is forced by one ascendant
pressure or the other to emphasize the
"neutral position” of the Vatican.
And, of course, liberalism and all the
other isms wouldn’t have occurred
without the "original sin” of the Prot-
estant Reformation.

From that fundamental doctrine it
is easy to prove, as Father Walsh does
in his essay, that geopolitics is nothing
but the consequence of Protestantism
plus liberalism. He writes:

"No informed European or thought-
ful American should fail to recognize
that Geopolitik is precisely what its
name signifies — the politics of a
wholly earthly conception of life. It
is the logical culmination of a process
of secularization both of the mind and
cultural institutions which has been in
progress since the Renaissance and In-
dustrial Revolution turned men’s
thoughts earthwards.”

The other consequences of the
"process of secularization” are, accord-
ing to Father Walsh, Darwinism,
Marxism, the "libido complex of
Freud,” cubism, dadaism, the frenzy
of financial speculation on Wall St.,
jazz and jitterbugs — in short every-
thing good and bad, important and un-
important, that happened since the
French Revolution. Walsh writes:
"The French Revolution has inter-
vened as the true starting point of the
renewed social and political upheavals
which have plagued Europe ...”


1943 V s. GOVERNMENT SPONSORED FASCISM 13


Walsh attacks German geopolitics
all the more violently because, as he
implies very subtly, it is a typical Prot-
estant Prussian development. But
since this accusation is not strong
enough he lumps together German
geopolitical thought with Marxism.
He rightly terms Karl Haushofer the
end product of the dangerous German
geopolitical school but in his eagerness
to emphasize the alleged Marxist basis
of Haushofer’s theories he forgets that
this man is not a Prussian but a Bava-
rian, not a Protestant but a devoted
Roman Catholic.

But the most fundamental signifi-
cance of Walsh’s theories of geopoli-
tics lies in the fact that he condemns
only the German form of that, theory
because he is clever enough to see that
the theory is a very useful weapon in
the hands of any kind of imperialism.
Therefore, he not only teaches his
pupils that some of the sources of Ger-
man geopolitics are British and Amer-
ican discoveries but that geopolitics
made outside of Germany and Russia
should be the motor of the foreign pol-
icy and activities of governments at
present friendly to the Vatican, and
may even be the salvation of Roman
Catholic Christendom. At the con-
clusion of his essay he says in an inten-
tionally cloudy form but very clear to
everyone who understands Roman
Catholic philosophy:

"So much for the geopolitics of the
past and present. The pattern of a
future geopolitics, American-born, is
even now beginning to grow discern-
ible in broad outlines. Whatever resi-
due of geographic, ethnic and eco-
nomic validity may remain after
rational discount in the claims of Ger-
man geojpoliticians must be examined
with objectivity and remedied with


frankness and courage. They do not
concern Germany alone but all Chris-
tendom.”

And he adds unequivocably:

"Safeguarded against abuse, geo-
politics can perform a legitimate and
useful function in the formulation of
national policy.”

Here we have the true meaning of
what Walsh is teaching our future ad-
ministrators of "liberated” territories
all over the world: geopolitics is evil
as long as it is in the hands of our
enemies, Germany and Russia, but it
can perform miracles in the hands of
the currently pro- Vatican United
States. This is a masterful manner of
distorting history and of educating the
flower of our youth to become cynical
Jesuits.

Less masterful, but nonetheless de-
signed to be effective on impression-
able youth, are such misinterpretations
of recent history as the reasons he gives
for the collapse of. France in 1940:
"France's moral unity was weakened
and her military power sterilized by
divided counsel, left wing radicalism
and indecision of leadership.” Perhaps
he got this piece of information from
the former collaborator of Lindbergh,
Alexis Carrell, whom Father Walsh
deStiibo as 11 a "thoughtful observer”
and who is a well known Fascist.

Father Walsh’s contribution to the
Syllabus which is used as a textbook
by the officers and soldiers enrolled in
Georgetown’s special training courses
is not confined, however, to this essay
on geopolitics. He has also written the
Introduction, Here he forgets his
Jesuit subtlety and bluntly lumps Hit-
ler, Mussolini and Stalin and equates
the Soviet system to the Nazi and
Fascist. He writes:

"It is an inadequate explanation of


14


THE PROTESTANT


October


current events to attribute them wholly
to Hitler, Stalin and Mussolini, or even
to the systems they represent. These
particular leaders and the regimes they
typify are effects and consequences of
symbols — not causes or originators of
the breakdown of European peace.
They were minor but daring conspir-
ators thrown up to the surface by the
earthquake of exploding social revolu-
tion. They simply leaped into the in-
viting saddle of prepared dictatorship
and rode the whirlwind."

The Syllabus is divided into sections
consisting of prospectuses to guide the
teaching of different subjects. Because
the Roman Catholic philosophy which
always presents a "neutral” face to
world affairs cannot come out in a
sweeping and unequivocal support of
capitalism, imperialism and Fascism, it
is forced to create artificial distinctions
between good and bad capitalism.
Therefore in the prospectus dealing
with economic defense our young
soldiers are taught that there exist two
economies: the "political motive econ-
omy" which is evil and responsible for
the disturbances of our modern world
and the "profit motive economy” which
leads directly into heaven. Of profit
motive economy the prospectus teach-
es: "Emphasis here should be put upon
the forceful incentive of private profit
back of it all, entirely separate from
governmental control: competition,

free enterprise, and accumulation of
savings all fundamentally resting upon
the motive of profit."

The evil "political-motive economy"
is explained as the economy in which
the state rather than the individual
dominates and this leads to an attack
upon the social reforms which were
put through in Europe fifty years ago
2nd which are reflected today in post-


war plans like the very innocuous and
modest Beveridge plan.

Does this fundamental attitude
which is being imposed upon our
young soldiers mean that these teach-
ers selected by our War Department to
train future administrators and occu-
pational police and by our State De-
partment to train our future diplomats
are just sullen critics of the past and
present and have nothing to teach
about the future developments of the
world ? On the contrary.

The pattern for the future is as defi-
nite and as reactionary as the picture
of the past.

Since much of the teaching is con-
centrated largely on German affairs
and since, as we have seen, everything
from the time of the Reformation was
evil in Germany, there is only one solu-
tion: the revival of the Holy Roman
Empire of the German Nation dom-
inated by the Vatican.

The revival of the Holy Roman Em-
pire as the proper settlement for
Europe is especially emphasized by
Goetz Briefs, formerly a dose collab-
orator oi the Roman Catholic Center
Party in Germany, a dose friend of
Chancellor Heinrich Bruening, and the
author of a book titled The Proleta-
ri at C hallenge to

bheis, of course, calls
"himself a democrat but his most recent
interpretation of democracy presented
to his soldier students at Georgetown
this September is as follows:

"The metaphysical impulse of de-
mocracy is dying out. So people will
ask: Therefore Fascism can do more
for us ? Well, there is a salvation for
democracy, that is the devotion to re-
ligion and the hope for eternal life.”
This manner of putting the whole
question of democracy which is a prac-


1943


GOVERNMENT SPONSORED FASCISM


15


tical one in the metaphysical sphere is
completely bewildering and not de-
signed to stimulate their belief in de-
mocracy.

This is. exactly what Briefs is aiming
at since the Holy Roman Empire was
anything but democratic and liberal,
was in fact the Middle Age prototype
of clerical Fascism.

Furthermore the Holy Roman Em-
pire included Germany, minus Prussia,
all of Central Europe, parts of Italy
and at times Spain. This appears to
mean that, in die New Holy Roman
Empire, Germany is to be divided into
Protestant and Catholic parts and
Catholic Germany is to embrace all the
bloody conquests of the Nazis.

This of course is implied rather than
said by Briefs in his lectures but the
implication is strong. Briefs’ lectures
are anti-Prussian but strongly pro-west
and south Germany which are Catho-
lic. He teaches that the future capital
of the New Holy Roman Empire must
be at Vienna, for the "German people
look towards Vienna and call Berlin a
robbers’ nest.”

But the significance of Briefs’ anti-
Prussianism does not lie simply in the
fact that Prussia is Protestant. Briefs
explains Nazism as the product of
Prussianism and Prussianism as the
product of "Slavism.” Briefs told his
soldier students this summer that
everything evil in Prussian and Ger-
man history arose from "Slavic in-
fluence” and the "influx from the
East.”

Therefore, he pointed out, Protest-
ant Prussian Nazism has nothing in
common with such "popular” move-
ments as Fascism in the Catholic coun-
tries of Spain and Italy.

However, he draws another conclu-
sion from his peculiar definition of


Nazism. Everything east of the Elbe,
he assures his students, is oriental and
Asiatic. "We must be careful,” he
warns, "that Europe is not overrun by
the Slavs.” This is a familiar Nazi
propaganda line since June 1941.

It is perfecdy clear in Briefs’ lectures
that by Slavs he means Russians. The
New Holy Roman Empire is to be, as
the Nazi State now claims that it is, a
bulwark against the Soviet Union.

Still another teacher in the army spe-
cial training courses at Georgetown
and at the School of Foreign Service
is E dgar Prochnjk , the last Austrian
Minister \o me U. S. Prochnik teaches
on Austrian, questions and is an out-
spoken monarchist. He claims to be
the representative of Imperial. Austria.
He told his classes this September that
for him the only possible solution for
Central Europe is a restoration of the
Austrian Empire with the Hapsburg
dynasty as its rulers.

However, Father Walsh, the guid-
ing spirit of our training school for
foreign service, clarified the issues very
distinctly in a lecture to his soldier
pupils. He said:

"The major problem today is to beat
the Russians to Berlin. Russia is the
most controversial element in history.
The Russian Revolution is the most
important event since the breakdown
of the Roman Empire. The breakdown
of Tsardom has brought to the world
twenty-five years of disturbance of the
equilibrium.”

Russia, Father Walsh explained to
our future occupation police and junior
administrators of military government,
has, never and would never abandon
the purpose of world revolution. "Rus-
sia was never part and soul of the
European mind. Russia has no unity
but is an ethnological museum.” (A


V


16 THE PROTESTANT October

■' i ,

favorite theme of the Berlin radio.) Africa) and whoever controls the
"Stalin," Walsh added, "has never Heartland controls the World Island
said he was fighting for world-wide and will therefore dominate the world,
democracy which we are fighting for. Walsh declared that Russian recon-
And that division of purpose has now quest of its territories in eastern Europe
become a real crisis.” poses the danger that Russia will be in

The Polish Committee and the Free a position to dominate the world.
Germany Committee in Moscow were, It is perhaps not surprising, in view
he said, the first two steps towards this of the Jesuit prejudices against all pro-
"real crisis.” As "evidence of the di- gressrve and democratic developments ■
vergence between Russia and the U. S.” since the Reformation, that in the en-
Walsh alleged that the Free Germany trance hall to Georgetown’s University
Committee • calls -for an "immediate of Foreign Service there is a large
peace’’ instead of unconditional sur- world map which indicates that For-
render. Stalin, he declared, has "chal- eign Service School graduates, ad-
ienged the Allies the right to run Ger- mitted to the U. S. Foreign Service,
many alone on occupation.” ' have been mostly rewarded* with posts

To clinch his argument, that Russia . in countries immediately bordering the
constitutes a menace to the United Soviet Union. This is a real cordon
States, Father Walsh cited the theory sanitaire drawn around an ally without
of Si r Halford Mackinder elaborated whose magnificent stand against Fas-
in asm there would be little possibility

published in I$TW Mackinder’s theory for an AMG or for the State Depart-
is that whoever controls eastern Europe ment and Franklin D. Roosevelt to
controls the Heartland (Russia) of the call for a “crusade for the liberation
World Island (Europe, Asia - and of the Pope.”


'N


VATICAN FINANCES

One little-noticed effect of the fall of Italy has been the loss to the Vatican
of the interest on 1*000,000,000 lira in 5% Italian Government bonds . These
securities , along with 750,000,000 lira in cash , were given at the time of
the Concordat in settlement of all claims arising from the dissolution of the
Papal States. This loss of less than $10,000,000 in annual income is not vital,
of course * Even in the event of long-term difficulties , the Vatican probably
never would be in dire financial straits < Appeals to the faithful would bring
in funds , and Papal credit is excellent . A sign that the Vatican may be looking
to the future, however, is the semi-official statement that Enrico Galeazzi, Papal
delegate who recently visited the U, S. and England, was handling "financial
and administrative matters "

Newsweek f October 11, 1943.
