AGENCY
CIA
A project of the fund for peace.
Washington,D.C.20002
122Maryland Avenue,N.E.
Center for NationalS
COVERT
 Security Studies
ACTION
Threat ToThe
Constitution
MeBeDeople
hrrvt
Mriicle.1
hili.1.
slahievnt

--- PAGE BREAK ---HUGE C.I.A.

OPERATION REPORTED
IN U.S.AGAINST ANTIWAR FORCES
OTHER DISSIDENTS IN NIXON YEARS
FILES ON CITIZENS
Helms Reportedly Go
Surveillance Data in
THE CENTERFOR
CharterViolation
NATIONALSECURITYSTUDIES
sectrt
WHOWEARE.WHATWEDO.

C.I.A.

cy aren'
srF.B.

rectlyw
telmsence
If nothing else, we should have learned too
iewsthe
The Center for National Security Studies(CNSS)
"Oncei
isconcernedwiththealarminggrowthofstatepower
init for1
fromWatergatethatexcessivegovernment
wiretap
countei
inthe name of “nationalsecurity."TheCenter
Most
powerisathreattoourdemocratic system.

S
ur
lance ana
npar
sponsors research and publishes reports on national
mesticir
In the name of“national security",the Nixon
rust b
security institutions-including the CIA,the FBI,and
ducted,th
administration
bugged,
，burglarized,bought,
S.

，verr
themilitaryestablishment.

the Unit.

and subverted-using the same techniques thatalliais
oureau·1
TheCenter is nowworking toinformAmericans
communit
tions_brs
gence.It
theCentralIntelligence
aboutthedangersoftheCIA'scovertactionpro-
F.B.I.0
form the
grams.

Our activities have included a nationally re-
athomeandabroad
for
thelast27
years.

stinea:
break-in:
nge info
ported conference on the CIA in thefall,independent
intelligen
Mr.

Nixon was charged
intheJudiciary
'Dee
onefo
research projects,a number of investigative articles,
Committee'sarticles
impeachment
with,all b
congressional staff seminars, and assistance to con-
"That's
“"misuse'of the C.1.A.,but in a larger sense,
ween'th
section,"
terintell
ferences, panels and town meetings sponsored by
genceex
wehaveallbeenmisused andbadlyservedby
espionag
others throughout theUnitedStates.

whose lia
was con.

this powerful, clandestine agency.

For
ver sati:
TheCenter is.staffed bymen andwomenfrom a
Ober,a lo
dIcan
wide range ofbackgrounds and experiences.The CIA
genceofi
weneedlooknofurtherthantherecent
tneroff
inNewDt
headlinesannouncing that the CIA had
itsor-mi!this powerful, clandestine agency.

For
ver sati:
TheCenter is.staffed bymen andwomenfrom a
Ober,a lo
dIcan
wide range ofbackgrounds and experiences.The CIA
genceofi
weneedlooknofurtherthantherecent
tneroff
inNewDt
headlinesannouncing that the CIA had
itsor-mi!

project is led by JohnMarks,former staff assistant to
Despite
thedirector of theStateDepartment's Bureau of
littlecould
cretly “destabilized’” the democratically elec- ts"
procedurr
Intelligence and Research,and co-author of The CIA
legeddoi.

v cuttir
for thefa
ted
governmentofChileand,
even
more
4.inot
andtheCult ofIntelligence.Otherparticipants
waskep'
ominously,has illegally spied on thousands of
Ift
from othr
bouti
include Morton Halperin,former member of the
C.I.A.

Americancitizens.

fHoove
National Security staff under Henry Kissinger,and
Onefl
, *”
whowork
Theserevelationsarebutthelatestin
Jaca!

formerAssistantSecretaryofDefenseunderPresident
Helms in
n whic
Johnson;George Pipkin,formerly with theInstitute
stringofscandalsinvolvingtheCIA-including
oftheag
to F.B.

Oberh
theU-2affair,theBayofPigs,fundingof the
stigatic
for Policy Studies; David Klaus, a graduate of
meetings
four
Stanford University;Nicole Szulc,a free-lance jour-
late sixtif
National StudentAssociation,and thePhoenix
inclu
"Ober
agenc
nalist and a number of volunteers.

confidenti.

program.In thewake ofViet Nam and Water-
rour wl
The Center is a non-profit, tax-exempt project of
theformer
always as
gate,the question must be faced:should the
cted
the Fund forPeace.It isfinanced by tax-deductible
ingabout
U.S.government continue to engage in clan-
foreig
wereabrr
form
contributions from foundations and private donors.

comeba
destine operations?

Black·Pa
ought
WeattheCenterforNationalSecurity
"atiop,"
'Not.

Studies believe that the answer is “No;”that
decisic
Theo
relatio1
learned t.

the CIA's covert action programs should be
ladde
quickly ass
endedimmediately.Therisksandcostsof
,encyt
ofpeople
counte
mousam.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Studies believe that the answer is “No;”that
decisic
Theo
relatio1
learned t. the CIA's covert action programs should be
ladde
quickly ass
endedimmediately.Therisksandcostsof
,encyt
ofpeople
counte
mousam. maintainingaclandestineunderworldaretoo
ama
than I thc
a majt
Afterth
great, and covert action cannot bejustified on
itot
mestic ope
men. either pragmatic or moral grounds. ；provo
Mr.Ober
erF.B. ferredfror
till wt
positionw
iomest
curTy"CoL
-atheydidr.e. he'stal
.ney..-any..reptitiot
well-informed source said，“bu
bag jobs [break-ins]."he sait
they didn't'want him around. The
officiaalsoraised
"they'dbetternothavetoldm

--- PAGE BREAK ---COVERTACTION:
COVERTACTIONAND
THEDAGGERBEHINDTHECLOAK
THENATIONALSECURITY
Defenders of the CIA argue that the Agency's
covert actions protect the“national security.”Yet
historically,covert action has had little,if anything,
todowith thereasonabledefenseof thecountry.We
spend about 100 billion dollars a year maintaining a
military establishment which is perfectly capable of
defending the United States.Morton Halperin,who
hasserved both in theDefense Department and on
theNational SecurityStaff,has stated that heknows
of no program of covert action which was necessary
to the national security.In 1968,Richard Bissell,
former Clandestine Services Director of the CIA,
Andyouwillask:whydoesn'thispoetry
admitted that covert actionisineffective against the
Speakofdreamsandleaves
Andthegreatvolcanoes ofhisnativeland
powerful closed societies in Russia and China-the
Comeandseethebloodinthestreers
twocountrieswhichmightposeathreattoour
Come andsee
security.Indeed,since 1950,covert action has been
The blood inthe streets
Come and see
“successful"”only in the Third World countries whose
Theblood in the streets.

povertyandinstabilitymakethem vulnerableto
theCIA.

Pablo Neruda-
Nobel Prizepoetfronn Chile
In September,1974,it was revealed that the CIA
Sept.13,1974:
had spent over eight million dollars to“destabilize”
a democratically elected governmentin Chile.The
Q.(JohnMarks) The techniques of covert
action include blackmail,burglary,subversion
Agencyhadengaged inbriberyofofficials,produc-
and assassination
Do you feel these
tionof false propaganda,financingof demonstrations,
techniques are justified in the name of national
strikesand aviolentright-wingcommando party.

security?Pablo Neruda-
Nobel Prizepoetfronn Chile
In September,1974,it was revealed that the CIA
Sept.13,1974:
had spent over eight million dollars to“destabilize”
a democratically elected governmentin Chile.The
Q.(JohnMarks) The techniques of covert
action include blackmail,burglary,subversion
Agencyhadengaged inbriberyofofficials,produc-
and assassination
Do you feel these
tionof false propaganda,financingof demonstrations,
techniques are justified in the name of national
strikesand aviolentright-wingcommando party.

security?

President Ford claimed that the activities were“in
thebestinterestsof thepeoplein Chile and certainly
John Marks,former staff
assistant to the Direc
in our best interest."
tor,Bureau of Intelli
YettheCIA'sintervention hasbeencondemned
genceand Research,
throughout theworld.The CIA's legacyin Chile has
State Department
beenabrutalmilitarydictatorshipwhichhasa-
bolished democratic institutions,suppressedfreedom
A.(William Colby） Ithink the use of an
of speech,press and education, and terrorized the
atomic bomb is justified in the interest of
populace with arbitrary arrests, torture, and assas-
national security,and I think that going down
sination.

from there is quite a realm of things you do in
Shamefully, the CIA's intervention in Chile was
the reasonable defense of the country.

not unique.The same tactics were used against
Arbenz in Guatemala,Goulart in Brazil and Cheddi
William Colby,current
Director CIA
Jagan in Guyana.At least twenty other developing
countries in the third world havebeen targets of
major CIA covert actions since itsfounding.

“COVERT ACTION"istheCIA'sofficial term
It can hardlybe argued that covert actions against
for its secret intervention into the internal affairs of
these countries add to our security.Rather, such
activities make us an object of suspicion and hatred
other nations.Itis not aimed at the collection of
intelligence about a country,but at actively manipu-
throughout the world.--- PAGE BREAK ---

not unique.The same tactics were used against
Arbenz in Guatemala,Goulart in Brazil and Cheddi
William Colby,current
Director CIA
Jagan in Guyana.At least twenty other developing
countries in the third world havebeen targets of
major CIA covert actions since itsfounding. “COVERT ACTION"istheCIA'sofficial term
It can hardlybe argued that covert actions against
for its secret intervention into the internal affairs of
these countries add to our security.Rather, such
activities make us an object of suspicion and hatred
other nations.Itis not aimed at the collection of
intelligence about a country,but at actively manipu-
throughout the world. Indeed,by practicing subver-
latingevents withinit.TheCIA'scovertaction
sionand terror,we only encourage others toadopt
capability has ranged from buying local elections in
the same tactics. the Congo to financing, training,and directing a
Even CIA Director Colby stated lastyear“if the
United States abandoned covert action it would not
35,000 man“secret army” in Laos. have a major impact on the current security of the
United States... How then can we continue to
justifythecriminaltacticsofcovertaction?

--- PAGE BREAK ---COVERTACTION:THEFURTIVEORIGINS
Tounderstand thepracticeofcovertaction,one
must understand its historical origins.It was in World
War IIthat theUnitedStates first developeda
clandestine war-making capabilityin the military
Officeof StrategicServices(OsS).In the contextof
total war,covert action was considered necessary and
William Clements Gen.George Brown Joseph Sisco
desirable.Only a few intelligence “professionals”
Defense
J.C.S.

State
conceived thatcovert actionmightbe carriedover.

intopeacetime.

As the Cold War was heating up, Congress created
theCIA in 1947.The newagency's announced
purposewastocoordinateand
analyzeforeign
intelligence for thePresident.Nomentionwasmade
ofcovert action anywhere in the congressional
William Colby
Henry Kissinger
hearings,in the public debate or in the resulting
C.I.A.

White House
National Security Act,which established the CIA.

The"40Committee
COVERTACTION:WHODECIDES
Since covert actionbydefinition mustbe secret,
onlyaveryfewpeopleareinonitsplanning.At
President
present,approval for a clandestine operation is given
by the top-secret“40Committee”whichis directly
Harry S.

accountabletothe President.The committee is
Truman
presently chaired by Henry Kissinger,and includes
theUnderSecretaryofStateforPoliticalAffairs,the
DeputySecretaryofDefense,the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff,and the Director of theCIA.

This “secret team"-former CIA Director Helms
For some time,I have been disturbed at
wasreluctant eventoconfirmtoa congressional
the way the CIA has been diverted from
committee that it isKissinger who chairs the 40
its original assignment ..: I never had any
Committee-hasanaturalbiasinfavorofcovert
thought when I set up the CIA that it
action.

Secret intervention abroad often seems an
would be injected into peacetime cloak
easy way outfor officials unwilling or unable to find
and dagger operations.This “secret team"-former CIA Director Helms
For some time,I have been disturbed at
wasreluctant eventoconfirmtoa congressional
the way the CIA has been diverted from
committee that it isKissinger who chairs the 40
its original assignment ..: I never had any
Committee-hasanaturalbiasinfavorofcovert
thought when I set up the CIA that it
action.

Secret intervention abroad often seems an
would be injected into peacetime cloak
easy way outfor officials unwilling or unable to find
and dagger operations.

diplomatic solutions.Adventurism is encouraged by
the tradition that covert actions can be“disavowed”
if theyfail.Theprocedures of the committeeinsure
TheCIAclaims that its covertactioncapability
thatitsdeliberationsaredominatedbytheCIA
wasauthorizedbyclause5of the1947legislation.

Director,who himself usually_comes out of the
But that clause is simply a routine catch-all permitting
Agency's Clandestine Services.Moreover,to maintain
“"such other functions and dutiesrelated tointelli-
secrecy,the committee excludes the very specialists-
gence...

as the National Security Council may from
includingthosefromtheCIA'sintelligence direc-
time to time direct”(emphasis added).

torate-whomightbeabletomakeaknowledgeable
Theactual charterfor covert actionwaswritten
assessment ofproposed operations.

onlyinhighlyclassifiedNational SecurityIntelligence
In addition to unwise decisions,the secret decision-
Directives issued inside the executive branch.This
making necessitated by clandestine operations pro-
"secret charter”was not even shown to any members
ducestwoforeignpolicies-oneovertand the other
of Congress before 1973 and,to this day,is still
covert.The overt policy is often contradicted by,or
concealedfrom theAmericanpublic.

is simplya cover for,the covertpolicy.Moreover,the
Thus,covert action-a tactic of total war-was
covertpolicy oftenviolateslegal treaties and accords
secretlyadoptedforpeacetime.Nowover25years
whichtheUnited Stateshaswith other countries.--- PAGE BREAK ---

onlyinhighlyclassifiedNational SecurityIntelligence
In addition to unwise decisions,the secret decision-
Directives issued inside the executive branch.This
making necessitated by clandestine operations pro-
"secret charter”was not even shown to any members
ducestwoforeignpolicies-oneovertand the other
of Congress before 1973 and,to this day,is still
covert.The overt policy is often contradicted by,or
concealedfrom theAmericanpublic. is simplya cover for,the covertpolicy.Moreover,the
Thus,covert action-a tactic of total war-was
covertpolicy oftenviolateslegal treaties and accords
secretlyadoptedforpeacetime.Nowover25years
whichtheUnited Stateshaswith other countries. laterwith theworld avery different place,weneed to
The result is that neither Congress nor the Ameri-
reassess the decisions made so quietlyin thelate
canpeople can even know what our real foreign
policy is, much less contribute to making that policy. 1940's.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ongress nor the Ameri-
reassess the decisions made so quietlyin thelate
canpeople can even know what our real foreign
policy is, much less contribute to making that policy. 1940's.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INTELLIGENCE:
CIA:THESECRETCOMPARTMENTS
THECLANDESTINEOPERATIONSCOVER
DirectorateofOperations
(Clandestine Services)
CIA spokesmen repeatedly charge its critics with
undermining the country's intelligence-gathering cap-
ability.Yet almost no critics believe that the United
Foreign
Counterintelligence
Intelligence
(Counterespionage)
Covert
States shouldhave anythingbutthebest information
(Espionage)
Action
Staff
Staf
for its national defense.The question is not one of
Staff
intelligence,but of covert political intervention.
Operational
Toa large extent,intelligence collection and
Missions and
Technical
Services
Programs
analysis have served as a cover forthe CIA'sprimary
Services
Division
Staff
Division
work-clandestine operations.In the modern intelli-
gence trade,the primary sources of data are technical:
satellites, sensors and antennae which can pick up the
mostminute detailsof apotentialenemy'smilitary
preparations.Openpublications andbroadcastsform
Area Divisions
a strong second source. These functions have de-
velopedoutsideof the CIA,primarilyin theDefense
Department and the National Security Agency.
Soviet
Western
Far
Bloc
Hemisphere
East
Africa
HowThe CIA SpendsIt s Budget
European
Domestic
Near
Special
Operations
East
Operations
Clandestine
Services
$440 M
Field Stations
and Bases
Support
$110M
Intelligence
Analysis
$70
M
Science&
This isa chart of CIA Clandestine Services
$120 M
Directoratewhich carriesout Covert Action.
Technology
Three different sections (in Red)have been
director $ 10M
implicatedinillegal domesticsurveillence.
$750M
TOTALCIABudget
The CIAhas developedprimarily asaclandestine
service for espionage (spying)and for covert action.
The CIA is divided into four“directorates.”The
Yet,spies provide only a small fraction of modern
directoratesofIntelligenceandofScienceand
intelligence information,and against the two coun-
Technology are primarily concernedwith intelligence
tries thatreallymatter-theSovietUnion and China-
analysis.They constitute the smallest part of the CIA.
the CIA's agents have had a notablelack of success.
The other two directorates,Operations(or Clandes-
Not surprisingly,the vast majority of CIA personnel
tine Services) and its“slave directorate,”Management
andresources arethereforedevoted tocovert action.
and Services, together constitute an agency within
Many officialsbelieve that the CIA's obsession
an agency.
with clandestine operations distort its intelligence
Operations (or Clandestine Services) includes both
function.Herbert Scoville,former Assistant Director
spying and covert action,but the latter greatly
ofCIAforScienceand Technologyrecentlystated:
predominates. Indeed,according to former CIA
“These covert actions are interfering with the legiti-
agents, the CIA's espionage activities in the Third
Worldnormally arein support of its covert action
mateintelligence collectionand analysis operations
(oftheCIA)."
programs there.ng with the legiti-
agents, the CIA's espionage activities in the Third
Worldnormally arein support of its covert action
mateintelligence collectionand analysis operations
(oftheCIA)."
programs there.

--- PAGE BREAK ---DOMESTICCONSEQUENCES:
THECIAISBIGBUSINESS
THESPIESCOMEHOME
Nosocietycanlongremain true toitsprinciples
athomewhileitsgovernmentsystematicallyviolates
those same principles abroad.Revelations of CIA
NotonlydoestheCIAreceiveaboutS750million
domestic spying suggest that the Agency's overseas
a year in.

secret congressional appropriations,but it
clandestine operations have an inevitable influence on
alsoreceivesseveralhundredmilliondollarsfromthe
our domestic politics.

operations of its ownfalse-front companies-called
In1967,it was revealed that the CIA had secretly
“proprietaries”in intelligence parlance.These pro-
funded the National Student Association,and hun-
prietariesaredesigned toconcealCIAactivities
dreds of other supposedly voluntary organizations.

aroundtheworld.Forexample,whentheClAwas
The purpose was to carry "America’s message abroad;**
tryingin1958 tooverthrowPresidentSukarnoof
theresultwastocreateafalsebottom world as
Indonesia,the Agency assigned the job of flying
misleading toAmericans as toforeigners.

bombingmissions to one of its fronts,Civil Air
Transport,so the US government could deny any re-
sponsibility.Unfortunatelyfor the CIA,one of the
米
proprietary pilots,Allen Pope,was shot down and
captured,and President Eisenhower wound up pub-
licly lying about the whole affair.

Civil Air Transport is just one of many CIA air
proprietaries.Another,Air America,is among the
largestU.S.airlines in termsof number of planes
flown.Some other examples areIntermountainAvia-
tion,Southern Air Transport,and Air Asia.Most
recently，a company closelyconnected to the CIA
calledBirdAirhasbeenflyingC-130sin Cambodiain
support of the Lon Nol regime.bombingmissions to one of its fronts,Civil Air
Transport,so the US government could deny any re-
sponsibility.Unfortunatelyfor the CIA,one of the
米
proprietary pilots,Allen Pope,was shot down and
captured,and President Eisenhower wound up pub-
licly lying about the whole affair.

Civil Air Transport is just one of many CIA air
proprietaries.Another,Air America,is among the
largestU.S.airlines in termsof number of planes
flown.Some other examples areIntermountainAvia-
tion,Southern Air Transport,and Air Asia.Most
recently，a company closelyconnected to the CIA
calledBirdAirhasbeenflyingC-130sin Cambodiain
support of the Lon Nol regime.

Other CIA fronts have included shipping lines,
news services (used to plant false propoganda abroad
and sometimesathome),publicrelations companies
(the Robert Mullen company which employed How-
ardHunt atthe timeof theWatergateburglaryis the
Pardonme,oltimer...butit seems
mostfamous),at least one training schoolforforeign
police (called International Police Services,Inc.),a
psychological research and testing center (Psycho-
InDecember1974,itwasrevealed thattheCIA's
logical Assessment Associates inWashington),private
Counter-Intelligence Division,headed by the mys-
detective agencies,international trading companies,
teriousJamesAngleton,hadmovedintodomestic
and until 1971 RadioFreeEurope andRadioLiberty
internalsecurityactivities.Angleton'sunitmaintained
whichreceived over$30millionayearfrom theCIA
files on over 10,000 Americans,and reportedly
for radio broadcasts toEastern Europe.

pursued awide-ranging program of surveillance,
Perhaps the most frightening aspect of the CIA's
break-ins and surreptitiousinspection of U.S.mails.

proprietaries is their total unaccountability.They
In January of this year,it was revealed that E.

generatemuchof theirown operatingrevenueby
HowardHunt and otherswere settingupa covert
“"living their cover,” i.e.--- PAGE BREAK ---

proprietaries is their total unaccountability.They
In January of this year,it was revealed that E. generatemuchof theirown operatingrevenueby
HowardHunt and otherswere settingupa covert
“"living their cover,” i.e. by doing business as "“pri-
actionunitwithintheCIA'sDomesticOperations
vate”companiesindirectcompetitionwithlegitimate
Division as early as 1962.By 1969,the Agency
firms whichdonotbenefitfrom theCIA's secret
reportedlyhadover25agentsmonitoringtheactivi-
subsidies.The profits earned by theproprietaries are
tiesofAmericancitizensin NewYorkCityalone. not returned to the Treasury,as is money received by
A bureaucracy trainedin thenefarious tactics of
all other US government agencies,but are instead
espionage and of covert action is a constant threat in
plowedbackintoCIA operations.What small control
an open society.Indeed,when former CIA Director
Congress exercises over the CIA through“the power
JamesSchlesinger firedsome 1,000 CIA operatives
of the purse”is to a large extent offset by the fact
in 1973,he was apparently given increased body-
that theCIA can literallyraise itsownfunds on the
guard protection.Not surprisingly,Schlesinger lasted
private market. In addition to being a multi-national
asCIADirector onlyafewmonths,andwasreplaced
covert action and espionage organization,the CIA is
by William Colby,a career operative in Clandestine
also a multi-national corporation,in the true sense of
Services, and famed as the director of the Phoenix
theterm. counter-terrorprograminVietnam.

--- PAGE BREAK ---DOMESTIC CONSEQUENCES:
DOMESTICCONSEQUENCES:
DECEITANDDEMOCRACY
THETHREATTOTHECONSTITUTION
Former Attorney.General Nicholas Katzenbach
haspersuasivelyargued that clandestineoperations
Sen.Stuart
Did you try in the Cen-
endangerAmericandemocracyandfor thatreason
Symington:
tral Intelligence Agency
shouldbeterminated.The domesticactivities of the
to overthrow the gov-
CIA are one indication of its ominous potential.

Yet,
ernment of Chile?

even if covert action is not“Misused,”it still corrodes
our constitutional order.

Former CIA Director
The Constitution requires that the people's elected
Richard Helms:
No,sir.

representatives decide when and where we go to war.

Symington:
Did you have any mon-
The Founding Fathers did not trust theExecutive
ey passed to the op-
alone tocommit the country tohostilities.Yet,in
ponents of Allende?

Vietnam,in Laos,in Chile,and elsewhere,the CIA
engaged in secret-war-makingwithout theknowledge,
Helms:
No,sir.

much less the consent of the Congress.

Senate Hearings,Under Oath:
The Constitutionrequires that all government
February 7,1973
expenditures be published.Again,Watergate demon-
strated the dangers of secret monies.Yet,the CIA's
budget is hidden,disguised in a false category of the
defense appropriations.Fewer than a dozen congress-
persons even know the size of the budget,much less
how it is used.

Richard Helms was lying, but we should not be
surprised.

Deceit is the covert operator's stock in
trade,and Helms had a very successtul career.

The
CIA'sactivitiesdependupon theabilityto contrive
appearances, to make things seem other than what
they are.If CIA operations are toremain secret,CIA
officials feel theymust lie to cover up their activities.Deceit is the covert operator's stock in
trade,and Helms had a very successtul career.

The
CIA'sactivitiesdependupon theabilityto contrive
appearances, to make things seem other than what
they are.If CIA operations are toremain secret,CIA
officials feel theymust lie to cover up their activities.

A bureaucracy skilled in deceit is suspect in any
government,but it is particularly destructive toa
republic.Democracy rests upon consent,consent
requires trust,and trust depends upon truth.Nothing
more saps the faithin government so necessaryto a
republic than systematiclying bypublic officials.

Madison to Jefferson
The Constitution protects a free press and free
(It is a)universal truth(that)
the loss of
speech.Yet the CIA's secrecy demands that the press
liberty at home is to be charged to provisions
becurtailedinorderthatCIAactivitiesnotbe
against danger,real or potential, from abroad.

exposed.The CIA even went to_court to censor a
Inthefinalanalysis,covertactionsbytheCIA
book on theAgency byJohn Marks andVictor
undermineourdemocracy
ybecausetheyarean
Marchetti,the first prior censorship in this nation’s
inherently criminal enterprise.Perjury,subornation,
history.

torture,theft,arson,fraud,impersonation,bribery,
The Constitution,in establishing a system of
assassination,and a variety of other acts for which
checks andbalancesinorder toprecludetheexercise
ordinarycitizensgotojailbecomethedictates of
of arbitrary power,provides for Congressional mon-
dutyfor a CIA operative.

itoringof the executiveagencies.Yetthe CIA has
Wehave for toolongassumed that theUnited
alwaysavoided truelegislative oversight.AsSenator
Statescouldsupportcriminalactivityabroadand
Stuart Symington,a member of the SenateForeign
still maintain a law-abiding government at home.--- PAGE BREAK ---

torture,theft,arson,fraud,impersonation,bribery,
The Constitution,in establishing a system of
assassination,and a variety of other acts for which
checks andbalancesinorder toprecludetheexercise
ordinarycitizensgotojailbecomethedictates of
of arbitrary power,provides for Congressional mon-
dutyfor a CIA operative. itoringof the executiveagencies.Yetthe CIA has
Wehave for toolongassumed that theUnited
alwaysavoided truelegislative oversight.AsSenator
Statescouldsupportcriminalactivityabroadand
Stuart Symington,a member of the SenateForeign
still maintain a law-abiding government at home. But,
Relations Committee,stated:
it is simply not possible to maintain a bureaucracy
It is incredible to me...that this committee
composed of trained criminals for use against for-
eignerswithoutfeeling theeffects-directandin-
countries with which we are not at war. It not
direct-athome. only doesn't make any sense,but,it has result-
ed in heavy loss of both money and respect.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Pros & Cons
WHATYOUCANDO
I.The Soviet Union has the KGB;We must have
We believe that covert action should be ended.We
the CIA.President Ford,trying to defend our tragic
think that you will agree that,at the very least,a
intervention into Chile,stated that “communist
broadnationaldiscussion of the CIA's covert action
nations spendvastlymoremoney thanwedofor the
should take place.You can play an important role in
same kind of purpose."
this effort.

Butwe should notchoose tomodel ourselves after
theSoviet Union.Senator Frank Church noted:
1.INFORMYOURSELF
"That equates us with the Russians and I always
For$3.00we will supplyyou with an Info/Action
thoughttherewas adifference.It seems tomewhat
packetconsistingof theauthoritativeMarchetti-
thePresident said is the only lawwereallyrespect is
Marksbook,TheCIA and theCultofIntelligence,a
the law of the jungle."
series of articles,a research bibliography,and a pro-
Wemayneed a small counterespionage service to
defend against the activities of theKGBwithin the
gram of suggested activities togenerategreater
public awareness.

United States.If so,that has traditionally been the
function of the FBI,not the CIA.

II.CONTACTTHENEWSMEDIA
I1.Onlythe CIA's failures are trumpeted;its
Onceyouaremore knowledgeable about the
successesgounheralded.

Frequently supporters of the CIA suggest that
issues,contact the news editors and the columnists
there havebeen some secret successes which justify
ofyour local newspapers,radio and television sta-
covert action,butwhich cannot be revealed to the
tions,asking them to examine critically and report
public.This oft-used homily need no longer be taken
fairly on the issues.

seriously.The failures and illegalities already revealed
more than account for any secret “successes"in
III.PROMOTEPUBLICDISCUSSION
assessing the CIA.Frequently supporters of the CIA suggest that
issues,contact the news editors and the columnists
there havebeen some secret successes which justify
ofyour local newspapers,radio and television sta-
covert action,butwhich cannot be revealed to the
tions,asking them to examine critically and report
public.This oft-used homily need no longer be taken
fairly on the issues.

seriously.The failures and illegalities already revealed
more than account for any secret “successes"in
III.PROMOTEPUBLICDISCUSSION
assessing the CIA.

As Morton Halperin,formerly a member of the
Encourage members of your church or synagogue,
Kissinger National Security Staff states:“If there
your school,or other groups to direct themselvesto
wereasuccessfuloperation thatwedidnotknow
the issues.Work with friends to organize discussion
about,that proved the case for covert action,the
groups,a town meeting,orpublic hearing on the CIA
temptation to make that public would havelong ago
andcovert actions.If.you create a forum,we will
overcome anyinhibitions against leaking information.

helpyoufindexperts toaidinthediscussion.

So this notion that there is something that none of us
know about thatis so important and so great that it
IV.WRITE TOCONGRESS
justifies all the fiascoes and failures,and crimes,I
take with a grain of salt."
Congress has begun to review the CIA's activities.

Followthehearings andtellyour representatives
II1.

Covert action is the necessary instrument of
what your views are.Organizea public meeting to
foreign policy,“between a diplomatic protest and
exchange viewswithyour electedrepresentative.

sending the marines."--William Colby.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Covert action is the necessary instrument of
what your views are.Organizea public meeting to
foreign policy,“between a diplomatic protest and
exchange viewswithyour electedrepresentative. sending the marines."--William Colby. Current Director Colby of the CIA has suggested
that a“moderate covert action”offers our leaders an
optionbetween diplomacy andinvasion.But there is
ALITTLEHELPFROMOURFRIENDS
an enormous range of political,diplomatic,economic,
The Center plans to continue to work to inform
andmilitarypressures that can,be employed overtly
citizens about theCIAandcovertaction.Butwe
withoutrecoursetocovertaction. need help.Most of our budget comes from founda-
The question is whether clandestine operations are
a legitimate instrument of foreign policy.Biological
tions,but we desperatelyneed private contributions
tocontinue our work.Ifyou could help,we can
warfare is an instrument of war-making,but we
choose not to engageinit,not because of its inef-
assureyouthatanycontributionswill bewell spent
andgreatly appreciated.Contributions are tax deduc-
fectiveness,but because it thoroughly violates our
tible.Checksshould bemade out to the Fund for
basic notions of decency.Covert action is nodif-
Peace and sent to:
ferent.It is both criminal and corrupting and should
be abandoned as an instrument of Americanforeign
The CenterforNational SecurityStudies
policy. 122MarylandAve. Washington, D.C. 20002
Please help if you can.