HEAD x WOUND


DIY PUNK FANZINE ISSUE THIRTEEN 50p OR TRADE


WELL FUCK ME RNIT Os


a: GE Bay ká
NEWS, GOSSIP AND ILL-FOUNDED RUMOURS


r


DISTRO ADDRESSES WORTH A LOOK


A SPIRE:


„Timo First and most impo i eed
v i = rtant by a long way is the news that Leeds
d Ea ACTIVE, BM Active, London WC1N 3XX, England Punx Picnic this year is on the 12th - 14th of July. You should have
"A BALD CACTUS, PO Box HP171, Leeds, LS6 1XX, England one of our very cutting and satirical fliers with this zine, so read it


BBP, Box 81, 82 Colston Street, Bristol, BS1 58B, England
BEAT BEDSIT, PO Box 2927, Brighton, BN1 3SX, England
DEATHWISH ZINES, 39 Station Road, Thirsk, YO7 1QH, England
FLAT EARTH, c/o 145-149 Cardigan Road, Leeds, LS6 1LJ,
England CH,

KATE SHARPLEY LIBRARY, BM Hurricane, London, WC1N 3XX,
England (Anarchist literature)

LOONY TUNES, 69 Wykeham Road, Scarborough, YO12 7SA,
England

RE-PRESSED,c/o CRC, 16 Sholebroke Avenue, Leeds, LS7 3HB,
England (Anarchist literature)

RIPPING THRASH, PO Box 152, Burt-on-Trent, Staffs, DE14 1XX,
England

RUPTURED AMBITIONS, Old Forge Cottage, Rushford, Lamerton,
Tavistock, Devon, PL19 8RY, England

SAVAGE AMUSEMENT, Rosehill, 20 Front Street, Tanfield lea,
Stanley, Co Durham, DH9 9LY, England
TOTAL ANNIHILATION, PO Box 298, Sheffield, S10 5XT, England
WEIRD RECORDS, 61 London Road, Balderton, Newark, Notts,
NG24 3AG, England
ad be a tight bastard - always send an SAE if you want a list
ack!


and make damn sure you're there.

- Trev HAGL wants your second hand records. Write to his distro
Savage Amusement (address elsewhere) if you have any punk / Oi!
/ ska / hardcore records you want to sell or trade. He was recently to
be found trying to flog a Simple Minds 7”, so | reckon he'll buy any
old tripe, Great excuse to get rid of all your shite and get yourself
some proper music.

- Gabba Gabba, Leeds’ premier punk / ska club is back again.
Sweeney of Dead Pets notoriety has recommenced his night at The
Bassment in The Merrion Centre. For those who don't know, it
involves a couple of live punk / ska bands and the music, uniquely
for a nightclub, is stuff you actually want to hear. Look out for fliers.
- Chris Wheelchair of Bus Station Loonies is doing solo gigs under
the name of Harikiri Karaoke, which involves him in a glittery
waistcoat with a keyboard doing cheesy punk covers. Expect to see
this dubious spectacle at your nearest punx picnic soon.

- Our mate Roger's friend used to think that 'Big'A, Little A,

1 Bouncing B' by Crass was about tit sizes so he avoided them coz
he thought they were too juvenile.

- Hastings lads Left For Dead (one of the UK's most under-rated
bands in our humble opinion) have just been recording in Bradford,
|| so expect a new release in the near future.

- Frontline, punk rock t-shirt printers run by Andy Cactus and his
mate who brought you such classics as ‘More Police Funerals’ have
jacked it in, so if you need such services, you'll have to look
elsewhere.

» Fans of music with a discernable tune will be glad to hear that Egg
Raid have called it a day as guitarist Matt is off to grow a beard and
pursue some weird folky project. Fans of screaming noise will be
relieved to hear that they'll be back soon under a new name.

- Following a recent threatened legal challenge by prisoner John
Shelley and the ‘Prisoner's Advice Service’, the governor of HMP
Full Sutton dropped his blanket ban on all prisoners receiving
publications from Haven Distribution (as mentioned in the Haven
interview in COAS # 6), conceding that such a ban would infringe
prisoner's rights to freedom of expression, which are protected by
Article 10 of the European Convention of Human Rights. For more
information about Haven and the service they provide contact:
Haven Distribution, Books To Prisoners, 27 Old Gloucester Street,
London, WC1N 3XX.


‘WANTED LIST...


If you have any of the following and you want to i

i f get rid ofthem to a
loving home, get in touch with prices. Decent ii E
prices peak ent quality and no rip-off

fiance - s / t EP and ‘Burn’ EP or the 3" CD with both of
Gundog - ‘He who laughs last...' LP x asic
kaj Maiden - s/t and ‘Killers’ LPs

yer - ‘South of Heaven’ and ‘Seasons In The Abyss’ LPs
The Business / Dropkick Murphys split CD da

Nice & Easy - ‘Stuff & Fings' EP


After a long period of looking increasingly similar, we've finally taken f
the plunge and fused Cargo Cult and Cat On A String together. If
any of you looked at the cover and are wondering why you've never
seen the previous twelve issues, that’s because we came up with
the idea of starting Headwound from the sum of our old zines (i.e.
this is my fifth zine and Rachel's eighth so 5+8=13). Plus cultivating
the illusion thet we've done loads of back-issues might make us look
at first glance like we're properly established and professional and
all that. 9 d

I think the accepted laws of zine etiquette dictates that at this point I
should issue the token apologies for being late, excuses for why it
isn't as good as it should have been and so on, but bollocks to that.
Or maybe in true lazy arse columnist style, it should begin
something like “it's four in the morning and my ooffee's gone cold,
Ive got ten minutes to finish this column and | can't think what to
write, oh I'm so terribly depressed”. Am I the only person who finds |. 4
that sort of thing infuriating? If you've got a guaranteed readership
of five or ten thousand punk kids, you have a great platform to
spread informative and worthwhile ideas, so if you can'tthinkof b
something worth saying then just don't bother wasting paper and ink
telling us that. The whole idea of columns is getting right on my tits
actually, and half the zines | see these days seem to be tying to
mimic it. What | find really annoying is the way you take some minor
‘celebrity’ of the punk world and get them to write something,
regardiess of whether or not its worth reading. | mean just because
someone runs a label, or sings in a band or whatever the basis for
their supposed punk rock notoriety may be, doesn't mean they have
some extra level of profound insight. But of course if they have a Š
‘name’ then that's alright isn't it? This is starting to get a bit sour-
grapes already, but l'Il point out by way of conclusion that
Headwound has no Heartattack or MRR aspirations (which is more


Hello, with Cat On A String and Cargo Cult safely ensconced in the
sarcophagus in which they rightly belong, here we proudly present
the all new Headwound. The finest in punk rock journalism, Being
the two best zine writers in Leeds (If not the world) other lesser
zines such as Attitude Problem and more have been forced to
relocate to Leeds in order to boost their zine credibility and trail in
the shadow of the mighty Headwound.

You may notice that we boast the smallest typeface in Leeds which
will no doubt have some nitpicking zine reviewers whinging but as it
means you get the maximum text for your money you can stop
moaning and buy a fucking magnifying glass if it’s that much of a
problem.

Our previous zines were always done as benefits but this is no
longer practical, in fact as most other zine editors will testify you
generally only break even if not actually lose money through zines.
To make anything significant for a benefit would mean a price
increase which, in turn, means no fucker will buy it. Pointless. We
make ten times more money for benefits from the gigs we put on
(bands get in touch) so it makes more sense to put our energies into
raising money that way instead of losing money from the zine.

Don't be thinking that just because this is a joint zine that the
opinions in here are anything other than those of the writer. We are
two Individuals with our own opinions, tastes in music (i.e Chip likes
thick as shit Oi where as | prefer proper music of the anarcho vein)
and sense of humour so make sure any criticism or backstabbing
gets directed to the appropriate culprit. This zine is not ashamed to
be described as ‘political’, we tell it like it is ("keeping it real” for you
HC kids!) and make no apologies for that. Anyone who has a
problem with politics in a punk zine can stick it up their fucking arse.
So there.

And on a final note - Headwound will be on the streets every three
months as opposed to the occasional two year gaps witnessed in
our previous publications so any stuff sent for review will be
guaranteed swift coverage and any news will appear before its out
of date, Now we are transformed from bumbling drunkards to
seasoned professionals ha ha.


em ee
SHITE JOKES


Q - Why do anarchists drink herbal tea?
A - Because all proper tea is theft.


Q - Why did the punk band eat sausage rolls?
A - Because they were Anti Pasti.


And you thought Bald Cactus had the monopoly on crap old jokes


YJA09 SLI A8 4009 V 39anr L.NVO NOA»


The Punktured


gig |:
Collective is flourishing
and as well as the now
legendary Leeds Punx |
Picnic we've been doing |!
pe Zea gigs every couple of


GE e months, mostly benefits
with six to eight bands at The Primrose in Leeds. Turnouts have
been growing and we're always on the lookout for new bands to put
on, so if you fancy a gig, let us know via the Headwound address. In
the spirit of that much talked about but seldom-practiced concept of
punk unity we try to mix bands from different sub-scenes (i.e.
anarcho, hardcore, Oil, ska, pop-punk etc). If more people did that |
instead of spouting the rhetoric then sticking to their own little
cliques the punk scene would a hell of a lot better off. Anyway, if you
Play one of our benefits you get travel costs, food and a place to
crash (and a guaranteed good night | may add) and if it ain't a
benefit you'll get whatever we make on the door, Look out for a
compilation of bands we've put on in the last few years, due out in
the next few months, unforeseen complications allowing.


OH DEAR, IT’S SHIT COMPETITION TIME
Suppress those groans, here's this issue's token competition, in
which you can win some unspecified stuff. Don't know what, but
we'll send you some ex-review CDs or something. Stuck in various
locations around this fanzine are SOME memorable quotes from a
variety of songs in our record collection. Simply tell us as many of
the bands and song titles as you can and the person with the most
correct answers by the time we print our next issue will win the
aforementioned quantity of CDs. = |


ARO NOA ‘


X


a brainceli amongst Condemned 84 than seeing horseshit columns
tarnish these pages.

Anyway, here you have the inaugural issue of Headwound, hope
you enjoy it and all that. Have fun, CHIP


Remember all opinions herein are ours, and as such should never
be taken as gospel. Reviews are only based on our thoughts and if
you think we got it wrong or missed the point, then tough shit, we
write what we think. Of course, if something we say gets your back
up, write us a letter and we'll probably stick it in. Our address is:


HEADWOUND, PO BOX HP171,
LEEDS, LS6 1XX, ENGLAND


For future issues, send 50p and a 33p SAE, or something of yours $
in trade. If you're writing from foreign parts, send us a local zine or ZO
an IRC or something coz foreign currency is more hassle than its ®
worth. If that’s not an option, send us two US dollars or two Euros
per issue post-paid, No back issues available obviously, but if you
want old copies of Cat On A String (issues 5 and 6) or Cargo Cult
(issues 2, 3 and 4) send us a nice letter and an appropriately
SAI charged SAE. Headwound is free to prisoners, so if you're banged
M up or know someone who is and might be interested, let us know
d and we'll despatch them a gratis copy forthwith. Contributions are
more than welcome if they're something good and interesting but
poetry in all its contemptible forms is absolutely forbidden. Note that
we have no e-mail address because its bloody pointless, so all you
computer nerds will have to stop looking up dwari-porn and
bestiality wanksites and reacquaint yourselves with primitive things
like biros and envelopes if you want to write to us.


CHIP’S RECOMMENDED LISTENING... ==
Stage Bottles, The Oppressed, Deadline, Gundog, Oi Polloi, Nice &
Easy, Terminus, Black Sabbath, Cress, The Business, Maiden, Bug
Central, The Elite, Left For Dead, The Tone, La Fraction, Runnin
Riot, Contempt, The Steam Pig, Newtown Grunts, The Warriors

Anti-Flag, Dropkick Murphys, Defiance, Linton Kwesi Johnson 4%,


(F ME BE e DŘ YOU E Ega
FYI I >
NE AU TOMN YEAR


epe GK FROM


«LNOYIVH SLI AS MNNd V 390Nf L


egur


PRINT RUN 350 - MORE NEXT TIME!


DS-13, Kismet HC, Active Slaughter, Quarantine, Left For Dead,
Tragedy, Terminus, Bug Central, Post Regiment, 1926 Committee,
TV Smith, Aus Rotten, Anti Product, Detestation, Imbalance,
Motorhead, Juggling Jugulars, Spitboy, Newtown Grunts.


Contrary to what this Picture
may suggest, Chip is not a
Psychiatric case, although
the resemblance to
Nosferatu holds a certain
amount of truth. Rachel does
not as this might be
interpreted, bear any
likeness to a 1980s
Greenham Common bird.
Look, it was just a small
egotistical indulgence that
filled a bit of empty space,
Okay?


THREE CHEERS AND A MUG OF FROTHING ALE TO —
Andy Cactus the PO Box monitor, Dave L for the computer, Claire
our gig collaborator, Lynn, Simon and Mick at The Primrose for
being total stars, Sweeney and Chris Bower for gig assistance
beyond the call of duty, all the distros who peddle our efforts, our
interviewees and finally you lot the punters, AND FOOTPRINT !


THREE KICKS AND A POT OF STALE PISS TO —


i FAVE TP


91274) 734160


So there we were, sitting outside The Lord Cecil in Hackney, drinking Brew and eating curry. We'd just came
from the Anarchist Bookfair and Harum Scarum , Kismet HC, Bug Central and Riot / Clone were playing. Then
along comes this lass and says “You've gotta get in early coz this new band called Act Of Slaughter are
playing”. Well | thought she said “Act Of...” anyway. So In we went, and fucking hell they were great! Highlight
of the night we thought (especially since Riot / Clone did an acoustic set (Ill) and Chip fell asleep on a table
during Bug Central...) They were duly asked to play in Leeds in a rather nifty petrol-saving trio of Cockney
bands along with Intensive Care and Bug Central, and being a nice bunch of lads with a lot to say, the interview
was despatched shortly afterwards. It’s something of an epic, so grab yourself a cuppa and read on...


HW - Before we get onto the trivial stuff like punk rock and politics...we've met various members of the
Emmerdale cast — have you ever encountered anyone from Eastenders?


Trev - Are you taking the piss here Rachel or wot? You bleedin’ are ain't ya. Have we ever encountered anyone from Eastenders?
What kinda question is that! Course we bleedin’ ‘ave missus. We live in London so we see them just about every day, innit. In fact | was
having a little chat with Peggy Mitchell just the other day. “Babs, whoops, sorry Peggy’ | said, "that son of yours, Phil, he's fing chicken
(orienta! — "mental") he is. He ain't got a danny (La Rue — “clue”) about women or motors and...(at which point | think it best we leave
this particular answer on the grounds that I'm the drummer in an ultra-right-on anarcho band and thus am not supposed to have
anything even vaguely resembling a sense of humour)


Jake - Ive seen one or two Eastenders cast members. | remember trying to get Bepi's autograph for my kid sister who fancied him at
the time, but he didn’t have a pen.

Active Slaughter did a gig in the former squat venue that some called the "Queen Vic”, I'm sure it would be fun to do a gig in the real
thing or E20 club.


JJ -I met Sanjay once a few years back. I'm glad Gita weren't with him though coz I'd have slapped her for cheating on him with that
posh bloke that time. "
Our mate Liam, well his dad is best mates with Phil Mitchell. He's meant to be an even bigger prick in real life. Ae nen EEE a


De en


rer Zoo r"


wy = egar er E p ii
HW- Who's in Active Slaughter? Any previous bands or other scene activities?


Trev -1 let Jake or JJ give you the Active Staughter bio as they do it far more eloquently than |. | will however just scotch the
rumours that | was once in Anthrax, cos | wasn't. | did do some backing shouting on their first demo but that’s the extent of my
involvement with them. Well, save for the fact that hundreds of years ago | was in a band called The X-Cretas who had various
members of Anthrax pass through their ranks. One of my cohorts on that particular Anthrax demo was the now almost legendary Mr
Noodles Romanov of Bug Central fame, of whom | was once the drummer (before being plucked from my cosy, comfy slipper wearing,
retirement by those boisterous young oiks Jake and JJ).

JJ - My previous activities include laying in bed in the day and going out at night, if a gig is on, to get pissed. Although | once joined the
Scottish Asian women's Hopscotch group in Scotland a few years back. it received a lottery donation so | thought I'd Join up to try and
get me self some money.

Jake - Active Slaughter is the first band I've been in that ever got beyond 2 practices. 've been involved in all sorts over the last ten
yéars. | leant my services to a number of causes like anti-nuke, road protest and hunt sabbing, did some animal care work that sort of
thing, no more than anyone else, just played my part. A lot of the lyrics in Active Slaughter are influenced by the sort of stuff that | have


been involved in for almost as long as | can remember. e 8 e


HW- The very short time between you forming, playing your first gig and recording your EP must surely break
some records — tell us the Active Slaughter story thus far.


Trev - Again, I'll leave this to one of the two previously mentioned oiks. Perhaps we should hold a tittle competition here for your
readers and ask them if they know of any bands who have done what we did, only quicker. In which case, my answer is The Mekons
who, | believe, formed, wrote and recorded their first single ‘Never Been In A Riot” all on the same day. Do | win a prize then? (Well you
might win yourself a Mekons record, which is punishment enough for being such a punk trivia anorak — Chip)


JJ -Me and Jake used to have monkey-spanking competitions in my room. Ya know, see who can do it the quickest. But we got bored
with that so | picked up a guitar and we started writing songs and decided to pull in 2 other members, Trev and Joe, to join our little club.
They refused entry into the monkey-spanking club, but we got them in Active Slaughter in the end. | honestly can't remember how
many weeks it was after our first gig that we recorded our song. You seem to know more so please let me know next time | see ya you
Rachel. | doubt it was record breaking though — Roy Castle wasn't there to tell us so.


Jake - OK, me and JJ where putting together the compilation benefit CD Direct Action Animal Rights and the idea we had had for a
while to form an Anarcho band just came together. It was about this time last year that we first started practising with just me and JJ in
his room. By the end of summer Trev and Joe we're doing a practice with us. The day after the practice we recorded "My Foot In Your
Mouth”. The practices continued, we did our first gig about 7 weeks after we had formed, got banned from playing the Verge by week 10
and within 3 months we recorded another 4 tracks and released them as an EP. We keep writing new ones and play as many gigs as
we can do. And that's about the story so far | think. P


ET G A po.


omeones-
HW - Your first gig (with Harum Scarum etc) was massive compared to the usual 7-of- o ja ur En
cellar most punk bands debut with — what was it like to do this? Do you think it helped


considering there was a “national” audience rather than just locals? ‚Played much else?


een} a hb


a mile i met


naa SI a


JJ - Yeah I think this one helped. Of course it did, the Leeds contingent was there to spot us and run up to us right after our set
begging us to play their gigs. | asked for 10 grand but we had to drop that. (It was our first gig, we were new, we had to try it!)

Jake - There's no doubt that we were lucky with our first gig, JJ had virtually organised the gig anyway so | kind of insisted that we
play (long story). We only played 5 songs that gig, but they went down a treat. People were going mental, not quite the reaction |
expected. it was the right time to do the gig as.the Direct Action Animal Rights CD had been released that day - the same day as the
London Anarchist book fair. We are excluded from Playing a lot of gigs in London because of run in's with the Verge, either that or we
won't play them. At this moment though we're doing quite a lot of other gigs and | expect any of the London ones we do to be at the
Swan and Lord Cecil, which I'm very happy with. We played the Astoria last weekend, after the Subhumans and before Conflict, |
know there was a mixed reaction to us playing Where we did. We've got some UK gigs, at least one festival appearance in Finland, and
we want to record again soon. Other than that Active Staughter hope to be playing in a town near you soon.


HW - Musically you seem to draw influence from the 80's anarcho scene - was
it Just turn out that way? While other areas of the 80


go
the punk scene is/has become


A BA ‘ : u ně
HW - I know JJ does the London Punks website, has this had a positive effect in publicising the local scene?


Do you foresee a greater role for the internet as a tool of communication within the punk scene? Will webzines
and suchlike ever replace the real thing?


JJ - I think its helped the London scene out. | know it helps a lot of people coming from abroad come over and get settled in and going


H to gigs etc. | think the London based punks just look at it for a laugh though. (The drunken photos etc)


The good thing with websites is they can be updated anytime. They cost nothing, you can Put great colour photos on it, you can interact
with others etc etc. One bad thing about it though is that not every punk has a PC. Although | must admit I don’t know anybody in the
London punk scene who don't know somebody on the internet (if that makes sense).
Trev -ı hope there is a greater role for the internet as, as you rightly call it, a “tool of communication” because hey, as Mr Hoskins
used to say, “It's good to talk”. | think there's a very great danger though that bands etc will become (ar indeed, already are) embroiled
in the various corporate marketing strategies that would have us believe that every household in Britain, nay the world, has a computer
or at least, some kind of access to one. Which, of course, is a complete and utter crock of old shit. What it means though is that there
exists the danger that bands will tend to cite their website address over, say, a PO address, forgetting that not everybody has, or likes,
computers and that some people actually like to write letters. Okay, I'll grant you that sounds a bit mellow dramatic but | just dislike the
idea that the internet ete can't run in unison with, again as you call it, “the real thing", cos they quite obviousiy can and should. This is
the condensed version of my answer. For a more thorough, up to date version go to www, dot, fuck-off-Trev, forward slash, you-arse
(and is it just me or does anyone else inexplicably snigger immaturely when they hear people Say “forward slash” on the telly?)
Jake - 'm actually answering this before any other question. Computers are a bloody hassle. Its the second time I've had to do this
interview due to the computer crashing. The internet has been a good way to promote Active slaughter, but so have more traditional
forms of information like flyers, fanzines and word of mouth. Inevitably | think computers are replacing the real thing and I really hope
that the price of computers and internet access does come down. To an extent computers exclude a lot of people, but you coułd say the
same of fanzines, not every one I know into punk can read for example. The internet is by far the best way to communicate with people
and make contact | reckon. | don't have it at home, but I can get cheap access or go to a friend. For me the internet is now an essential
form of communication. It is a lot cheaper to email someone in the USA than it is to write a letter let alone phone them. The internet
does give you access to more contacts than the world of photocopied fanzines ever has.

> a E EE, „| |< <w


HW - You've had a lot of involvement In the organisation of the Barry Horne Memorial gig In April - how did this
come together? Where are the proceeds going? What's the score with the number of tickets a band sells
determining their place in the punk rock hierarchy, er, | mean gig line up? What has it been like working with the
relaunched CONflict?? Do you think that in some quarters it might be perceived as “that big CONfliet gig”


“Ne


ma RR a.


rather than the Barry Horne Memorial? Is Colin Jerwood buying any more racehorses? Come to think of It,
what are your top 3 CONflict rumours?


JJ - Alright, well each band was given 50 tickets to sell and the more tickets a band sold the higher up on the line-up the band goes.
This is why Active Slaughter went on at 9pm just before Conflict. We eamed that place as we worked our balls off selling 60 tickets.
Money raised from the gig goes to Arkangel (a brilliant animal rights org and magazine) and the Barry Horne memorial fund. Arkange/
and the Barry Horne fund are both run by ‘Rob Arkangel'. He's a really nice bloke and has been active in the AR scene for years and
years, helped organise Barry's funeral and spent time in Bedford prison for some actions a while back. I'm not quite sure what the Barry
Horne memorial fund is, but by what rob has told me, the fund will help various AR causes out.
We ain't really worked with Conflict, just Colin really. He's an alright geezer. | don't see what all the fuss is about or why everyone's
asking us what's he like etc etc. He’s just a South London lad.
I think people decide for themsetves if it's a big Conflict gig. We actually call it the big Active Slaughter gig. (Nah I'm only joking with
that). It does actually annoy me when people call it the Conflict gig though. | don't think that its Conflict’s fault (although you could
mention the flyer or poster in which their name is massive and at the top. But sometimes you need something like that to catch
someone's eye so they look at the poster)
{ don't have any conflict rumours, and if I did | wouldn't be mentioning them Publicly. I've heard some really stupid ones from various
people about Colin eating meat, being spotted in McDonalds etc etc, which are just plain stupid really.
Jake - | found working with Conflict quite useful, | also think Colin has been good to us. So I'm not about to get drawn into slagging
the guy off. n
My top 3 Conflict Rumours...

1) Joe's 1980's t-shirt Cornflake's The Breakfast Continues

2) A member of Active Slaughter went to prison following a riot at a Conflict gig

3) Mortarhate are releasing the Smash HLS EP for Active Slaughter.
As for the score with the politics of the April 7" gig I'd just like to set the record straight. The Astoria costs 10 grand to hire. Bands
playing were given 50 tickets to sell. The more they sold the higher they play was said from the beginning. Active Slaughter shifted
them plus half a grand's worth of tickets where Arkangel got to keep the money. In all, at least 5 grand was raised for the Barry Horne
memorial fund by this gig (this excludes money individual stalls made) and I think it's time to put into context what that means. Look at
the Lord Cecil gig in October that was 4 quid in and raised about a grand for SHAC, which is great, but if you think it would take no
fewer than 5 of those gigs to raise what one gig did then | don't know what the problem is. There were roughly 15 bands on at the
Astoria, which means 1 band for a quid. People have been drawing comparisons between the Barry Horne memorial gig and HITS, the
difference with HITS is that there is no political content, no benefit what so ever. That's why Active Slaughter took part in the Barry
Horne memorial and will never play HITS. | am not denying that the Astoria was expensive especially at 3.50 a can, the bouncers are
wankers | know that, but that gig was not the evil some in the movement said. Just ask the animal rights groups who were there raising
much needed funds.
Trev - There's no doubt in my mind that the gig was perceived by many as “the big CONflict gig” and that the cause(s) itself was
either lost or ignored by many of those present. Unfortunately that is, and always will be, the case when gigs are put on in support of a
cause, especially if the bands playing are all of one particular musical genre. As you know Rachel, perhaps more than most people
given that you promote Rape Crisis gigs, people essentially come to see the bands and the cause, which is infinitely more important
than any band on the bill, becomes kinda secondary, if not lost altogether. In simple terms, in order to raise more money for a cause you
need bands that will pull in people and invariably “who” is playing then becomes more important to people than “why” they're playing. To
me it's both a touch of “human nature” - we all wanna see bands we like - and also indicative of the apathy that | think is quite prevalent
within the punk scene. All that can be hoped for is that people are made aware, either through the bands themselves or literature etc at
the gig, that the whole thing is actually about awareness concerning certain issues. | personally think that the closest you're gonna get
to the cause being recognised as being more important than who's playing is if you have a wide variety of different acts on, so that in a
sense no one band becomes the complete centre of attention. To be honest though, I'm not overly concerned why it is that anybody
came to the gig, be it to support the cause or merely to dance till they vomited (or, indeed, both), because at the end of the day it raised
a fuck of a lot of money for some very worthwhile causes (anywhere between 1 to 2 thousand people at £15 a go — you do the maths).


PEZE Pa Ser e E877


HW - Does the song ‘Phase’ reflect your perceptions of the London punk scene? The Leeds scene has had a
huge swell of younger kids “looking the part” especially at HC/pop-punk gigs, but who seem totally apathetic,
both politically and in terms of what they put back into the scene — does this sound familiar? When you mention
“got all the cool accessories to pose” are you referring to the same rich kid, 5-minute punx as in verse 1? And
don't you think that any branch of punk fashion — skinhead, 77, HC etc - is just that, a fashion with differing
“cool accessories”? On a different note, what do you make of the trendy 5-minute activist mentality so often
seen from similar kids in political circles (before they fuck off to become stockbrokers or whatever)?


Jake - Whether it's London or where ever “Phase” is attacking the apolitical fashion victims who just want to dress up not mess up. |
think it's great to see all the punk rock types on demo's it's just a shame that so few bother. "Phase" has been classed as
condescending or what ever, it's just an observation. | suppose the main bit of the lyrics were inspired by the type of people who go to
mine and JJ's favourite (not) club “Take warning” at the Verge. Without mentioning any names these very people decided not to buy a
McMurder meal on Mayday 2000. They made a call on their mobile phone and realised the nearest McShit was being trashed, so their
attitude was we better not. Wankers, it irritates the hell out of me seeing these idiots come out of their ska punk gig into a bloody
McDonalds. That is the type of stuff that “Phase” is getting at. There's enough people that think having a Mohawk or bondage trousers
makes them a rebel, where as we know that being alternative means going vegan or vegetarian at least and making as much of a stand
against the state as you possibly can. Everyone can go on a demo at least, we accept not everyone is up for doing direct action, but it
would be nice to see more people in the punk scene at least get involved in something.

As for the 5-minute activist stuff | know what you mean, | frequented a lot of things fike the Road Protests up and down the country
between the early and mid 1990's. There were very many people of the “5 minute activist" mentality to be found here who can be found
working for the fucking Guardian now, the fucking twats. A point of real irritation was there seemed to be an influx of protestors to the
places getting media attention for all the wrong reasons like the chance to be on telly. Where as just as equally important protests didn't
get the same interest due to it not being a media circus. | don't see as many people actively doing that sort of stuff theses days probably
most of them fucked off to a cushy career. In saying that there are people like myself who remained involved but on a more low profile
level than had previously been the case. Much of this has been due to burn out, and the way the Old Bill have clamped down on shit
over the last few years has obviously played its part. | was told back then this is just a phase you're going through, but bollox, most of
my life has been involved in working for change. | don't feel that way is from working within the system and by the time you get a
criminal record it's too fucking late any way. | hear a lot of people saying they are gonna get a job as a lawyer or something and work


their way from the inside, and it's like wake up. Maybe some people have the power to make small changes within the system, a teacher
could influence anarchist views in very rare cases, or you do get the odd DSS worker who will help rather than penalise people. But in
general the system just seems to suck people in to a position where they are too tired and complacent to bring about change. So bollox
to all those ex eco-warriors who now earn loads in their pin stripe suit. Phase is just having a go at any one who says it’s trendy to be
different until university has finished or something along those lines. Being different means making a difference. There, does that
explain enough for you.


JJ- “Phase” is basically having a go at these “kids” you mention. We'd like to say not all the kids, as we gotta give the younger
generation a chance eh. But I'd have to say sp many of them are what this song is about. It's not only about younger kids though. A lot
of "older" people still act the same realty. Ok maybe mummy and daddy don't give them loads of money when they are older (or maybe
not?) but they still have the same mindless mentality.

Punk fashion is ok... mohican, bondage trousers, tattoos, piercings, leopard print hair etc IF the person has a mind to go with it too, if
you know what | mean. But in a hell of a lot of cases this ain't true. Leeds must be a lot like London then by what you are saying
Rachel. Both cities have too many uni students trying to get into the punk scene then dropping out after 2 years and becoming a


“stockbroker” or what ever. r Ea E
ed WZA,


HW - The scientific and ethical arguments against vivisection are indisputable and there have been significant
victories in the fight against vivisection in Britain, such as the closure of Hillgrove. How far can these victories
go in stopping vivisection when huge companies can Just relocate to cheaper countries with even lower
standards than Britain? And do you think the state will ever allow a protest movement to forcibly eradicate
vivisection, since it sets a frightening precedent for the state itself if it is shown that mass action can work? Do
you foresee greater state persecution of the animal rights movement on these grounds?


JJ -Wel as far as getting it stopped and banned in the UK, in the end we shall win! Going to other countries will be more tricky. But |

2. erg we start thinking about getting our passports and packing our luggage to go hassle some foreign-based lab, we gotta stop
'e first.

The state aren't allowing a protest movement right now. But we still do the demos, we get hassle off the old bill, get nicked for no

reason, get old bill following us home etc but we don't give up as its been shown with Hillgrove.

HLS is going under. They are losing money and shareholders and backers every week. They are a dying company. ALL because of the

AR movement which goes under the name of SHAC when it comes to smashing HLS.


Jake - Most of Active Slaughter were present for a demo against vivisection at the beginning of this week. My attitude was “Ok it's
just gonna be one of those demo's where you hand out leaflets, the Old Bill won't give us any grief’. Oh how times have changed. The |
Old Bill out numbered us 2 to one, followed us on the tube, nicked a woman for having a mega phone, prevented us from walking down
the street to hand out leaflets. Even in ten years of protesting | was surprised, it's evidence they are fucking scared. They did this using
a rarely implemented Section 5 of the 1986 Public Order Act (very similar to Section 60 of the 1994 Criminal Justice Act). The Police
have So many more rarely implemented powers since 1986 that it is frightening thinking what they could do next. Under the Terrorism
Legislation brought in last year the Home Secretary can decide who is a proscribed organisation allowing the Police to act in 24 hours.
This has very strong implications for animal rights or any one who wants a better world really. Most of us have been unfortunate enough
to get nicked and spent the night in the cells, that's bad enough. Think what it would be like to get nicked under terrorist powers. The
kind of scenarios of the Guildford 4 are potentially well on their way for being the reality of even showing support to the ALF or SHAC.
People who've been nicked and jailed for ALF have always been treated as terrorists by the State. ALF has been at it for what 30 years
now and it's really beginning to bite, it's not just the stuff about Hillgrove and Shamrock closing, it's the fact that the SHAC campaign
has caused real economic damage. SHAC has thousands possibly millions of supporters worldwide and the State is fucking scared. The
bloody fucking Government are too proud to let us break the evil of HLS. 1) They can't be seen to back down to our demands on
anything especially animal rights. 2) They have invested in HLS because of its research into the human genome project. That prick Tony
Blair would love to boast to the world about some Brave New world scientific break through.

Animal Rights scares the fucking Government, look at the fox hunting issue, that has the real potential to see some anarchy breaking
out. If they go ahead with any ban ail these fox hunting scum will still go out, will the Old Bill be arresting them the way they did to Hunt
saboteurs in 1994 when aggravated Trespass was brought in? Will they fuck. All this ALF activity for the last 30 years is really beginning
to piss off those wankers in Parliament and beneficiaries of the capitalist world. | think we can expect a clamp down, unless more people


get involved and it’s time they did. RER.


HW - When you say “you don’t wanna be preached to about animal rights — you think it's a load of middle class
shit” what do you mean? Are you implying that the working class are somehow less receptive to animal rights
arguments? And in terms of “middle class shit”, I've encountered plenty of that in the animal rights movement
particularly from the single-issue fanatics. What about “vote fabour to give animals a voice” for fucks sake?
Also, where do you stand on consumer boycotts? Surely these are middle class orientated - if you've got kids
to feed on a giro and can only afford to shop at Nettos, you haven't got the time or money to worry if there's
casein in your rubber gloves or whatever, and many of the “ethical alternatives” are simply unrealistic for many


people. Your opinions? .
JJ -Wel I've been told by loads of skinheads that AR is just a load of middle class shit. | don't see AR being about any class system, |
see it being about stopping animal abuse. Every organisation is going to have middle class, working class in it. Does this mean we
should turn our backs on something because there are too many middle class people involved? We ain’t doing it for the middle class.
Yes there are a load of what you might call middle class people involved in AR. I've spoke to many of them and yeah maybe they do
sound a bit middle class In their accent but their beliefs and their actions certainly don't make them seem middle class to me. There are
also a lot of working class people involved in AR, but I'd have to say that there's maybe a few more middle class people involved,
Whose fault is this though? Personally | couldn't give a flying fuck if Tony Blair was trying to break through a police tine at HLS to get
over the gates to burn that place down! I'd be helping him over. (Just so you could trip him up and impale him on the razor wire | hope! —
Chip)

About animal tested products... Trev's right really. You have to do what you can. I'm sure there are rare circumstances where certain
people have to buy certain products as they are cheaper or more attainable. But this shouldn’t be that common. So many ather products
are non tested and cheap

Too many people use that excuse of them not having enough cash to buy non tested products etc. If you really believed in not testing on
animals then *most* people would be able to get I reckon 85% of stuff that is not tested.


um


Think about it, if 80% of the UK population did this, animal testing would be stopped right now as the govemment and companies would
realise they could make more money from products which ain't been near an animal


Jake - That particular lyric sort of came together in a conversation and what people have said about animal rights being a middle
class issue. In fact It was someone who calls themselves a class struggle (meat eating) anarchist. The point | was making is that the
fight against HLS is not solely about what they are doing to animals. HLS is a good example that there are so many human rights and
environmental issues involved. The Government is wasting working class people's taxes on a fucking terrible thing like HLS. Let's face
it, the only people who benefit are sick and twisted scientists and coppers on over time. If you took the time to talk to most people they
would no doubt oppose HLS and yes, do have far more personal worries about their survival and their kids.

| personally don't see animal rights as a single issue, obviously | love animals, but it's a wider struggie to me. Over the years I've noticed
there are a lot of single-issue vegan police wankers. | think it's out of order telling a single mum do this, do that. Yes it is fucking
expensive to buy a whole lot of vegan products, but if you shop around and inform people in a non-condescending way of the fact being
vegan can actually work out to be cheap and it's better for you and your kids. | think the system encourages meat eating for a number of
reasons. At the end of the day the amount of meat that people in Britain eat kills a vast percentage of them. It isn't in the Economies
interest to promote the vegan diet and that’s why it's often perceived to be really expensive. Ethical Altematives are something | can't
afford to buy, but | do manage to eat quite well as a vegan for say 15 quid each week. Ethical Alternatives are another filthy lie any way,
Green Capitalism is bollox and it's every where from Holland & Bastards to Sainsbury's to Oxfam. Fair Trade for example means the
workers get 10p a day instead of 1p a day, it's all such a load of bollox. | manage to support the local grocers quite a lot but can't avoid
going into Sainsbury's. I'm afraid I've been living off these Spring Rolls (4) & Samosas & Onion Badjees (6), they are only 69p a box at
the moment. The beauty of it is they say "Suitable for Vegans” on the box. | think that proves being vegan ain't that pricey. y
Single-issue politics are dangerous, | think it's better to see yourself as against all forms of oppression. | known vegans who are racist or
whatever else, but equally I've known some very bigoted anti-fascists. Anarchists, anti fascists, animal rights, eco warriors or whatever,
should see themselves more as the same struggle not splintered into their clique. | do my best to boycott multi nationals, but it is
virtually impossible, | wouldn't actually agree that consumer boycotts are a waste of time. I'll never knowingly buy a product from Smith
Cline Beecham for example. That doesn't mean to say any multinational is any better, but do what you can to avoid supporting them.


Trev - I know for a fact that some members of certain class-orientated organisations (no names mentioned) perceive animal rights
issues and arguments to be the domain of the middle class. Quite why ! really don't know. I think though that the real Issue lies with
those who do adopt and adhere to single issues and fail to recognise that the many issues that affect humankind, animals, the
environment and most everything else are all interlinked. Yes, we all perhaps choose causes that are immediately closer to our heart,
but to dismiss others as being less important, for whatever reason, is effectively to play the state's game of "divide and rule”. To me,
animal abuse is as horrendous as the abuses served upon third world countries, which is as horrendous as our destruction of the planet
and so on. All of which can be placed under the collective banner of “capitalism at work” and all of which need to be addressed and
fought as vehemently as one another. | also totally agree that each person has to choose at some point how far they can go with things.
Your example of “ethical consumerism” is spot on. People find themselves in different situations at different times and they then have to
decide how best to operate within those circumstances, and as much as f'd like to think we all play the perfect ethical consumer, | know


it isn't always possible. e We


Ee HW - in ‘Fuck Off M.O.D.' you attack sq


happen to me” mentality, especially in so called “peace time”). Mind you most kids | knew that signed up were
tossers to start with, but not all of them!


JJ - Until we have a draft again in this country, a squaddie joins the army at his own choice. A lot of people work at slaughterhouses
because it's the only way out for them to get some money. Don't mean we should let them off the hook though does it. I'm not saying all
squaddies are as bad or evil as that but it's just an example. ?

I'm sure a big percentage of squaddies are very nice people. And even if one of them does get killed in action, we ain't gonna throw a
party. Almost any loss of human life is sad. But having said that we can't have too much sympathy for them. They thought about it, they
joined up, they went to war, they got shot, they died, they knew the risks, shouldn't have joined!


Jake =| do totally recognise that the army is the only reality for a lot of young lads as a means of escaping hopeless prospects. | have
known lads who were squaddies and who joined up for that reason. | think at the time of writing MOD I was so angry about the war
that had kicked off that | just had all these drummed up images of the arse hole squaddie mentality you'll see in towns like Aldershot. I'm
not as much having a go at those who chose the career it's just once your told "Right Britain is going to war and we are going to kill
people”, in the recent Afghanistan military actions most of these people have already suffered enough. It's just about having no
conscience, | knew a squaddie who had seen killing and he left the army and funnily enough got involved in anti military stuff (I shall say
no more). | don't have a problem with squaddies as such (though there are a lot of morons you don't wanna bump into when they're in a
gang), | do have a problem with say someone on a nuclear submarine launching the Cruise missile to go and take out civilians. Each
verse attacks the 3 wings of Britain’s military run through the M.O.D, i.e. Army, Air force and Royal Navy. It was just a quick response to
the blood shed Britain is a party to in Afghanistan and a general having a go at the British Military. But you make a valid point, they do
show the Army to be booze, birds and beaches. The Army is going to be a good way out until the next Falklands eh? . You could
actually say that the first verse is a comment about the Simon Weston mentality of the brave soldier boy, who still doesn't question after
being so badly scarred by the horrors of war. The song is trying to comment about the farce of war and Britain's involvement in it.

Trev -1 always have a problem with these kind of questions. On the one hand | can understand and accept the argument about
joining the army as means of a way out of the shit many working class kids are in. But then I think hold on, for everyone of these kids
that join the forces there's also a fuck of a lot that don't, so why's that? | actually tend to believe that a lot of people join the army etc not
because of the lure of travel and adventure, as it might be for a very few, but quite simply to feel superior to others. Or, in some cases,
because they do actually want to kill people. Anyway, regardless of any of the reasons that make people join the forces, to me the song
is about the institution of the M.O.D. itself and those within it who are there because they want to be. It is an institution, and they are
people, who inflict pain and anguish upon others in the pursuit of imperialistic rule and gain. The type of people who maintain and
perpetuate the homicidal, Darwinian based myth that “Britannia rules the waves”.


id
ped Returning to the subject of war, do you think the recent attacks by the USA and its siavish minions on
cope erta ed reei Into something far worse, especially when the man with his finger on the red

a redneck imbecile? How badly do you think this situation will be Z
attitudes in Britain and how can this be curbed? n pa e a KE
JJ - | doubt bush would push that red button,
! don't think bush wants to
hands.


That's unless he chokes on another pretzel, trips over and lands on the button.
wipe out any country, he prefers control. He just wants to control them and have them eating out of his


ing on over there. Boneheads will always use this type of


olerance and understanding by people


and by educating peopl kicking the shit out of any racist scum.


Jake - Clinton was a


people in the community
what is said in the papers about Muslims but P
they are people just the same as anyone else


ming from outside). I'm not taken in by
't alienate me. But at the end of the day,


don't you ask us a question?
Trev - | understand you're quite a fan of the rhyming couplets in some of our songs. Do you have any that you think would fit into our
repertoire given the subject matter of many of our songs (i.e., animal rights)?
HW - Better than rhyming couplets here's a song which we expect to be used though we realize that your own
stuff will pale in comparison to this lyrical genius: >


E Murdering scum thinking only of your belly / Cooking up our wildlife
de Listen to the fishes, hear their dying dei / The Gio ug ole Palabra i i
24 Chorus: Lock up your daughters / We're Active Slaughter / (repeat ad nauseum)
Smashing up McDonalds, going wild / Molotov cocktails and Silk Cut Ultra Mild /
aking on the pigs we might be handy / But coz we’re cockneys we only drink shandy // (Rachel)


iw, d Lock UP your DaucHreps ČŠ Sei Ne


utographs for my adoring fans
I was chauffered off to a cocaine


hed ofthe cae de went home and passed out on the
Jake - Yeah tell me 3 things about the


HW - well since we aren


GE ię
HW. This is definitely the end so
JJ = May the 1st is with you...always!
Jake - First of all thanx to Rachel


Contact Active Slaughter at: PO Box 3591 3, London, N17 9YP, UK


Website: www.activeslaughter.co.uk
For info on SHAC (Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty) mentioned in the interview, che:
See the music reviews section for more info on the EP and the comp CD mentioned above.


ck their website at www.shac.net


d
4
i


m


SHOSIUYOH


iCi331ud AHL ADIML LY BIKOTE “NI 00°E3


E aS


Dear Dr Laura, k 3
Thank you for doing so much to educate peopie regarding God's


Law. | have learned a great deal from your show, and I try to share
that knowledge with as many people as I can. When someone tries
to defend the homosexual lifestyle, for example, | simply remind
them that Leviticus 18 : 22 clearly states it to be an abomination.
End of debate. | do need some advice from you, however, regarding
some of the specific laws and how to follow them.
1. When | burn a bull on the altar as a sacrifice, | know it creates a
pleasing odour for the Lord (Lev 1 : 9). The problem is my
neighbours. They claim the odour is not pleasing to them. Should |
smite them? i
SA 2. I would like to sell my daughter into slavery, as sanctioned in
Exodus 21 : 7. In this day and age, what do you think would be a
fair price for her? EN
3. I know that I am allowed no contact with a woman while she is in
her period of menstrual uncleanliness (Lev 16 ; 19-24). The problem R
is, how do | tell? I have tried asking, but most women take offence.
4. Lev 25 : 44 states that | may indeed possess slaves, both male
and female, provided they are purchased from neighbouring
nations. A friend of mine claims that this applies to Mexicans, but
not Canadians. Can you clarify? Why can't | own Canadians?
5. | have a neighbour who insists on working on the Sabbath.
Exodus 35 ; 2 clearly states he should be put to death. Am | morally
obliged to kill him myself?
6. A friend of mine feels that even though eating shelifish is an
abomination (Lev 11 : 10), it is a lesser abomination than
homosexuality. | don't agree. Can you settle this? d
7. Lev 21 : 20 states that I may not approach the altar of God if |
have a defect in my sight. | have to admit that | wear reading
glasses. Does my vision have to be 20 / 20, or is there some room
for negotiation here? d
8. Most of my male friends get their hair trimmed, including the hair
around their temples, even though this is expressly forbidden by
Lev 19 : 27. How should they die? y
9. | know from Lev 11 : 6-8 that touching the skin of a dead pig
makes me unclean, but may | still play football if | wear gloves?
10. My uncle has a farm. He violates Lev 19 AD by planting two
different crops in the same field, as does his wife by wearing
garments made of two different kinds of thread (cotton 1 polyester
blend). He also tends to curse and blaspheme a lot. Is it really
necessary that we go to all the trouble of getting the whole town
d together to stone them? (Lev 24 : 10-16) Couldn t we just burn them
to death at a private family affair like we do with people who sleep
with their in-laws? (Lev 20 : 14) n
| know you have studied these things extensively, so | am confident
you can help. Thank you again for reminding us that God's word is
eternal and unchanging. Your devoted disciple and adoring fan.


ta
m


=>


4 q j dei =
SĘ Zei R
Laura Schlessinger is a US radio personality. Recently, she said
that as an observant Orthodox Jew, homosexuality is an
abomination according to Leviticus 18 : 22 and cannot be


i i ing i letter to Dr
condoned in any circumstance. The following is an open le
Laura penned by a US resident, which was posted on the internet.


(Plagiarised word-for-word by CHIP from the booklet accompanying
Limp Wrist’s new LP)


EMO - THE FACTS
I'm getting really pissed of with people in zines using ‘emo’ as an
insult, particularly when many people don't seem to have much clue
as to what emo actually is. Why would that piss me off? Have |
suddenly taken up a newly open-minded policy towards the twenty-
first century equivalent of student shoe-gazers? No I haven't. It’s just
that if you've never experienced the full horror of emo in action |
don't really think you should throw that term around lightly. Look I
live in Leeds and we have more emo bands per capita of normal
population than anywhere else in the whole fucking world. You can
scarcely go into any boozer without hearing the droning voices of
students mourning the fact that they can't get a shag because
they're dressed like something from an early 805 episode of Grange
Hill and daddy won't buy them a new car. Never use the 'e' word
until you really know what emo is and the depths it can fall to. Like a
Vietnam Veteran, I'll leave you with this thought - you weren’t
there, you can never understand! (CHIP)


atl


| ZERO TOLERAN


eek


CHIP’S VENDETTAS


In which | vent my spleen on the various idiots who make daity life
such a grinding chore, Sod the lot of them. +
4. Smackheads. Particularly the thieving scum who nicked my flight
jacket off the washing line. You are human sewage. You have the
audacity to try tapping change outside my local off-icence. No | je
can't spare you any money to fund your sordid habit, now fuck o!
and get some dignity.
Ch The Leeds DE wae who we overheard in the café at a recent Wi
1 In 12 Club gig, engaged in the "> conversation... č
t A jo's this band on now?”
nat B Erio called Eggraid. Don't know who they are. We
should just stay up here until someone we know comes on u
You ignorant cliquey tossers. If you don't know a band, how : d
know if they're any good or not? Most of your bands are shite u E
least | can say I've given them a chance. You pay three ae M ge
into a gig then you sit upstairs and ignore half of it coz it's ba
that Fracture hasn't told you that you should like. Just fuck off with
your stupid glasses and your crap clothes that make you look like


the soft kid at school.
3. Gary Bushell. It's been said a thousand times before but the
smug beardy arsehole needs a fucking slap. About two years ago |
walked past him in the street, did a double-take and realised that
yes, jt was actually Bushell, and missed a golden opportunity to
lamp the bastard. Gutted. š F
4. Rip-off 7” prices. Recent offenders include Con-flict charging
three quid and a bit for their last 7”, which was shit anyway and
some HC band called Nazti Skinz (read that carefully - yeah I
thought it sounded dodgy as fuck at first glance too) charging a
ludicrous £4.50 for an EP. But worst offenders of all are Victory
Records (purveyors of utter shite as far as | can ascertain) trying to
charge a laughable five quid for an integrity / Lockweld split 7”
picture disc. Are you having a fucking laugh or something?
5. Bands who describe their music in terms of their diet. Someone | |
phones you up, asking you to sort out a gig for them, you ask them
what sort of music they play and they say “vegan straightedge . No,
| didn't ask you what you ate or whether you fancied a pint, | asked
you to describe your bloody music. So if | was in a band and |
phoned someone up about a gig and described my music as “tacto-
vegetarian, drinking and smoking" that would be adequate would it?
No it wouldn't, so just answer my sodding question properly and
stop banging on about your lifestyle choices, or D make you listen
to my collection of diabetic grindcore and gluten-intolerant crust.


EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES — FUCK 'EM ALL!
Employment agencies have been a bloady millstone round my neck
for the last nine months. Having failed to get myself a proper job in
that time for various reasons, I've had the pleasure of experiencing
a string of minimum-wage sanity-threatening warehouse jobs. But
while the work is shit, the periods where they "haven't got anything
for me” are worse. | mean | don't really want to go back on the dole
(too many awkward questions, too littie money) so pending a real
job I'm stuck with a totally unpredictable income. As I'm writing this,
I've had a total of zero work in the last fortnight, so I'm reduced to
pauper-level living. Bastards. | actually want to work (well obviously I
don't, | just want the income that goes with it, but you know what |
mean) and considering how long | spent on the dole doing my
utmost to avoid any form of work whatsoever, it feels like some
great big sick joke. Now agencies themselves are dodgy as fuck,
and they're a rapidly expanding phenomenon now that the move
towards the reintroduction of casual labour is underway. People
fought, starved and died to win what working rights we have and
agencies are at the forefront of undermining this. Job security
life? Forget it. The eight-hour day? Forget it. Skilled trades? Forget
them too. And don't even bother asking about trade unions, health
and safety or a wage you actually live on. The fact that agencies
have been obliged to introduce holiday pay (and some form of sick
pay is apparently on the way) is proof that they are the sad future of NA
employment. A little bit of sugar with your shit, sir? They operate on po 4
the basis of charging a company roughly double what you actually f°?
get paid, so if | get minimum wage, the agency makes around four
quid an hour profit for hiring out my labour. Parasites in other words.
And to really rub it in, most agencies are staffed by slimy patronising
careerist tossers, who act like they're something special because
they have some level of control over your life, while they've got one
eye on some shit-bag management job and they're talking about
you like you're some kind of inanimate commodity. Welcome to the fe
workplace of the future. (CHIP) p A


ay


&
Z


for


NAZI WEBSITES 4


I no longer have internet access at home which is a pity because it
was vastły more entertaining than watching shit soaps on TV.
Obviously there’s a lot of mileage in fetish websites and boundless
amusement can be had at the expense of the hordes of weirdos
who feel the need to advertise their bedroom antics to the world. But
the really interesting stuff was nazi websites. These are absolutely
priceless in terms of information-gathering on the local shelf-dusters
and are also worryingly compulsive viewing. Like most people
involved in the far-right, the contributors to these sites are the usual
rag-tag bunch of psychiatric cases and reading the goings-on in
their guest-books and chat-rooms not only gives you an insight into
the paranoid and hate-filled workings of their minds, but it is
occasionally funny as fuck as well. Take the names they use for
example. The Combat 18 and National Front guest-books have
provided such classic monikers as ‘War Wolf and ‘Storm Lord!
Does the image of some Bilty-no-mates Dungeons And Dragons
freak spring into your mind too? The arguments they come out with
vary widely too, from pseudo-intellectual revisionism to the standard
brain-dead streams of vitriol. Particularly worth a look is Bev from
Derbyshire, some twisted old slapper who has her say on anything
and everything on the NF site, with a tendency to post random stuff
in the middle of night, again Suggesting no life. The utter bullshit the
wannabe academic characters spout often defies all belief, and
Storm Lord, who clearly spends an unheaithy amount of time on his
own, is one of these. Also worth a laugh are some of the graphics,
including my personal favourite, which | used as background on our
computer until someone pointed out how dodgy that looked - ina
sad case of lowest-common-denominator appeal, the C18 website
welcomed you with a photo of a bird in a bikini brandishing a gun in
front of a South African nazi flag. Dear oh dear. Our local fuckwits,
Yorkshire NF have a picture of some naked bird {nicked from a
Pirelli calendar by the look of it) with the surreal nonsense “All her
ancestors were racists" emblazoned above it. Not only puzzling but
profoundly sad I think. The factual reporting is note-worthy too, or
rather its absence. Levels of support and attendance on fash demos
is exaggerated ludicrously and fash getting their heads kicked in is
somehow reversed into a victory for them, which indicates either
staggering levels of self-delusion or propagandising to their fellow
nazis about how organised and unstoppable they supposedly are.
Of course best of all is when they get the handbags out and start
bickering, either about anti-fascists or more often each other. Leeds
is burdened with two particularly vociferous gobshites, BNP
candidate and Leeds Uni student soft lad Mark Collett, and
paranoid-schizophrenic police grass and NF organiser (until they
kicked him out for grassing) Tony White. Both of these specimens
have contributed some hilarious pearts of wisdom to their respective
sites, made all the more amusing because they despise each other.
Not only does this tell us that left to their own devices, the far-right is
so hopelessly stupid and self-destructive that they'd probably finish
each other off before we even got a chance, but its also quite telling
that the BNP is relying on mouthy student wankers as electoral
candidates. Anyway, the point of all this is that far-right websites
give you a very good idea of what's going on in their sordid little
world, which normally leaves you a bit disturbed at what goes
through some scumbags' minds but optimistic that they're such
imbeciles they'll never get anywhere serious, for all that the BNP
currentty seems to offer a threat at local government level. The
absence of any program of policies beyond vague sweeping
statements is quite telling. Either they have a lot to hide (i.e.
compulsory repatriation doesn't go down too well with the British
electorate) or they simply don't have any policies because they
aren't real political movements anyway, just opportunist bigots. In
my opinion the reluctance to lay their cards on the table is probably
a combination of both factors. They're worth a look chiefly to
demystify the British fascist movement, which is revealed to be not
the gun-toting Aryan psycho-terrorists that the liberal press and
SWP would have you believe, but a motley collection of thugs,
morons, petty criminals and megalomaniacs. In other words, nothing
we can't stamp out with enough concerted effort. To find any of
these sites, use a search engine and a bit of initiative, but | don't
recommend doing it down your local library. | was once browsing in
one af the computer rooms in the university until | noticed that
everyone was staring at me coz the screen had big pictures of
swastikas all over it. Oops. So use a bit of sense, eh? (CHIP)
For more info on combating the fash on ail levels, contact:
No Platform Anti-Fascist Network, PO Box127, Leeds
LS3 1TS or phone 07970 398 933


| from long-forgotten demos or “wacky” outtakes. A definite winner


| the original


La eu «dE a
3

RACHEL’S VENDETTAS
1. Discography / live LP etc. Can't think of any new lyrics? Too
busy with your groupies and cocaine to write any new tunes? Well
nevermind cos you can always push “product” to the punters in the
form of a Greatest Hits LP (don’t worry you don't actually have to
have had a hit!) or for the more avaricious among you how about a
“ive” LP? After all you can release one every year if the habit's
becoming a bit expensive and you can throw in any ropey old shite


cos you're greedy and your fans are stupid ~ a perfect combination.
Worst offenders (except obvious ‘big names’): Angelic Upstarts,
UK Subs, ( Citizen Fish, Blyth Power

2. Charging for water in pubs. Oh dear, not content with over-
charging for piss poor pints with 2” heads there's the added insult of
charging for tap water. 70 fucking pence at the New Roscoe and 50
at Brudnell Social Club. They get round any legal requirements by
“providing drinking water in the toilets”. How generous. Needless to
Say we fully advocate stashing your own beer into such money
grabbing establishments or better still keep well away.

3. Leaving after ‘own’ band played. So what's all this about then,
you go and see your mate’s band then bugger off home when a
band that's travelled a couple of hundred miles to play arrive. Yeah
that's really supporting your punk scene ain't it? A good case in
point was the Dead Pets / NTG at The Fenton which was totally
rammed with kids for Dead Pets and then left to 10 paying śą
customers (plus the Dead Pets so no disrespect to them) and a fine
array of tumbleweed for NTG when the call of the skateboard was
obviously too Joud to ignore. So what if you've never heard of the AB
band — that's the whole point isn't it, to discover new things? You've GIS
already paid the entry fee so what've you got to lose? Dear me, just JM
realized, 10 o'clock is obviously bed time for most punks now isn't JM

it?

4. Complaining about stuff then not getting off your arse. First off,
there's the people you hear constantly whinging: “this gig's fucking
crap, this zine's fucking shit, this distro didn't send my stuff quick
enough" whinge, whinge, ad nauseum. Almost always the people
who do precisely fuck all themselves so either get off your arses and
do something yourself, offer some help or shut the fuck up. And
then there's the apathetic armchair anarchists who spend all their
time iistening to their favourite bands singing about burning political
issues as if that alone is going to change anything. These are also
the gobshites in the pub who always have an opinion on everything
yet do nowt. Obviously not everyone is in a position to be involved in
every political action going but l'm sure everyone can spare an hour
to hand out some flyers or put up stickers instead of hiding in their
bedroom listening to Conflict whilst whinging that there's nazis on
our streets,


MORE NEWS AND GOSSIP.


~ Next Punktured gig at The Primrose in Leeds will be Saturday
17th August. The usual half dozen or so quality bands and it's a
benefit for Haven Distribution. And, weil | never, it also happens to
be the weekend of Rachel and Chip's birthdays...

- Bug Central have just recorded an EP's worth of stuff, so expect
to see that soon. Wonder if there'll be any photos of the band on it?
- “Tonight Matthew I'm going to be Jello Biafra!” The pretend Dead
Kennedys will probably have done thelr UK tour by the time you
read this. | bet they were fucking shite.

- Active Slaughter are apparentiy recording again soon, so with
their hyper-efficiency, expect at least three full-length albums by the
end of the year. They've also done a version of intensive Care's
‘Any Hole's A Goal’ which I'm guessing is tyricalły far removed from


- Dog On A Rope have just been off touring to Denmark and
Germany, leaving in their wake several towns and cities with critical
Shortages of buttons. Check out their incredibly stylish new Let's
Get Ronnie’ t-shirts, available at bargain prices from DOAR via the
same PO Box as us.

- Speaking of t-shirts, if you want owt printing, Jessi Adams is your
man, so get in touch with him at the address at the end of the


Theoretically this zine is meant to be out every three months, so if
you have any news (or indeed any scurrilous gossip) let us know
and we'll stick it in. And don't bother asking us about advertising
rates - having no delusions of grandeur we don't fucking do ‘em,


our gigs. They've gone through several line-up changes and have own maturity. Differences
recently released a CD so now seemed a good time to catch them tot less violent these da


for an interview...


Anarchy Spanky. Where on earth did the
name come from? Who's in the band,
and what other bands / punk scene
activities have you been involved
in?


MICHELLE - The band began
with myself on bass, Kimberly on
guitar and Vicki on vocals. Nane of
us had played before so Col (later
to become our guitarist) taught us
in our front room. When we found
somewhere to rehearse property
Cooney joined as our drummer.
Vicki had other priorities at that time
so drifted out of the band and Foz
joined. When | wrote ‘Sugar And
Spice’ it was felt that male vocals were
inappropriate as the lyrics are from a
woman's perspective. Kimberly tried her hand
at singing first on this song then others. By this
time Col had become lead guitarist and Foz and Kimberly


held. | don't think | gave any thought to the politics at that time.
That came later with Crass and anarcho punk and | suppose my
over the years? Well, the scene seems a


ys. We used to go to a youth club to see
bands and you could always count on a fight breaking out between
individual punks. 1 think today’s punk is less political than in the
HEADWOUND - Tell us a bit about the history of eighties. In fact the only political thing about it is the actual


suppose


alternated playing rhythm. We recorded our first demo with this eighties became sick of


line-up. It was in cassette form and looking back, was pretty basic wanted to be an
but everyone has to start somewhere. During the recording Foz left collective like on


being established we had certain figures i.e.
Cress, Poison Giris, Conflict etc
promoting the direct action ethic which


people do question things more now
which is after all what punk is about. | also
think that we have experienced a backlash
against anarcho politics. Just speaking to people |
know that some punks who were Involved in activities during the


individual again rather than a part of some ‘Borg’
Star Trek. There is a negative side to this though


during the eighties when anarcho was


encouraged activity. Nowadays, there
isn’t anyone in particular involved in
such promotion. I'm not saying that
we should have a form of leadership
or that everyone should be in total
agreement to issues. What | do think
is that the distinction between
political and non-political thought
has become more pronounced.
During the eighties it became aimost
fashionable to accept the anarcho
politics without questioning. 1 think


it being shoved down their throats and


the band and so we continued with Kimberly taking on all the lead which we are experiencing at present in that it has created conflict


vocals with Col doing backing. Foz has continued as vocatist for


and the formation o


f political and non-political cliques. Even though


Manchester band Born Idols and we all wish him well. In 2000 there are differences in opinion | think that we all agree on the


Kimberly left and after some searching Ani joined. We recorded our principles of DIY. W
and focus and this or


CD ‘Sugar And Spice“ later that year.


le should therefore put our differences aside
there may not be a future to the underground.


Where did the name come from? Ha, we get asked that quite often. The younger ones who are getting into punk via pop-punk don't


Well we didn't want to have a predictable punk name so we seem very interested
decided upon one derived from our perverse sexual activities and good time and mosh.


threw in a bit of anarchy for good measure. The name tends to principles of DIY to be


make people smite which is nice.


in politics. They appear to just want to have a
This is all well and good but by allowing the


overridden by purely social motives will


create a scene not unlike commercial punk. | may be wrong about


Other things we've been involved in? | used to run Noize pop punkers being non-political and welcome views from pop
Corporation distro a number of years ago. Col was previously in punkers who want to discuss the issue.

Phobia and PMT (Bolton one) during the 80's then Blood Sucking COL- | got involved in Punk when | was about 12 In 1977 and
Freaks in the 90’s. Ani sang for External Menace during their tour Virtually everyone in my class at school was the same for about


in Germany a couple of years ago.
HEADWOUND - Could you tell us a bit about


four weeks. Then when the craze had worn.off we were left with a
few of us who hung round together and talked of forming bands for
a couple of years. We'd formed a band before any of us even had


Michelle’s dissertation? Is it true that you have plans to | adil uns 14 before | ily played anything. We


publish it?


generally pissed around covering Cockney Rejects, Angelic


MICHELLE - | was inspired to research the role of women Upstarts and Sex Pistols songs for a while and only did a few of


female counterparts have to say!


ing community who organized outdoor gigs in the moors and


there wasn't a divide between punx and skins, that


jonsense in 1979 when anyone


Tuesday or so at 20 or 30p to get in, but you used to
get one punk band with


two other types such as a pop band or a
nds at the time did covers for most of


at the practice and | stood in. There were a


people in our area linked up with the


HEADWOUND - How did you get involved in punk without it the punk scene as it is would not be around now. Bands


and what changes have you noticed over the years?


MICHELLE - | got involved with punk in 1979 when I met Col.
| started by listening to the records that he brought to my house. I
was drawn to the rebellious element that both the music and style


releasing records a8 they could afford to, but Crass went one
stage further putting material out as cheaply as possible and trying


to do without the invo!


ivement of major labels etc. Most of the


organizers left the area to join the peace convoy and the soene
went downhill, but that also seemed to happen everywhere at the
same time. The band | was in did a gig with Flag of Convenience
at Wigan and only three people turned up. Even gigs with bands
like UK Subs weren't being well attended. Most of the people I'd
grown up with suddenly got into smoking weed and sitting in their
attics on their own rather than going out to gigs. | think that having
kids played a part in this as we were all about the same age. Not
much happened for a while then there was suddenly a big increase
in the number of gigs but we were going out to some events called
punk and seeing shitty American pop bands and the places were
packed out. Luckily there were some decent gigs to go to, and we
soon got to know which gigs would be OK. Recently the only punk
scene that seems to be doing well is pop punx singing love songs.
The anger and the issues that used to be punk are now being
covered by some of the nu-metal bands who owe a lot of their
musical influences to punk.


ANI — Wel | couldn't really escape from punk whilst growing up
as my brothers and sisters were into their music big time! You
could say it was the way | was brought up. So both eras of punk
were around me when growing up, both very different in
motivation. Today it's not all commercialism, it's more getting your
views heard and going through mayhem to get them across.


HEADWOUND - What has the reception to your
‘Sugar And Spice’ CD been like? Was it a deliberate
decision to release it on CDR format, or was it from
necessity? Do you think formats like tape and CDR are
taken less seriously in the punk scene despite being
more ‘DIY’ (i.e. they're only seen as ‘demos’ and a band
often isn’t taken seriously until they put out vinyl)?
MICHELLE - The CD has gone down very well. Yes, we
deliberately had it put out on CD format by FCR and Chincave. It
was an affordable option and they're easy to carry around to gigs!
I'm not sure if bands are taken more seriously if they put out a
vinyl. If people choose not to take us seriously because we are not
on vinyl then thats their problem and not ours. Personally | don't
hold with such silly attitudes. At the end of the day putting out
recordings DIY is what matters. Many bands put their stuff out on
both CD and vinyl and cassette. | think it is just a matter of
personai choice and affordability. In retrospect | think we should
have put ‘Sugar And Spice’ out on cassette as well as CD because
not everyone has a CD player. So, we've done a bit of taping for
people when necessary.


HEADWOUND - How does having kids affect the
band? How do find peoples’ attitudes in the punk
scene to kids and parenthood? Do you think the punk
scene excludes people with kids to some degree (i.e.
gigs going on ‘til late etc)?

MICHELLE - Our kids are grown up at 17 and 15 so it isn't a
problem for us. Our 15 yr. old often comes to gigs with us and gets
stuck in. He's also into pop punk but | think him coming out with us
provides him with an insight into DIY culture. Maybe one day he'll
come to his senses and burn his Green Day CD's!!!!!!!!

As there are many punks who are parents | don't think there ts a
negative attitude in general. | certainly have not experienced any. |
suppose that the scene excludes those with kids to some extent
depending on the age of the kids. When they were younger we
took our kids to gigs wherever possible but as you say they go on
late and kids get tired — and bored I may add! | remember when we
took our eldest when he was about 10 months, to an outdoor gig in
a quarry. He got tired and cranky during Phobia’s set (band Col.
was in) so | parked his buggy up at the side of Col's amp and he
fell asleep in seconds. Incidentally, he's now into music big time! |
wouldn't suggest that those punk parents with younger kids do this
at gigs though — delicate hearing and all that! Punks do take their
younger kids to picnics but then can't take them to gigs afterwards.
| don't see any easy way around this because as a parent you
have to be responsible and consider the child's well being. You
may be enjoying the event but who says the child is? Having to rely
upon baby-sitters to go to gigs will be an inevitable necessity until
the children reach an age where they can be taken to gigs or left
alone. Maybe parents could organize a créche collective at gigs
where this would be possible. They could work by a rota on looking
after them and keeping them occupied. Maybe you could set a
precedence Rachel and start one off?


ANI = Kids, sometimes are an inspiration where lyrics are
concerned ~ you don't want them making your mistakes or the
mistakes of your generation. As for gigs going on late it's up to
when and where you play and if the organisers are tolerant
towards ankle-biters!


HEADWOUND - Your song ‘The Cruelty Of Greed’
covers the fur trade. Now fur has made a return to the
catwalk, do you think people will start to wear it after
its recent stigmatisation? How far do you think people
are really influenced by the rich catwalk fashion
anyway? The animal rights movement successfully
helped to stigmatise fur, but how far do you think its
associations with wealth and excess contributed to its
downfall, as opposed to leather, which is
fundamentally the same?


MICHELLE — Past campaigning by animal rights groups was
immensely successful but | think that people have short memories
about certain issues and unfortunately the fur trade is one of them.
| would say that the past decline in wearing of fur was more to do
with the fear of being attacked by animal rights activists than a
class or wealth issue. Basically, most people shut negative things
out of their minds. They can't see what goes on and feel more
comfortable not knowing. | actually wrote that song in response to
the return of fur being worn on the catwalk and the lyrics attack the
mindless uncaring attitude of consumers of fur. | think the way to
combat the problem is not only use tactics of past campaigns
whereby fear and stigmatisation are useful but also to educate
people about the fur trade and to keep the issue on the agenda so
people don't forget. Anyone who still wants to wear fur deserves all
they get from activists. On the issue of leather, yes, | agree that as
with fur it is the skin of an animal. | personally choose not to wear
leather for this very reason. However, | don’t as a rule challenge
those who wear it. Some people would argue that leather is a by-
product of the meat industry and would be wasted if not used
whereas fur is obtained for the purpose of sheer vanity. Like ! say |
think skin is skin at the end of the day and | respect animals
enough not to wear either.


HEADWOUND - Your song ‘The Real Disgrace’
explores perceptions of homelessness. In it you refer
to heroin, which Is currently a huge and growing
problem in our area. While sympathetic to the causes
of this problem | see it as a cause of anti-social crime,
what do you see as a viable short-term solution? Is
decriminalisation a way forward?


MICHELLE- | was inspired to write ‘The Real Disgrace’
through my work which involved working with homeless young
people, many of whom were heroin addicts. The lyrics reflect their
experiences. Heroin misuse is often a part of homelessness and
this | mention in the song but this is only a small part of the issues
mentioned. Whilst being sympathetic to those who are homeless
through no fault of their own | have none for smack users. Using
my experience of working with drug users, particularly of heroin, |
agree with you that it is a major cause of anti social crime, in
particular burglary and street robbery. It also fucks families up big
time. A solution? Fm not sure if decriminatisation would work. It
would hit those who are making money from the suffering of others
and cut down the crime associated with this but l'm not totally
convinced that decriminalizing it would be successful. It will be
interesting to see the outcome of the Government's proposal to
make heroin available on prescription.

| think more rehabs should be in płace and the length of time it
takes to get into one cut drastically. People have to wait months
before getting into rehab. What's the bloody point of that when they
want to get off the stuff now? | also think the rehab programs
should be reviewed and intense ongoing support offered on being
discharged. Suitable accommodation should be available on being
discharged in areas away from user circles. So many people
coming out of rehabs are left with little support and put in
accommodation with those who use. Lo and behold they start
using again. One last point I'd like to make is that the individual
makes the choice to take the shit in the first place and it's they who
have to make the choice to stop — until they want to it won't
happen!


you


relations between the wider white and Asian
cammunities in Lancashire? What are the roots of the
divisions in town like Oldham and what steps are
necessary to bridge these divides?


COL - There hasn't been much of a far right movement in
Bolton as far as I'm aware. Most racial tension historically has
been between the Indian and Pakistani communities. | don’t think
that Bolton has the same conditions of dire poverty and totally
unsuitable housing as in Burnley and Oldham. Having spoken to
some people from Oldham it appears to suffer from a kind of
Apartheid with people from any community being attacked if they
enter the wrong area, but without personal experience | couldn't
really comment. Closer to home the intolerance in our area is
towards anyone who looks different
from the vast majority of trendy kids.
Most of my youngest sons friends
have been attacked and severely
Injured for being ‘goths’. This has
even happened at school and the
teachers don't give a fuck. If these
were racist attacks they'd have to do
something but while one section of
the community picks on another and
they don't have to act then that's quite
acceptable. On the subject of racism,
despite the facts the vast majority of
the general public are convinced that
all punks are nazis. Most people
outside the punk community are quite
surprised to find that we actually
detest prejudice and sing songs about
it. That's media coverage for you.


HEADWOUND - Within in
the punk scene refusal to
participate in the electoral
process is a widespread belief,
what are your opinions on
voting and would condone
tactical voting to keep fascists
out of Council seats? Do you
think the main political parties
are scare mongering on the
BNP issue in a bid to get votes
for themselves? What role do you think physical
opposition has in removing fascists off the street?


COL - Working class people were massacred in Manchester in
order to get the vote and many women suffered and died for the
same reason. What would your attitude be if the politicians took
away the right to vote and declared that they'd make all the
decisions on who would have that power? Having said that | am of
the opinion that voting in itself doesn't and cannot achieve much. |
have always registered my vote out of those who fought to win it
from the aristocracy who own this country but have usually spoiled
my ballot paper. Unfortunately, this will no longer be possible in our
area as they have changed the voting system to a touch pad so |
doubt I'l ever be going again unless there is a green party
candidate, or a BNP candidate to vote against. If voting changes
nothing then it really doesn't matter that there are 3 BNP cunts in
Burnley purely because most people couldn't be bothered to tum
out. Of course, that brings in the question of who you'd put your
fick against but surely anyone would be better than them? I'm also
a bit disillusioned about why people vote for politicians. My
understanding has ałways been that we elect public servants to
obey us and do what we want them to, not who we want to rule us
as was said at the last election.


ANI — | was taught ‘voting is a waste of time’ but if enough
bodies were willing to throw apathy out of the window and vote out
certain fascist regimes, yeah, I'd do it! k


HEADWOUND - What are your thoughts on old
bands reforming for Holidays In The Sun etc? Do you


think thet it impacts on the DIY scene In a negative or
positive way? How do you feel about people making
profit from punk especially bands who once claimed to
despise this practise eg. Subhumans and Omega
Tribe?

MICHELLE - | find the reformation of bands for Holidays In


The Sun quite sad. | know the event is very popular but what {can't remember who said it), | would like to point out that we don't POP bands playing for money then you can take them as they are.
exactly is the relevance to punk nowadays? None | would. | went to neg songs around animal rights because it's punk rock to do so you have to remember is that when most of the early banas
the first event that was to commemorate twenty-five years since Me because something has inspired us to write about it. | suppose formed that is what they were, no different to anything else in the
punk began. | thought there was appoint to this as a one-off and is person would prefer it if we did rugby songs! Well, | for one am charts and certainły not DIY or in any way politically correct. Eater


enjo it. Now though, year after year It
ed of how ke. perceive punk l.e. something in the
past that should be celebrated annually rather than being a part of
their everyday life. | was having a conversation with someone
recently about this very subject and though he attends, he likened
it to nostalgic events of past bands as The Beatles. | thought this


MICHELLE = ‘Oh Bondage Up Yours’ is one of my favourite think they're playing at, and I just can't understand why people are ;
BO bera l think it reflects the early punk era perfectly and | Supporting them. We went to the gig in Liverpool last summer z
es, zo very inspired by Polystyrene and other women punks of which had a lot of the old 70's bands on and Menace were easily

a . However, just because we cover this song it doesn't the best band from that era I'd seen for a while. But the problem is
en Ku we play seventies style punk or live in the past. We the same as at Blackpool and Morecambe, 60 to 70% of the
me a music is inspired by lots of styles of punk and our audience don't know anything about the bands that are about now
by EEE means something to us. | read a review of us OT even after 1979. One bloke was telling us that his ‘wife had let
gene rhere it was suggested that our lyrics are predictable him out to go to the gig and wasn't it a shame that nothing like this
„e. Animal Rights etc. Well in response to this shallow remark, happened any more". If you see these events a long the lines of


has become a sad not going to apologize for having political ideologies. It is a part of used to have a pig’s head on stage when they played, can you
who | am. Actually, our lyrics cover a wide range of political and imagine that at any punk gig after about 19807Aiso = event ike
ert themes. Each of us in the band has our own views on ‘his attracts haards of sky saluting morons. Who the fuck wants to

ings and have had different life experiences which | think Pe Associated with them! (Exactly! Sadly these events also attract
rdo E our lyrics. We atso have a good sense of humour and | ‘ice as many apathetic, apolitical imbeciles who probably wouldn't

nk this comes across in some of our lyrics i.e. ‘Give Me More bat an eyelid if the whole of the 1933 German War Cabinet was
Bliss’, ‘Through The Night’ and a new one ‘Designer Vagina’, Our IGO next to em! - RACHEL) The whole swastika thing was a piss
lyrics and to „some extent the music, reflect feelings and take and when Siouxsie and co. realised they were attracting
experiences of individual band members and | don't think there's SCUM they stopped wearing them. Jimmy Pursey used to tell them
any greater reason to write lyrics than that. to stay away from the Sham gigs but they still turned up and
COL — we covered the song cos we like it. Bands from hat ara caused trouble. For some reason there is still a few of them that
have been a big influence on our music but I wouldnt say the bie think its punk to be a nazi.

m 'e. Quite a lot of our so
erea wee brought f ei eae Gees a = HEADWOUND - What are your plans for the future?

Any more recording planned? Any last words?


Pairs. Between us we have a lot of musical influences from Black

Sabbath to The Doors and punk from 1977 to today. On the MICHELLE- we're working on new material at present and
ject of old bands reforming, we went to the first gig at Blackpool hope to record a CD / cassette sometime this year. Thanks to

which | thought would be a one-off and | wanted to see some of the Steve of FCR / Ripping Thrash and Dave of Chincave for
nds | couidn't afford to see when | was young. The actual event SUPPorting us by putting out the CD. Anyone who can offer us a gig

was OK but | was really disappointed with some of the bands Please contact us at:

gdko AEE d who | was really looking forward to Anarchy Spanky, c/o Col and Michelle, 56

wale bat ot rea has 3 ron esi bei Soraia ZZ Holden Lea, Westhoughton, Bolton BL5 3PA.

despite a court order she managed to get back in and give her pk a olde ag RPNE NS SW, |


views during the Buzzcocks set, mainly to deaf ears | thou
A ight. As b
o the band touring without her, band memt FRE but COL - Im going to write a concept album on frogs complete with
sa koho l a video of them swimming round and eating caterpillars. lve


wouldn't class them as a band relevant to the DIY punk scene
more, along with all the other reformed for profit outfits rt already got 25mins of footage and It's so relaxing it's unbelievable.


the Subhumans and Conflict. What the fuck do those two bands ANI — We hope to record again soon, when we've got our new
stuff down to a tee! As for last words, erm, I'm all out of profound
statements! Cya at the gigs.


was a very good way to

describe such events. After all,

how many people crawl out of

the woodwork only to return the

following year? | would hazard

a guess at a lot! For some this

is exactiy what the event is, a

chance to listen to bands from

their youth or from a past era,

For others, who still identify
themselves as punks they don't
seem to accept that 1977 or
even 1984 are long gone.
There were many inspirational
bands from the past and many
have shaped punks
development but things move
on and people would do better
by supporting bands that are
around now. By celebrating
punk as something in the past
people are accepting the
opinion expressed by the
media and academia and are
not considering the present or
indeed the future.

As for my feelings on the
bands themselves who take
part. Well, it's often forgotten
that many of the bands who
were around during the
Seventies were not apposed to
making money from what they

did and so it should not come as a surprise when they do. What I
do think.is hypocritical are those bands who viewed making profit
with disdain and now are doing just that. What the fuck are they
doing? Maybe you should interview them Rachel and ask them?
That's if you are important enough to get an interview! (What a
cheek! They aren't important enough to warrant an interview in the
mighty Headwound! — RACHEL)

My feelings on the subject are extended to X Ray Spex touring

without Poly Styrene. At the first Holidays in the Sun Poly actually
got up on stage and explained that the reason she wasn't playing
with the band was the high ticket prices. She said it should have
been a free event held in a field somewhere. The band touring
without her doesn’t really make a mockery of what they stood for
because Poly's decision not to be a part just makes a mockery of
them.
ANI — | think that ‘in their day’ the bands in question were DIY,
and they did work hard, but I've seen some of these bands recently
and their ‘nose in the air’ attitude of punk totally contradicts the
cause. They shoulg stop profiting from everybody else’s efforts to
keep us all heard. f


HEADWOUND - Why did you decide to cover ‘Oh
Bondage Up Yours’? How far have bands from that era
been an Influence on your music and lyrics? Returning
to the question of old bands reforming what do you
make of the tikes of X-Ray Spex touring without Poly
Styrene — doesn't that make a mockery of what they
once stood for?


pe)
Se
=
Pad
=
G)
zz


Le i itt | JAWA
R : W U YNA DOO
PARTE NE EE eee, 0 V
Urban Rail Punk? What the hell is that then? Well read on and find out. Eastfield were somethin i ‘em li
A A . g of a mystery to me until | saw ‘em live
at The White Stag (once the best boozer in Leeds, now the domain solely of redneck scum — RIP). Having mentally filed them under R
me,


‘innocuous pop-punk’ | was surprised, nay gobsmacked, to find they were fucking brilliant tuneful punk rock with a brilliantly original e
streak. They were duly requisitioned by ourselves for various gigs and since then I've got right into them (so to speak). So here is the p


obligatory interview..
EEE i A


ere R
HW- Who's currently in Eastfield? Has the line-up changed since last week? Does the number of cha
affect the band?


JESSI- For the last few months Eastfield has been operating more as a floating collective (at least that's what it has been referred
to in some quarters) rather than a conventional band. For various reasons we have had several stand-in drummers, all have been
bloody marvellous. This works as Eastfield songs are straightforward with no messing around trying to be too clever or technical. This
doesn't affect the band on an individual gig basis but there needs to come a time when the line-up is consolidated so we can work on
and record new songs. For the record, last night in Bath we were Jessi (crap guitar / vocals), Ben (bass / vocals), Chris (drums / vocals)


HW - what did ‘The Gasman’ do to rile you and “where did you think you were going boy?” Is that a x
younger, slimmer Jessi engaged in some manly fisticuffs with said gasman on the photo? Tell us the tale...
JESS! - The day in question was 16th April 1993, there was a national rail strike meaning all the trains were tucked away in their
depots. Not wanting to cross any picket lines, it was better to use unorthodox methods to obtain entry. The ‘Gasman’, an officious
security guard of a gas container yard on former railway land at the back of Stewarts Lane depot in Battersea, took an exception to my
crawling out under the fence after successfully photographing every locomotive in the place. | verbally counteracted his threats to get


the Transport Police to which he completely lost it, went ballistic and the resulting scuffle ER f
(slightiy) more slender!!! 2 ng scuffle ensued. I'm proud of that photo, yes | do look


7
HW - Jessi did a stint in Blyth Power and Eastfield have been widely compared to them but unlike Josef


Porter you sing about bad nightclubs and artificial sweeteners, jum, port
a up and do ircut
are you the anti-Porter? Tell us about your involvement with Biyth poser mac” chocia


JESSI- Eastfieid occasionally get com;

h È pared to Blyth Power presumably because on one hand we move in sit i
ei eterra in terms of music, we are poles apart. | like the notion of being an 'Anti-Porter' with kartia errara Ze
etta duera > en 1980s / early 1990s i used to prostitute myself helping them out in a Ray Gange style in exchange for lifts
pcs pow d gai to photograph freight trains. A few years ago | ended up joining Biyth Power by default; me and Bambi
pra a e asked to learn a set of early Biyth stuff for a mutual friend’s wedding. With a fairly straightforward set learnt, it

sense to do a few conventional gigs in conjunction with this, three were proposed which later swelled to twelve. After this gigs
ead m. bo borren ikutzea eek to clash more with Eastfield commitments. About a year ago | was asked to leave

I a ě 3

Frege geh ZE nie sep deri ba recently and was constantly asked if it felt strange not playing with them, I


a SS ZN ZK DEE He Ee. ZA:


EEA
H ae I take It from the lyrics to ‘Chiddingfold General’ that you've had some experience of hunt
en in true talking-it-up-in-the-pub-afterwards style, tell us your greatest sabbing exploits!

—! went out with Brighton sabs for several seasons. When visiting old friends a lot of reminiscing inevitably goes on, every


en] week there was some sort of amusing incident that | i i

EO j 3 ing incide: t | could write a whole book. Putting aside all the tales of scraps, arrests and

KO eika biera ora eg that whilst we were out sabbing it was very rare for a fox to get caught. There dd many sede, e
E beeko Gear ly ‘esting fellow sabs and constantly out-witting the hunt. Did | tell you about the time | took on the whole


Since then | hadn’t been out for years until recently whi i

so ieta ly when Eastfield played Plymouth in March. We arrived the day before so | went out

HW - Tel d e NRA SONG
- Tell us about Eddie Watson - is he your best mate?! I mean you put his song on the CD twice, and


its on the ‘Come To B i
adik evland' EP so he must hold a speciai place in your heart ~ are you fixated with this


JESSI - Eddie Watson is far from m
tson y best mate although last time | bumped into him he'd calmed down considera
beai egg na wes self. The original version an the ‘Come To Beviand’ 7" had Elaine's vocal left off in yu pi aa ga
och ch anes beete Para Trenes’. At the same time we did a remix of the track which was to be exclusive to the Cowley Club
d b costs we bunged the remix on the same CD master as the rest of the album not realising that the CD pressing plant
exact copy of the whole CD. it would have cost £100 for the plant to remaster the CD and although it could have pta


done cheaper elsewhere, it was co:
tha ent about ho io Gre see d unnecessary cost so the uncredited extra traok ended up on the CD. (But I'm still none


O an 4 ZN W


HW - You've been involved in punk for decades so here's some “blast from the past” retro zine question.


Give us the
da sena Does of your wisdom and clear up, once and for all, the following much over-debated


a) CD vs vinyl (who gives a toss?)


b) Who would win in a fight between C à
bt feck da = en n Conflict and The Exploited? (not that they ever would cos it might


c) = you sign to EMI to spread your message to a wider audience? (like they'd ever offert)


jo with the most
| was given a CD
inyl. The


JESSI- CD vs Vinyl... who cares? I'm certainly not anal about packaging and format. Our vote would gi
environmentally friendly format although neither particularly are. | didn't have a CD player until fairly recently when +
walkman to plumb into my stereo. CDs are easier to play and the current climate is that people tend to buy CDs more than vi
ide is that lots of cheap vinyl bar: ains can be picked up in charity shops etc. ; j
za Exploited. There |. ten stand-off until the four Teletubbies came along and beat them all up, including all the ex-
members that had been in either band, ever.
jen abso!


jutely not. If years down the line we sell out then feel free to call us hypocrites.


Sia ee, ETK A


In implausible circumstances


HW - Now the burning issue that we really wa
Engine or Ivor The Engine?

JESSI- They're both crap kettles. At least Thomas the Tank Engine stories feature some die
going to preserved railways expecting to photograph some hard traction but being foiled as it's a
stupid plastic faces attached to them.


sels. Though having said that, I hate
‘Thomas Day’ and all the engines have


SEN), e WA a OO NI \
HW - Railways are fucked now aren't they? I mean we try to get a train 5 miles up the road and its always
delayed or cancelled or something - compared to Europe or trains are rubbish. This is no doubt a symptom
of privatisation - you know, you give some public utility to a load of private companies and they inevitably
make a total fucking pig's ear out of it. Wankers. Your thoughts on this? How far does this serve as a
microcosm to changes in the rest of society?
JESSI- The railways have always been a national joke but at least you knew where you stood with British Rail, Privatisation has
made the situation worse... just try booking tickets using more than one train operator, and see how far you get. On the continent buying
tickets is simple e.g. in Hungary there is a cost per kilometre chart at each station and the timetables have the distances on so you can
work out roughly what to pay. There are single and return tickets, some discounts and that’s about it. In contrast, the fares manual over
here is the size of a telephone directory. If they spent as much money on improving services or extra trains as they did on re-branding
and other associated privatisation gubbins we might have a half-decent train service. You wouldn't believe how many short-term re-
structurings and reorganisations occurred in the run up to privatisation of the raitway. All these involved changes of logos and liveries on
stationery as well as the trains, it must have cost a fortune in paint not to mention fees to the design consultancies who are laughing all
the way to the bank. Related to the rest of society, it seems like the country is image with image, charities are constantly re-branding
themselves wasting loads of donor's money in the process, presumably to be more corporate sponsor friendly. £73 million to re-name
the national lottery, it's madness. With all this emphasis on image and brand brezo wondar that kids want to dress in the latest
fashions and are paying through the nose for shit trainers that you can't even kick a all with. DE eare z

= M SNR ee

HW - I hear you're now playing with the Bus Station Loonies how did you come to be involved with that?
Are there any plans to record owt? Have you ever met a bus spotter? Amongst the train spotting fraternity
are bus spotters considered to be weirdoes?


JESSI- Last year the Loonies were doing a few Punks Picnics with stand-in line-ups. Chris has drummed for us on several
occasions, in a ‘you scratch my back, l'H scratch yours’ fashion | offered my services as a stand-in guitarist if they were stuck. After they
had a line-up change | got asked to join which is good as long as | don't make them rubbish... would hate to see a good band go
downhill with my inept guitar playing. It's good ‘cos now we can do Eastfield and Loonies gigs with more or less the same people.
Loony-wise, Chris has been writing some new stuff. There are plans to record this in the not too distant future.

All bus stations have their resident loonies, although spending much more time at train stations, | tend to meet more there. There are a
few bus spotters in Birmingham, | always see one of them bashing the busses on railway replacement services. | can't see the attraction
myself, | mean put a Bristol VR next to a Class 37 locomotive and it is obvious which one looks, sounds and smells better. Having said
that, some of the modern second generation passenger trains might as well be busses. On the other hand plane spotters are hard,


especially those that go to Greece and get stuck right in. eg ZE RE € 53
= eea e A EA A KO A


HW - I remember you once saying “it was 1978 the year I got Into trainspotting and punk rock”... s

a) what got you into punk rock, what bands / scenes have you been involved with over the years?
Your best and worst experiences from your years in punk?

b) what got you into trainspotting? I take it your brand of trainspotting is very different to the
number-collecting anorak brigade so tell us what you get up to then? Your best and worst experiences
from your years of trainspotting?

JESSI - a) | always hated pop-stars and celebrities. When punk came along | was initially attracted to the novelty value but soon
started thinking about rebellion and politics. At an early age, | was lucky to have older friends whose records | could borrow. In 1982 |
got asked to join a friend's band so bought a guitar, we were rubbish. In fact I've in a lot of rubbish bands over the years. The only ones
you've probably heard of are Eastfield, Blyth Power, Bus Station Loonies and Raggity Anne. I've always been suspect of scenes,
especially cliquey ones that dictate what you should be into and who you should hang out with. Don't get me wrong, there are lots of
decent people involved but as a microcosm of society there are also going to be a lot of arseholes. I'm not going to identify with
someone just because they are a punk rocker, or a trainspotter or an Arsenal fan, I'd rather take people as they are. Although it was
massive at the time, I found a lot of the early 1980s apocalyptic punk very negative, the saviour came in the form of the anarcho bands.
The best moments of punk have been meeting lots of sound people, the worst moments have been when equally sound people haven't
been acknowledged by punks because they aren't ‘punk enough’.

b) Peer pressure! The London Paddington to Bristol mainline ran at the bottom of our school field. At dinner time all the hard kids used
to go up to the railway embankment to smoke. | wasn't interested in that so used to hang out with the trainspotters. 47089 ‘Amazon’
came past — one puff and i was hooked. Nowadays, my personal interest lies in photographing locomotives and I do get a buzz out of
bunking into depots to photograph trains by any means necessary. To this end | am no less of a kleptomaniac than your average
trainspotter, who you'd be surprised to hear isn't adverse to a bit of aggravated trespass themselves. Trainspotting is non-hierarchical,
although with everything you do get idiots who try a bit of one-upmanship on their colleagues, like does it matter if someone has more
numbers, photos ormileage than anyone else?...er, yes. Best moments have been when I've exercised a fair degree of naughtiness to
see or photograph a train and it's paid off... walking down the track for two miles from Bishop Auckland to Etherty Tip, or from Bowes


a F PET = = PTT
T E NT HH REESE „awake datami =


ee RE ME Ee EE


Park station into the Fort Knox-like Bounds Green depot spring to mind. The worst moment has to be when | got nicked by the Transport
Police for a crap trespass at Port Talbot. (Disclaimer: Any kids thinking it is clever to trespass on railway property, don't do it as you'll
got anything better to do with their life)


end up as an obsessive sad individual who hasn't


EE © SVA


cva EE D E


HW - You played the last ever gig at 120 Rats Chaos Embassy. Have you had any experience of squatting
over the years? When places like the 121 Centre and Rats are evicted, not to mention thousands of people
evicted from their homes every year, don't you find it offensive that Dial House was saved from the same


fate simply by having the right names attached to it?


JESSI - The first squat gigs | went to were at the Demolition Ballroom in Bristol. | lived in a squat in Hackney a few years ago and
helped occupy Archway Tower for a day (this was supposed to be a joint action by a housing campaign and actual squatters to highlight
a government building that lies empty and costs the taxpayer £1 million a year... neediess to say the housing campaign backed out as it
was scared of losing its government funding) | find it offensive that anyone should lose their home, especially as in many cases the ex-
squatted houses / flats are boarded up and remain empty for months. Councils know that having squatters in their properties is better
than leaving them empty and susceptible to damp etc but cannot admit it. The fact that Die/ House was saved has to be seen as a


victory, it's a shame there aren't more.


- Let TUN
HW - Last words? TZE


ae aa
etzo


LA
EA


JESSI- Thanks Rachel and Chip, hope I've kept myself brief. Anyone wanting to converse more on the delights of punk rock, trains


and football etc please do get in touch...


Eastfield, PO Box 7804, Birmingham B13 8AS, UK


www.eastfieldrailpunk.co.uk


EASTFIELD ‘Keep It Spikey’ CD

K This is a re-issue of their first LP (pius EP and a couple of
unreleased tracks) but this is the first time I've heard it myself as |
used to think they were a shit pop-punk band. What you get is
melodic, singaiong punk with a fiair for original lyric writing.
Examples include coppers CS gassing themselves (ha ha), the
shitness of juggling, Patrick Swayze and Phil Collins and even a
song entitled Mask’ mocking the deformed kid in the Cher film of the
same name though I'm sure Jessi would argue it's irony! There's a
nod to Blyth Power in the song structures and the fixation with
trains (they appear in at least half of the songs). All in all happy,
bouncy stuff that'll leave you with a smile on your face — fucking
briliant. Get it from Ruptured Ambitions. (RACHEL)


Hailing from the bustling metropolis of Nuneaton this is a somewhat


KIEJ Unorthodox fanzine. There's the usual reviews and intervie
A (Mikabomb from Japan, Peawees from italy and Mighty Gordinis


from Belgium) interspersed with eccentric observati 'eryda
fi \ rvations

life, Fortean Times style weird happenings and lots of em ú
artwork including Paul's own. Paul has his own unique style of


KO writing which always provides a healthy amount of hum i
AK c our but is
E also complimented by wry stabs at TV propaganda, the fuckers who


decide what should or shouldn't be censored and other banes of our


N SO daily existence. Loads of reviews, which include some great,


scathing putdowns. Paul also does a distro so be sure to ask for a


KRY catalogue when you send your 50p and SAE
to: 4
GO Nuneaton, Warks CV11 5PT (RACHEL) A


e ETETE E N
a dE HAVE BEEN CHANGED # 1 (2) a
is out 'n' paste zine is new to me and | think it's >
although it doesn't say. There's interviews with dda erio
zn. like they're ‘several yards up their own arse), Egg Raid and
a Th Gits whose singer was murdered a few years ago. There's also
zine reviews plus a selection of articles which vary from excellent,
like the one about the effects of sound and its use in hi-tech war, to
unintelligible tripe like the one entitled ‘Picking The Beach’. The
=> by Mark Barnsley about the travesty of the appeals system is
= br aread too. There's a lot of variety in here (and no poetry)
SAE job, Wet to dayne Kay oe Ryland 18 Cho he dan
. o
Cum-Guy asi Cambe, CBS 9AF, Eda Ob


„ab


NUTE REVIEWS.


ARGY BARGY ‘Songs From The Streets’ CD a
is was bought on the strength of their split EP with Beerzone,
track (Broken Glass’) from which is on here and is the en:
miles. This lot contain two thirds of Nice & Easy but rather than


ký breaking the streetpunk mould, they play it by the rulebook —


swallow tattoos on the cover and songs about footie hooligans
kicking in child molesters. Musically its tuneful and brilliantly pial


| Oi! with some great guitar and the singer has one of those gruff


cockney voices that go realty well with this sort of stuff, but
hold a tune and there’s a lot of melodic backing galea]
The song ‘Empty Days’ ls a cover but it's still bugging me who did
the original, and the chorus to ‘Immaterial Gir!’ is ripping it out of the
Madonna atrocity. Incidentally putting an acoustic version of the
latter on asa ‘hidden track’ is a fucking tacky idea. The album
finishes with ‘Stand Strong’ complete with a great long terrace-
chant outro. Don't hold your breath for any thematic originality here
but tnia ie si defnitoly worth tracking down for the music which is |
x nt. Its on Captain Oil, so dbe getting
from Savage Amusement. (CHIP) EO derak u


Bram CREED # 3 < M o

en | first saw this zine | thought it would be going i
anarcho-political lines, but kide a edizio
and reviews direction. Included are Four Letter Word (interesting
as always), New Model Army (who have fuck all to say), Love
Junk, Blackfish Records, Sad Society, artist Jess Spice, Red
Letter Day and Out Cold, plus reviews and a few articles including
a spot-on appraisal of the internet in punk. There's a fair bit to read
a delightfully gory front cover and apart from two pages of diabolical
poetry it's well worth a look. 80p inc postage from 17a Chamiey


Avenue, St Thomas, Exeter, EX4 1RD, England. (CHIP)


RESTARTS ‘Slumworid’ CD

These are a band that have never impressed me with their studio
output and then, lo and behold, along comes this CD (their first full
length album) and, bugger me, its great. Fifteen tracks of original
punk in the pfoper sense of the word, sound politics and enough
variation to ensure that it never gets boring. There's great screamy
style dual vocais, a good use of samples and the production on it
really shines. In places a couple of tracks employ a ska feel to them
but this is always well executed and doesn't come across as the
‘token ska song’. The album cover is exceltent the Abba cover at
the end le shit, Here we have a band to watch out for I reckon. Get it
from Active for about £4. (RACHEL) x


THEY'RE NOT SOCIALISTS, THEY DON'T WORK
AND THEY CAN'T FUCKIN' PARTY!


Walk down any high street on a Saturday and you can guarantee
that you'll find a bunch of shabbily dressed students gathered round
a pasting table hassting innocent passers-by to sign some petition.
While it might be tempting to ignore these creatures their habits
merit study in much the same way as a zoologist is compelled to
study the peculiarities of bizarre species. Or to put it another way,
who are they, what do they do and why are they so fucking
irritating? Headwound investigates...

A couple of years ago in Leeds the SWP organised a march in
protest at the sentence of Mumia Abu Jamal (the framed black
American prisoner on Death Row). From the outset it was an
embarrassing shambles. Firstiy, for a march relating to a black rights
prisoner, it says a lot about the SWP's recruiting ground that every
single person there was white. Then of course, due to the nature of
the protest, half a dozen NF boneheads turned up, bravely waving
their Union Jacks from the safety of a bus shelter 100 yards away.
After everyone was suitably bored by the lefty speeches the march
commenced and what an epic it was! The Trots, a handful of
independent anti-fascists and the “Aryan master race” set off up the
road and, Mumia forgotten, the insults flew. The Trot camp reverted
to their standard-issue ‘Nazi scum off our streets’ routine to which
the NF responded (while seig heiling and wearing SS Death's Head
regalia) with the blatant fle, “we're not nazis, we're British” and went
on to try arse-licking to the pigs by chanting “hang all cop-killers”.
Confronted by the ‘menace’ of six fash, the hundred or so SWP then
did a quick deal with the pigs, who agreed to nick the fash if the
march was cut short, End result — the march went all of two hundred
yards and the SWP revealed themselves to be utterly gutless in the
face of a handful of nazis, happy to go begging to the police to fight
their battles for them. Adding insult to injury, a couple of nights later,
Black Panther activist, Lorenzo Kom'Boa Irvin, was doing a talk in
Chapeltown when one SWP member had the audacity, after
Lorenzo had been explaining how communities should “police
themselves", to stand up and claim that the SWP had chased nazis
off the streets! The tying hypocrite got the short shrift he deserved
and SWP paper-sellers were harangued outside.

The SWP's attitude towards nazis is particularly interesting — they
see the working class tradition of anti-fascism as such a prosperous
recruiting ground that they created the Anti Nazi League (otherwise
known as ANaLs) to divert genuine, effective anti-fascism into
pointless banner-waving charades. it's only fair to say that some
ANaLs, contrary to party rules, have been known to have a pop at
the fash, and no doubt got promptly expelled. However, that cannot
be said of a recent ANaL encounter (Ooh matron!) with local BNP
candidate, scrawny student, Mark Collet where they let him over
turn their stall and made no attempt to retaliate. Another example of
such gutless behaviour was in view at an SWP anti-war demo when
3 nazis intimidated the 20 or so Trots, giving one of them a smack
with the Trots making no attempt to defend themselves. Turning the
other cheek is a fucking stupid idea and obviously gets you
nowhere. Yet most disgraceful of all was an incident in Pudsey last
year where a National Front paper sale was taking place. While
independent antifascists turned up and gave the fash a pasting the
Trots whinged about this “ruining the atmosphere”. And how exactly
do you "ruin the atmosphere” in a street full of nazis? The SWP's
idea of anti-fascism (big demos with stupid, yellow lollipops and
plastering the town with posters) probably does more to publicise
the fash and certainly offers no sensibie solution. kt wouldn't be too
cynical to suggest that this is a deliberate policy to boost the SWP's
membership figures and party income.

it's not just anti-fascist issues that the Trots make their presence felt
in. Wherever there’s a demo the Trots can be found taking the
liberal, reformist angle, selling their papers and giving out thousands
of placards with their name on it. The technical term for this
behaviour is ‘hijacking’. On any march they're involved in they'll be
there at the front, megaphones in hand whether it's appropriate to
the situation or not. If there's any press cameras there guess who's
in front of ‘em? Its hard to make politics accessible and fun at the
best of times but the Trots manage to remove any trace of
enjoyment whatsoever. Take, for example, the Gay Pride March in
Leicester last year. Normally Pride marches are a real laugh and
everyone puts in loads of effort but the SWP weren't going to allow
any of those kind of shenanigans and made it about as interesting
as a Bible reading session. Instead of the big party at the end of it
people were ‘treated’ to a succession of Trotskyite speeches. Yawn,


yawn, yawn. This culminated with a demand for a round of applause
for the police — they're not called the Socialist Wankers Party for
nothing!

The ed life of an SWP member is very different from that of any
normal person as it centres around Meetings. These are generally
widely advertised in the hope of attracting new recruits but anyone
who walked in off the streets would walk straight out again.
Meetings follow an established formula where a number of guest
speakers drone on for hours, spouting the approved party line about
the latest right-on issue. Then the lower ranks get to have their say.
Fearful of straying from the party line they take it in turns to stand up
and bore each other senseless with speeches they've rehearsed in
front of the mirror. They're all eager to get noticed and climb the
party ladder by advertising their ability to memorise the complete
works of SWP Commissar Paul Foot. You can just imagine what a
laugh it is down the pub with them after the Meetings! “Another
shandy there, Comrade Tarquin?”

So we've established that the SWP are wankers but what do they
actually stand for? The simple answer is: your guess is as good as
mine. My guess is: fuck all. They're very good at making a song and
dance about what they're against but try and pin them down on any
specific strategy or policy and they'll come back with a smug hollow
soundbite along the lines of * an alternative based on producing for
need, not greed”. Well cheers, that’s really illuminating. Ask them
any awkward questions and they'll pass you on to the Branch
Leader who will attempt to confuse with bullshit about Marx’s theory
of dialectical materialism. At this point it might be tempting to punch
them in the face but it’s far more effective to remind them which
Socialist newspaper spent the run-up to the 1997 General Election
telling us to vote for Tony Blair then promptly did a U-turn upon him
being elected. Which sort of says it all — policies are altered on a
weekly basis to maximise recruitment and they do a good line in
conveniently forgetting their past statements. If they try to do the
friendly ‘anarchists and socialists can work together’ routine tell the
fuckers to buy a history book and look up Kronstadt - it won't
fucking happen again.

So haw much does it cost to participate in this dynamic and exciting
club then? Well, like any other CULT It'll cost you an arm, a leg and
practically all your vital organs. if you're on minimum wage it cost
you the bargain price of £375 a year in local and national subs. If
you're on a decent wage of 15 grand a year forget your foreign
holiday or new motor cos the Trots will be wanting £2,100 each
year. And what does it get spent on? You've guessed it that
imaginatively titled shitrag The Socialist Worker — a paper not even
worth using to line your cat's litter tray. What a fucking tip-off at 50p
(far better spent on Headwound) and just to show how money-
orientated they are sales figures of the paper is one of the criteria
for promotion in the party. Mustn't forget all of those placards and
stickers, and Trotsky only knows what the higher echelons of the
party make out of it.

This article has proved conclusively that the SWP are a load of
fuckwits but if you're still in any doubt then their aggravating chants
should soon dispel these. At any point on an SWP demo when the
zeal of junior members appears to be flagging a senior Trot will
unleash his megaphone and use it to initiate a series of sheep-like,
chanted clichés. The 2 most common are “Nazi scum off our streets”
(most often directed at non-Trot anti-fascists or failing that any bloke
with short hair and/or a football shirt) or the multi-purpose “Tony
Blair hear us say...". This can be appropriated to any liberal
demand e.g : “...please make capitalism go away” and is rendered
ludicrous as Tony Blair plainly can't hear you and wouldn't care less
even if he could. Then there's always the classic formula of “What
do we want? Liberal reform! When do we want it? In due course!” |
recommend, considering the nature of the SWP, Orwell's “Four legs
good, two legs bad” might be more fitting. (RACHEL)


DISCLAIMER: the author of this piece is NOT, and never
has been, a member of the SWP but has crossed paths with
them on far too many occasions.


For further information about the SWP and their dubious activities
read ‘Carry On Recruiting’ by Trotwatch. (pub AK Press) available
from Active Distribution.


JA


rt E
d


aea


e


something.


We first encountered Rich’
puts on in The Market Ta


resulting from their song ‘Stutz’ being played at one of our


a couple of years to settle, make friends and learn


RICH. — Yeah, Bristol is full of crusties innit? So is Nottingham, don
ndy Cactus make sure of that. Birmingham is a mix really, | can't think of any two bands that sound the same My favourite bands in
Birmingham would be Cupid Stunt / Cracked Actors / Eastfield and Sensa Yuma who have now sadly split up. There’s also a new
who | wanna plug, they are more skater punk but are real good at it. Venues, well
only regular punk venues that | use. Zines are non-existent, we are supposed to
Stereotype Brummie punx ha ha bunch of moaners ha ha. d
eare n er pred, +


band called Jif Not Cif (possible spelling error alert!!!)
The Market Tavern and The Railway are really the two
be starting a collective zine but | think people lost interest before it started.


UNDERTAKING TO DOING NORMA


bands are constantly e-mailing me. I’m so
longer put on regular gigs, just occasional all-dayers, okay.


HW. How DID YOU GET INVOLVED IN PUTTING ON GIGS? WHAT HA
IN GIG ORGANISING SO FAR? DO YOU THINK YOUR GIGS HA VE HAD
SCENE? WHAT TIPS WOULD YOU
RICH - DSS when we started couldn
new band, we were unknown even in o
was losing £150 at the Xmas Black Co,
thankless task, most bands have at le:


Za |


soon, maybe a split 7” — not sure yet. The best a:


do a label, put out records by bands | like, So far |"
Generals split 7”, Punk Shit Vol 1 CD, Runnin’ Riot / Tower Blocks split7” N


s 8 band Dogshit Sandwich when we put them on at Leeds Punks Picnic 2000, and his zine Punk Shit was
doing the rounds about that time. We've put them on a couple of times since and been down to Birmingham for some of the gigs Rich
vern which have been pretty bloody good. So since he'
the punk scene he duly became another interview victim. it's worth pointing out that Rich and Rachel had a bit of a disagreement

N J Rape Crisis benefit gigs and Rich’s accusations that Leeds is some ultra-PC
fourth reich or something. No hard feelings though and that was one of the reasons we decided to interview him. Anyway nuff bullshit
from me, onwards with the interrogation...


HW- INTRODUCE YOURSELF. WHAT WOULD YOU BE DOING TODAY IF YOU WEREN'T ANSWERING THESE
QUESTIONS?
RICH - Hi Rachel. If | wasn't answering these questions I'd be composing a highly sexist song just for you.
Di AL I X)

HW - DRAW US A SELF-PORTRAIT (AND NO BOTTLING OUT OF IT, WE DON'T CARE HOW CRAP IT IS)


RICH - i'm shite at self-portraits coz I'm far too attractive for any old biro hand-drawing. | do a good Horny Seany (ex-DSS bassist)
(not included coz it ain't a self-portrait, but suffice to say it was a picture of a fat bloke entitled ‘The Fat Poisonous bastard’ — whoooh


h N >
— TRU] Zer, Le egi
of Longford in 1997 to Birmingham. I'd been tryin’ to get a band together in Ireland but ff


everyone | knew who was into music wanted to be the next Nirvana, so there was little chance of anything happening there. It took me
guitar before | started Dogshit Sandwich. It all started there in March 1999.


HW- How DID you GET INVOLVED IN PUNK? WHAT KEEPS YOU INVOLVED?
RICH - | moved from the punkless Irish county


't know a lot about Manchester. Leeds is PC as they come, you and


HW- I KNOW YOU ORGANISE THE BRUM PUNX PICNIC. DO YOU FIND THATA SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT
L GIGS? DO YOU THINK PICNICS ARE AN IMPORTANT PART OF THE PUNK SCENE?
RICH - ı love picnics, very important to the punk scene in my view. | think they bring people together from all over which is great. |

much prefer doing all-dayers to regular gigs, bigger better crowds and more


1 fun in general. More work but I guess into li
you get out eh? I just wanna mention while we're on the subject, somebody : ae yp eher


s one of those people who does a lot of different stuff in


VE BEEN YOUR BEST AND WORST. EXPERIENCES Ẹ
A POSITIVE IMPACT ON YOUR LOCAL PUNK ;
OFFER TO ANYONE THINKING OF PUTTING ON THEIR FIRST GIG?


't get gigs, so we thought fuck ‘em all and started to put on our own shows. It's my advice to any FE 7
ur area, we put three gigs on in three weeks and were then part of a scene. Worst experience

untry Piss-Up in 2000, best was Brum Punx Picnic 2001, a huge success. Being a promoter is a
‘ast one moaning wanker in their ranks, but don't let that Put you off, after all you are doing


put my details on the Book Your Own Fucking Life site and


Try | don't have time to answer all the mails. If you're in a band who's mailed me then I no 4
4)


ze
STE ><


'spects art


ve done three things — Dogshit Sandwich / Hippy War
„Next release should be a four band, four label split CD. | JA


€ the finished product, the worst is all the shite


p


N


D


SA
4


CY


SĄ


)


X


-J


k


4


Pa
$0-00


RZ)


ZRK
(AJ


5 Og]


4


m ij m -ET


b RICH - | knew that to move my releases properly, | needed to start a distro. Even before | started the label, I had been trading the


9


dealing with pressing plants and nightmare couriers. Distribution for me is simply trade, | don't bother with distribution companies and ail
that. I just trade with other labels, bands and distros. | realty like it that way as | can get great stuff in return.


HW — How HAS Your ‘PUNK SHIT VOL. 1' COMPILATION BEEN SELLING? DID THE AMOUNT OF BANDS ON IT
MAKE IT A HEADACHE TO COMPILE? WITH BOZ'S ARTWORK, DID YOU GIVE HIM A SPECIFIC DESIGN, OR DID HE HAVE JĄ
FREE REIGN? HAVE YOU HAD ANY POSITIVE FEEDBACK FROM ANY OF THE BANDS INVOLVED, AND DO YOU THINK
ITS HELPED TO GET SOME LESS WELL KNOWN BANDS MORE WIDEL Y RECOGNISED?

RICH - ‘Punk Shit Vol 1’, | made 2000. | have 650 left, most have been traded. | really wanna see the back of them now, | wish |
hadn't done 2000 but | guess 1000 went ina couple of months. 1500 would have been a more realistic figure to shift. It took me a year
to compile and get the cash together. It was fun. | mailed Boz and asked him to do the booklet, he said okay and asked what | wanted. |
didn't know so | said whatever you like, I'm sure it'll be good, and it was. | have to Say some of the bands have been really grateful for
the exposure, others didn't seem too bothered. The plan was to help less known bands get recognised, | hope it helped in some way.


E TE E AEE eee
HW- IS YOUR ZINE PUNK SHIT ON HOLD OR HAVE YOU GIVEN IT UP FOR GOOD NOW? WHAT MADE YOU START
DOING A ZINE AND WHAT RECEPTION DID YOUR ZINE RECEIVE?
RICH - Punk Shit is dead and buried. | had loads of time to do it before, now | don't, simple as that. The Discordian people have
talked about doing a zine but it ain't happening. | was gonna be part of that and I still hope to be. My Zine received very little interest that
| know of, | used to do 500 copies and just give ‘em out. People don't support zines, nothing angers me more than seeing zines flung on
the floor. People don't reatise how much time, effort and money goes into making a zine.
V. KC Zn
HW- DO YOU THINK ZINES ARE STILL AN IMPORTANT PART OF COMMUNICATION IN THE DIY PUNK SCENE? DO you
THINK THE ARRIVAL OF LARGE PRINT-RUN FREE ZINES LIKE FRACTURE AND REASON TO BELIEVE HAS MADE IT ooo
kod


HARDER TO SELL SMALLER ZINES? AS YOUR ZINE WAS FREE, DO YOU THINK YOU REACHED A DIFFERENT AUDIENCE
(.E. PEOPLE WHO WOULDN'T NORMALLY PA Y, OR ARE UNFAMILIAR WITH THE TRADITION OF PAYING FOR ZINES)?
DID YOU FUND IT FROM YOUR OWN POCKET OR DID YOU GET MUCH FROM ADVERTISING?

RICH - Zines are essential for DIY punk, how else would the majority of us got into the bands we like? Without any help from the big
magazines all we have is zines. i'm not a massive fan of the large zines you mentioned, they are okay but less personal than the
average zine done by one or two people. | haven't got the foggiest who read my zine. Yes, | funded it the majority of it from my pocket.


HW - DID YOU INTEND TO START A DISTRO OR DID IT JUST EVOLVE AS A SIDE-EFFECT OF THE LABEL? DO YOU
THINK IT'S POSSIBLE TO DO A LABEL. WITHOUT ALSO ACQUIRING A DISTRO? ARE YOU VERY FUSSY ABOUT WHAT
OTHER STUFF YOU'LL TRADE FOR YOUR RELEASES OR WILL YOU TAKE ANYTHING IN ORDER TO GET WIDER
CIRCULATION FOR YOUR OWN STUFF? DO YOU SHIFT MOST STUFF AT GIGS OR THROUGH THE POST?


DSS ‘GGYFC’ 7" which was released by Weird Records. Yeah it's possible to avoid but then you are dealing with people like Universal
and that, big distribution companies, not really DIY. Like for example, | asked Dave at Suckapunch Records (Spunge’s label) to trade

and he said he doesn't trade but gets distribution labels to sell his records. | guess it's a good way to move them but it's very business-
orientated in my view. | enjoy trading with bands and labels all over the world. | trade most stuff, if it's something | can't sell then | can N
usually trade it with somebody who distros that type of stuff. | used to just sell at gigs and finally managed to sort mail order which is (7 4 7 A


proving real gaod. | sell stuff real cheap if people buy in bulk. eten = x > T z
me DÁ BER OT NS) WZA


IT TEN lace Boke eni E


HW- GIVE US A BRIEF INTRODUCTION TO YOUR BAND AND WHAT RELEASES YOU HAVE OUT SO FAR. HOW WOULD À
YOU DESCRIBE DSS TO THE AVERAGE PERSON ON THE STREET WHO'S NEVER HEARD A PUNK BAND BEFORE? a 3
WHAT'S ON THE CARDS FOR THE FUTURE?

RICH - DSS are currently Sam (guitar and vox), PK (vox and bass), Rich (vox and guitar) and Wig (drums and vox). Releases are
Worm Burp demo, Open Prison demo, GGYFC 7" and split 7" with Hippy War Generals. Some of the above releases are available in
distros the band have no copies of any of them. DSS | guess are a band that doesn't really want to be labelled. We like many different
types of music which we try to put into what we do. We are mostly serious but being serious all the time is boring. We have a split 7
coming out on Weird Records with The Dangerfields from Belfast plus a split label split CD including DSS, Blisterhead, Bombscare


and Homebrew. a: AE: ETTE
i L m LEE TETY
HW - / KNOW SOME OF DSS'S SONGS HAVE BEEN CRITICISED ON THEIR LYRICAL CONTENT. WHAT ARE YOUR
THOUGHTS ON THE ISSUE OF ‘POLITICAL CORRECTNESS’ IN PUNK? IN TRYING TO DISCOURAGE PREJUDICE, CAN
THE PC THING BECOMING TOO STIFLING OR CENSORIAL? PERSONALLY DISAGREE WITH THE WHOLE
TERMINOLOGY OF PC VS NON-PC, AS I THINK IT DEPENDS ENTIRELY ON THE CONTEXT (I.E. SOMETHING WHICH IS
FUNNY IN ONE SCENARIO CAN BE OFFENSIVE IN ANOTHER) AND I THINK IT'S SIMPLY A CASE OF USING COMMON
SENSE AND NOT BEING AN ARSEHOLE ABOUT IT (FROM EITHER ‘SIDE’). YOUR OPINIONS?
RICH - The DSS songs you refer to were not written by me and the band has changed a lot since those songs were first included.
The personne! of the band at that time was very much different to now. PC people get on my tits. | think if somebody is an arsehole well |
We


leť em get on with being an arsehole as long as they don't affect you. | agree though on the “something being funny to one not being

funny to another" and I think that's where DSS got criticised. | feel that alienating anybody for whatever reason is wrong and I know you |

have said.to me before about The Macc Lads etc. | fuckin’ loath them, they are typical meathead wankers but others find them funny 4 j

and | think if they do well let them get on with it, as long as they aren't hurting people well let them be twats. It's like a lot of people | NN H d

know go around making racist remarks, half of them are just thick twats who think it's clever to talk that way dd A
M NĄ m A]

HW- WHAT DO YOU THINK OF THE STATE OF THE UK PUNK SCENE AT THE MINUTE AND WHAT CHANGES DO YOU koś

SEE ON THE HORIZON? WHAT EFFECT DO YOU THINK MTV PUNK WILL HAVE ON THE DIY SCENE, IF ANY? DO YOU ý

SEE A DANGER OF THE PUNK SCENE BECOMING SPLINTERED INTO ‘SUB-SCENES’ AS THE GAPS BETWEEN, FOR

EXAMPLE, PUNK, HC, EMO ETC WIDEN?


RICH - | think the UK punk scene is great. | think there are piles of great bands now. The MTV thing | doubt will affect what we do,
after all that's a commercial thing to make money. Like any other commercial music it does annoy me though when people think that the


fuck wearing designer gear and had the

people go to both punk and
k / HO / metal ete kids cause they cannot be
AE, ek oe


THE PUNK SCENE? WILL WEB-ZINES EVER
INK (EG. LABELS, DISTROS ETC)


only punk about is trendy skater music like a di
audacity to slag me off for


ickhead skater | met who claimed to be punk as
t-shirt, It's splintered alraady In big cities.
HC shows. In smaller places like Telford where DSS played last week you got a mix of pun


segi Gurru E S. ee TT


- U SEE THE INTERNET AS HAVING ANY MAJOR IMPACT ON
pta ‘BUSINESS’ SIDE OF PU!
"VE EVER SEEN?


ortant thing to hit us. It opens the w
de, book gigs and just about every
zines are brilliant for reading while takin,
facing a huge struggle. The AL4A


In Brum very few


S A v Z
Ni


PLACE THE REAL THING? DOES THE INTERNET MAKE THE 1
EASIER TO COORDINATE? WHAT'S THE BEST PORN SITE YOU


RICH - The internet as far as | am concerned is the most imp
wherever we want. Without it I'd be screwed totally. | use it to tra
will replace the real thing totally unless you have a laptop cause !
to shift records at all without the internet, any band that hasn't got it today is


orid to us and we can get our music
other thing | do. | doubt webzines

g a dump. As | said I'd struggle
site is great, especially


THAT
DISCS TIME ~ CHOOSE THREE ALBUMS, THREE BOOKS AND THREE RANDOM OBJECTS


HW - DESERT ISLAND
YOU VALUE MOST.

RICH - 3 albums — Runnin’ Riot ‘Reclaim the Streets’, 1
Bleeding Rectum. 3 books — Nosebleed fanzine, Cat On A String fanzine, Scanner


Stiff Little Fingers ‘inflammable Material’, Toxic Waste split CD with


fanzine. 3 random


objects — Milla Jovovich, Janet
ses | might add)


Jackson, Catherine Zeta Jones (all for sexual purpo:


HW - ANY FINAL COMMENTS, WORDS OF WISDOM OR SHAMELESS PLUGS FOR THINGS YOU WANT TO SELL?
RICH - Final comments eh? Live everyday as if it's your last and someday you'll be right. I would like to plug the Runnin’ Riot /
Tower Blocks split 7” which is available for £2.50 (p & p inc.) It’s two of Europe's finest Oi! bands on one record. Also Punk Shit Vol 1
CD is £5.50 (p 8 p inc.) It's got 40 tracks, cream of UK / Ireland scenes plus a few others from around the world. Finally keep an eye out
for the Dogshit Sandwich / Dangerfields split7” comin’ soon on Weird Records.

To contact me write to: Rich, 74 Bristnalihali Road, Oldbury, West Midiands, B68 9TJ
Or e-mail punkshitrecords@hotmail.com


Ml
W Also DSS website www.dogshitsandwich.cjb.net
Bl Thanx for the interview, c ya, Rich Lard
EN + eer E
DOGSHIT SANDWICH ‘3 Years Of Sh o
This discography CD takes in their 7"s, demo and comp tracks,
with a nice letter and a few quid and see what happens. There’


The Business and The Macc Lads
what DSS sound like. Nearest comp:


and while its not a proper release as such, you might want to contact Rich
. s thirty-odd of their own songs plus covers of Runnin’ Riot, The Pogues,
— take all these, stick 'em in a blender, speed it up a bit and add shouty vocałs and that's pretty much
arison | can come up with off the top of my head is Bloody Sods or some other Madskull Records

'Gary Glitter You Filthy Cunt' as well as works of tyricał non-
category. Contact Rich at the address above. (CHIP) =


< band, if that helps. Includes such classic titles as ‘Fat Poisonous Bastard’ and
KEN genius like ‘Siutz’, and overall falls into the ‘not bad at all’


ws
EN


SEE YOU IN HELL s/t EP
Czech hardcore of the aargh! variety. Lots of time changes and
makes use of that double pedal thingy on the bass drum (hey | don't
know the technical term I'm only a dumb bird!) which makes it seem
faster and gives it a rumbling effect. A lot of the time the vocals
(which seem to be pretty low in the mix) appear to be drastically out
of synch with the music but surprisingly this works well as a variation
on your average thrash racket and draws comparisons with fellow
Czech band Dread 101. The tyric sheet is certainly no barrel of
laughs with subjects being covered including the slaughter of
animals for consumption, state control, Big Brother and other evils
so don't be expecting any ‘comedy’ cover versions. In fact the one
cover they do is D.R.F's ‘Violent Pacification’, which continues ‘the
world is fucked-up' theme. Well worth a listen and yours for £1.50
from Ripping Thrash distro.


ESEL WAC


Hailing from the land of Volvos and Abba (and also some of the %
worst nolse-mongers imaginable) is this zine which has similarities
with In Darkness... Erik's personality shines throughout this and it's
obvious that he has as sense of humour especially when he’s taking
the piss out of older punks! He interviews three people who've been
involved with punk for years and it’s really interesting to read
people's different reasons for being active and the motivations for
sticking with it plus you get varying perspectives as they're all from
different countries. Other interviews include Denak, Turnult, Gride
and Rille though the last one is all in Swedish so | ain't got a clue
what they're saying. Lots of reviews covering an international array,
some classifieds and loads of contact addresses. Look forward to
seeing more of this zine in the near future. No price but send a
couple of US dollars to: Erik Ahiberg Viborgsslingan 25, 224 72


SENSA YUMA ‘Every Day’s Your Last Day’ EP
This lot are ex-members of GBH, POA and Police Bastard and the
influence of the latter is clear. The title track is the best, and most
original sounding starting with Crass-style military drumming and
slowing down for the chorus, while the second track, Waste Away’
is alright too, but lacks the twists of the first. Both are well-produced
and musically good, but a bit on the standard-issue side. The B-side
‘Funky Moped’ is by contrast awful. Sounds like someone’s been
listening to too much Toy Dolls, and call me a miserable cunt, but
this sort of ‘comedy track doesn't do it for me. Stil I'd be interested
to see what the forthcoming LP is like, coz if it’s all like the title track
here, | might be more impressed. Get ft from Ruptured Ambitions.


MORGENMUFFEL # 10
This is always a good read, and as you may know consists lar; of
cartoons, detailing the personal and political exploits of the writer”
Isy. This time we get tales of touring with Anal Beard, the aftermath
of September 1{th, more about the Anarchist Teapot caterers, a
guide to Isy's bedroom and where ta get good puddings in Brighton!
There's other odds 'n' sods like recommended reading, a "What is
fi Anarchy?" essay, loads of ‘things | hate’ and a hilarious -Spy
jj Socialist Factions’ checklist. Smart stuff, different to anything
9 doing edert at the minute and manages that rare feat of
‘personal’ writing that isn't self-indulgent wank. and an
from e, PO Box 74, Brighton, BN1 4ZQ sat


“POLICE OPPRESSION, THERE'S NO CONCESSION, WE'LL TEACH
THEM A STRE


K LESSON!”


ZZ fi
trum’ who are complete arseholes as well as plenty more who
SOD af C vs NON-PC dd are sound an uch. ań matter whether you're the most pious
vegan straightedger or the world’s greatest Macc Lads fan, p A
I'm getting really fucking fed up with this whole PC vs non-PC shite. | counts is if you are a decent person. Of course the definition ra a
in certain circles, its got to the point now where PC is being used as ig very flexible and you set your own boundaries. Personally there's
an insult not only to the sort of overbearing right-on fanatics you'd a lot of so-called PC behaviour that | think is as bad as its
A expect, but to anyone who expresses a thought out and considered counterpart. For example, I remember an incident when oł
opinion on anything ‘political’. And more to the point its being used sabbing a few years ago and a new lass was out for the first time,
as a feeble excuse by bands and zines for talking shit. Write a song committing the animal rights police offence of carrying turkey


: : d
that’s offensively sexist or homophobic and rather than trying to sandwiches. Where someone with a bit of sense might have talked A


justify what you say when you get pulled up on it, you just resortto to her about it (or just ignored it), the over-keen straightedge kids,
> ndo back the accusation of PC fanaticism. Take the example of fuelled no doubt by a Starburst-induced sugar high, grabbed her
Dogshit Sandwich who were asked not play their song ‘Siutz’ at sarnies and lobbed them out of the window, then gave her some
last year’s Leeds Punx Picnic because it was a Rape Crisis benefit condescending lecture. Not surprisingly we didn’t see much of her
and that was tactless to say the least. Not too unreasonable | think, again. That to me was an example of simultaneous ultra-PC and
but instead of trying to explain why they wrote it or whatever, out ultra-AH behaviour, and whatever the motive it had the drid
comes the "you're just PC fascists, fuck offi” line. Now I wouldn't as getting pissed up and singing “get your tits out for the lads” woul
really have thought much about the whole episode if they hadn't have done. h o
gone round trumpeting Leeds as some PC totalitarian regime, which So if someone does something non-PC maybe it'll be funny, may E
J i most certainly fucking well is not. And god forbid if you dare to talk it} make them an arsehole, it all depends. My new classification o
about anarchist ideas in a zine, or question the political leanings of a punk takes into account the context as well, as illustrated by the
band like Condemned 84, who slag off ‘reds’ but who's criticism of earlier Dogshit Sandwich example. That non-PC song was just a


is is conspicuously (and I'm increasingly coming to suspect), bit daft to be honest but in the above situation | thought it passed

eea dż Never E that they get bonehead scum at their well into AH territory. And I can think of plenty other situations where
gigs, question the status quo and you're just being a PC fanatic. Its something non-PC can be a good thing (i.e. a laugh) d in
all just shit. another context the same thing could be really offensive (thus z
On the other hand it pisses me off just as much when certain other making the protagonist a prime arsehole). So from now on I R no

' quarters of the punk scene start acting all condescending about going use the old, Inadequate (not to mention american Opra
bands or zines who aren't openly political. So fucking what if Winfrey bullshit) notions of PC-ness, I'm just going to call an
someone wants to write or sing about beer or football or shagging Or arsehole an arsehole.


tever, Say whatever the hell you want if you can back it up and So where does that leave me then? Am | in the PC or non-PC
ra Gen | mean | don't sit thinking about politics every minute camp? Well for one reason or another i'm pretty sure neither yi |
of the day. I've got my beliefs and I'm not backing down on them, them would have me and each would accuse me of being the E
a but there's a lot more to life than bringing forward the glorious day, (I think that's called fence-sitting, which in other scenarios | detest).
and for some uitra-politico to start accusing bands of being thick or Like any normal person | have tastes and beliefs which are |
non-PC or something because they commit the heinous sin of contradictory. | am non-sexist in my beliefs and actions but 2 pa
having a laugh or singing about beer is equally as bad as the anti- the Mace Lads funny. I'd sing along to England’ by The Ups
PC tossers | mentioned earlier. | don't think a band or writer should but} find patriotism pathetic. I really believe in the inherent
be obliged to prove some ethical point in public if they don't want te, decency of human nature and our capacity to live together


j j i ise large
as long as they themselves are sound that's what counts. Yeah peacefully and co-operatively, but sometimes i still despise
thats an just shit as well. portions of the human race and casually wish horrific misfortunes
| propose the idea of ditching this whole terminology of PC or non- upon them. And yes | do approve of pornography. Which I think to
PC and replacing it with something which reflects what people some degree is what everyone is like, contradictory, and there are


actually are. How about AH or non-AH? How supposedly ‘politically no absolutes whatever scale you apply to people. Just don't act like Być
correct’ you are means fuck all, what counts is whether or not you're an arsehole. (CHIP) E ege


an arsehole, and | know plenty of people at both sides of the ‘PC TE e a mie En
NY R (CI A © ZA
SUZ ee EE Mann SANYO GES OO fe


at our . Chip has already dealt with the matter of DSS and
T E B oLL ö GKS ? ? ? E geria a little bit of tact and common sense then they
ber EE ko should be prepared to accept criticism for their actions. Take the
As you all know Leeds is PC capital of Britain, home to a the uira example of Scum, a local “non-political” Oi band who played at one
fight-on types. The men spend all day lentil polishing while being of our anti-fascist benefit gigs in January. They were quite happy to
burdened wan the ato being born mito oe oppressive gender. play an anti-fascist benefit but went on to cover a Combat 84 song,
Meanwhile us “wimmin" pass the time plaiting our armpit halr and a band who although not exactiy Blood and Honour were seriously
breast-feeding our liberated beagles. Or that's what's certain ma dodgy. At the very least this was inappropriate and we ha dp eople
WORK NENNE earen EO why Is that? The demographic p T complaining about it. | am not accusing the band of being nazis, just
Leads punk scene is no different to that of any ‚her Jorge cRy. he tactiess and | make no apologies about confronting them about their
only significant differences are that we had 120 Rats, there's several „nice of songs afterwards. If that makes me PC then sobet.
overtly political zines hailing from Leeds and the scene is On the whole | find the whole concept of political correctness quite
proportionally larger than most places. The oriy E iu edos? ridiculous, there's a difference between having a set of RTZ
could be seen as making Leeds more PC is wed ere! = y and sticking to them and the type a puritanical, EIE teous i
rn that PC no longer refers to an attitudes that virtually forbid the mention of drinking ur agging
“Political Content”. So since when has being politically aware Deen A (ie anything thats fun) and insist on spelling the word Women
negative thing? Only if you're too det d eei 8 e wrong. At the end of the day such a set of regimented za is
a shit yourself and you feel guilty Seca wi o cuse alienating to the average person and just becomes a pathe k d
would seem to me that this whole anti-PC bac kf oon Z measuring stick for who's the most 'right-on'. As if it matters. EO
for tolerating thick bigots. In terms of punk being shocking, since nothing particularly admirable about sticking to this mythical PO ni
when has it been big and clever to be shocking — not since 1977. book but there's a lot admirable about having thought out principles
These days any fucker can be shocking but it takes real oj be of your own and standing by them. if bands and zines can't take a
intelligent and thought-provoking. I'm not about to tell people what challenge to their principles, or lack of, and can't respond with
they can and can't put in their zines but Gary Bushell and E intelligent discussion instead of the stock response of ‘you're a PC
BEATA fesait ener rwa amu je
s a een p i one should agree me a 4
MACAE REL es rratua rar W POKI bus ay should at last be able to back up what
The PC fascist accusation has une ugly they're saying without resorting to childish insults. Sermon finished,
head in connection with me apparently telling ba eycan jm just off to get my tits out for the lads. (RACHE L)


ET dz BAT NET i:


“SEE US COMING AND YOU KNOW IT'S FOR REAL, BOOTS SHINED UP WITH TOES OF STEEL” Ji


BOT V


a.


Chineapple Punx. Then last summer we put on Thingy, the band that resulted from the N J
amalgamation of the two and we acquired a copy of their The Greatest Ape’ CD which ”
proved to be bloody brilliant. Inconvenientiy they split up before we got a chance to put i
them, but here Is a retrospective interview with them anyway. | strongly recommend checking %4
out the CD, available from the address at the end, the music Is top notch and lyrically it deals N
with subjects like cider, pub rock, hard pensioners, tramp-spotfing and the papal enthusiasm N
EEE E Lo a Ga) cs SEE
HW - Introduce yourselves and tell us a bit about Ciderfex, you know the history of the band,
your other punk rock activities and so on. i a
MARTIN - \'m Martin, the one who's writing this on behalf of the others. The other two left are Simon vun ay
Pete Trousers. Simon No Beard who passed away three years ago was also there right at the beginning We er i
In 1996. Doug (of Chineapple Punx fame) also twanged a guitar at the start along with John Slightbeard. We al Ly
together through a drunken Christmas, having been long established friends. Most of us had been in bands excep’
me, the talentless singer. Mainly we led a fairly standard punk life back then involving squatting, sabbing, some
direct action and the usual cider induced trainspotting (Not more fucking trainspotters, please?!?! - Chip)
— ee ewe OKEJ LEE E :a
HW - How did you get involved In punk? What keeps you involved?


MARTIN - Music was the main reason that got us involved in punk. We all met up through the music and then
through that other areas of the scene developed. We've all moved along in life, houses, jobs and marriage but the
same values are still kept. As | say we've moved along but not moved on (not yet anyway).


HW - What have you released thus far? What reception have your releases had? =f


MARTIN - We originally had a split 7" with the Chineapple Punx and to be honest it was mainly due to their har
work that they sold quite a few. | think the ‘rawness’ of the sound went down quite well even if it was a bit lacking on
real quality. Next we did a DIY CD of 14 tracks. This had.a much fuller sound and people have really enjoyed it, if
only for the cover having a monkey on it. e


HW - Your recent CD was self-released - was this your intent or would you rather have done it through a
label? How easy have you found it to distribute? E EE
MARTIN - we fully intended to go DIY due to the volume we expected to sell and the cost that we would incur if we went thro

label. Mind you we never approached any labels so that's not really an excuse. Distribution would've been easier had we E rei
more. We did get a replacement bass player (PJ) but by the time we finally released the CD we had come to an end. We've still go!
some if anyone is interested (£5 inc p&p)


HW - Following on from the above, how important is the notion of DIY to you?
MARTIN - DIY is very important to me. Personally | don't like to have to rely on anyone else and secondly you have the freedom to
do what you want and when.


4 HW - Does your song 'P
MARTIN - simon Beard wrote this | think and really ft was a shot at all the old 70's bands that played week in week out at the pubs


where | go to gigs? What are your best and worst gig stories?


MARTIN - we no longer play, nor played much. Only about forty gigs | think. Probably the best was in Belgium which we eventually £3
got chased out of the venue because | pulled a moony at the headline band. Not very PC but it was fun, especially as we had to push z)
start our van! =


SĘ


(i HW - On a completely random note, is the big house in the photo in the CD that place near Wycombe with


aj the caves under ił where the Hellfire Club used to meet? Am | completely wrong and If not are you impressed A


3 with my knowledge of Buckinghamshire local history? TER
iu

Mea £

| HW - if you had to define your sound (without any cheesy self-deprecation), what would you say you sound

like? What bands have Influenced your music and your lyrics?


MARTIN - Pub Rock Oil Musically late 70's bands like Menace and The Clash along with 80's band Serious Drinking. | think only | z
personal experiences have influenced the lyrics. (Some strange personal experiencessyou've had then — Chip)


HW - Your lyrics aren't in any visible way ‘political’. How Integral to punk do you think politics is? Do you feel
4 that non-political punk bands tend fo be given less ‘scene credibility’?
MARTIN - Politics are important but more the way you live your life and adhere to certain principles | think. Take Wat Tyler - they


have huge ‘scene credibility’ but their lyrics are mainły just a great gag. But behind the music as people they are in the right frame of
mind,


ODP, " 3 ZE i \


k punk scene over the years? Is It getting better or worse? How do
you think bands like Blink 182 will affect the DIY scene? Would you rather see a large scene as a result of punk
being the latest MTV trend, or a smaller and more dedicated ‘underground’ scene
MARTIN - i'm not too keen on the american mass punk scene. We only see them once they are on MTV though. I'm sure they must
put in a lot of ground work to get there. But it does seem more of a mainstream business. The kids like it tough but they probably in the
main just see the music and the skateboards, although for many it will lead to other stuff. It will stay underground to survive but there will


be ups and downs and let's face it, when it started it was in your face.


VV ZAA


HW - Some of your songs suggest you are into football — Is this the case? And if so can you explain to me what


the appeal Is coz apart from internationals I Just can't gi


jet excited about it? And what do you think of the state


of the game today, now it has been increasingly pulled from its working class roots?


MAR TIN — C'mon the Gunners. It's a double year again, Like punk on MTV etc it's all about money. Its bubble will burst and it will
come tumbling down. But that's only the top flight. There are thousands of matches every week, pub teams, social clubs, kids. It may
not be working class anymore but it creates a passion throughout the people that play and watch.


; HW - The name and some of your songs suggest you're p
the benefit of readers who are unacquainted with world o


MARTIN - Favourite bands must be R


SCY CET Re KO


artial to cider. Tell us your favourite brands, And for
f white cider, please explain the 8.4% to 7.5% shift.


. er, Haywire, Deep Purple and The Who
Cripple Cox and some stuff | had in New Zealand. It was stil 8.4% over there! Its al do ame u a the question wrong. Merrydown,


do with duty laws | think. It got classed as a wine


if it was over 7.5% hence more excise. Mind you my mind is clouded these so it might be bollox.


WIA


HW - Moronic Smash hits type questions - tell us the following


jj a) Your preferred hangover cure
A b) The last fight you had
¢) The weirdest piace you've ever had a shag


MARTIN - a) More beer b) About 16 years ago c) Space shuttle to Mars


HW - Since we probed you, you can probe us. Anything you want fo ask us?
MARTIN - How far back in your mind did you dig out Ciderfex? We thought we were long forgotten — thanks.


HW - Any last words, gems of wisdom, good Jokes etc?


MARTIN - Does anyone want to buy an Escort RS2000?


Contact Ciderfex at — Martin, 81 Wi


© WORKING CLASS HEROES


PUTTING THE BOOT INTO THE WEALTHY!!!


; 4 So-called artist, Damien Hirst created a £5000 “exhibit” at the Eye


Storm gallery in London which consisted of a pile of full ashtrays,
beer bottles, coke cans, coffee cups and sweet wrappers — in other
words a pile of fucking rubbish on more levels than one. Cleaner,

4 Emmanuel Asare said, “As soon as | clapped eyes on it | sighed
because there was so much mess. | didn't think for a second that it

d was a work of art, it didn't look much like art to me so | cleared it all
in to bin bags and dumped it." Nioe one son! Considering Emmanuel
was on £5 an hour that pile of “art” was being sold for at least 6

A months worth of his wages. Surprisingly he didn't get sacked but
even more surprisingly the pretentious rich tossers at the gallery got
all the rubbish out of the bin and re-assembied it. There's plenty
More over-paid “artists” exhibiting their rubbish in galleries so lets
hope more cleaners develop Emmanuef's enthusiasm for getting rid
of shite. (RACHEL)


MORE SO-CALLED “NEWS”...


HW - What lies in the near future for Ciderfex?
MARTIN - Maybe a gig in 2004 in memory of Simon No Beard.


ndsor Drive, High Wycombe, Bucks, HP13 6BL, UK
Or e-mail - msblois@globalnet.co.uk


| WORKING CLASS TRAITORS |


SELLING THEIR SOUL TO THE RICH SCUMI!!


Ozzy Osbourne was a true rock god. Black Sabbath produced
undeniably the coolest music in the pre-punk world and they were a
bunch of normal working class fads. Lets face it, how many of you, |
given access to infinite quantities of booze, drugs and birds wouldn't

have done it like they did? Okay | might have stopped short at the

bat incident. Admittedly the last two Sabbath albums were a bit shit |
and his solo stuff hardly merits a listen, but that didn’t matter

because by that time punk had come along rendering it all

irrelevant. Anyway as I'm sure you've noticed, he's back in the

spotlight, baing a professional celebrity with that MTV series about

him. Amusing enough, especialły as they still act like a good white

trash estate famiły, but now he's got to that "famous for belng

famous" stage and you can't get him or his god-awful missus out of

the papers. And he tops it all by playing the fucking jubilee. If he'd

done something cool like had strippers on stage or simulated anal

sex with a horse you could forgive him. But oh no, he's truly past it

now and as well as betraying his working class roots he's now

acting like as much of a rock god as Mark Knopfler. (CHIP)


- Sweeney from Dead Pets is appearing on TV in Faking it’. He has to go and live with a gay conductor and has four weeks to smarten up,


"ZONE: acquire a Russian accent and write and conduct a piece of classical
- Nowt definite yet, but Active Slaughter might have Colin Jerwood


* New name for Egg Raid is Fuck Hate Propaganda — catchy eh?


music to the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra. No shit.
from Confilet producing their album.


- Coming soon from Ruptured Ambitions is the Sensa Yuma LP and allegedly (after a very long walt) the Two Tone covers LP and Crass


Records / Mortarhate covers LP.


wei.


side current faves The Devils, Boxed In or Scalplock but it seems
they've been tarnished with the untrendy ‘punk’ brush so none of the
Leeds HC kids bothered to come and see em. How pathetic. | could
moan on about this cliquey attitude for hours but | won't cos its
heither the time nor the place but be warned it will be rearing its
head in a rant near you! Sadly not many people were paying
attention (too busy posing in the other room) but Eggraid were
certainly the best I've ever seen them with Alex hogging the floor for

a few theatrics involving rolling around with the mic lead wrapped ‘
around his neck but | suppose it takes all sorts! According to lyric


the last minute. Fortunately Indicator and Bickle’s Cab stepped
bravely into the breach saving the Punktured crew from public
disgrace. Phew! In an amazing and unprecedented quirk of nature
all of the bands turned up on time and | was able to impress them
will my culinary skills (except in cases of national disaster | never
ever cook at home so gigs become time for experimentation and
bands become guinea pigs, ha ha!). As local lads, Indicator, were
setting up, a great piece of news reached our collective ears,
namely that the Queen Scum had finally kicked the bucket. Hurrah,
nothing like a good death to get us in the party,mocd! So first up


The Wurzels. Tonight's two-part set saw them covering old ground
with songs like Junction Signal’ and 'Alnwick & Tyne’ and a load of


Right, the procedure is as follows. We go to a gig, drink some beer


© | in quantities varying from a small amount to far too much, watch new stuff from their recent CD. Since Joseph Porter sacked the old Z were Indicator and for me at least here was a lesson to be learned || Sheets the songs are about GM, pollution and other nasties but
some bands, and maybe dance around like idiots. Then we get band a few years ago and now seems to get through ‘session’ “ — | about prejudice and stereotyping. We had only heard of Indicator's || tonight it all sounded like ‘Die die die’ which at least made it easier
home and the day after nurse whatever hangover we may have musicians on a weekly basis, there was a feeling of going through existence when we were handing out gig flyers and this young lad to sing along to. A great set, they will be sorely missed (by ear-plug
acquired, then write down as much as we can recall about the the motions with the old stuff, and the new stuff was all a bit Blyth- told us he was in a band. Fair enough we took his number but we manufacturers at least). Last up but certainly not least were the
previous night's frolics. No apologies for reviewing our own gigs by-numbers. They are still a good live band (if you like their studio mentally dismissed them completely on the basis that he was about || hardcore punx from Hastings, Left For Dead. Their CD is currently
because a) we're more likely to be sober enough to remember those stuff) but having seen them about four thousand times in the last sixteen and of course we smugly equated this with either NOFX my favourite of all time and they are always excellent live. Having
ones and b) no one else is going to do it If we don't, ee eight years, there was nowt new here and | get the distinct feeling baggy pants malarkey or nu-metal bollocks. This came to haunt us i herded all the vagrants from the other room to where the music was
me = en they're past their prime now. | vastly prefer Porter's solo acoustic when we were forced to find a band at short notice and Indicator (after reassuring the miserly cunts they weren't in any danger of
ANAL BEARD / COMBAT SHOCK / ASBEST stuff live these days and rather like | did with New Model Army a agreed to do it. So, expecting a bunch of nerdy kids playing at being || having to put a donation in the No Platform jar for whom the gig was
Tuesday 26th March at The Primrose, Leeds couple of years ago, after seeing Blyth tonight | sort of feel like , „| Bad Religion we were compelled to eat our words with the arrival of badi d E = pee show the errs hawit shouid
Zá ; b EE Gata “% f the calling It a day with their live stuff at least. Top entertainment was to dei young punks (14-16) who set about tearing up the gig room with le. By this time Mr ( s was practically paralytic from the
ZZ Putting a gig on in Leeds on a Tuesday night if you aren't part o be had though nutter-spofting in the audience. They have a loyal 4 their full-on hardcore punk. They all took turns to sing and the Buckfast (made a refreshing change for me to be able to laugh at
V right clique usually means a crap turnout and this gig was a bit like (ke. singie-mindediy obsessive) fan-base who all seem to make us enthusiasm they put into their set was infectious — no one who had his antics) and was heckling left right and centre while dancing like a
that — well tough shit to all the miserable cunts who couldn't drag two look like fresh-faced youngsters, and the best laughs were to be come to the gig had heard of them before but everyone was man possessed. Credit where its due though at least he was
themselves away from Eastenders coz it was a top night. First up had from them. Top marks goito the bloke who danced on his own commenting on how good they were. Musically they drew dancing and apart from a valiant spot of crutch-waving (read that
Brighton's Anal Beard, not ek much GE PER as pre plain ena de got his top off half way through, the lad with the comparisons with a whole gamut of punk - Minor Threat, The carefully!) from Steve Attitude Problem the majority seemed content
SA BEN bitatea Gi sní sodou be fool. We Ramones hairdo who air-drummed and flounced about and the lad SATU Casualties, Partisans, Black Flag...Indicator — a band to watch to stand about like they'd had ramrods shoved up their arses while


LFD delivered all their finest tunes — ‘Don’t Say Nothing’. ‘Guns For
Sale’ ‘Never Wanted’...interspersed with a few newies. Throughout
this a certain drunkard kept shouting for thern to change the end line
of Eugene Terrablanche’ to one about Nick Griffin but instead it
became “Cactus you cunt!” ha ha ha. Despite a below average turn
out this was one of the best gigs Punktured has ever put on (or at
least its one | can remember in its entirety!) and although the gig
had to finish early cos of Sweeny's Gabba Gabba night in town a
good night was had by all.


i L | ae A 7.


HARIKIRI KARAOKE / EASTFIELD / BUS STATION
LOONIES / MAFIA VS NINJA
Saturday 13th April 2002 at The Palm Tree, Nottingham
With nothing much happening in Leeds we decided to head off to
the land of Robin Hood and join his band of merry men. Rather than E
just tum up for the gig we thought we'd spend the day as tourists,
taking in the many splendoured sights that Notts has to offer or,
more likely, amble around until we found a suitable drinking
establishment. So, after a rather non-descript journey we set off to
find Anchor Surplus, home to all your army surplus requirements. I'd
never been there before and | certainly wasn’t expecting to be
greeted by a fleet of tanks and a war-head of some kind or other!
Practically every kind of military gear you could imagine plus riot \
gear as used by the pigs except it's right expensive so | doubt you'll
see many punx wearing it for demos! Didn't buy anything but at
least I'll know where to go next time | want to get an Exocet missile
launcher. Of course this was thirsty work so next stop was The
Angel pub for a pint of beer and some dinner (their meals are cheap
and veggie and are well worth enduring the nu-metal shite on the
Juke box for) before investigating the historical nature of Nottingham
in the form of yet another pub. The Trip to Jerusalem’ is the oldest
public house in England and is actually cut into the rocks
underneath the castle so it's like a big cave. Pretty cool and serves
a nice pint (which we only bought cos we thought it would be rude
not to help preserve such a building of historical significance with a
small donation!). Decided we would leave the castle and cave
museums until the next day, after all too much culture in one day
can only be harmful so we set off to visit our mate, Mal, who recently
moved from Leeds to Forest Fields. Except like total buffoons we
managed to get lost in the middle of a cemetery. We were
pretending to be Goths (not really) and admiring a mass grave
thingy where loads of plague victims had been buried when we
realised that we didn't know how to get out. Chip suggested we
jump over a wall but with a 25 foot drop | was way too wimpy so we
had to walk for miles accompanied by much moaning from myself.
Finally arrived at Mal's, which is the Sumac Centre, home to
Veggies catering and other sorted ventures. Here, we were treated
to a taste of the foulest nutmeg wine ever made - if all alcohol was
imbued with the same ‘flavour’, cyrrohsis of the liver would be
eradicated for all eternity. After a bit of a chat with Mal and his
housemates we thought we'd best put in an appearance at the gig


who grinned all night and for some inexplicable reason took his

shoes off. Takes all sorts eh? Like | said it was a good night but |
couldn't get excited and | think I'll stick to playing my old Blyth
albums at home from now on. (CHIP)


out for, remember you read it here first! Needing no introduction
whatsoever in Leeds, next up were our very own Fig 4.0. Currently
they seem to be the darlings of Fracture but you can rest assured
that they haven't let the lure of fame and fortune go to their heads
and are still willing to play any kind of gig (even metal ones!) or
venue they're offered. Nice to know when so many others from the
same ‘scene’ have developed cliquey-ness beyond belief refusing to
play mixed bills (“we're not playing with punk bands we're hardcore”.
Oh dear.) Or demanding £150 for benefit gigs E
Oh, aye the music — well for the uninitiated Fig 4.0 play

fast, shouty hardcore while proudly displaying their punk roots. Joe [ii
is a brilliant frontman and he just can't keep still which always
makes me wonder if someone's put itching powder in his pants!
Either way better than your average male vocalist who stands stock
still trying to lock cool (take note boys you don't and it just makes
you better targets to throw things at!) and tonight's performance
didn’t disappoint in the slightest. Check these out as soon as
possible, they certainly deserve the success that is no doubt round
the corner. Bickle’s Cab from Sheffield took the stage and | can't
really remember too much about them as this was the busiest part
of the night so | spent most of their set getting punters to part with
their hard earned cash. What | did see was pretty cool — political,
mid-paced 80's punk. | do remember having a stupid argument with
my mate Roger about whether the vocalist looked more like Sweeny
from Dead Pets or Dog On A Rope’s Nat. We never did decide but
since | was sober and Roger was pissed as a bastard | reckon | p
won. After getting 7 people and their assorted instruments onto a
cramped stage Mafia Vs Ninja set about showing us the hidden
talents of Thirsk. I'm not too sure how to describe the result but IU
hazard a guess at 'rap-punk'. Three singers set against a RATM
style racket and these certainly provided me with the most laughs of
the night. | couldn't really tell what they were singing about but being
from North Yorkshire it was probably summat to do with webbed feet |
and having 3 eyes and in any case it didn't matter cos the facial
expressions one of the vocalists was pulling were priceless! | was so
4 busy being doubled-up at this sight that | managed to knock
someone's beer out of their hand. Oops. Still that'll teach em to
imbibe Satan in liquid form (alcohol). The raffie took place between
jj sets amid (false) accusations that we always fix who wins.
Admittedly tonight wasn't the only time that Andy Cactus has won
the raffle but then he comes to all our gigs and always buys a ticket
80 work it out for yourselves. Anyway we carried out our tradition
whereby me and Claire get to have first swig of the Bucky (don't
know where this ‘tradition’ came from but | like it!) and then it was
fime for the music to re-commence. Now I've got to say | was
particularly keen on seeing Eggraid play tonight as they'd promised
it was their last gig. The liars - it was only second to last and | felt
cheated that | wasn't going to see their grand finale especially when
they didn't even play a single track from their ‘brilliant’ ‘Go Kiss The
Blind’ CD! Ho ho! Seriously though their set made me realise just
how much of the punk scene (for bands at least) is based on
knowing the ‘right’ people or playing at the ‘right’ gigs. Eggraid play
fast screaming hardcore / crust which wouldn't be out of place along


got some classic piss-funny tunes with accompanying antics,
inctuding ‘My Name’s Bungle’, their manic cover of Combat
Shock’s ‘Sicknote’ and my personal favourite ‘Sexually Weird’
dedicated to deviant Dr Who fans. The last song featured Primrose
soundman Mick on bass as their bassist had fucked off somewhere.
Geniuses. Next up were Wisbech exiles Combat Shock, with angry
80s style punk a bit like The Exploited with female vocals and a lot
more brains. Cue shit heckling from some random psychiatric case
shouting on about Wisbech and Sham 69, who was made to look a
fight twat by singer Mel. All the classics again going right back to
their early days of Love My Liver’. Last band up, and tonight's
unknown quantity, were German hardcore lads Asbest. Paul Anal
Beard, who was organising the tour, told me for some reason they
sounded like Sonic Youth so that's what | wrote on the posters.
Fortunately that was completely wrong and they were full-on in-yer-
face hardcore with a few instrumental breaks and a singer who gave
one of the most energetic and sincere performances I've seen from
a hardcore band in a long time. And they even started their set
identically dressed in matching brown tracksuits looking like a j
hardcore version of Kraftwerk. Being new to this band | had no idea
what to expect but they really impressed me, which for that sort of
music is unusual, and their CD (reviewed elsewhere) is well worth a
listen. The nobhead heckler from earlier was booted aut somewhere
around this stage, and we all did off home for some beers. Despite
the shit turnout this was a great night and putting on bands who are
musically excellent as well as 100% sound people is one of those
things that really keeps you going (it certainly kept me going the
next day when | had to be up at seven o'clock for work at any rate)


Thursday 11th April at The Grove, Leeds
Five quid for one band when they've only come from Harrogate is
bloody robbery, but then at twelve quid so are Blyth Power's CDs.
Mind you it was at The Grove which is a great pub and that alone
was reason to go, especially considering they usually play in shit-
holes like The New Roscoe. The Grove is a Die pub marooned in
the middle of loads of new office blocks but the area used to be all
back-to-backs which were demolished, leaving only their local as a
reminder. Since the sixties it's been a folky pub and these days its
full of CAMRA real-ale anoraks with beards and sandals and is one
of the few boozers in Leeds that hasn't been completely fucked
around with. Anyway onto the gig. Blyth Power for those who don't
know are one of those bands you either love or detest and we both
fall into the former category (we've even both interviewed them).
Their music is a very hard to describe folk / punk, the nearest
comparison to which is The Whisky Priests, but a less esoteric
parallel might be a sort of hybrid of The Mob, Martin Carthy and


SCATHA / LA FRACTION / DEZERTER
Friday 5th April at The 1 in 12 Club, Bradford
One good thing that came out of the Con-flict circus at The Astoria
was that it induced a couple of good European bands, seldom seen
in these parts, to arrive on these shores. We'd been looking forward
to this gig for a while but nearly didn't make it thanks a rail strike we
hadn't known about, so we had to get the bus and missed half of
Scatha. We got there to see their last half which was pretty much
their usual mid-paced hardcore with lyrics about dancing with the
pixies and singer Angus guming like an old bloke who's lost his
false teeth. Not bad but having seen them loads of times before it
didn't really sustain much interest. The bar floor of the club was shut
for refurbishment which meant no one could skulk upstairs and
ignore the bands, so the gig room was looking quite full tonight,
which was good considering how far two of tonight's bands had
travelled. After Scatha the next band were La Fraction from
France. They've played locally before at 120 Rats where they were
excellent, so we had high hopes for them tonight and we weren't
disappointed. For a full description of their music see the reviews
section, but live they were great, with the singer bouncing around
and looking like she was having fun (makes a change from the
sullen gits you get so used to seeing). The kids started dancing, I
had a couple of pints and the night was getting good. Last up were
Polish veterans Dezerter. | rate them as pretty average on record
and to be honest | couldn't really get into them live. Its fairly
standard melodic punk and the Polish vocals give them a unique
sound but they were just a bit on the bland side. Everyone else
seemed to having a great time and loads of people were dancing,
so maybe it was just me, but | did hear comments to the effect of
*|'ve waited ten years to see these and they're just boring”.
Apparently they did some Post Regiment (their other band) stuff as
well and like | say the kids liked it, but for me La Fraction stole the
show by miles. Overall one of the best gigs I've been to at the Club
for ages and Scottish Neil gave us a lift home so we didn't have the
usual sleeping on someone's floor versus sixteen quid taxi fare
conundrum that normally follows Bradford gigs. Top stuff. (CHIP)


INDICATOR / FIG 4.0 / BICKLE’S CAB / MAFIA VS
NINJA / EGG RAID / LEFT FOR DEAD

Saturday 30th March 2002 at The Primrose, Leeds

For a while it was touch and go as to whether or not this gig would
take place at all since we'd had problems with bands cancelling at


©


M


“YOU CAN FLY THE FLAG AT THE ALBERT HALL IF YOU’RE UPPER CLASS, BUT IF YOU FLY THE
FLAG AT FOOTBALL YOU'RE LOWER THAN A RATTLE-SNAKE'S ARSE”


| "ALBION ST, BRABRIRE


1274) 734160 BET = |


ALBION ST, BR)


erek iben An KKOCKOUT RECORDS


P A


NETTE zn.


JEDNESVAY i CZ TIK BESEDNE EMB


E ar EE ZN ERI CWE ZE TPR E wars 3 sort ) i
pts E E BSE ma uiBZE EF Be o AD d
AEE LIMP WRIST s /tLP NEA SEAT FEE. | BARSE 77 ‘Hardcore Pi i
, - i A 2 Ą lardcore Pissing Stories’ ta
w era ae alg ry r she baga = bls one s oe wee HAGL has ee onto the punk | E
bia oł ave to have been living in that cave in Afi istan ti
One the ZG of rn ie air. Frey Moor have avojded-hearing their name. But what are they aor Wek j
rave ver E Za Za edar b eei egi musically the ‘77 bit gives it away and the comparisons with The
5. gas Buzzcocks and Eater are as accurate as anything else | can com:
En tan Cne W ke up with. This tape-only release has vastly dE bizio than k
one ne Pg 5 ae te e GORA ia. No al their first CD, which is odd coz this was home-recorded on an 8-
4 s S-styl Sr 4 track. I'm not really the biggest fan of this sort of punk but it ain't bad
EA thank fuck) with shouted rather than screamed vocals, but its the £ | at all. Lyrically the much-touted non-PC pea a Bł at p d z
d ideas that make it. It comes with a good booklet explaining the herring. | was expecting Macc Lad: ;
songs and dwelling (with a sense of humour!) on subjects chiefly Y Alten type stuff, but its fairly tame rirako ge san
based around sexuality, and urging the hormonal sXe lads to ehr political diatribes here, its all innocent good fun — ‘Sisters Malin
out and admit it instead of just feeling each other up in the pit (and (| Pornos’ should give you an idea of where they're coming from The
d mind what colour bandanas you eari beai RZ teri 4 highlight by fer is / Hate America’ with a superb chorus Of “One-Nil
they'd spent a lot of time listening to Youth ay. 4 Vietnam!" | demand copies be despatched to the National Rifle


@ detest this, while anyone with an ounce of sense will appreciate Ea SRT 3 ©

ks A d ind the Texas Militia pronto. Nowt i
what they're saying. And me, well the music | can sort of take OF f || a listen an berak Gi dd ACO but worth
leave, but as a release | think its great. Obtain from Active a yw s .50 post paid to Savage


Distribution. (CHIP) p Amusement (CHIP) Sa ~
; <i Tr EE CIE


DIRECT ACTION ANIMAL RIGHTS comp CD
WORM / LOS DESTRUCTOS split CD L What you've got here is a benefit CD for HSA E SHAC (Hunt
WORM have always been the epitome of everything | hate about NA Saboteurs Association and Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty,
pop-punk — nauseatingly whiny wannabe American vocals and respectively) with tracks (all animal rights related) being donated by
irritating tunes so | was pleasantly surprised to find that their side Is || punx of all musical classification and from many parts of the world.
not only listenable but actually quite good. Musically it hag


A t | Unity in the punk scene — whatever next?! It's nice to see a benefit
comparisons with Travis Cut or The Vandals but sadly the vocals comp that isn't solely made up of all the usual suspects (Oi Polloi,
let it down big style. Oh dear too many aspirations towards being in fi Citizen Fish, etc) and what we get is a mix of the old and the new,
Green Day, Blink 182 or whatever the current ‘big name is, l'm


. the well-known and the lesser known and as they say variety is the
afraid — very strange accents for a Yorkshire band! Song titles spice of life. Well enough waffle and onto what's actually on here,
include ‘I've Got Green Hair’, ‘Summer’ and Perfect Girl’ which


\ which is 21 bands including: Conflict, Chester, Ruidoactivo
offers an indication of their light-hearted poppy approach to lyrics (Spain), Dog On A Rope, Crucified Venus (Aus), Kismet HC,
which is fair enough, no-one wants to hear about ‘smashing the Stress; Active Slaughter... There's something for everyone and at
system’ every minute of the day. Best song by far, however, is


r £5.50 towards two excellent causes you've no excuse for not
‘Stupid Song’ which is all about pop-punk bands writing about their || sending for this forthwith from the same address as the Active
girlfriends and having nowt to say; irony eh? Now then The Slaughter EP. (RACHEL)
Destructos kick in with an HC intro and I'm thinking: "great,


diversity on a split CD is what the kids need” but no, it’s not to be. In $ SOCIAL INSECURITY ‘Futureless World Demo’ tape
the very next breath we're back into pop-punk territory and after


A z x $ Ever noticed that crust reviews have their own language? Like the
hearing a whole LP's worth a second instalment seems a bittoo {f over-use of words such as ‘raging’ or if a band is good they ‘shred’
much to endure but, nevermind, these are the sort of sacrifices we $} or ‘maim’. Curious. Anyway this is straight-forward studs 'n’ spikes
reviewers have to make in order that you, the kids, can base your | crust from Scotland in the Doom tradition, bombs and grim reapers ague
purchases on what snippets of critical analysis we give you, ha ha!t


p i on the cover, songs called ‘Police Brutality’ and ‘Burn All Flags’ ete.
This js basically more of the same but with Scottish accents instead y d d


You kn NICE ‘N’ EASY ‘Sold Out’ CD
arse-kiss to anyone 80 if you i Sie who's vé Z aa E EGO ZO
Whingy emo tripe, wannabe rock-stars and fuck-awful grindcore Sen parrer, E dd , rriors a Bargy rgy wo
] shite might as well know in advance that we'll probably give you a Wel ee era sb, teo ee umea =
słating. After this issue we won't review anything unless it comes ere d 5 Ae a d s m den re Gesk
with a postal address, as this recent trend for onty giving computer- around ‘Setting Sons’ era than else, erezi pare
nerd e-mail addresses is ridiculous and alienating to a lot of people dekre diria ur ur ah a mai edik
including us. And unlike certain publications we don't expect free | t ars. Dece
en a god-given right so we are perfectly happy: with promo l ate sache idea a b. pradera as re a he A
demo versions. Owt we don't like will get used as raffle prizes for ootba figt ting Za Bloody re
our next gig, so rest assured we won't just waste it. And Caled Fee tie ries Greed ye = sped burin pai bo “
is only our opinion, even if we say its wank we'll describe what keo d e eskuerara
sounds like so the punters can make their own minds up. pe d Mert ba a roe gone a er
berun e EE bloody brilliant and got virtually non-stop play in our house for about
ROOTS & BOOTS Working Class Heroes. CD a week. Even Rachel liked it and she is normałły allergic to music
This is classic Oi! very much along Cocksparrer lines. The cover D, with a tune. Obtain this album by any means at your disposal. Or at
bears a peculiar resemblance toa Whiskey Priests record, with a the very least write to Savage any ment or DSS Records, PO Box
photo of some 1920s blokes in fiat caps drinking beer, and the 739, 4021 Linz Austria ( CHIP)
songs deal with such groundbreaking and innovative topics as
football, being a skinhead and how great it is to be working class.
Every cliché is on here, with song titles like ‘Having Our Laugh,
Having Our Say’ and "Joe Hawkins’, which isn't The Oppressed
song but rips it off to the extent that they may as well just have
covered that. So where do you reckon they d Tom ront S
ezers, maybe? Nah, they're from Malaysia.
ann wd like and act out every English


U o
=


e


ASBEST ‘...dann heirate ich eben ohne Eure Eriaubnis!”
cD
I'd never even heard of these until we got asked to organise a gig
for them along with Anal Beard and Combat Shock (see review
elsewhere) but now their CD is one of the current faves at our
house. Live they were truly awesome and in some ways ! don't think
I'd appreciate the music so much if | hadn't already seen the band
first. Well, for your money you get treated to melodic German
hardcore with plenty of stoppy-starty bits and time changes for
i ii ip’ variety. I've been informed that these are what are known as ‘emo-
EEG breake but fuck that, nothing associated with the dreaded 'e' word
DSS Records, PO Bo has a place in my collection so ‘stoppy-starty’ will suffice. | would
AG (CHF) also have used the word ‘experimental but this too is oft a
e description for tiresome arty wank (Psychic TV et al) so | won't,
Anyway, adjectives aside, the vocals range from nice ‘normal’
singing to shouty-screamy taking in talky bits along the way.
Couldn't tell you what the lyrics are about cos there's no English
translations — and why the fuck should there be, how often do
English bands sing / translate their stuff into others’ languages?
Practically never so | don't see why we should expect special
treatment. It always seems to make more sense to me for a band to
sing in their native tongue and not understanding the words often
makes you appreciate the music a hell of a lot more than you would
if you knew they were singing about football or their girlfriends! A bit
of an odd one this, on the whole, but just right for those days when
u fancy something a bit different! For info write to: Lars Bendfeldt,
Freyastr. 41, 42117 Wuppertal, Germany. (RACHEL)


UNDERGROUND - IT CAN HAPPEN HERE comp CD
A compilation of noisy stuff from various parts of the globe and yeah
this is good stuff. A lot of hardcore and its hordes of off-shoots tends
to leave me cold but | think where this works is that there’s obviously
a bit of thought gone into the compiling of this so there's a bit of
variety between the bands rather than an all out thrash attack. First
up are Eggraid (recently deceased but don't worry I've set up a
Take That style help line for any fans who have suicidal tendencies
ave) p „l caused by this sad demise!) with their own brand of screamy HC —
KNESET = N lots of stuff about pollution and GM. Existench didn't exactly rock
GENERATORS ‘Tyranny’ CD BL dete
GENERAT gul en of stu where you cant fad || "Yoransaram o at kast ne what T sounded ike Mele
single fault with it, but it still fails to grab you. The music and E, desein € here zj pra
production is brilliant, and its all singalong straight-up punk rock like dedi] En geie ek SHC x a d Ge wać: ba KRE
the UK Subs or something (but yanks) with lyrics that are fairly zeko rragoa baa i gate
standard issue. Logically | ought to like this but | can't really get Gz Uarets tring the CD) to a Snich and ts ol grand. | ws 3
M excited about it, although its one of them albums that you can anal Ge e that Finnish and Br ca A 5

d the house or whatever. Maybe it's just a bit too pi i ularly pleased to discover hat inni an azilian hardcore
cheerfully play roun though it doesn't 100% light my isn't all as raucous and speed orientated as I'd been lead to believe
safe and formulaic. Like | wi Rok: nd finitely worth a look if - | could've sworn | heard tunes in there! Top stuff and a great way
d fire, bs sth proper good punk rock a to hear bands you wouldn't otherwise know existed plus info on the


ATTILA THE STOCKBROKER'S BARNSTORMER 'Just


One life... CD
Except for a couple of tracks on comp tapes I've never really
encountered Attila before since | was always put-off by his
association with poetry. Well, more fool me cos this CD is brilliant.
Falls into the same category as Blyth Power and TV Smith, at least
musically, so those of you who run scared at the thought of
musicians who can actually play their instruments and sing about
‘non-punk’ stuff might as well folk off now, ho ho. (Christ what a crap
joke, eh?). Politics are high on the agenda, however and there's a
diatribe against Austrian fascist scum in ‘Haider’, praise for an
Albanian president and a slating of thick Sun-reader fools. This is
not po-faced sandal wearing folk, rest assured, there's plenty of
witty jibes delivered to those who deserve them and a truly
inspirational comparison of the lives of Marc Bolan and Pinochet
(i.e. one was a fascist dictator who has lived too long and the other
wasn't) in ‘Scumball Pinochet’ all done to a T-Rex tune. Cool. Only
track | wasn't too keen on was ‘Twenty Years’ — an autobiographical
ZEA epic that seems to go on forever but with al this new-fangled

FTA technology we've got these days it's easy to skip it and the rest of
the CD is well worth an airing. An essential purchase for those days
when ear-bleeding music seems like too much of an effort. £7 from
Bald Cactus distro. (RACHEL)


N B p = Musically It's a good recording, and wins points for not having fuck
of Yanky ones and there's nothing else that really distinguishes this | awful widły guitar solos in it, and while crust ain't exactly my thing A
from WORM so if you like them you'll like these. Not exactly my these are one of those occasional bands | thought weren't bad.
cuppa but neither is it the kind of thing that makes me want to buy a | However its yet another bloody release with no real address on it,
m ma tak saris teek bei p mamane al Leeds } so get your nerdy anorak out and then e-mail at this load of
centre. For more info le to: S.l. ecs ven’ got an berish - social.insecuri a erve.net CHIP
address for ‘em. Sorry. (RACHEL) d : == Tee" Satu in E i
Ea — — 95 ©
sf E i
A CURE FOR THE JADED comp tape GANA dg
de wate from Trev HAGL, different from his previous vein. Not really the kind of thing | tend to listen to these dase bie A
? guesa ie = ed EE rei bara sone en which | fans of Zero Tolerance or External Menace should appreciate it
r idea o ey're like, although it does i f €
EE Si coea mear lete Danda: Musicany K la bloody superb: proper There was the inclusion of some metally guitar solos which seemed


x A 5 a bit odd but as I'm led to believe that they hail from Castle
R dei ry ohhh rar eee — Donnington that would explain it! Straight-forward traditional punk
Boots Nice & Easy, Wasted Deadline Sera = oots a rock, no surprises but no nasty shocks either. No address on this
pure coincidence you can get al this stuff from the distro, Cart BY | CD-R but fm sure Ee gyaliabia mt Miei gigs ouch as

kit. Send two quid and an SAE to Savage Amusement (CHIP) (shameless promotion time) the Leeds Punx Picnic, 12-14th July.


(RACHEL) E


OI POLLOI ‘Six Of The Best’ CD
The name should give you a clue, its six EPs on a CD. Apart from
the first LP, the best of Ol Polloi’s output has been on their 7"s (and
the 2nd and 3rd LPs were crap) so this is well worth buying,
especially as some of them are a bit tricky to get these days. If
you've any knowledge of the band you'll probably know it all back to
front, and it goes right from their first Punks n' Skins’ EP through to
| the THC’ EP, missing out the recent ‘Let The Boots Do The Talking’
EP which is a shame, but to its credit the awful heavy metal
nonsense of the ‘Outrage’ EP is missed. Smart stuff. Buy this and
the recent CD re-issue of the ‘Unite And Win’ album and that's all
the Oi Polloi stuff you'll ever need. Write to Rugger Bugger, PO Box


DEAD PETS ‘Too Little Too Late’ CD
After continuous line-up changes Dead Pets have finally got their
Ń first release out on the streets. Worth the wait? Absolutely. This is
top-notch punk rock and fun all the way. These are like a Yorkshire
version of the Newtown Grunts and with ten band members within
their ranks they certainty manage to kick up a (tuneful) racket. All of
which is evident in the production — totally mint sound. The kind of
CD that's great to put on before a night of mayhem and it
successfully manages to combine a brass section with noisy guitars
yet steers well clear from the awful Americanized notion of ska-
punk. Best tracks on here are 2000 AD’ and ‘King Alfred The Great“
(he's on your giro!) but it's all good stuff. Not sure how much of your


youre into the whole US streetpunk / TKO thing. Get It from TKO shocking actions of the US Justice Dept masquerading behind the hard d cash they' be wanti: to part with but iti
Records boy i or get a cheap copy som Savage | "war against terrorism’. Send: a couple of quid to Ripping Thrash kę dj ee View, parre Leeds, LS6 38x, ec kongoni A 9 1 AD, England or try Bald Cactus. (CHIP)
Ą Amusement Ta | B Ze LA distro. (RACHEL) (RACHEL) -ya ram DRIN
d dd ED “YOU MAY LAUGH LIKE IT'S A JOKE BUT THEY CAN'T LAUGH WITHOUT A THROAT” Za “THEY TOLD US OF SOME SECOND COMING SO WE LOOKED TO THE SKIES, ITS NOT A SAVIOUR


tm tartej erem oraarord ; THAT WE WANT JUST SOMEONE ELSE TO CRUCIFY”


i : £2 members/ £2.50 non-members’ Ze p Pcp jazzy ws
DL Gast, Di Mazi PSE : -mem erz


2 ac k MIO


TT Le M EREEEEEERSOTT


ŘJ aunen


17: DECEMBER x


SE ZA BATE €
ky D dren =


VANILLA MUFFINS ‘Haill Haill Sugar Oil’ double CD T H E
Td only heard their brilliant ‘Sugar Oi! Come On’ EP, with Frankie

Flame on it (that’s on here and it's the best song by miles) but they F
seemed good enough to merit buying this big best-of package,
especially as | have no inclination whatsoever to track down their
considerable back catalogue. It is good as well, and what they call
"Sugar Oil’ is basically a poppy punk rock with a bit of a trashy rock
'n' roll feel in places. In fact the use of the word Oil is altogether
misleading coz its more pop-punk than owt else. Fuck knows what
they're singing about, coz the only songs | can make sense of are
the football ones, but it gets a general thumbs-up anyway. The big
criticism is that it gets repetitive after a while and there's no way I
could sit through two whole CDs at one go. In fact they shoułd have
ditched the 'bonus' live tracks (i.e. pointless space-filters) at the end,
chopped out some of the dross and done it as a single CD. Still
enough good songs to make it worth tracking down, and a decent
booklet. Get it from DSS Records, PO Box 739, 4021 Linz, Austria,
but I'd try the aforementioned EP from Savage Amusement before
you consider forking out. (CHIP)


ZEE"


ANAL BEARD / COMBAT SHOCK split CD
They both live in Brighton and they share one member, but apart
from that, these two coukin't be more different. This CD has two
new songs from each, plus a cover of each-others' song. I've
normally scorned this practice, it being the kind of thing that A
diabolical grindcore shite bands usually do, but fuck me, for once it
works. First we have Combat Shock — pissed-off 80s style shouty
punk. The first track, ‘Celebrity Hit-ist’ is great, the second not so
much. They go on to cover ‘My Name's Bungle’ in a suitably
raucous fashion. Then we have Anal Beard, who | currently (and
unexpectedly) rate as one of my favourite live bands. Their studio
stuff, however, veers wildly from brilliant to almost unlistenably
eccentric. Their two original tracks aren't the best they've done by
any means, but they really shine when they do Combat Shock’s
"Sick Note’, which they reduce to a series of manic babbling noises.
Fucking priceless. As a package, it ain't the greatest, but as an
1 introduction to the two it's well worth picking up. Obtain it via Beat


Bedsit. (CHIP
sit (CHIP) tto that! ,


ACTIVE SLAUGHTER ‘Smash HLS’ CD EP á
Hurrah! Brilliant 80's style anarcho-punk straight out of Cockney
land and not a single ex-Conflict member amongst ‘em. As you'd
expect the lyrics are angry, political and all relevant so if you like
songs about drinking and fighting give this a miss cos you wouldn't
understand. There's plenty of spleen vented here with farmers,
soldiers, vivisectionists and the MET police coming in for a well
deserved verbal kicking. My personal favourite is “Phase” with it's
attack on punx who place more emphasis on ‘looking the part’ than
having any real desire to do anything creative within the punk world
they claim to be a part of — "big A little a bouncing b, too many
arseholes in the punk rock scene”. Indeed. Sadly, | know just too
many people who this song could have been written for. Wankers.
Musically this takes it cue from the Anthrax / ExitStance strain
(with the addition of ska breaks on a couple of tracks) and could
certainly out-Conflict the latest incarnation of sald band any day of
the week. So then, blow those cobwebs away from your wallets and
get forking out £2.50 to: PO Box 35913, London N17 9YP


(RACHEL) —


NEWTOWN GRUNTS ‘Disgruntled’ cD
A Scottish band with hard-hitting lyrics and tunes you can dance to!
Following on from their ‘Day of the Jakey’ LP, this bounces along in
a variety of styles and certainty benefits from having three singers.
Old topics such as football, drinking and religion are viewed from

ives and given a new breath of life. Every track on
i and even the most cynical of anarcho hearts will


DECOY 47 ‘Anti-RUC EP’ CD
Describing themselves as ‘Belfast city ru
its not really. This five song EP starts with Non-Peaceful Protest’

>] which is the highlight and has some interesting, almost surf, guitar in
A it. The rest is more punk rock but with some weird lead bits in it and
songs like ‘Cider Punx' and ‘Sir Des’ (about Dessie Cush, a Belfast
skinhead who died). What lets this down is the rough quality which
sounds like a dodgy five recording although | don't think it is, and in
places | thought | could detect a hint of american accent coming
<4 through (capital crime!). It's pretty good and if they sort out the
production it could be really good, and white | wouldn't be rushing
out to get hold of this, I'd definitely keep your eyes peeled for future
releases. But oh dear they're yet another band who can't be arsed
if you want it you'll have to e-mail


you but fortunately
of these as you could possibly imagine. Despite its associations with
the Oi! genre (you always see them billed to play Oi! all-dayers for
example) this is good, tuneful poppy punk with femate vocals and |
like it. There's no works of łyrical genius on here but its all up-beat,
singalong stuff — great accompaniment to doing the housework (or
so Chip tells me, ha ha!) with ‘it Gir’, TN Dreams’ and By Numbers“
being particularly worth a listen. Sadly it peters out towards the end
when the vocals on ‘Hate Song’ become gruff in the extreme and,
just like The Business’ ‘Hate Kill Destroy’ track it seems like a
token hardcore song, making it both out of place and pointiess.
Aside from that this CD is worth investigating and can be yours for
BS) £7 from Savage Amusement distro. (RACHEL)


E


REJECTED ‘Heat Of The Night’ CD
Seven tracks of streetpunk here, and proof that Finland can produce
some music which doesn't sound like a pitbull gargling battery acid.
Musically this is really well produced and seems to be very much
along current US streetpunk or Burning Heart Records territory, in
other words nowt you haven't heard before but bloody well done.
The vocals let it down as they're a bit weak and almost slurred, so
you can't make out much of the lyrics, although with titles like ‘Drink
& Fight’ t doubt they're exactly cutting edge. Still the music carries it,
and it's cheap, so it's well worth a look. Plus it's good for winding up
the missus coz she hates it. Get it from Kidney Records, c/o V
Helisten, Niputtajankatu 12 b3, 57510 Savonlinna, Finland or from
Savage Amusement. (CHIP) nn

PENITRAITORS ‘PC Punk’ CD A A

Shit Southpark rip-off cover and song tities like ‘Tampon Up Your
Ass’, ‘Going To Work On Heroin’ and ‘My Mate Shagged A Fat Bird’
set alarm bells ringing and | thought straight off it was either going to H
be realty funny or shite. Just my luck, it turned to be the latter. The
first song sounds like Disorder, and the rest of it varies from chaos
punk to 77 style. Sounds like they've spent way too much time in the
| company of white cider and evo-stick. It's not the worst thing I've
ever heard, and the quality is okay for that sort of thing, but | can still
u safely predict that it'll never get another airing. And guess what,
there's no fucking address on it, so if you want it you'll have to e-
mail them at penitraitors@hotmail.com. (CHIP)
ee ee zez =
ITCH ‘Spiralling Paper Planes’ CDEP
“As soon as we pick up our instruments and begin to play,
ki everything becomes focused and dreamlike, it's like we are lost in
the movement of the songs”. These words of wisdom were selected
d having endured the CD
they only serve as ammunition against the band themselves:
“dreamlike” should be replaced with “nightmarish indie toss that
make all of those early-90's bands like The Cranes and The
Cowboy Junkies sound like
of the press blurb goes onto add that the band are so selfless that
they just want to share their music with the world. Yeah just what the
world needs — another third rate whining emo band that makes a
Phil Collins love songs LP seem threatening and radical. With
tracks called things like “All Our So Called Bad Luck Stories” you
can just tell what kind of self-obsessed, adolescent rubbish lies
within. Only recommended as an instrument of torture. Send £4ppd
to M.D. Milner, PO Box 17, Batley, WF17 8YR (RACHEL)


‘OHMS


=


they just seem to enjoy what they're doing and are able to inject a
healthy dose of humour in along
a song about people you hate cou
hear Scottish accents loud and clear in these times of bands
pretending they hail from New York in a bid to be the next Blink 182
or whatever. Plus they are able to carry off the much tried but rarely
successful trick of adding a cover-version. Angelic Upstarts’
‘Solidarity’ receives the NTG treatment, being updated for the
Liverpool Dockers. Top stuff, a real treat for your ears. From Bald


Cactus (RACHEL)


£2 members/ £2.50 non-members


JE


$ i do fe e mow ay eee


THE TONE 'Here's Another Reason...' LP E E, &
| missed the boat with this lot | think. Andy Cactus has been talking
them up for years, but their flavour-of-the-month status has always
put me off investigating them, which just makes me look a twat
really since it turns out that beyond the hype, they're actually very
good, Laid back poppy punk rock with music that reminds me a lot
of The Jam in places but with skanky bits thrown in. In fact give ‘em
Nice & Easy’s singer and you would have The Jam reincarnated.
The vocals are a kind of mellow cockney geezer sound, a bit like
Thatcher On Acid (one of their oki bands) according to Rachel and
the last song ‘Outside The Post Office’ is utter plagiarism of The

| Kinks. Tum It Up’ is the real winner here, but the whole album is 4
great pop music and | fucking love it, See Andy, I do listen to things W
d apart from Oi! songs about fighting. Anyway, top release and it's
made me want to swallow my preconceptions and check out more of
their stuff. Write to Rugger Bugger, PO Box 357, London, SE19 1
PA AD, England or Bald Cactus. (CHIP)


RU! plit EP
A The two songs from the Belfast Ol! lads don't seem to be up to the
i standard of their last CD even after a few listens, but an average
Runnin’ Riot song is still better than most bands could ever aspire
to. Great working class political lyrics which have improved loads
since their first LP and which prove that quality Oil needn't rely on
clichés. | was particularly impressed with ‘Divided Loyalties’ about
sell-out unions, and they remain arguably the best current Oi! band
doing the rounds. Never heard of Tower Blocks before, but their
first song ‘General Boredom’ is a grade-A classic already, and their
second ‘Drunk In Public’ (go on, have a guess what that's about) is
not bad too, despite the hackneyed lyrics. Basic but well-executed
tuneful German Oi! with English vocals, and well worth looking out
for. Records like this make you wonder why so many people bother b
A recording shitty horrible moaning crap and have the audacity to call
| it ‘punk’, when if they took a few hints from bands like these they
might actualty be good. Get this promptly from Punk Shit, 74
Bristnalihall Road, Oldbury, West Mids, B68 9TU, England, or from
Bald Cactus or any other distro with taste. (CHIP)


LA FRACTION s/t LP
Wow these are just so good live! Saw them the other night and they
were amazing. Anyway, how does this translate onto vinyl? Pretty
well, actually. The first thing that hits you is how loud this is,
certainly a quality pressing. The music is standard mid-paced
modern punk with drumming reminiscent of The Adverts during the
‘Gary Gilmore's Eyes’ era but it's the powerful female vocals that
make this. Proper singing with no screeching or growling bits but
with a tendency to warble like a French Siouxsie. That said | can't
think of any direct parallels to compare this with which can only be a fy
compliment. Make no mistake this is no dated '78 type thing, it's NM
totally unique and not like anything you'd se doing the rounds in the
British punk scene. It’s all done in French but for all you ignorant
mono-linguists there's English translations included. Highly
recommended so add this one to your shopping lists. £4.50 from
Active Distribution. (RACHEL)


JUGGLING JUGULARS ‘Propaganda Immunity’ CD
Finnish hardcore eh? Until discovering these, alongside Pax
Americana and Life's A Riot, | had always been of the belief that it
was all raging thrash of the variety that only Colin Hel! and
|| Damnation could possibly like. Just shows how wrong you can be.
i Juggling Jugulars (and the 2 other bands mentioned) are both
mid-paced and melodic yet angry and powerful. A good combination
if ever there was one. The duel male / female vocals give this a Dirt
in their ‘Just An Error phase sort of feel to it and there's a bit of
Kismet HC in there too but not for the vocals this time, rather the
m choppy guitars. Lyrics are intensely political covering a whole
4 spectrum of subject matter which is not only topical but also specific
thus avoiding the usual ‘war is bad’, ‘policemen aren't very nice’
stí Gate? CD =. with nice artwork and posh digi-pack cover
also lends an aesthetic touch to your collection! £4.
Cactus distro. (RACHEL) E AZE


4 DISAFFECT Discography CD
M Ever heard of Scatha or Sedition? What about Debris or
$ Quarantine? These along with Disaffect and probably countless
more, are all part of a large incestuous band family from the -
Highlands so if you've heard any of em before you should have a
rough idea of what to expect. With the early EPs being long deleted
this discography gives everyone the chance to hear the whole back
catalogue in one go. Gruff male / female vocals let leash on a range
of topics such as fascism, pollution, vivisection, child murderers,
drug abuse — not exactly cheery stuff but the lyrics are original and
don't resort to hackneyed sloganeering and you get to hear the
words too which is always a bonus! Abrasive guitars and tribal-style
drumming all help to hammer the messages home. A nice package
with 7” booklet and certainly has that all-important Headwound seal
of approval. For punx with tribal tattoos and ankle length dreads! £4
from Ripping Thrash. (RACHEL)


nr VS NINJA ‘Evil Demo’ & ‘Radiation Generation’


Thirsk eh? Don't be going there after nightfall, keep off th
can you squeal like a pig, boy? Obviousty bored a ring jes
wrestling videos, the Thirsk punx launch a new band from the ashes
of The Write Offs. Musically its punk / ska territory but what
distinguishes this lot is having three singers with a strong rap
influence. Not my favourite thing in the world normally, but this
makes them a bloody excellent live band, and hangs together
surprisingly well on the studio stuff. Evil Demo’ has four songs and
a lot of horror film samples, while the second CD has two studio and
one live track {not too well recorded) and they've toned down the
samples. Lyrically they seem preoccupied with things like ‘being evil’
and the like. its certainly original and | can't think of any close
comparisons, and | suspect this would be popular with the baggy -
pants kids. Like | said, to realty appreciate these you need to see
em live and although it's decent enough, the two CDs themselves
ek really float my boat, but I'd still recommend checking them out.
oh dear, unless you're a spotty nerd you'll have problems coz :
once again there's no real address on it, so you'll have to e-mail ‘em
at mafiavsninja@choked.net although I'm sure a nice letter to fellow
Thirsk dwellers Deathwish Distro might do the job. (CHIP)


VIRUS.CON 'England's Dreaming’ CDEP
Hot on the heels of their Moral Hypocrisy’ CD is this — 4 tracks
inspired by the Sex Pistols’ ‘God Save The Queen' to mark the
Queen's Golden Jubilee on June 3rd. Apparently it is intended as an
attack on New Labour (or, more accurately, their position as the
‘new Royal Family’) but this is not in the slightest bit evident from
what's on offer here. First up is the sample laden dance version -
pretty good if only to imagine a load of ravers dancing to a punk
classic. Next up is the dub version which starts off pleasant enough
and owes a great deal to Youth’s Killing Joke remixes, but swiftly
becomes tiresome and at 12 minutes long doesn't really ever inspire
much chance of ever reaching the stereo again. Like watching paint
dry while waiting to see your Claimant Adviser. An irritating car-
alarm version follows and doesn't make it past the first 30 seconds.
Complete bollocks. Lastly there's the aptly titled Eng/and's
Nightmare‘, which is largely unlistenable (which | suspect is the
point) — distorted samples set to discordant industrial-y Techno
(think Jim Foetus). | wanted to like this CD more than | did — a nice
idea that missed the mark big style. Virus. Con obviously have an
interesting approach to punk which | hope to see more of but this |
CD is heading for the raffie bin (you have been warned punters!).
Lovers of aural assault should send £2.99 to Black Red Records PO
Box 53, Norwich, Norfolk, NR2 4WA. (RACHEL)


MADFLOWER ‘Car crash spectacle’ CDEP
Released by the guy who does Ay Up Cocker zine. The press
release compares this to Radiohead and as my knowledge of this
type of music is limited, to say the least, | guess that's as good a
reference point as any. Four tracks of indie guitar-based stuff with
personal lyrics heavily influenced by Nirvana et al and would have
been a big hit in the alternative discos (or whatever they're called
these days) five years ago. Melodic and obviousiy competent at
what they do but Madflower don't do it for me I'm afraid. £4ppd
from: Toddler Records at same address as Ay Up Cocker. (Rachel)


Saturday 15th January żuuu ypm-2am


1 in 12 Club, Albion Street, Bradford
£2 members/ £2.50 non-members


Te cage BoRE? HUNGOVER? THEN ENGAGE YouR BRAIN AND TRY OUT TAE...


a E,


It's Punx Picnic season and the sun is shining. Four punks
are sitting on a park bench spending some guality time
getting really pissed. Each punk drinks a different brand of
stomach-corroding cider, each has a different hairstyle and
their drunkenness manifests itself in different ways, Using
the clues and the grid below and whatever logical thinking
you can muster up, match each punk with their hairdo,
beverage of choice, foolish drunken behaviour and what
time in the afternoon they pass out. We've entered the first
part of clue number one to give you a start.


MOHLCAN
DREADS


SKINHEAD


WHITE LIGHTNING
HAIRCUT
WHITE STAR


WHITE SPIRIT


MOHICAN


WHITE PowER


eds. | strongly recommend


use environmentally sound paper and ink and they're also way


| liked it and all that, and as ever | don't give a toss if you didn't coz


coming your way in about three months time. See you then, CHIP


A HA.... Just read in The Mirror that dodgy cunt ex-


1. The punk with the mohican vomits explosively but not as
a result of drinking White Spirit.


` H 2. The punk drinking White Star, who regularly pisses


himself, passes out later than the one with dreads.
3. The punk drinking White Power Passes out at 3pm
4. The skinhead doesn't fight with inanimate objects, but
does pass out shamefully early at mid-day.
5. The punk with spikes Passes out later than the one
N drinking White Lightning.


= erre p
AT)
PASS-oUT Tine CIDER CHOICE DRUNKEN HABITS 7 A k


orth a mention here are our


Z | them for anyone doing a zine. They're a worker's Co-operative and Oh no, its four in the moming, my coffee's going cold and I've got


ten minutes to finish this fanzine. Oh I'm so depressed. No one


d cheaper than anywhere else we've found. So why not save yourself istenti f ist Ki
\ the existential angst at the core of my existence. Hit

a bit ofcash and take the ethically sound option? Give ‘em a ring for edariz SEa of my kiez I'd be truly alone. My
a quote on 0113 262 4408. Anyway, cheers for buying it, hope you boyfriend doesn't understand me and daddy won't buy me a new


l car. A single tear has just hit the keyboard of my PC between the


got your fifty pence anyway, suckers. More of the same shite will be letters O and P, just like my soul it slides away into a dark crevice.


Perhaps it will short circuit both those keys so | can never again
Gr the word ‘hope’... AAAAAAHHHH!!! What the fuck came over
me? | caught Fracture disease! The only cure is drinking, shagging
and proper punk rock so I'd best get on the case immediately before


- HEADY


ND


DIY PUNK FANZINE ISSUE THIRTEEN 50p OR TRADE


Combat 84 singer Chris Henderson got nicked and deported tying B is „comes terminal. | can't be bothered writing a proper outro — I've |
to get into Japan for the England / Argentina match. What a shame! | written enough to fill this gap now FUCK OFF! |.


SL 7 P TN eo e:


PLUS REVIEWS, NEWS, RANTS, GOSSIP AND SOME OTHER STUFF
