AlO


NMiirW... Jul, It. lull


THE WASHINGTON POST


CiA Admits Study
Of Domestic Group
Despite 1975 Ban

By AnguB Mackenzie

pjnlic NratliarMcc

A CIA court statement has revealed that the
agency maintained an active inteliigenoe project
through January, 1979, aimed at the Student
Association, which i^reeenta 3 million Americaa
students at 360 institutiorts.

The CIA action will be addressed by a special
panel at the association's annual convention m
AtlanU starting next Thursday.

The intelligence dbcloeures came in a "docu-
ment disposition index" filed by the agancy with
the U.S. District Court Targeting of dome^ or-
ganizations was supposed to have been halted in
197ft.

President Reagan ordered the CIA back into
domestic operations on Dec. 4, 1981« sparking pro-
tests from many civil liberties orpnizations.

The student group, which until 1978 was caflad
the National Student Aasodation (NSA). susd in
June, 1982, for aoccas to ita CIA file. In a widely
publicized 1967 oontiuveiey* the NSA had bean
exposed as a CIA front

The CIA document index wm subnullad to the
court in an effort to keep the student group's file
secret Under normal oomt prooedum, when a
giivemmenl agency wants to keep raa^ ckw ad,
it must acknowledxe what docunienis it poaasMa
and explain why they should be hidden from the
public.


The student association is now trying to con-
vince U.S. District Court Judge June L Green to
order the release of the 1,500 CIA documents ac-
cumulated through 1979 and listed in the index.

In a surprise rnove June 21, Green ordered the
agency to produce fur her inspection "an unexpur-
gited copy of every 25th document it has indexed
in this action,” according to CIA attorney Molly
Jean Tasker. Thiwe documents were submitted to
thejudge July 8.

1%e step was unusual for two reaaona, said the
students' attiimey, David Sobek the judge asked
for the documents instead of waitir^ for the stu-
dent association to request her inspection, and sht
refused a CIA request, usually granted, to supply
affidavits describing the secret documents.

According to the document index, the CIA ac-
cumulated more than 372 pages on the student
group after February, 1969, induding 28 pagea in
197CL AD CIA-originated materials regarding the
organization from 1978 on, and most from other
recent years, are being withheld by the agency.

l"heiie materials are classified "Secret" becauK,
aiTording to the index, they reveal "inteliigenoe
methods” and contain CIA employe names as well
as "inteliigenoe sources” and "cryptonyms and
pseudonyms.”

The index, which wm obtained by this reporter
from Sobek notes that one document, dated Aug.
4, 1978, "consists of brief statemenU which would
identify a method umd to support intelUgenot
activities.” Another, dated July 27, 1978, "states in
precise detniL step step, a method umd to sup-
port iniellisenoe aetivitici.”
