Ur^'

VOLUME 2, NUMBER 3 THE FOURTH DECADE


PROOF AND MORE PROOF

By

Milicent Cranor

In the September issue of this journal, Dennis Ford said that
I (and others) made claims about fraudulent evidence that
cannot be proven or disproven. [1] In July's TFD, I provided
the ultimate proof of a fraud : two tapes of the same interview,
before and after doctoring; a passage lasting only 3.5 seconds
was removed — almost seamlessly — from a historic state-
ment by Governor Connally in which he says he turned to his
left after hearing a shot, and saw Kennedy "slumped," after
which he himself was shot, action that, according to the FBI,
had been on the Zapruder film. It is now gone from that film
r as well. Connally's full left turn, performed before he was hit
an d^ after Ke nnedy was grasp ing._at_h is throat, completely
^ contradicts the single bullet theory. [2] Does Ford suggest I
don't have such films? I played them before hundreds of
people at COPA. Did I splice footage of an actor impersonat-
ing Connally into the film? Or put words into his mouth? NY
Times writer Martin Agronsky put the same words into his
mouth. FBI film expert Lyndal Shaneyfelt spent considerable
time studying the Zapruder film; did he imagine this left turn
which he says occurred at the exact time Connally said it did
(before he revised his story)? Are witnesses only right when
supporting the single bullet theory?

Ford says publishing papers like the above "lessens our
standards of proof." It is instructive to examine the sort of work
that meets with Ford's standards:

Dennis Ford on Gerald Posner's Case Closed :

"... scientific ... brilliantly written... well-researched... a
literary model for all books of this genre . " [3] [emphasis
added]

There is a great deal of proof in Case Closed — proof of
conspiracy. But you might not know it unless you compare
Posner's versions of facts and testimony with the actual
source, something Dennis Ford would never suggest you do.
The following samples from Posner's degenerate book show
his unethical methods of discrediting eyewitnesses. For
Howard Brennan he performed the opposite service.
SAMPLES FROM A "LITERARY MODEL"

Milicent Cranor

630 W. 246th St., * 921

River dale, NY 10471


MARCH, 1995

On page 234 of Case Closed . Posner says Will Greer
"slowed the vehicle to almost a standstill." Few would argue.
Robert MacNeil put it more strongly, saying Greer "slammed
on the brakes," [4] and this description was echoed by many
witnesses, some of whom say the car swerved to the left at that
time. Apparently Posner's source of information is eye witness
testimony: ]t can't be the Zapruder film , for it shows no such
thing, one more possible indication the film has been cut . The
change in the car's speed is barely perceptible, except when
it finally speeds up. Why is it that neither Ford nor Posner have
mentioned this discrepancy?

Ford gleefully states that "(t]he most exciting aspect of Case
Closed isthe debunking of conspiracy theories. Posner attacks
such theories in the most decisive manner, by impeaching the
testimony of crucial conspiracy witnesses." Decisive or just
derisive? You decide:

CAROLYN WALTHER

Carolyn Walther swore that, just before the motorcade
arrived, she saw two men in a southeast window of the
Depository building, one had a white shirt, blond or light
brown hair, and a gun with a "short barrel and seemed large
around the stock." to the left of this man, she could see a
portion of another man. ..with a rifle. ..As the window was very
dirty, she could not see the head.. .She is positive this window
was not as high as the sixth floor. This second man was
apparently wearing a brown suit coat..." Mrs Walther said she
heard at least four shots. [5]

In an effort to discredit this witness, Gerald Posner points out
that (a) she said nothing about the gunmen to her companion,
Mrs. Pearl Springer, and (b) Mrs. Springer did not see the two
men. [6]

Mrs. Walther said she "thought there were guards every-
where." Is it not possible that Mrs. Walther made no remark
about the men because she thought their presence unremark-
able ? In fact, what is remarkable is that guards were not
everywhere. Secondly, although her companion Mrs. Springer
did not see the two men, her statement explains why: 'They
stood there for about fifteen minutes waiting for the parade.
During that time, she looked around at the crowd but never
looked up above the ground floor of (the TSBD|."[7]

ARNOLD ROWLAND

Arnold Rowland said he saw two men on the sixth floor
about fifteen minutes before the motorcade came by, an

30


VOLUME 2, NUMBER 3


THE FOURTH DECADE


MARCH, 1995


apparently white (or "light Latin") man with a gun whose face
he could not see well, and a balding "elderly Negro" in the
"sniper s nest." [8| His testimony presented two problems for
the Commission: (a) He saw the man with the gun at a time
when Oswald was said to have been elsewhere, and (b) he
continued to see the Black man until very close to the time of
the shooting: "Approximately 5 minutes prior to the time the
motorcade, he wasn t there. About 30 seconds or a minute
prior to that time he was there."[9]

Posner tries to cast doubt on Rowland's testimony because
he did not comment on the "Negro gentleman" to his wife. But
numerous Black employees were leaning out of windows in
anticipation of seeing the President, and both Rowlands
commented on this, fl 0] Rowland probably made no remark
to his wife about the one on the sixth floor because, once
again, the situation was not remarkable. But contrary to
Posner's false claim, Rowland did try to report it later.

*•••/ told them I did see the Negro man there and they
told me it didn't have any bearing or such on the case
right then. In fact , they just the same as told me to forget
it now. " [1 1 1

Posner also tried to discredit Rowland with seemingly
damaging quotes from Mrs. Rowland.

"/ know there weren't any other people on that floor
looking out the windows that could be seen from the
outside." [121

Posner omitted: "I mean I know they couldn't be seen from
the outside because I couldn't see them . I am nearsighted ."
(Emphasis added.) [13| Posner continues:

When asked l "Do you feel you can rely on everything
that your husband says r she replied ' "At times my
husband is prone to exaggerate. Does that answer it>"

[141

Posner omits her direct reply to the question above: "I don't
feel that I can rely on everything anybody says." [emphasis
added) He also omits "Usually his exaggerations are not
concerned with anything other than himself..." [15]

Posner also tries to discredit Rowland with false informa-
tion:

" Rowland also claimed that while the gunman was
standing fifteen feet back of the window, he could see
all of the rifle and two thirds of the man. The author
I Posner I stood at the same spot.. .it is impossible to see
inside the sniper's nest because of the right wall , and
also to see anyone more than a few feet behind the


window ." [161

As Posner himself says, Rowland said the gunman was in the
west window [17) which is not the sniper's nest. On two
occasions, Rowland explained the gunman stood only 3 to 5
feet back from the west window, and complained that the FBI
mistakenly recorded 1 5 feet. [1 8) As for seeing the black man,
he was leaning out of the east window, [19) making it
unnecessary to "see inside." Posner is as sloppy as he is
deceptive.

AMOS EUINS

Posner writes that "After the third shot, Euins remembered
the sniper "pulled the gun back in the window." While he
could not describe the shooter, he ran..." [20]

Euins said he pulled the gun back in after he heard a fourth
shot. Euins' did describe the man originally, and that descrip-
tion corroborates Rowland's. Reporter james Underwood
testified that Euins told him he was sure the shooter was a
"colored man"[2 1 ], to Agent Sorrels, "he couldn't tell whether
he was colored or white." [22) In Euins' statement to the
Sheriff, the man became white; [23] by the time he testified
before the Warren Commission, the "while man" had been
reduced toa"white spot" [24] (the forerunner of the blue dot?);
elsewhere, he described a man of indeterminate race with a
"bald spot" (25) But there is more: "Another man told him [the
policeman) he seen a man run about the back... He said the
man had kind of bald spot on his head. "[26) I have no opinion
on the race of the man or men in the window, but it is very clear
that neither the Warren Commission nor Gerald Posner pur-
sued any leads that might contradict the case against Oswald.

HOWARD BRENNAN

Howard Brennan, the Government's star witness, testified
that he only heard two shots. [27) There is nothing wrong with

this one shot can sound like two, two shots can sound like

one, and four shots can sound like two— but Posner does not
tell you Brennan only heard two shots. The following para-
graph suggests Brennan heard three:

"He [ Brennan ], like many others, thought it was a
backfire. "...Then came the sickening sound of the
second shot... I wanted to cry , / wanted to scream , but
I couldn't utter a sound." A woman next to him
screamed when she realized the noises were rifle fire.
Brennan's eyes locked on the solitary figure steadying
his rifle for the final shot. "He was aiming again and I


31


VOLUME 2, NUMBER 3


THE FOURTH DECADE


MARCH, 1995


wanted to pray , to beg Cod to somehow makehim miss
the target.. .Then another shot rang out ." Brennan hit
the ground, afraid there would be more gunfire. The
President's car started to speed away. He looked up at
r the window a final time. "To my amazement the man
^ still stood there in the window. He didn 't appear to be

' rushed..." [281

The above is a composite of two separate descriptions of the
same shot, the second and last one heard by Brennan; it gives
the impression that the second description refers to a third
shot. Or did Brennan change his story?

Posner glosses over a far greater problem with this witness-
— his ability to distinguish one man from another, both of
whom he saw up close and spoke with: Inspector J. Herbert
Sawyer, and Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels. Who pro-
vided the description of the man in the window at 1 2:45 to
Sawyer? And whom did Brennan give his description to
shortly after the shooting? According to Posner, "Brennan
mistakenly called the plain clothes officer "Sorrels/ the name
of a Secret Service agent he met about fifteen minutes after he
met Inspector Sawyer/ [29] But Brennan never said he met a
second Secret Service agent after the first. It is one thing to
confuse names, and another for a star witness to confuse faces,
j Brennan testified that the same man at the car who took down
his description (Sawyer?) also took him to the sheriff's office
L(Sorrels).

Brennan said that within seconds of the last shot, he ran to
an officer who "had to give some orders or something on the
east side of the building on Houston Street. And then he had
taken me to, I believe, Mr. Sorrels, an automobile sitting in
front of the Texas Book Store... I related my information and
there was a few minutes of discussion, and Mr. Sorrels had
taken me then across the street to the sheriffs building." [30]
Sorrels testified that he returned to the Depository building
and was directed to Brennan whom he interviewed, and then
took to the Sheriffs office. [31 ]

Inspector Sawyer did not identify Brennan as the man who
came up to him with a description, not even with hindsight;
Sawver said he never saw him again . [32] Surely Sawyer
would have seen Brennan again and again. He described the
witness as "white, around 35" and could remember nothing
more. [33] If Brennan had been the man, wouldn't Sawyer
have mentioned something as emblematic as his hardhat?
James Jarman, Harold Norman , and Sorrels said Brennan was
wearing it at the time he was talking to the police, leading them


to characterize him as a "construction worker with a hardhat/
Another reason to suspect the witness was not Brennan:
Asked about the gunman's clothes, Sawyer replied to his
dispatcher, " Current witness can't remember that ." [34] But
Brennan had been very specific, saying the gunman wore
"light colored clothes, more of a khaki color." [35]; and his
pants were "similar to the same color of the shirt or a little
lighter.. .that was another thing I called their attention to at the
lineup.. .That he was not dressed in the same clothes that I saw
the man in the window." [36] Sorrels testified that Brennan
described the gunman's clothes to him. [37] Was Brennan's
memory prompted, or did he only speak with Sorrels ? Sorrels
says he returned from the hospital within 20 minutes after the
shots, i.e., 1 2:50, just five minutes after the gunman's descrip-
tion was broadcast. [38]

ANOTHER FILM CUT?

Photographic evidence that could have cleared up the
mystery has disappeared. Consider this fascinating exchange
between Commissioner Bel in and Brennan:

' ...I believe you said that the car that you talked to the
Secret Service agent in was at point "G" approximately?
Right.

Now, are these accurate or approximate locations, Mr.
Brennan?

Well , don't you have photographs of me talking to the
Secret Service men right here?

I don't believe so.

You should have. It was on television before I got
home — my wife saw it.

On television?

Yes.

At this time we do not have them. Do you remember
what station they were on television?

No. Buttheyhad it. And I called I believe Mr. Lish [FBI]
who requested that he cut those films or get them cut of
the FBI. I believe you might know about them.
Somebody cut those films, because a number of times
later the same films were shown, and that part was cut . "
[39]

Once again, it seems that critical seconds were cut out of a
film. It would have shown Brennan talking to either Sorrels or
Sawyer. What difference would it make? If it was Sawyer, it
would prove that Brennan mixed up two people. If it was
Sorrels, it would prove that Sorrels got back faster than he says


32


VOLUME 2, NUMBER 3


THE FOURTH DECADE


MARCH, 1995


i


he did, but so what? It would prove that a witness other than
Brennan reported a gunman with perhaps too many specifics
to be observed from such a distance. What else was on that
film? It would have shown the front of the TSBD within
minutes of the shooting.

CONCLUSION

A president of the United States has been violently cut out
of office. Action contradictory to the official version of this
event has been cut out of films and testimony. Effective critics
are cut out of the media. The truth has been cut to pieces, and
now some very strange people want to keep us from examin-
ing the pieces. What next?

Notes

1. Dennis Ford, Letter to the Editor, The Fourth Decade,
Vol.1,#6, September, 1994, pp. 30, 31.

2. Milicent Cranor, "FBI Copy of Z Film," The Fourth De-
cade, Vol.1,#5, July, 1994, pp. 38,39.

3. Back Currents, 1/93

4. Robert MacNeil, The Wav We Were (New York: Carroll
& Graf, 1 988).

5. Warren Commission Hearings and Exhibits, vol. 24, p.
522. References from this source cited hereafter in format:
24H522.

6. Gerald Posner, Case Closed , (New York: Random House,
1993) p.231 .

7. 24H523.

8. 2H188.

9. 2H178.

10. 2H175.

11. 2H183.

1 2. Posner, Case Closed , p. 23 1 .

13. 6H185.

14. Posner, Case Closed , p. 231.

15. 6H192.

16. Posner, Case Closed, p. 231.

17. 2H169.

18. 2H1 71 ,1 82.

19. 2H175.

20. Posner, Case Closed, page 247.

21. 6H170.

22. 7H349.

23. CE 367.

24. 2H208.


25. 2H204.

26. 2H205.

27. 3H144.

28. Posner, Case Closed , p. 248.

29. Posner, Case Closed , p. 249. CC 249, 5awyer/Sorrels

30. 3H145.

31. 7H349.

32. 6H317. 3H1 97,207.

33. 3H1 97,207.

34. 7H348.

35. 3H1 44,1 61 .

36. 3H144, 161.

37. 6H317.

38. 7H348.

39. 3H150.


33
