home | about rich | about karyn | books | articles | purchase | contact

Twelve Government Documents
That Take UFOs Seriously
by Richard M. Dolan
copyright 2003 & 2009 by Richard M. Dolan. All rights reserved.out rich | about karyn | books | articles | purchase | contact

Twelve Government Documents
That Take UFOs Seriously
by Richard M. Dolan
copyright 2003 & 2009 by Richard M. Dolan. All rights reserved.

Ask people what they think about UFOs, and you’re sure to get
opinions ranging through all extremes and nuances. Some are so
embarrassed by the topic that they simply refuse to consider any
evidence whatsoever, like the Pope refusing to look through Galileo’s
telescope. Others claim not only to be certain that aliens are here,
but to have exact, insider knowledge of what it’s all about. Between
these extremes are endless variations.
It’s the same with how we approach the subject. Some people read
UFO books for fun, like a mystery novel or scary story. Others are
more interested in scientific evidence, such as analysis of
photographs, videos, or material samples. Still others prefer more
hypothetical roads, like theories about the likelihood of life elsewhere
in the universe, or how an advanced propulsion system might work.
There are a host of specialized studies, too, ranging from abductions,
to crop circles, to animal mutilations, and more. Or, you may focus
on the believers and witnesses themselves by studying UFOs as an
element of popular culture, or from a psycho-social perspective.
Another approach is historical. There are, after all, government UFO
documents that anyone can read. What do they say? Can these
documents tell us whether the government or military have ever
been interested in this phenomenon? If so, why?
Granted, this approach might not be of the same value as subjecting
a piece of flying saucer to laboratory tests. But it would certainly be
important if the government had documents showing that UFOs are
truly something extraordinary, and even possibly alien. Especially
after telling the public the opposite for years. Since belief in UFOs is
a near-professional suicide in most respected circles, what would it
mean if we discovered that, within the classified world, people have
taken it seriously for years?
It just so happens that they have. They do.
For many years, it was hard to obtain declassified government
documents about UFOs. During the 1950s and 1960s, a few
documents wended their way to the rest of the world, but this was
rare. Then, in 1974, the U.S. government amended the Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA). The result was a veritable golden age of
document releases that lasted roughly until a 1982 Executive Order
from President Reagan. While UFO documents continue to be
released, a repeat of the Great Flood of the seventies appears
unlikely.
Blacked-out, declassified UFO documents look rather cool, but most
don’t provide any evidence for aliens, and many of them are not
even that interesting. But some are very interesting. Whether they
prove that UFOs are aliens or something entirely different, they make
it clear that this topic has been taken very seriously at high levels,
and has been subject to a great deal of secrecy.
Considering how marginalized this subject is from mainstream
culture, making this point is enough for a day’s work. There are
always deeper waters within which to swim, but for now let us stayecrecy.
Considering how marginalized this subject is from mainstream
culture, making this point is enough for a day’s work. There are
always deeper waters within which to swim, but for now let us stay

Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
1 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

close to the shore and look at a few of these documents. Even
though most of these are well-known to UFO researchers, they
continue to remain almost completely unknown to the wider public.
Apparently, some things are so obvious that they are invisible.
General Nathan
Twining, author of the
September 23, 1947
memo. He later
earned a fourth star
and became USAF
Chief of Staff -- and
then Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff.that they are invisible.
General Nathan
Twining, author of the
September 23, 1947
memo. He later
earned a fourth star
and became USAF
Chief of Staff -- and
then Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff.

1. The 1947 Twining Memo.
For good reason, this is one of the most important UFO documents
we have. On September 23, 1947, right at the beginning of the
“modern” UFO era, General Nathan Twining, Head of the U.S. Air
Material Command (AMC), wrote a classified letter to Air Force
General George Schulgen regarding the “flying discs.” He said the
objects were “real and not visionary or fictitious.” They may possibly
be natural phenomena, he wrote, such as meteors. But:
“the reported operating characteristics such as extreme rates of
climb, maneuverability (particularly in roll), and action which must be
considered evasive when sighted ... lend belief to the possibility that
some of the objects are controlled either manually, automatically, or
remotely.”
Twining listed several common descriptions of UFOs. They generally
were silent, had a metallic or light reflecting surface, no trail, were
circular or elliptical in shape, and often flat on the bottom. Many
descriptions indicated a dome on top. Several reports indicated they
flew in formation. Quite specific information, indeed.
UFO skeptics have pointed to Twining’s statement that no wreckage
of a flying disc had been recovered. It’s true that he was probably in
a good position to know. But what we don’t know is whether Twining
would have been able to tell Schulgen about a UFO crash, if indeed
such a thing happened. Simply put, if Schulgen lacked a “need to
know,” Twining could not have told him.
On the other hand, Twining did state that UFOs were not secret
American craft. This came as a surprise to Schulgen, who expected
to learn that there was nothing to the affair, that everything was
under control. Was Twining was hiding the fact that UFO’s were
classified technology? It’s a fair question.
With the hindsight of more than fifty years, the answer seems to be
no. There is simply no credible evidence that the U.S. had any craft
in 1947, experimental or otherwise, that could duplicate the reported
maneuvers of flying saucers. Anyway, why would Twining tell
Schulgen to keep studying flying saucers if they were simply
classified American craft? If there were good reasons for doing so,
none have emerged.
Pages one,
two, and
three of the
Twining
Memo.
Click to
enlarge.
J. Edgar Hoover.
America's #1 law
man, and the recipient
of the January 31,
1949 FBI memo on
UFOs.ons for doing so,
none have emerged.
Pages one,
two, and
three of the
Twining
Memo.
Click to
enlarge.
J. Edgar Hoover.
America's #1 law
man, and the recipient
of the January 31,
1949 FBI memo on
UFOs.

2. 1949 FBI Memo.
In my own opinion, this three-page document is just as extraordinary
as the Twining Memo. On January 31, 1949, the FBI issued a memo
on UFOs, entitled “Protection of Vital Installations.” The classified
document was sent to FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, the Army’s G-2,
the Office of Naval Intelligence, and the Air Force Office of Special
Investigations. It mentions a meeting among these groups
concerning UFOs.
Here is a key statement of the document:
“Army intelligence has recently said that “the matter of ‘Unidentified
Aircraft’ or ‘Unidentified Aerial Phenomena,’ otherwise known as
‘Flying Discs,’ ‘Flying Saucers,’ and ‘Balls of Fire,’ is considered top
secret by intelligence officers of both the Army and the Air Forces.”
This was a year and a half into the modern era of UFOs. All the while,
government sources had been telling the public that this
phenomenon was just a combination of hoaxes, hallucinations,
Pages one,
two, and
three of the
1949 FBI
memo.
Click to
enlarge.
Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
2 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---a combination of hoaxes, hallucinations,
Pages one,
two, and
three of the
1949 FBI
memo.
Click to
enlarge.
Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
2 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

conventional aircraft, and misidentification of natural phenomena.
Why, then, was the subject considered top secret?
The answer is contained within the memo itself. It mentions, for
instance, a near-collision by an commercial airliner with a large
“rocket” type craft (with windows, no less) traveling at an estimated
speed of – strap yourself in – 2,700 mph. More serious, the memo
explains, were invasions of sensitive airspace by unknown objects in
the vicinity of the Atomic Energy Commission’s installation at Los
Alamos, New Mexico. The memo states that these had occurred
throughout December 1948 (on the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 11th, 13th,
14th, 20th, and 28th). The witnesses of these "unexplained
phenomena" were "Special Agents of the Office of Special
Investigation; Airline Pilots; Military Pilots, Los Alamos Security
Inspectors, and private citizens." The sightings continued into 1949,
as a similar object was seen in the area on January 6.
The memo goes on to explain that "recent observations have
indicated that the unidentified phenomena travel at the rate of speed
estimated at a minimum of three miles per second and a maximum
of twelve miles per second, or a mean calculated speed of seven and
one-half miles per second, or 27,000 miles per hour." Moreover, "on
two separate occasions a definite vertical change in path was
indicated." In other words, the phenomenon was able to maneuver at
a very high rate of speed, and seemed to be focused on Los Alamos.
The memo states that reports of the appearance of the object as
typically round, occasionally diamond-shaped, "with a definite area to
the light's source," and having elongated trailing lights. "On two
occasions reports have been received of the sighting of multiple
units." There is some speculation within the document that the
objects were Soviet in origin, but no evidence or proof is offered.
The memo also refers to "scientific reasons" why the objects could
not be meteorites. "The only conclusions reached thus far are that
they are either hitherto unobserved natural phenomena or that they
are man made. No scientific experiments are known to exist in this
country which could give rise to such phenomena." On the third
page, the idea of "cosmic rays" was offered, though without any
theory or evidence to support it.
Although the memo does not state the Extraterrestrial Hypothesis
(ETH), its attempt to explain the Los Alamos phenomenon as either
natural phenomena or man made does not supply any actual
evidence -- the only reason why these explanations could even be
offered. Because once one tries to find a "hitherto unobserved
phenomena," or a "man made" object, one only comes up empty.
The F-51 was better
known as the P-51
Mustang, made
famous during WWII.n be
offered. Because once one tries to find a "hitherto unobserved
phenomena," or a "man made" object, one only comes up empty.
The F-51 was better
known as the P-51
Mustang, made
famous during WWII.

3. 1951 USAF Intelligence Report
This report describes a rather up-close and personal UFO encounter
on July 9, 1951, by the pilot of an F-51 fighter plane from Lawson Air
Force Base in Georgia. The pilot, a combat veteran from World War
Two, provided quite a bit of detail, which was recorded in the report.
“Object described as flat on top and bottom and appearing from a
front view to have rounded edges and slightly beveled. From view as
object dived from top of plane was completely round and spinning in
clockwise direction.... Object did not appear to be aluminum. Only 1
object observed. Solar white. No vapor trails or exhaust or visible
system of propulsion. Described as traveling [at] tremendous
speed....Pilot states object was 300 to 400 feet from plane and
appeared to be 10 to 15 feet in diameter....Pilot states he felt
disturbance in the air described as ‘bump’ when object passed under
plane....Pilot is considered by associates to be highly reliable, of
mature judgement and a creditable observer.”
What commentary is necessary? The report says it all.
Pages 1
and 2 of
the 1951
Air Force
Intelligence
Report.
Click to
enlarge.
Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
3 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CIA Director Walter
Bedell Smith, recipient
of the Chadwell
Memo. Smith had also
been Gen. Dwight
Eisenhower's Chief of
Staff during the 1944
invasion of Normandy.riously
3 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CIA Director Walter
Bedell Smith, recipient
of the Chadwell
Memo. Smith had also
been Gen. Dwight
Eisenhower's Chief of
Staff during the 1944
invasion of Normandy.

4. The Chadwell Memo of December 2,
1952.
1952 was an important year in the history of the UFO. Across the
United States, the number of sightings skyrocketed, and several of
these were well-documented encounters by military personnel. At the
end of July, the Air Force held a press conference explaining that,
although some of these reports remained unexplained, there was no
evidence they were alien craft. Within the classified world, matters
were not so serene.
H. Marshall Chadwell was the CIA’s Director of Scientific Intelligence,
and very much interested in this problem. In this memo, addressed
to the CIA Director, General Walter Bedell Smith, Chadwell wrote:
“At this time, the reports of incidents convince us that there is
something going on that must have immediate attention.... Sightings
of unexplained objects at great altitudes and travelling at high
speeds in the vicinity of major U.S. defense installations are of such
nature that they are not attributable to natural phenomena or known
types of aerial vehicles.”
This statement bears very close scrutiny. Here is yet another
comment by a high-level U.S. official that UFOs were real, probably
artificial, probably intelligently operated, and not apparently ours.
Nor was there serious consideration that these were Soviet.
If not American, if not Soviet, if not natural phenomena, and if they
appeared to be technological and under intelligent control, we begin
to run out of viable options. Chadwell’s memo makes it obvious that
he understood this. Understandably, he was loathe to state the
obvious.
The
Chadwell
Memo.
Click to
enlarge.
U.S. helicopter of the
1950s.out of viable options. Chadwell’s memo makes it obvious that
he understood this. Understandably, he was loathe to state the
obvious.
The
Chadwell
Memo.
Click to
enlarge.
U.S. helicopter of the
1950s.

5. 1954 Maxwell AFB Emergency Report.
Throughout the 1950s, the air space violations kept on coming. This
report (headed “Emergency”) originated from the flight service
center at Maxwell Air Force Base, and was sent to the Commander of
Air Defense Command (ADC) in Colorado.
The report describes the entry into airspace of a “strange stationary
object variable in brilliance” which moved rapidly, then returned to its
original position. The base sent a helicopter to investigate. The pilot’s
assessment: “definitely not a star.” Many people watched this object
from the tower, and a civilian tower radioed that it also had it in
sight. The object became dimmer, showed a slight red glow, and
disappeared.
Could it have been a star? Possibly. Still, the personnel at the time
asked the same question, and concluded it wasn’t.
According to the report:
“...pilot of helicopter wished to stress fact that the object was of a
saucer-like nature, was stationary at 2000 ft. And would be glad to
be called upon to verify any statement and act as witness.”
It is worth noting that copies of this report were sent to the CIA, the
National Security Agency (NSA), the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and each of
the military services.
Emergency
Report from
Maxwell
AFB. Click
to enlarge.
Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
4 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The UFO over Minot
AFB was seen visually
and tracked on radar.Report from
Maxwell
AFB. Click
to enlarge.
Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
4 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The UFO over Minot
AFB was seen visually
and tracked on radar.

6. Intrusion at Minot Air Force Base,
1966
A large UFO wave took place across the U.S. during the mid-1960s.
This caused a good deal of publicity, congressional interest, and the
eventual study of UFOs by the University of Colorado in the hopes of
settling the matter once and for all. Although the Colorado
Committee was supposed to have full access to classified UFO
reports, in practice it received very little to go on, and instead
conducted a number of ad hoc investigations of sightings as they
became known.
One of many classified reports that slipped through the cracks
occurred at Minot Air Force Base, in North Dakota, on August 24,
1966. That night, an airman radioed to the base about a multicolored
light, very high in the sky. A team went to the location, confirmed the
original unknown, then saw a second, white object pass in front of
clouds. The base radar tracked the object, which was as high as
100,000 feet (almost twenty miles). The object rose and descended
several times; each time it descended, an air force officer in charge
of a missile crew found his radio transmission interrupted by static,
even though he was sixty feet below the ground. The object
eventually descended to ground level ten to fifteen miles south of the
area. The Air Force sent a strike team to check. Apparently, they saw
the object either on the ground or hovering very low. According to
the official report:
“When the team was about ten miles from the landing site, static
disrupted radio contact with them. Five to eight minutes later, the
glow diminished, and the UFO took off. Another UFO was visually
sighted and confirmed by radar. The one that was first sighted passed
beneath the second. Radar also confirmed this. The first made for
altitude toward the north, and the second seemed to disappear with
the glow of red.”
The incident lasted nearly four hours and was confirmed by three
different missile sites.
Key page of
the Minot
AFB
incident.
Click to
enlarge.
Air Force officer
Robert Salas, a key
witness to the 1967
Malstrom UFO event.early four hours and was confirmed by three
different missile sites.
Key page of
the Minot
AFB
incident.
Click to
enlarge.
Air Force officer
Robert Salas, a key
witness to the 1967
Malstrom UFO event.

7. Malmstrom AFB 1967
Early in the morning on the March 16, 1967 at Malmstrom AFB in
Montana, occurred one of the most extraordinary events in the
history of military-UFO encounters. Under a clear and dark Montana
sky, an airman with the Oscar Flight Launch Control Center (LCC)
saw a star-like object zigzagging high above him. Soon, a larger and
closer light also appeared, and acted in similar fashion. The airman
called his NCO, and the two men watched the lights streak through
the sky, maneuvering in impossible ways. The NCO phoned his
commander, Lieutenant Robert Salas, who was below ground in the
launch control center. “Great,” Salas said. “You just keep watching
them and let me know if they get any closer.”
A few minutes later, the NCO called again, shouting that a red,
glowing UFO was hovering outside the front gate. “What do you want
us to do?” asked the NCO. Salas told him to make sure the site was
secure while he phoned the command post. “Sir,” replied the NCO, “I
have to go now, one of the guys just got injured.”
Before Salas could ask about the injury, the NCO was off the line.
The man, who was not seriously injured, was evacuated by helicopter
to the base. Salas woke his commander, Lieutenant Fred Meiwald. As
he briefed Meiwald, an alarm went off in the small capsule, and both
men saw a “No-Go” light turn on for one of the missiles. Within
seconds, several more missiles went down in succession.
Twenty miles away, at the Echo-Flight Launch Facilities, the same
scenario was taking place. First Lieutenant Walter Figel, the Deputy
U.S.
Defense
document
confirming
the events
at
Malmstrom
AFB. Click
to enlarge.
Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
5 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt Walter Figel, the Deputy
U.S.
Defense
document
confirming
the events
at
Malmstrom
AFB. Click
to enlarge.
Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
5 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Crew Commander of the Missile Combat Crew, was at his station
when one of the Minuteman missiles went into “No-Go” status. He
called the missile site and learned that a UFO had been hovering over
the site. Like Salas, Figel doubted the story. But just then, ten more
ICBMs in rapid succession reported a “No-Go” condition. Within
seconds, the entire flight was down.
Strike teams were dispatched to two launch facilities, where
maintenance crews were already at work. Figel had not told the
strike teams about the UFO report. Upon their arrival, however, the
teams reported back to him that all of the maintenance and security
personnel had been watching UFOs hover over each of the sites.
The missiles were down for most of the day. Neither the Air Force
investigation, nor the laboratory tests at Boeing’s Seattle plant found
any cause for the shutdown. According to the Boeing engineering
chief, “there was no technical explanation that could explain the
event.” UFOs were not part of this analysis.
Wurtsmith AFB, scene
of an intrusion by an
unknown object, or
objects, in 19758.

Wurtsmith Air Force Base, 1975
During October and November of 1975, another extraordinary series
of air space violations took place, this time across the length of the
U.S.

northern border, involving several military bases from Montana
to Maine.

Air space incursions also took place through much of 1976.

All are unexplained to this day in any conventional sense.

On the evening of October 31, 1975 at Wurtsmith AFB in Michigan,
an airman saw what appeared to be running lights of a low flying
craft, possibly a helicopter, near the southern perimeter of the base,
heading westerly.

One light pointed down; two red lights were near
the back.

The object was either silent or very quiet.

A little later, other witnesses saw several lights near the western
edge of the base.

The lights turned north and appeared to lose
altitude.

Most heard nothing, although some claimed to hear a quiet
sound similar to a helicopter, but which faded quickly.

Then, three times within the space of 11 minutes, security police at
the back gate reported that an object with no lights – possibly a
helicopter – entered the base and hovered very low over the
weapons storage area.

Radar personnel detected low flying objects
(plural) in the area.

At the northern perimeter of the base, one of the
crafts briefly turned its lights on.

A KC-135 tanker was flying to the base at the time.

It was ordered to
intercept and identify the object or objects.

The crew tracked what at
first appeared to be a single craft for about 35 miles southeast from
the base.

However, they soon decided they were seeing two objects,
apparently communicating with each other with irregular flashing
lights.

Radar trackings could not last longer than 10 seconds.

Every
time they tried to close, the objects simply pulled away.

The crew lost the objects among fishing boat lights in Saginaw Bay,
so they started back.Crew Commander of the Missile Combat Crew, was at his station
when one of the Minuteman missiles went into “No-Go” status. He
called the missile site and learned that a UFO had been hovering over
the site. Like Salas, Figel doubted the story. But just then, ten more
ICBMs in rapid succession reported a “No-Go” condition. Within
seconds, the entire flight was down.
Strike teams were dispatched to two launch facilities, where
maintenance crews were already at work. Figel had not told the
strike teams about the UFO report. Upon their arrival, however, the
teams reported back to him that all of the maintenance and security
personnel had been watching UFOs hover over each of the sites.
The missiles were down for most of the day. Neither the Air Force
investigation, nor the laboratory tests at Boeing’s Seattle plant found
any cause for the shutdown. According to the Boeing engineering
chief, “there was no technical explanation that could explain the
event.” UFOs were not part of this analysis.
Wurtsmith AFB, scene
of an intrusion by an
unknown object, or
objects, in 1975

Every
time they tried to close, the objects simply pulled away. The crew lost the objects among fishing boat lights in Saginaw Bay,
so they started back. Here is how the story ends, as told by the
navigator to the base historian four years later:
“On the way back, we picked the UFO up again at our eight o’clock
position. We turned away, and it proceeded to follow us. Finally, we
turned back in the direction of the UFO and it really took off back in
the direction of the Bay area. I know this might sound crazy, but I
would estimate that the UFO sped away from us doing approximately
1,000 knots. We continued in the direction of the Bay until RAPCON
(radar) called us again and said they were painting a UFO four to five
miles over the coast traveling in a westerly direction. They vectored
us to the position of the UFO and we proceeded but at point we were
low fuel and were forced to return to Wurtsmith. I remember that
while on final approach we saw the lights again near the Weapons
Storage Area. Following the mission we discussed the incident and
about a week later, Captain Higgenbotham was questioned by OSI
Two U.S. Defense
Department
documents
confirming
a UFO over
Wurtsmith
AFB. Click
to enlarge. Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
6 of 14Higgenbotham was questioned by OSI
Two U.S. Defense
Department
documents
confirming
a UFO over
Wurtsmith
AFB. Click
to enlarge. Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
6 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and cautioned not to discuss the incident.”
Could this have been advanced helicopter technology? If so, it would
have to have outperformed what was then the most advanced
helicopter design in the world: the recently built Apache prototype.
But as awesome a machine as the Apache is, even today it can not
duplicate the reported actions of the unidentified intruders at
Wurtsmith. And, of course, this still begs the question ... who was
responsible for this?
An F-4 "Phantom"
fighter jet. Two of
these were thoroughly
outclassed by a UFO
over Tehran in
September, 1976.9.

The Amazing Encounter over Tehran in
1976
[Note from Richard Dolan: this account largely follows my description
from UFOs and the National Security State: The Cover-Up Exposed,
1973-1991.

Additional details and citations are found in the book.]
On the night of September 18, 1976, the Iranian Air Force was
involved in one of the most dramatic UFO events in modern history.

Not only was the case itself extraordinary, but so was the
documentation: namely, a four-page U.S.

Defense Intelligence
Agency report.

The strangeness began after 10:30 p.m.

on September 18, when the
control tower at Mehrabad Airport received calls about an unknown
object hovering at 1,000 feet in the northern section of Teheran.

The
tower supervisor observed the object with binoculars, describing it as
rectangular or cylindrical.

In his words, “the two ends were pulsating
with a whitish blue color.

Around the mid-section was this small red
light that kept going in a circle....

I was amazed.”
He notified the Iranian Air Force.

Two hundred miles away, at
Shahrokhi AFB, General Nader Yousefi ordered an F-4 Phantom to
investigate.

It took off at 1:30 a.m.

on the morning of September 19.

According to the pilot, the object was intensely brilliant and “easily
visible” at a distance of 70 miles.

As he came to within 25 nautical
miles (about 29 statute miles), his aircraft “lost all instrumentation
and communications.” He broke off the intercept and headed back, at
which point his aircraft regained all instrumentation.

The General had already authorized a second F-4.

When the second
pilot reached a distance of 27 NM, he obtained a substantial radar
return, “comparable to that of a 707 tanker.” At this point, the UFO
began to move away from the F-4 at the same speed.

It was
extremely bright and gave off flashing strobe lights arranged in a
rectangular pattern.

The colors alternated blue-green, red, and
orange, although the sequence was so fast that they were almost
simultaneous.and cautioned not to discuss the incident.”
Could this have been advanced helicopter technology? If so, it would
have to have outperformed what was then the most advanced
helicopter design in the world: the recently built Apache prototype.
But as awesome a machine as the Apache is, even today it can not
duplicate the reported actions of the unidentified intruders at
Wurtsmith. And, of course, this still begs the question ... who was
responsible for this?
An F-4 "Phantom"
fighter jet. Two of
these were thoroughly
outclassed by a UFO
over Tehran in
September, 1976.

It was
extremely bright and gave off flashing strobe lights arranged in a
rectangular pattern. The colors alternated blue-green, red, and
orange, although the sequence was so fast that they were almost
simultaneous. The UFO then released a bright object, “estimated to be one half to
one third the apparent size of the Moon.” It headed straight toward
the F-4 “at a very fast rate of speed.” The pilot tried to fire an AIM-9
missile at it, “but at that instant his weapons control panel went off
and he lost all communications.” Seeking to evade, he dove and
turned away, but the object followed him and turned inside his own
turn. It then returned to the main object “for a perfect rejoin.” The
F-4 pilot then regained communications and weapons control. At this point, another object came out of the main object and rapidly
descended. The F-4 crew observed this, anticipating an explosion. Instead, the object appeared to rest gently on the Earth and cast a
very bright light over an area of about 2 miles. The crew noted the
object’s position and then headed back. Before landing, they circled Mehrabad Airport several times, receiving
frequent interference and losing communications. During their final
approach, the F-4 crew saw a cylinder shaped object with bright
steady lights on each end and a flasher in the middle. They inquired
with the tower, which replied that there was no other known traffic in
the area. Description
of the
Iranian UFO
encounter,
from a U.S. Defense
Intelligence
Agency
report. Click to
enlarge. Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
7 of 14raffic in
the area. Description
of the
Iranian UFO
encounter,
from a U.S. Defense
Intelligence
Agency
report. Click to
enlarge. Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
7 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---The next morning, the F-4 crew was taken in a helicopter to the area
where the UFO was thought to have landed – a dry lake bed.

They
saw nothing, but picked up a beeper signal west of the area.

At the
point where the return was the loudest was a small house.

They
landed and asked the residents if they had noticed anything strange
the previous night.

The people mentioned a loud noise and a bright
light, “like lightning.”
Although the DIA memo indicated more information would be
forwarded, no follow-up military documents ever came to light.

Researchers Barry Greenwood and Lawrence Fawcett stated, “reliable
sources have told us the Iranian case was about one and a half
inches thick, yet absolutely no admission to having this file has come
from any government agency with a possible connection to the case.”
Nevertheless, taped testimonies in later years by Iranian Air Force
generals Nader Yousefi and Mahmoud Sabahat reveal that General
John Secord, chief of the USAF mission in Orion, attended a high
level briefing with Iranian authorities and the pilots.

Furthermore, Lt.

General Abdulah Azarbarzin of the Iranian Imperial
Air Force admitted to U.S.

reporters that the UFO encounter had
been carefully documented and passed on to the USAF.

“This was the
request from the U.S.

They have the procedure, if we have some
information on UFOs, we’re just exchanging all this information, and
we did it.” In 2005, one of the Iranian pilots, General Parviz Jafari,
confirmed the facts of the chase in an interview with Whitley Strieber
and Dr.

Roger Leir.

U.S.

intelligence analysts found the case to be spectacular.

An
evaluation in the DIA files stated:
“An outstanding report.

This case is a classic which meets all the
criteria necessary for a valid study of the UFO phenomenon: a) the
object was seen by multiple witnesses from different locations ...

and
viewpoints.This case is a classic which meets all the
criteria necessary for a valid study of the UFO phenomenon: a) the
object was seen by multiple witnesses from different locations ...

and
viewpoints.

b) the credibility of many of the witnesses was high (an
Air Force general, qualified air crews, and experienced radar
operators).

c) visual sightings were confirmed by radar.

d) similar
electromagnetic effects (EME) were reported by three separate
aircraft.

e) there were physiological effects on some crew members
(i.e.

loss of night vision due to the brightness of the object).

f) an
inordinate amount of maneuverability was displayed by the UFOs.”
During the 1990s, Lee Graham and Ron Regehr of Aero-Jet in
California confirmed that the UFO sighting over Tehran was tracked
by the U.S.

military’s Defense Support Program (DSP) satellite.

This
is a deep space platform primarily used to detect the launch of
ballistic missiles.

It can distinguish different aircraft by comparing
their infrared signature with a comprehensive database of known
aircraft.

Graham and Regehr obtained print-outs showing that the
DSP detected an anomalous object in Iranian air space at that time.

The obvious question is, who was operating the object over Teheran?

Based on the all that is known, it makes no sense to claim that this
was American technology.

Why would the Americans confront the Air
Force of such a key ally within its own air space?

Nor has there ever
been any indication in subsequent years that the Soviet Union
created technology responsible for this – to say nothing of the fact
that for the Soviets to have engaged Iranian F-4s over Tehran in
1976 would have been even more provocative than if the U.S.

had
done so.

Indeed, after the encounter, the Iranian government asked
the governments of the USSR and the U.S.

whether this had been a
test of their military equipment.

Neither nation claimed responsibility.

The real problem is that this object so clearly outperformed
American-made fighter jets.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Neither nation claimed responsibility. The real problem is that this object so clearly outperformed
American-made fighter jets. Some agency – or civilization – was
responsible for it. Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
8 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

USAF Lt. Col. Charles
Halt10.

The 1981 Halt Memo.

The Rendlesham Forest incident remains among the most important
UFO cases ever.

It involved a landing of an unknown craft near two
Air Bases in Britain, was witnessed by many U.S.

military personnel,
and is supported by military documentation.

In addition, the area
held a large stock of nuclear weapons, a fact that was denied by
authorities for years, then admitted to be true.

The case remains
controversial, however, because proponents have not agreed on
certain key details, and other critics have claimed it has wholly
prosaic explanations.

Moreover, confusion has plagued the case in
matters so simple as the exact dates when it occurred.

A major reason for this stems from the primary military document
associated with the case, prepared by Deputy Base Commander Lt.

Colonel Charles Halt.

This was written from memory several weeks
later, left a great deal out, and ascribed incorrect dates to the major
events.

Nevertheless, the incredible detail provided by so many
witnesses, much of which is well corroborated, makes it clear that
something extraordinary happened.

Early in the morning of December 26, 1980, two USAF security police
patrolmen saw unusual lights outside the back gate at Britain’s RAF
Woodbridge.

Under the assumption that this was aircraft in trouble,
three patrolmen were ordered to proceed on foot to investigate.

According to the report by Halt (which ascribed this sighting to the
following evening), they reported seeing a glowing, triangular object
in the forest, about 9 feet long and 6 feet high, emitting a powerful
white light.

It “had a pulsating red light on top with a bank(s) of blue
lights underneath.” The object was either hovering or standing on
short legs.

As the patrol approached, the strange object maneuvered slowly
through the trees to a nearby farm, causing disturbance among the
animals.

It then quickly disappeared into the sky.

About an hour
later, the object was sighted in the sky.USAF Lt. Col. Charles
Halt

It then quickly disappeared into the sky. About an hour
later, the object was sighted in the sky. The following day,
investigators saw three ground traces indicating possible landing leg
depressions. Later that night, Halt and other men personally
witnessed a “red sun-like light,” moving and pulsing. Here is his
description:
“At one point it appeared to throw off glowing particles and then
broke into five separate white objects and then disappeared. Immediately thereafter, three star-like objects were noticed in the
sky, two objects to the north and one to the south, all of which were
about 10 degrees off the horizon. The objects moved rapidly in sharp
angular movements and displayed red, green and blue lights.... The
object to the south was visible for two or three hours and beamed
down a stream of light from time to time.”
There also exists 18 minutes of an extraordinary audio-tape
recording (covering several hours), made while Halt and his team
investigated during the second night. In addition, the main airmen
involved have all been interviewed, and in essentials their stories
hold together well. One important fact that has surfaced is that as the object hovered
above Halt and his men, one hovered motionless and began to shine
laser-like beams of light down all over the forest and RAF
Woodbridge. In Halt’s words,
“It sort of danced about in the sky and it sent down beams of light.... falling different places on the base.... The people in the Weapons
storage area and several other places on the base also reported the
lights.... [The beam] stayed on for about 5-10 seconds and just as
abruptly as it came, it disappeared... Not only this, but in 1993 Halt told investigators privately that beams
The memo
by Lt. Col. Charles
Halt,
prepared in
January
1981. Click
to enlarge. Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
9 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---igators privately that beams
The memo
by Lt. Col. Charles
Halt,
prepared in
January
1981. Click
to enlarge. Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
9 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

had penetrated the steel, earth, and concrete of the hardened
bunkers containing the nuclear weapons secretly stored at the base.
Given the history of UFOs and their proximity to nuclear weapons, it
is certainly plausible. Ultimately, the beams reached the secured
areas where the weapons were stored, “adversely affecting the
ordinance,” in the words of Halt.
There is much more to this event, which has received several
book-length treatments as well as detailed coverage in my book,
UFOs and the National Security State: The Cover-Up Exposed,
1973-1991.
As the years go by, the stature of the Rendlesham Forest case has
continued to grow, not merely as a bona fide UFO encounter, but as
one of the most significant ever. The British Ministry of Defence,
following its long-established policy of silence and disinformation
regarding UFOs, stated curtly that the Rendlesham case was of "no
defence significance."
The Perry Nuclear
Power Plant: apparent
site of interest of the
Lake Erie UFO.cy of silence and disinformation
regarding UFOs, stated curtly that the Rendlesham case was of "no
defence significance."
The Perry Nuclear
Power Plant: apparent
site of interest of the
Lake Erie UFO.

11. U.S. Coast Guard Encounter with a
UFO, 1988
[Note from Richard Dolan: This is a direct excerpt from my book,
UFOs and the National Security State: The Cover-Up Exposed,
1973-1991. Article citations are provided in the book.]
On the evening of March 4, 1988 near Eastland, Ohio, not far from
the Pennsylvania border, Sheila Baker and her children were driving
home along the shore of Lake Erie. At 6:30 p.m., their attention was
drawn to a large, bright object apparently hovering over the lake. It
seemed almost like a blimp. Bright lights appeared at each end of it,
and the whole thing was rocking end to end like a seesaw. The
brighter of the two lights was strobing. Once home, she persuaded
her husband, Henry, to accompany her and the children to the beach.
There, standing on the shore of Lake Erie, they all saw the object. It
was gun-metal grey and positively enormous – Henry later said it
was “larger than a football held at arm’s length.” It made no sound
that they could hear. Somehow, however, it caused the lake ice to
rumble and crack, perhaps by application of heat. The object then
began to circle slowly over part of the lake, coming nearly overhead
at just 1/4 mile altitude.
Feeling nervous, they drove back and watched the object from their
home. From there, they saw it descend; red and blue blinking lights
were along its bottom edge. More interesting, however, were five or
six bright yellow triangular lights that detached from its side. These
lights hovered around the main object, then darted and zig-zagged in
the night sky at high speeds. Henry believed these objects were
smaller than a one-seat Cessna and “crossed 50 mile stretches low
over the ice in the snap of a finger.” They approached the shore,
made right-angle turns, and shot straight up. Several passes were
toward the nearby Perry Nuclear Plant. One neighbor of the Bakers
also saw this display, and tried (unsuccessfully) to photograph the
object.
In response to several phone calls, two members of the Coast Guard,
Seaman James Powers and Petty Officer John Knaub, drove to the
beach. As they arrived, the triangular objects approached them,
prompting them to turn off their vehicle’s headlights. The men
continued to watch the triangles fly over the lake, one of which
accelerated straight at them, then veered east, zoomed straight up,
and came down beside the parent object. The Bakers were back at
the beach now, and listened to the Coast Guard personnel
communicate by two-way radio with their base in Detroit. What they
overheard was:
“. . . be advised the object appears to be landing on the lake ....
There are other objects moving around it. Be advised these smaller
The U.S.
Coast
Guard
report of
March 4,
1988,
describing
a
spectacular
UFO over
Lake Erie.
Click to
enlarge.
Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
10 of 14sed these smaller
The U.S.
Coast
Guard
report of
March 4,
1988,
describing
a
spectacular
UFO over
Lake Erie.
Click to
enlarge.
Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
10 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---objects are going at high rates of speed.

There are no engine noises
and they are very, very low.

Be advised these are not planets.

At the same time, 15 miles to the southeast, not far from the Perry
Nuclear Plant, Cindy Hale was walking her dog.

She saw a triangular
light hovering above her, and her dog began to whine.

The triangle
flashed a sequence of multicolored lights, and she responded by
flicking her cigarette lighter.

This went on for 30 minutes, until the
triangle accelerated and left without a sound.

Another local resident, Tim Keck, was watching the stars through his
telescope when he saw a bright triangular object.

Luckily, he had his
camera with him – a cheap 110 Instamatic he had received as a
Burger King promotion, but it worked.

He took a picture of the object
before it silently moved beyond the horizon, catching about half of it
before it moved fully out of the frame.

Because of the nature of the
camera, part of the object appeared beyond the formal edge of the
negative’s frame.

Meanwhile, back at the lake, the large ship was nearly directly on the
ice.

Henry Baker continued to listen to Powers and Knaub tell their
base, “you should be advised that the object is now shining lights all
over the lake and it’s turning different colors.” The ice made cracking
noises so loud that Powers and Knaub had to yell in order to be
heard.

Suddenly the triangles were back, returning one by one into
the large object.

The ice boomed louder and louder, then all the lights
went off, the ice stopped making noise, and everything became
“dead silent.” After another 30 minutes, the object could not be seen.

The witnesses could only assume it had gone below the surface.

On the morning of the 5th, unusually huge pieces of broken ice were
seen where the object had been.The witnesses could only assume it had gone below the surface.

On the morning of the 5th, unusually huge pieces of broken ice were
seen where the object had been.

That day, a Coast Guard
representative told the Bakers that they had been instructed by the
Army and NASA (whom Sheila had also phoned) not to investigate
the matter further, nor to take their ice cutter out to the lake to
examine the ice.

The matter was “out of their league and out of their
hands.” They said all information was being forwarded to Wright-
Patterson AFB and a facility in Detroit.

For its part, Wright-Patterson
refused to confirm or deny any interest in the matter.

The Coast Guard created an Incident Report on March 5, 1988,
describing the event in concise detail.

The report stated that a large
object had landed a quarter mile east of the nuclear power plant, and
that it had ...

“...

dispersed 3-5 smaller flying objects that were zipping around
rather quickly.

These objects had red, green, white, and yellow lights
on them that strobed intermittently.

They also had the ability to stop
and hover in mid-flight.”
During the night of March 5, Sheila Baker saw what she thought was
the same UFO, hovering over the lake, only at a higher altitude than
the night before.

The Coast Guard sent some men out who arrived
too late and saw nothing.

The Coast Guard then contacted the Lost
Nation Airport in Willoughby, Ohio.

The control tower operator told
them that “the two bright lights” were Venus and Jupiter, which were
in near-alignment.

The flashing lights were “gases in the
atmosphere.” Never mind that Baker did not mention two bright
lights, but a large object.

The Coast Guard promptly wrote a
follow-up report on the original encounter, laying the whole matter to
rest.

The entire series of events was then debunked in the Cleveland
Plain Dealer and other newspapers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Coast Guard promptly wrote a
follow-up report on the original encounter, laying the whole matter to
rest. The entire series of events was then debunked in the Cleveland
Plain Dealer and other newspapers. Whatever the cause of the March 5 sighting, to attribute the events
of March 4 to Venus and Jupiter goes well beyond the boundaries of
credibility. MUFON, to its credit, continued to investigate the sighting,
even placing a classified ad in the newspaper looking for witnesses. The tactic worked; others did come forward, including Cindy Hale,
Tim Keck, and others. All of these people described UFO activity from
that night between 10 and 10:30 p.m., and all described triangles. Bruce Maccabee analyzed Keck’s photograph, determining that it was
a legitimate image of an unexplained object. Years later, Shiela and
Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
11 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---s photograph, determining that it was
a legitimate image of an unexplained object. Years later, Shiela and
Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
11 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Henry Baker remained adamant about what they saw.
Amazingly, according to Hudson Valley-based UFO researcher Philip
Imbrogno, a number of triangular objects were seen by multiple
witnesses near the Indian Point nuclear facility in New York State on
March 4, 1988 – that is, the same night as the sightings in Ohio. Not
much in the way of followup occurred, however, and little else is
known of the incident.
Due to the caliber of the witnesses, the official documentary
evidence, the photographic evidence, and the intrinsic nature of the
event itself, the Lake Erie UFO incident must be considered one of the
most compelling UFO events in modern history. All evidence points to
the conclusion that an intelligently operated and enormous object
came down over the Lake Erie ice; that this object released several
bright triangles that flew beyond the ability of any known aircraft;
that these triangles were interested in the nearby nuclear facility;
that they interacted with the witnesses who observed them; that the
Coast Guard officials were convinced the event was something
important; that the Coast Guard itself was prevented from pursuing
this incident by higher agencies; and that the matter was
successfully disabled by the national security apparatus and the
media.
Photograph of a
triangular craft over
Belgium, taken during
the spring of 1990,
studied and deemed
authentic by the Royal
Belgian Air Force.

Radar tracking of a
UFO, from one of the
Belgian F-16s during
the night of March
30-31, 1990.er
Belgium, taken during
the spring of 1990,
studied and deemed
authentic by the Royal
Belgian Air Force.

Radar tracking of a
UFO, from one of the
Belgian F-16s during
the night of March
30-31, 1990.

12. UFOs Over Belgium, 1989-1990
From late 1989 to the spring of 1990, hundreds of reports of lighted
objects, often described as large triangular-shaped craft, were
recorded in Belgium. The most spectacular sighting took place on the
night of March 30, 1990. Thousands of witnesses saw one or more
low-flying triangular UFOs with bright lights flashing in the center.
The Belgian Air Force sent two F-16s to intercept the UFOs, which
were tracked by several NATO radar stations; the jet pilots also
tracked the objects on radar, and even see them at times. But the
F-16s – among the top jet interceptors in the world – were
thoroughly outclassed by the triangular objects. Not only could these
objects accelerate at incredible speeds, not only could they fly as
slowly as 30 mph, but they could change altitude almost instantly. At
one point, for example, Belgian Air Force radar tracked a UFO as it
descended approximately 4,000 feet in one second. That’s nearly a
mile. Belgian Air Force Chief of Operations, Colonel Wilfried De
Brouwer, added “there was a logic in the movements of the UFO.”
To whom did these triangles belong? Despite the fact that no
perfectly triangular aircraft officially exists, many have suspected a
secret American project. The Belgians certainly inquired, and
received the reply that “no USAF stealth aircraft were operating”
during the period in question. The statement appears carefully
worded. It’s hard to know the truth here.
Major P. Lambrechts of the Belgian Air Force General Staff did not
seem to think these were American craft. His “Report on the
Observation of UFOs During the Night of March 30-31, 1990” includes
a detailed chronology of events and dismisses several alternative
hypotheses, including the aircraft thesis. According to Lambrechts:
“The speeds measured at that time and the altitude shifts exclude
the hypothesis according to which planes could be mistaken for the
observed UFOs. The slow moves during the other phases differ also
from the moves of planes.... Though speeds greater than the sound
barrier have been measured several times, not any bang has been
noticed. Here also, no explanation can be given.”
If these triangles were American, the U.S. Air Force made no
requests to the Belgian government for any such type of mission, as
it would have been required to do. More fundamentally, however, it
still remains a challenge to explain the performance characteristics of
the Belgian UFOs.
5 pages of
U.S.
Defense
Department
documents
describing
UFO events
in Belgium
from 1989
to 1990.
Click to
enlarge.
Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
12 of 14lgian UFOs.
5 pages of
U.S.
Defense
Department
documents
describing
UFO events
in Belgium
from 1989
to 1990.
Click to
enlarge.
Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
12 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---And What of Today?

In the last few decades it has become difficult to obtain UFO reports
through U.S.

government agencies.

This does not mean that the U.S.

military no longer encounters UFOs, only that detailed documentation
about them is not easily forthcoming.

For instance, we know of a UFO sighting that took place in 1996 at
Griffis Air Force Base, in upstate New York.

Researcher John
Greenwald sent a FOIA request to the United States Space Command
at Peterson Air Force Base, and received a slim “Summary of Unusual
Sightings” report.

The sightings only covered 1995 and 1996, all
rendered in concise form.

The entry for Griffis states:
“16 May 96 0800Z.

Received call of UFO sighting at Griffis AFB NY.

Four enlisted men observed circular orange light just above tree line
ESE of their location.

Five minutes total hovered and then
disappeared.

Reported via CONR/NEADS.”
The Griffis encounter is by no means spectacular.

However, it does
prove, as Greenwald pointed out, “that the Air Force [continues to
take] an interest and still sees the UFO phenomenon.”
Much more interesting was the failed attempt by F-16 jets to
intercept UFOs near Washington, D.C., during the night of July 25/26,
2002.

Many witnesses phoned their local radio station about it, and
the incident was briefly reported in The Washington Post.

I spoke
face-to-face with the first known witness, retired police officer Gary
Dillman, who told me he saw four F-16s chasing several objects that
easily outperformed them.

They left the area, but later two F-16s
reappeared, pursuing a single UFO.

Later, other witnesses saw two
F-16s chasing an unknown bluish object that easily outmaneuvered
and outdistanced the F-16s.

An Air Force spokesperson even told The Washington Post that a UFO
had been tracked on Air Force radar, but disappeared.

Nevertheless,
the Air Force blithely commented that :there are any number of
scenarios, but we don't know what it was." Surely, one might be
curious!--- PAGE BREAK ---

An Air Force spokesperson even told The Washington Post that a UFO
had been tracked on Air Force radar, but disappeared. Nevertheless,
the Air Force blithely commented that :there are any number of
scenarios, but we don't know what it was." Surely, one might be
curious! No official documentation on this encounter is available, but it
happened just the same. This encounter was not from the 1950s, but
the post-9/11 era. An object of extraordinary capability eluded
interceptors in the vicinity of the nation’s capital, with only the barest
of whispers from the nation’s media. Of course, it is not only the military of the U.S. that encounters
UFOs. These types of events occur everywhere. My most recent
book, UFOs and the National Security State: The Cover-Up Exposed,
1973-1991, details many of these. The foregoing should make it clear that UFOs have been a consistent
and significant thread of our “hidden history.” They have attracted
serious attention from the militaries of the world, in particular that of
the United States. And yet, this powerful interest is equaled by an
absolute refusal to acknowledge the phenomenon publicly. It doesn’t take a political genius to recognize that there is a
discrepancy here. Nor to begin the process of filling in the blanks:
that there is reasonable cause to believe that a technology not
belonging to any known terrestrial power has been operating in our
civilization, and that at least a few people in positions of authority
are well aware of this. Richard M. Dolan
Author, UFOs and the National Security State
keyhole@rochester.rr.com

Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
13 of 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Richard Dolan - 12 Government Documents that Take UFOs Seriously
14 of 14