There is an unintended com liment in one of Mr* Spar row’s criticisms
of my writing, which before he composed this article had totalled about a
,illion words. "Mr. Lane’and Mr. 7/eisbergM , he declares, ” have therefore
(in my case, because I do not aspiuse any kooky theories) adopted a meht-.od
of controversy that does not expose them to direct refutation. They offer no
con ected account of what they think happened."
Mr. Sparrow’s interpretation may be Questioned, and I do question it.
In fact, I directly challenge it. But no matter, I do offer an entir-ly
connected account of what I think did not happen, the official fiction
embodied in the Warren Report, and that, certainly, as an even better target
for I restrict myself tc the 'onnission's evidence and in 8ll important cases
I cite it-in the text, so here is no need to thumb to the back for citations.
It is a simple metter to prove I misrepresent or misquote; 1 have made it
simple, to attempt, at least. I sug est this is a much more stable target
that arguing with me about theories. And I also suggest thet the eminent Mr.
Sparrow does not do it because aitkM he dare not, either from lack of
knowledge of the subject matter, lack of error on my part, or lack of courage
on his.
Whatever a reasonable man man or may not say or believe, he can hardly
expect sensible men to believe that in a million words coming from cited
sources fl am "not exposed to direct refutation”. It is only that Mr. Sparrow
has neither the eviience nor the kidney.
Describin' a series of Questions that come from the preceeding text of
the book in the conclusions only tc my first one, Mr. Sparrow selects the
word "rhetorical”. This is not his only liberty with the dictionary. Of hhese
he elso says mo'e than he intends of his own logic and, proofs.±a As though
these questions were net all answered before the conclusion, were they serve
to focus attention on what was already proven, he expresses the opinion thatds of his own logic and, proofs.±a As though
these questions were net all answered before the conclusion, were they serve
to focus attention on what was already proven, he expresses the opinion that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"ao far as they ere valid they can he answered consistently with th- Com-
mission’s theory", Naturally, the Com -ission is right simply because it ma!<es
the claim, --hy bother with the evidence/ "'Ey bother with trials V Why
r r
concern oneself ith fact end evidence wh9n there is "theory"*
t
Ferhaps it would be interesting to repeat 8 few of these question
so distasteful to Hr, Sparrow end give him the opportunity for ei'te r that
Mdirect refutation'
1 he finds so elusive or the citation of the sprrorpaite
"theory" of disproof:
" V/hy did the ^eport suppress the fact thst the ’found* bullet had
been cleaned before receipt in the FBI laboratories* 7,hy did the FBI not
t
analyze the organic traces left on the bullet * Why did not the Commission
t
find out wh6 first cleaned the bullet and why the FBI did not analze the traces
remaining* Why, in fact, did the Commission rsraain mute on receiving this
f
testimony'* Why did the Commission not trace and report on the laundering of
f
Governor Connelly’s clothes, vfaich destroyed tfrairxx
evidence ebout his wounds’*"
f
These are a random, uninterrupted selection, I await "refutation by
theory"•

--- PAGE BREAK ---dering of
f
Governor Connelly’s clothes, vfaich destroyed tfrairxx
evidence ebout his wounds’*"
f
These are a random, uninterrupted selection, I await "refutation by
theory"•

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mr. Spar ow says that "Marina’s circumstantial ac ount of the confession"
of her hsubend’s alleged "attempted assassination of General Ualker" is
"supported" by "physical evidence". This is diametrically op osed to truth
and fact. The truth is tfcart not only contrary, but when confronted with the
possibility of establishing a "physical" connection between Oswald and the
at empt on tfelker, as by spectrogrephic comparison of the bullets with the
whole one and the f38gnent3 attributed to the assassination, th* government
did not even attempt it.
This is consistent with the continuing and illegal suppression of
the spectrographic analysis of the "assassination" bullet and fragments.
Does one belief that if this scientific test in any way confirmed the
false claims of the government this evidence would be sup^res ed* Yet I
*
pinpointed this in my first writing, chel’enged Mrl- Ho-ver to releese
the spectrographic analysis before any other bo k on the ’barren *leport
had been published, repeated this demand on all available levels, and h8vs
total silence for an answer.
Another of Mr. Sparrow’s r-giment of straw men, enough to dry a very
large literary barnyard, is this:"Again it was an essential factor that Oswsld
should ocitain a job in the Book depository".
.'Thy- Could not the cito of th* assassination h* ve been selected by these who
t
framed him simply because they learned he had this employment*
t
Still another is .the jacket misrepresented as Oswald’s that so
conveniently turned up near the escape route of the Tiprit kil’er. .ith<but
crediting (for he never mentions it existence) the source of the proof that
this was not Oswald’s jacket, my own THlTEwASHII: THE ^BI-SEC-BT SE-VTCE
COVIA UP -and it is I who ransacked this evidence from suppression in the Com issio
this was not Oswald’s jacket, my own THlTEwASHII: THE ^BI-SEC-BT SE-VTCE
COVIA UP -and it is I who ransacked this evidence from suppression in the Com issio

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat
this was not Oswald’s jacket, my own THlTEwASHII: THE ^BI-SEC-BT SE-VTCE
COVIA UP -and it is I who ransacked this evidence from suppression in the Com issio

--- PAGE BREAK ---

*• • v».» .*
*§|^S)
rescued this evidence from its burial in the Commission’s files -as though
end 10,000,000 words
with about 20,000 pages for evidence, there wwas no space for it-Hr. Sparrow
grudgingly conceded, "There is dif iculty in identifying the jacket”. How
much can en 'non st men understate; He then berates us:
"So obsessed sr= the critics with the laundry nark and its attendant
difficulties ("difficulties"* for whom but the blind apologists*) thst they forget
two things simple facts: Oswald was seen buttoning up his jacket when he leftickx
his lodgings at 1 p.m. (which is not the time he left); he hed no jacket on
when arrested.••• "
To save Mr. Sparrow trouble, for he has mor than enough, let* us assume
that he did have e jacket on when he left his lodgings, for whatever thst means
when that Jacket was never produced. Ee need now only explain how "Oswald was
seen buttoning up" a zipper jacket that war net and could not have been his.
More invidious is this fiction of the eminent warden: that the commissioners
got together and decided on e”coverup" or assembled and conspired. These two
things he attributes to me in defience of my writing and speaking thatbis 100$
to the contrary. In one of the books he fails to mention and judges my work withoul
reference to and in prte pretended ignorance of it (a new concept in literary
end legal criticism), whet I actually says it that the members of the Commission
were "spoon fed a pre-digested pablum". This same bock as the subtitle,"The
J-Bl - Secret Service coverup".
Bat to sey the evidence is lacking that the members of the Commission
were conscious conspirators is hot to say they were wight »r not all possessed of
better judgement than they here displayed. For the monster of the .Terren "eport
to heve issued after a ten-month gestation requires a rape more than a con-
spiracy. That there was.
And in eayung, as he does, that "& policy of xxansrwMBX
*cov ring up’ would have required the complicity of the seven Comissioners...
oull the ^hief Justice have obtained such agreement"* Coild he heve
f
.*..;• >Vk.-fe*yV'.V.^*;k». V;’* "V ‘ •. .. Vy I V‘.'•V'V..'' •' V*. .* ‘ . 'l ',V* -•complicity of the seven Comissioners...
oull the ^hief Justice have obtained such agreement"* Coild he heve
f
.*..;• >Vk.-fe*yV'.V.^*;k». V;’* "V ‘ •. .. Vy I V‘.'•V'V..'' •' V*. .* ‘ . 'l ',V* -•

--- PAGE BREAK ---even Comissioners...
oull the ^hief Justice have obtained such agreement"* Coild he heve
f
.*..;• >Vk.-fe*yV'.V.^*;k». V;’* "V ‘ •. .. Vy I V‘.'•V'V..'' •' V*. .* ‘ . 'l ',V* -•

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"fabricated" dcouments* The Chi_. Justice "would have been a brave man to
suggest such e step to his colleagues unless he was sure of their unanimous
support", Hr. Sparrow demeans the intelligence of a retarded juvenile. This
str8?/ man is so feebel the proximity of a quiescent feather is enough to
demolish it.
recognized
T£is is arrant nonsense, responsible "critic" has ever suggested
this in any v/ay. .tod it is the kind of "defense" the chief Justice end his
associates will be fortunate to survive.
The straw-man regiment has envdless recruits: "Again, it is herd enough to
se~ how e man could have fired repeatedly from th* grassy knoll and got clean a
away in fhll view of tbe public". Here is a fair revealtion of genuine ignorance
Tne grassy knoll is crested by a sxli stocksde fense. Only one man among the
witnesses was on the side away from the assassination. Does Hr. Sparrow’s
great wisdom and good common sense dictate that an assassin on the grassy knoll
would have had to have been cri the public side of thi3 fense, toward the
victim 8nd the protectors snd the public* On the reverse side of the fense,
f
the side any assassin except the kini Hr, Sparrow requires would have be^n, thex
was an abundance of obstruction between him and the man in the sirnal tower.
However, why the requirement "get clean awayi" Again, a demonstration
t
that ignorance is not alleviated by learning and degrees end respectability.
If you question this, I will supply unpublished pictures taken for me six
months ago of a rerfect ambuscade on the grassy knoll from which an assassin
would not have to flee. One does not have to be familiar with Dallas to hzve
and learn this; 1 have never be^n there. But one does require an open mind, and
that Hr. Dparrow does not have.
Of the same substance is his postulation requiring'
Tthet a conspirator
fcnejetiirasia$x±8£x (need rush to) the hospital four miles away” thenuire an open mind, and
that Hr. Dparrow does not have.
Of the same substance is his postulation requiring'
Tthet a conspirator
fcnejetiirasia$x±8£x (need rush to) the hospital four miles away” then

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd
that Hr. Dparrow does not have.
Of the same substance is his postulation requiring'
Tthet a conspirator
fcnejetiirasia$x±8£x (need rush to) the hospital four miles away” then

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Of the same solid substance is this one; about the possible planting of
the magic bullet with the built-in intelligence, Exhibit 399:"3ut how much strong
er an obstBncle to belief is provided by the practcal improbability that a
conspirator v/oula have succeeded in reaching the hospital four miles r.vay, in gal
gaining access through its ra*=ze of wards and pessages to the right place, in
identifying the strectcharm am ’planting’ the bullet in it unobserved."
First, it should be understood thst there today is quite a question
about which strtcher the bul'.et traces to. The one think that cannot be in
doubt is that it was the "right" one, for that it we.n't. It may well have
been one of several tfwrong" ones (my writing refers to other patients
admitted at that time).
Then Mr. Sparrow forgets for a inoment his favorite bete noir, Mr. Joesten.
If Joestem is right enu all officialdom wa invokv d in the murder, officialdom
did have ubre.rtricted access to that area.
JThef,meze of wardsX and pessages" is a£x of Mr. Sparrow's creation. It
would not have confronted his mythical conspirator. As a mini less burdened
by learning snd degrees might assume, the hosoital emergency room is
convenient to the emergency entrance.
However, the quite obvious lack of necessity for this torture of
reality is that the ideal place for such a conspirator was inside the
«
hospital, "1th no necessity for this mad rush. He cr uld have been a just-
admitted patient-as, for example, one with a epileptic seizure (and there
as one, in Salyer Plaza, immediately before the motorcade readhed it); or,
he could have been an employee of the hospital, whose freedom to roam it is
without question (end among the ^nnedyOhatinr Cuban refugees there were
a number on the very spot).
r*o more viable is this pretended logic; attribute into the "critics’
unfeal, meloframetic world- a world where an object moving slowly away from
- ' : ■ ■ - ■ • ' - "■ ■number on the very spot).
r*o more viable is this pretended logic; attribute into the "critics’
unfeal, meloframetic world- a world where an object moving slowly away from
- ' : ■ ■ - ■ • ' - "■ ■

--- PAGE BREAK ---spot).
r*o more viable is this pretended logic; attribute into the "critics’
unfeal, meloframetic world- a world where an object moving slowly away from
- ' : ■ ■ - ■ • ' - "■ ■

--- PAGE BREAK ---

h' . i
the marksman (not accross his field of visionJ becomes d s difficult target
at under 100 yards'*•
Here, in reality, urm Sparrow stages an uncontested claim on the
"unreal*’ and "melodramatic", for in re-enactinr the crime, after the
rifle alegedly used in it was considerable improved, and in an environment
that likewise was more congenial to success, as with halff the elevation, no
waving trees or brisk wonds, nc 18-inch wall to shoot through and under a
window open less then that much, with no boxes to work around (and they could
not possibly have been a rest and for any otherpn purpose were very much
in the way), and with even easier target than a life one "movi g slowly
away" - with all of this benefit plus all the time in the world for the
first shot ( canr.ot younimagine the considerate President halting his car so
his assassin could craw a steady bead)') and still, inanimate targets solidly
/
planted at distances to hich experienced marksmen could readily adjust,
mechanically- the nest shots the Commission could get, rated as "masters" by
tha National Rifle Association - could not duplicate the spectacular success
attributed to the duffer ^swsld.
Particularly because he postulates this was so easy a show, so unexcep-
tional a feat, owuld it be comforting to hear Mr. Sparrow clamraor for the
release of all thenrecords the National Rifle Association has on this "test"
that was so grossly misrepresented by those Mr. Sparrow "defends"/
Oswald was a "disappointed ^cmmTinist,*, Mr. Sparrow assures us, no
doubt from his trust in tha ^eport, which without fail describes its villain
as "dedicated to marxism end ^omunism". The is a rather exceptional representa-
tion of what one finds if one takes one o" tbs rare good suggestions Mr. Sparrow
makes, pleased is h* with his advice that he repeats it.
M
.re should read
Oswald's "historic diary", he seys, as though we didn’t. (Oswald’s privately-
expressed beliefs ere certainly important. They do, as idr. Sparrow infersadvice that he repeats it.
M
.re should read
Oswald's "historic diary", he seys, as though we didn’t. (Oswald’s privately-
expressed beliefs ere certainly important. They do, as idr. Sparrow infers

--- PAGE BREAK ---ts it.
M
.re should read
Oswald's "historic diary", he seys, as though we didn’t. (Oswald’s privately-
expressed beliefs ere certainly important. They do, as idr. Sparrow infers

--- PAGE BREAK ---

give us s true picture of the nan. This is his pro—S viet stance: The Rus ian
leaders ere "fet, stinking politicians". And here his love for the American
Ctenunist ^arty: it has "betrayed the working class".
I can only wonder if Mr. Sparrow to~k his own advice.
His questions are not quite as good. in explaining that the public wes
ready prey for us "scavebgers", he also represents that no one had read the
Heport or any substantial p> rt of it. "Row many of them have otv»ned the
Report", ha esks, "let alone weighed its arguments against those of the
attackers'?" Eis implication is that the Report is unknown.
he will not be comforted by its sale, in the official, Government Print-
ing Office edition, which v/es a spectacular success, in the commercial, hard-
back editions, in the countless thousands in bo kclub editions and in the
also countless abridgements. Does he forget there was en immediate pocket-
book edition* Does he forget that the “eport’s "Sum'ary and Conclusions"
t
were the official press release, that it was cartied, word for word-all of its
great lenght-as the wire-service story* Does he forgetithe very generous
t
press attention-the complete thing in the ^ew York "Times", for example'*
Mr. Sparrow has been playing back his own records or whet is equally
fatal, listening to his Araarican colleague, ^-r. ouis I*izer, the great lawyer
who wrote a glowing endorsement of the Wsr.en "eport for one of the commercial
editionsi and, somehow,escaped being celled a "scavenger" for it) without
having seen the alleged supporting avid nee, which was not published for
two more months.
Of course, there Bre other -<r. Sparrow respects, praises and recon ends.
For example, Mr. William Manchester who, he says, pen. ed an "hour-by-hour
chronicle". That he did, without the things that did happen and with aL1 of
the things that didn’t in a rare upsetting of the law of averages that made
hi more wrong on detail than if he had consciously invented it.
• tJUSjy' '■
■ “v"‘v • i V'y.V&N.' '• sw' ,• yjvy}
• • • . . ■•■••••hat didn’t in a rare upsetting of the law of averages that made
hi more wrong on detail than if he had consciously invented it.
• tJUSjy' '■
■ “v"‘v • i V'y.V&N.' '• sw' ,• yjvy}
• • • . . ■•■••••

--- PAGE BREAK ---upsetting of the law of averages that made
hi more wrong on detail than if he had consciously invented it.
• tJUSjy' '■
■ “v"‘v • i V'y.V&N.' '• sw' ,• yjvy}
• • • . . ■•■••••

--- PAGE BREAK ---

He likes Coramis ion Member Congressman Ford's "Portrait of the
Assassin”, and who could be mors impotrisl e commentator on Congressman
Ford the Commission Member than Congressman Ford the commentator on itV
/
(unless it is the ghost who wrote the book!)
Then there is Jean Stafford, whose gruesome capitalizing on the
distress of the distraught mother may have revolved the cirpse of her lete
and respect husband, **r. A.J. Liebling, one of the more responsible com-
mentators cn the press, rather rapidly in his grave but has nothing to do
with any of the fact of :£sx either the murder or its investigation.
And in a vivid re’*rit9ng of the dictionary, AUr. Sparrow describes as
a "human document” that exceptional display of fillial warmth and respect
by Robert ugweld, who enriched himself by the most disgraceful comment on
his mother, thus ennobling both motherhood and himself, Robert beers an
unusual love for his murdered brother, who he describes as the assassin without
any independent knowledge, ^nd, of course, is well paid for it. e h8d lit le
work to do because thw writing was by the "-end husband and wife teafh. Robert
had been the first to profit from the assassinstion, as the suppressed Sec-
cret Service investigation of the scandal proves. For protecting Marina from
the exploiters, in the designation of his publisher, this gentle and selfless
soul got an initial 10? of Marine's gross. Phe was milked for a total of 35?,
in al lactation made possible by Robert. N0 prize cow ever yielded as much
cream, "hum n", indeed. Mr. Sparrow’s recommended reading is like his own
writing.
There are, he ever, a few strange selections from Mr. Sparrow thet
should be noted, respects *-r. Joesten for "the courage of his own crazy
convictions", in which "he has provided an object-lesson for Messrs. Lane
and Weisberg**, 3rasXxHfxxM^xi^uaai®sxHi^xsuMXXiffliiBx.. .They have had three
or four years in which tc think of a more convincing conspiracy theory than
• . .... • .bject-lesson for Messrs. Lane
and Weisberg**, 3rasXxHfxxM^xi^uaai®sxHi^xsuMXXiffliiBx.. .They have had three
or four years in which tc think of a more convincing conspiracy theory than
• . .... • .

--- PAGE BREAK ---srs. Lane
and Weisberg**, 3rasXxHfxxM^xi^uaai®sxHi^xsuMXXiffliiBx.. .They have had three
or four years in which tc think of a more convincing conspiracy theory than
• . .... • .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.
fe-w'vi,;.
'#$.' u Avi*S.->;>.-: v
J ~
that of Mr. Joesten but they have not produced one, .Thy noti"
t
I dount that it wDuld impress Mr. Sparrow to repeat that this is not
the function of a responsible writer whose explicit purpose^is to disprove
the official,ac ounting of the assassination.
'.That may trouble him-and shoul d if it aoesn’t-is his nuotation of
Joesten’s lete-196J7 bo^k as compared with mine, which dates to mid-February
1965 , or Mr. ~anes, whose publication date was toward the end of September
196j6, es giving us ’’three or four years”.
But were Mr. Sparrow the type tk easily troubled, he’d be distressed
at the clamorous obfuscation he hurls at Mr. Lane (and me, although it is
entirely inappropriate es addressed to me) in claiming that the doctors
in -hi as did not know their business and could not recognize a wound (St
entrance in the front of the neck because they didn’t look at a wound twice
as large in the bake 8nd that they said this was a wound of ntrance only
under the pressure of an unwelcome press conference.
This would come with better grace from Mr. Sparrow if he had cited
my evidence of font-entrance for the neck wound. It is in the handwritten
draft of the autopsy, father, it is in the unbumed one. ^r. Sparrow has
no invective for the chief of the autopsy who burned the first draft of the
autopsy report two days after the murder. Kor has he sny explanation of the
magic which converted the unchanged description of this wound as a ’’puncture
wound” into ’’second, much smeller wound” whsn the autopsy was tpped.
Now, unless there is perjury and its subornation, which i3 not at all
unlikely, this information was not given the autopsy chief by the doctor in
charge in Dallas until th? day efter the murder. It is hardly from spontaneous
press sources.
-ii
; i. ;.v- • is . st sunlikely, this information was not given the autopsy chief by the doctor in
charge in Dallas until th? day efter the murder. It is hardly from spontaneous
press sources.
-ii
; i. ;.v- • is . st s

--- PAGE BREAK ---rmation was not given the autopsy chief by the doctor in
charge in Dallas until th? day efter the murder. It is hardly from spontaneous
press sources.
-ii
; i. ;.v- • is . st s

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Alowhere, in even by inuendo, does Mr. Sparrow represent the doctrine,
purpose, content Hfx*anflXM or thrust of my writing. It is explicit in ell my books.
All are part of a single study of the assassination and its official investigation.
It is and has been my inflexible determination to do what I could to bring about
another official investigation of the assassination. This is 83 explicit es it
can ossibly be in all of my writing and speaking. I have dwelt on this et
great length, impromptu and under considered_e pressure without, I am absolutely
confident, in sny way indicating otherwise than what 1 now tell you: I believe
that
the re-investigatiin myst must be of-'icial because unless it is ^he society
which began to fall apart when the accused assassin was first systematically
denied all his rights (and with him, all of us) and then Murdered only because
public authority made it possible must at some point begin to function egii
again; and ixhxlixwxxttxt: unless we all acknowledge our collective r sponsibility
through the government and the government acknowledges its specific responsibility
we will not recapture our lost national honor.
For this purpose I dedicated myself to the disproof of the Report to
the degree possible. This I have undertaken on a number of levels, with
the published "evidence'’ and by resurrecting what has been suppressed, on a
scale that all the others, collectively, do not approximate. 1 have published
almost
three books that come in large part or entirely from the suppressed evidence,
and the fifth is written.
For this purpose it is in no way my obligation to pretend to solve the c:*im€
1 do not consider myself Jarnes Bond. I am a writer and an analyst. I make no
pretense of solving th^ crime.
Having devoted great length ana emphasis to *~r. Jossten’s ‘’solution’ ,
which is obviously foreign to my belief and writing, ^r. Sparrow then says,
"No wonder Messrs. Lane end Weisberg have no positive theory to suggest!
To cite a parallel: if Mr. Spar ow is defending a mm ac -used of murder snd
.my belief and writing, ^r. Sparrow then says,
"No wonder Messrs. Lane end Weisberg have no positive theory to suggest!
To cite a parallel: if Mr. Spar ow is defending a mm ac -used of murder snd
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that men is innocent, must i^lr. Sparrow replade the police sni prosecutors and
bring to bo:k the actual murdered?
/
If an innocent man can go free only if he finds the guilty one, how many of
us would be free*
•• : • ■ ■ , v ■

--- PAGE BREAK ---police sni prosecutors and
bring to bo:k the actual murdered?
/
If an innocent man can go free only if he finds the guilty one, how many of
us would be free*
•• : • ■ ■ , v ■

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is child’s play for Mr. Sparrow to cite tfcsxniBx* whet he thinks least
credible of the writing of any one bcritic" and assign it to ail. He does this
-Tith me, often in direct opposition to what I have written. Not once does he
ci$e my words, ega! nst me or the others* ;,hy do we (I) not believe that us\vald
murdered Officer Tippit? Because of the "unreliability of some of the witnesses
/
(e.g.Mrs. Markham
1)" .
From tr is one would never believe that not one of the witnesses who
"identified" Oswald did so without benefit of ha ing prev ously seen him
officially identified as the murderer, or that the Commission itself proved he
could not have gotten to the scene of that c ime until five minutes after it was
reported on the police radio.
Or that it failed to vail as a witness the off-duty policeman, Officer
Dowley, who swore it is he who made that broadcast on the murdered policeman’s
car radio-and looked at his watch and established 8 time ten minutes before the
earliest that fcxsjnSz* Oswald could have reached the scene of the crime, even if
one accepts all the Comr.i ssion’s errors in tracing and timing Oswald.
To say thst we or I "seek to discredit the Commission’s conclusions on vital
points (e.g., the source of the shots) by calling attention to the differences of
opinuona among the obse vers" is a deliberate li8 as it is addressed to me and a
deliberate misrepresentation of my own published writing Mr. Sparrow oretends to
review. The fact is that it is 1 among the "critics” who began by saying 7/hat &r.
Sparrow knows and the Commission ignored, that eye-witnesses are among the J.east
dependable sources of information in such dramatic events.
Again lumping me in ith who I cannot begin to i agine, 1 leorn that I have
done an evil things and written an undependable work because I "repeatedly
failt to distinguish between a good point and a bad Train* one and refuse to abandon
arguments that have been shown to be without foundation". Vfe do have a specific
example that is foreign to my writing even when interpreted hy such
*i TM-
V.‘' - ■"■'v.v. ’ ,v v r-
■■ ■ ■ ■ • ■ • •• ■ents that have been shown to be without foundation". Vfe do have a specific
example that is foreign to my writing even when interpreted hy such
*i TM-
V.‘' - ■"■'v.v. ’ ,v v r-
■■ ■ ■ ■ • ■ • •• ■

--- PAGE BREAK ---shown to be without foundation". Vfe do have a specific
example that is foreign to my writing even when interpreted hy such
*i TM-
V.‘' - ■"■'v.v. ’ ,v v r-
■■ ■ ■ ■ • ■ • •• ■

--- PAGE BREAK ---

minds as Mr. Sparrow* s:"3ircumstances th/j t seemed suspicious (e.g.,the military
rehearsal shortly before the assassination, of the ceremonial for a presidential
funeral) heve been shown to be without foundation".
i
\7hat this really shows to be '’without foundation” is any intent on Mr.
Spessow1s part that is in any accord with honesty or purpose or belief.
Cne of the examples he cites at this coint, however, should comfort him
lit le. lie denies that it is true, in his words, "that the Dsllas police took notes
of Oswald’s interrogation end then destroy.d them”.
One might imagine so eminent and learned e gentleman as Mr. Sparrow to
wonder about the total absence of a single original note of any kind or
character of any of th^> hours-long interrogations of the rasn accused of
murdering the President. One might expect those of leas academic standing
and considerably leas learning to woner why Oswald was being interrogated.
If there were no ijotes of what he said, how could what he said he established'/
t
Por what other purpose was he allegedly being questioned/
t
In the case of the chief interrogator, Homicide Captain Will Fritz, it is
explicit* he did make notes, he prepared e typed tand then altered) statement
from them, and then dest oyed them (particularly since ths Jencks decision are
the police atrrehensive about having notes that can be demanded and examined by
the defense. Destroye notes, quite obvuously, cam.ot be the subject of embarrassing
cross examination.) In the case of the FBI it is not only explicit; it is unvarying.
Every questioned FBI agent destroyed all of his notes and each insisted it was
the inflexible FBI procedure. Sven Jampes Patrick Hosty, the "Oswald” expert,
who did net type up his notes until a month after the assassination, well after
the beginning of the official investigation, nonetheless destroyed them and the
Commission was wit out complaint of any kind.
Does Mr. Sparrow imagine that had ^sweld confessed there would be ho
tape recording of hi3 words/ Or no exact, stenographic transcript/'What police,
t • »
■ T‘V ■.* .*»;*•
• v, V&y’C’-.V '•.vid.
Does Mr. Sparrow imagine that had ^sweld confessed there would be ho
tape recording of hi3 words/ Or no exact, stenographic transcript/'What police,
t • »
■ T‘V ■.* .*»;*•
• v, V&y’C’-.V '•.vi

--- PAGE BREAK ---imagine that had ^sweld confessed there would be ho
tape recording of hi3 words/ Or no exact, stenographic transcript/'What police,
t • »
■ T‘V ■.* .*»;*•
• v, V&y’C’-.V '•.vi

--- PAGE BREAK ---

federal or local, would seek a confession ant then not be prepared to
receive it* For what purpose is the accused allegedly 7/arned that anything
be says car. be used against him if there is no preparation to have and
us9 "hat he says*
$
Mr. Sparrow likewise departs from any relevance to ray writing in, this
xayxxg writing, which can in no way be justified:
HAt the same time, says Mr. Joesten, there was afoor a conspiracy to kill
the President, the parties to which included one of th President's araxixsxx
aides Ken O'Donnell, °hief Starry and Captain Fritz of the Dalles police, members
and-
of the F.B.I. (among them, it seems, Mr. Ho~ver)/Mr. Joesten makes much of this-
Mrs. ^ainep.•.The President was to be killed by simultaneous fire from the famous
’grassy knoll1 and from a window in the ^ook Depository - in essentials, the
plot is the same as that postulated by Messrs Lane and tfeisberg.•."
This, truly, is an outrageous and abominable departure from any reasonable
extension, even as **r. Sparrow has himself stretched it, of what to any reasonable
man is fair comnent. Aside from my belief that there wa* shooting from the front,
and on this my writing is specific with the sources, this is absolutely opposed to
what I believe, think or have ever said. Ishud.er to think that a responsible
publication would dare print such defamatory writing without a cursory check.
If Mr. Joesten has done what I would hsve thought impossible-libel the
Dallas police-how much better is his critic, that upholder of tte law and protector
of decency, John Sparrow?
t
The restbof this rotten passage likewise, as Mr. Sparrow presents it, is
in essence at ributed to me and is likewise a total abandonment of any pretense
of responsibility or integrity on the author's part as it is an assumption of
responsibility for which the publisher should be held tanaccount.
v. • ''V~ .7 . . • V.~ • 7;
7•• • • 0.‘ • "
7:., * V'/o’ :vAv ■ 7. *
'r integrity on the author's part as it is an assumption of
responsibility for which the publisher should be held tanaccount.
v. • ''V~ .7 . . • V.~ • 7;
7•• • • 0.‘ • "
7:., * V'/o’ :vAv ■ 7. *
'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

>v •
•VW.WJ'
In one of hi = defenses of the Commission -r. Sparrow expresses his
disapproval of thos of us who say end overwhelmingly proved that the
wommission wes selective in its testimony-taking, exhibit searching and
evaluations, omitting (and I say suppressing and destroying) what was
inconsistent with its predetermined conclusion of Oswald’s solitary guilt.
"VThat else”, is his pious plaint, should an investigator do”.
There are two proper answers.
If, as I have from the first charged, the Commission acted as merely
a prosecutor, although the canons of the U.S. bar sredify otherwise, it
might be argued thst as a prosecutor the Cornsdssion might have ignored
the ovidence that would heve been adduced by the or.her side.
If, on the other hand, it took seriously the duty with which it was
charged, to get and present all the truth, all the evidence, then it had
the responsibility '£ presenting, side by side with whet it espoased, that
which was in contradiction. Its failure to do this cannot be taken as a sign
of either integrity or iSadizHtiara wsrsussiBn conviction of its own rectitude.
Mr. Spar-ow cannot have it both ways. If he insists that the Commission
behaved honorably and properly in cerefully eliminating that which was inconsisten
with its conclusions, he must acknowledge that it actea only as a prosecutor.
If he does this, he acknowledges that he is worng end I am right, for in my
initial writing on this subject-and that in the first book end the first
published book on it-thia is precisely what I said, that the Commission
constituted itself a prosecutor rather thai a fact-finder.
n :;rWi

--- PAGE BREAK ---d that in the first book end the first
published book on it-thia is precisely what I said, that the Commission
constituted itself a prosecutor rather thai a fact-finder.
n :;rWi

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Mr. Dwight Macdonald wrote for Fsouire a Critioue which is the shrewdest
fairest, weightiest, 8nd most entertaining of the strictures on the Report that
have been published".
If Mr. Sparrows regards this as a subject on which he is to be entertained,
I leave him to his own tastes. Mine are different.
Now nowhere in his lengthynopus does to. Sparrow make any reference to
his own knowledge, personal or viaarious, of what is in the '
w'inr:iss ion’s files
that it withheld. I mince no words. I call this suppression, nlike those who
do not and cannot produce documentation, there are 150 pages of facsimile
reproduction of documents relating to the uno.uestioneble and deliberate
suppression, misrepresentation end destruction of pictures of the assassination,
in my third book, to which Mr. Sparrow alludes. Most of these were entirelt
suppressed by the Cimmission. I got them from my own extensive? painful and
expensive search. Securely founded in his own ignorance, to. Sparrow says of
^r. MacDonald, whose article was published in February 1955, "he did not believe
that they intended to conceal anything". Thus does Mr. Maci5oneldfs writing end
beliefs become attractive to Mr. Sparrow, this he becomes en "expert". Mr.
delineated
Macdonal’s own contentment v/ith his own opinions is more adequately protrayed by
his own record: he never wrote the book for which he contracted with Prentice-
Hall, and he never withdrew from his contract so they could undertake another
work. Seemingly without embarrassment, "‘r. Sparrow concludes his glorification of
Mr. Macdonald with further exposition of his credentials:.he agreed with
their conclusions."
Not that Mr, Sparrow is inconsistent. Professor Alexander Bickel’s article
is"searching", much to his liking. Why? Not alone because he is 8 "professor".
*p. Bickel also is in accord with the Comission’s conclusions. His depth of
scholarship and astuteness of mind made him the author of a mechanism for
proving the Commission right by making them wrong. Instead of the first shot
• ' •• v .V' /• S : •. ''.Vj. . ••, ...>V' •? v'1'• ’/•: :-S >S-'tuteness of mind made him the author of a mechanism for
proving the Commission right by making them wrong. Instead of the first shot
• ' •• v .V' /• S : •. ''.Vj. . ••, ...>V' •? v'1'• ’/•: :-S >S-'

--- PAGE BREAK ---e him the author of a mechanism for
proving the Commission right by making them wrong. Instead of the first shot
• ' •• v .V' /• S : •. ''.Vj. . ••, ...>V' •? v'1'• ’/•: :-S >S-'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

having baen fired at or 8fter the 210th frame of the amateur movies taken by
Mr. Abraham, which is central in the Commission’s concept of a single assassin,
Porfessor Bickel would have it shot, having first been aimed, in less than one-
eighteenth of a second, though a tiny aperture in a tree. So little av/are of
the essential evidence is this learned practisioner and teacher of American
law that he is entirelt unaware that for the shot to have then been fired, were
any man in the w0rd capable of such split-second reaction and mechanical
performance, at this point in the sequence of events and from that sixth-floor
serious
window from which it allegedly came, the/injuries inflicted on the Texas
Governor and and th9 Insignificant one suffered by a bystander, Jernes C.
Tague, are entirely without accounting. But, Mr. Sparrow likes it anyway.
"The academic origin" of Epstein's work also appeals to iur. Sparrow, as does
that slight book snd its author. They "did more to damage the Commission.. .than
any other contribution to the debate", ^his tribute is limited, howwver; to
"enlightened readers".
Mr. Epstein's attractive is identical with Mr. Macdonald’s end Professor
Bickels; He is a "scholar", in this case scholarhhip is defined as a study
not based on the existing evidence (»r. Epstein’s knowledge of it is so scant
he had to get one of Mr. Sparrow’s "demons", Mrs. Sylvie Meagher, to do his
notes for him). But Mr. Sparrow makes no secret of the reason for his liking of
M
Tm Epstein:"...he does not believe in a conspiracy..." and "he accepts the
view that Oswald shot the President". ?,acceptsT’ is hardly the description of
to
a "study" lx which the question is stranger. Mr. Epstein at no point examines
this evidence. L^ke the Commission and 1,1 r. Sparrow, he assuaea Oswald’s guilt,
which ia the only possible way of establishing it, the Commission's onm
credible evidence leading to only the opposite conclusion
Professor Popkin is not quite as attractive to Mr. Spar:ow as the other
"scholars", but he likes and respects him. "Professor Popkin’’, he says”, ia no
more a demonologist then is Mr. Epstein".
em0nOl0Cy
’ ■opkin is not quite as attractive to Mr. Spar:ow as the other
"scholars", but he likes and respects him. "Professor Popkin’’, he says”, ia no
more a demonologist then is Mr. Epstein".
em0nOl0Cy
’ ■

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Demonology" is Mr. Sparrow’s dividing line, Mr. Popkin is on the right
side of it. is further attractive to *^r. Sparrow because "he puts forward
a positive theory”. That Mr. Spar ow finds this ’’theory"/ entirely
incredible me ely mekes Mr. -^opkin more attractive to him. Likewise Mr.
^opkin’s assumption that Oswald was a cancious part in a conscious conspiracy.
Mr. Sparrow’s likes and dislikes have nothing to do with fact or evidence. They
can be accurately measured by a writer’s attitude toward uswald; the gulit
guiltier the more attractive. Thus I C9n understand why Mr. Sparrow likes ne
si little. Prom the first I have insisted that the Commission's own evidence
establishes Oswald’s in ocence.
If the professors do nothing else, they stick together end look
out for their own’.
,

--- PAGE BREAK ---e first I have insisted that the Commission's own evidence
establishes Oswald’s in ocence.
If the professors do nothing else, they stick together end look
out for their own’.
,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The ghost of the late Senator McCarthy has entered the mind of Mr.
Sparrow. After en entirely distorted intorductory section, intended to establish
whatever the Conr.ission might have said as unquestionable truth end those of
use who prove otherwise as "derconologists", his kindest profanity, 7/9 are told
that "the manufacture of conspiracy theories became e small-scale industry
in the United States". ?.hat may woth no less fairness be said of a writer who
exploits his position end defames his honorable calling to grind out falsehood
and misrepresentation, depending upon his exalted reputation and position for
their accetance and shunning truth and fact in their content* Is Mr. Sparrow
»
less of an "industry"* The difference is thet he hes done little or no work*
' *4
and contents himself with the certification of the correctness of the eport
on the extraordinary basis that it says it is and those who wrote it say this
also.
This slander is folLowed in the very next paragraph with McCarthy more
subtle: "As time goes on it will become increasingly evident that the real mystery
concerns not the doings of the protagonists in Dallas during the fatel week,
but the subsequent performance of the mystery-makers themselves end the success oi
their campaign".
Next, ’’There is a certain evidence of association between those tfio have
criticized the Report."
Now I declare that between me and those other writers Mr. Speriow
cites the only "evidence of association" is one-sided and unauthorized;
my material was used, without credit or remission. There is no other
"evidence of association".
However, he is specific, and for a rare once correct, in reporting
that I "supplied material to u im Garriosn" (later in his article he forgets
this). But Mr. Sparrow’s obvious and dishonest intention is to associate me with
“r. Joesten and the others, and with this association, to try and brush of* on
1 ■ ■ ■ ■ ••n his article he forgets
this). But Mr. Sparrow’s obvious and dishonest intention is to associate me with
“r. Joesten and the others, and with this association, to try and brush of* on
1 ■ ■ ■ ■ ••

--- PAGE BREAK ---gets
this). But Mr. Sparrow’s obvious and dishonest intention is to associate me with
“r. Joesten and the others, and with this association, to try and brush of* on
1 ■ ■ ■ ■ ••

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to try and pretend that what he quotes at some length from their writings and his
"answers" to them ere fairly applicable to me and my writing. Thus he can say of
me-for he does net except me* what is as totally false as it is libellous,"If the
critics turned their scruting upon themselves they might well detect in their
own activities evidence of s sinister combination". And thus I become a "crack-
pot", a "rabble-rousing publicist" or a few other things, prudently does not
specify. ,Perhaps he really means all of them.
Again hiding behind the words of another and a deliberate vagueness, as his
training in the law perhaps counsels, 1 now find that for an American to seek to
preserve his society, to want and fight for justice end integrity of government,
is, in the words attributed to Dwight MacDonald ( whose expertise is established by
his basic accord with the Commission's conclusions), is to have "a large, lefts
handed political axe to grind".
This is not the only political sn©8kery in Mr. Sparrow’s writing and
disturbed mind. All that is lacking is the once-polular "Moscow gold".
blemi shes
In this apr.roach, eside farem the revelation of character iBfxsiBMiBi
and intellectual deficiencies, what does Mr. Sp arrow ffveel of himself* How does
he conceive the end product of 8 re-investigation of the Kennedy Xssassination-
What he carefully hides from his readers, certainly greater in number, to use
his own figure, than those who read my works, is the basic conclusion I make
specific in ray very first writing: that the expect job has not been done and
must be, entirely in public and preferably by Congress.
Now just bow "left" must one be to ask for a Congressional investigation
that might be headed by Senator lames Sastland of Mississippi? Just bow sub-
t
versive is it to demand that instead of the star-chamber secrecy and prosecution
back-room axx proceedures of the Warren Commission, the new investigation be
entirely in public'*
f
And what, indeed, does he think would follow government acknowledgement
' . . .and prosecution
back-room axx proceedures of the Warren Commission, the new investigation be
entirely in public'*
f
And what, indeed, does he think would follow government acknowledgement
' . . .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that the investigation did not do the job, that the awful crime has not been
solved, that the Report is undependable* Does he expect the Red Army in
'.Yashington, perhaps ^o in the Yhite louse's Does he expect this to inspire
a revolution, any kind of a popular uprising*
t
Has it never occurred to him thet the Anglo-Saxon concept ±xx*hxtxi»n
of law is that man err, than the most eminent, the judges, and bound to make
mistakes, and thet a decent society provides for the rectification of this
error that is as certain as man’s mortality* Does the law or respect for it
*
crumble form the reversal of wrong decisions on appeal-
r
Rather, I say, the rectification of error by government inspires
respect for and trust in thatbgovernment. Khen our government does what I
have from the first and without deviation aemsnded, re-investigates the
assassination, entirely in public and in conformity with traditional
Anglo-Saxon concepts of evidence and decent procedures and subjects its
evidence to honest examination, the effect will be exactly opposite to the
sinister implications of this man who has so little confidence in the law,
so little faith in justice and public procedures, so little trufct in people.
The government will not be subverted or in any way endangered. It will,
instead, enjoy e trust and respect the right to which it has forfeited. Only
8nd senseless hate
a man xixk so sick with fear/he cannot think straight can conceive otherwise.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ll,
instead, enjoy e trust and respect the right to which it has forfeited. Only
8nd senseless hate
a man xixk so sick with fear/he cannot think straight can conceive otherwise.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There is one men in England who writ s of the barren Report without
possession of or-‘direct reference to the 26 volumes of so-called "evidence".
That Mr. Sparrow can use this word to describe the collection of untested
citations of the Commission is no tribute to his concept of the law or respect
for its tradition8 and standards. Having read his newest apology for what no
man who is honest and informed could apologize, I am now satisfied that Mr.
Sparrow either doesn't have them or doesn’t use them. For example, he sjrysxtta*
ofztteaaazSfixmixamzyz* writes, "The evidence taken by the Commission was pub-
lished in 26 volumes, hslf of them consisting of photographs and other exhibits."
Tne best that can g? said for this is that it is ignorance.
The Commission did publish 26 volumes. The first fifteen are of "testimony",
the remaining 11 are of "exhibits", including some pictures. ±n neither number
nor bulk are "half of them...photographs and other exhibits."
Consistent with this is Mr. Sparrow’s comment on Professor ^opkin. It is
always easier to addres the copy, as Mp. Sparrow did. The iopkin work is a rather
thin transparency of some of mine, to which he has added irresponsible conjecture
so
and inaccurary while remaining faithful to my footnote error and impressed
by my contraction of testimony that he uses the same words-no more and no less.
And Mr. Sparrow has a clear preference for "professors" and "scholars"•
J-n comment on the incident at th e Irving, Texas, gunshop, as reported by
A opkin, wir. Sparrow says:
"In fact the clerk wos a woman and all she said ebout seeing Oswald was
that she could jot remember his ever being in the shop”.
I would recommend that Mr. Sparrow hencaforth shun the Dallas, ^exas
ares, for the youn men there consider themselves very manly. That "woman" clerk
is Dial Duwayne Ryder, whose testimony appears in Volume 11 of the Hearings,
beginning on page 224.
Mr. Sparrow tells us, -The owner was eray during the relevant period...
* ■ ■ ■   ' ■man" clerk
is Dial Duwayne Ryder, whose testimony appears in Volume 11 of the Hearings,
beginning on page 224.
Mr. Sparrow tells us, -The owner was eray during the relevant period...
* ■ ■ ■   ' ■

--- PAGE BREAK ---Duwayne Ryder, whose testimony appears in Volume 11 of the Hearings,
beginning on page 224.
Mr. Sparrow tells us, -The owner was eray during the relevant period...
* ■ ■ ■   ' ■

--- PAGE BREAK ---

,l vv;v, :c,^s. .j
And, "the key witness wes the manager, who contradicted himself to the
police.There was no such person-no "manager” , thi3 "key witness".
Next Mr. Sparrow favors us with a direct quotation from this "key
witness", this non-existent "manager",
He prefaces it with the denunciation that he "contradicted himself to the
police", the same -olice who had not a single interrogation report in their
files of the their investigation of s President’s murder, then says that:
"...when pressed about the contradiction on oath before the Commission
and asked whether he could sey definitely whether he had seen him*outside
of the shop any place’, replied ( and his enswer, seen in context, seems to
cover the shop also):’No, sir, I dont believe I have, A mean, I couldn’t say
specific, because back egain to the common features, so on and so forth’."
Because this is a fair paraphrase of the question asxed by C0m ission
Counsel -esley J. Liebeler and the words inside quotation marks are some
of this ura in the testimony of Diel Ryder (11H231), we now know that this
"key witness" who was the "manager" was the youthful repairman.
Charles W. Greener, owner of the Irving Sports Shop, also is not a
woman. Presumeebly neither he nor his wife would any more relish reference to
himas a woman than *yder or his v/ife.
And despite the considerable amount of time A have spent pouring over the
Commission’s documents, public and private, **■ must confess ignorance of Mr.
Sparrow's woman clerk. Had he been specific, with names and citations of testimony
^unafraid to "bore" the reader, as be so coyly out it), we might locate her and her
testimony - if she and it exist.
ur is it that Mr. Sparrowm despite the lustiness of his expsrte and behind
the beck esseult upon ell of those who do net agree with him, really fears devils
loving scripture'*
.. § • • ' ■ •
• -vur is it that Mr. Sparrowm despite the lustiness of his expsrte and behind
the beck esseult upon ell of those who do net agree with him, really fears devils
loving scripture'*
.. § • • ' ■ •
• -v

--- PAGE BREAK ---

)\
to. Sparrow is trouble by ny use of language. He prefers'what he calls
"dispassionate" writing. I do, indeed, write on this subject with pession.
I am not an intellectual eunuch. I may no effort to hide my feelings - and I
am not one bit ashamed of them. I think they are as appropriate a s they are
in broad daylight
honest, My President was gunned down on a street of a major city in my country,
“e was then consign*d to history with the dubious epitaph of a fake "investigation",
by the government that cams into power by that murder. I think when this hsp ens
the basic institutions of our society are in jeopardy, including the presidency,
and that when it is uncorrected no president is ever safe or free. I regret that
eminent lawyers, who argue only that wrong is right because wrong saya it is
right, do not see it this way and have no dedication to the tradition of
their profession.
I claim a dedication to my^wesponsibilities as e writer. To those intellectual
leaders whose abdication was somtotal when the -resident was murdered, when his
accused murdered was in turn murdered Alla he was innth hands of public
aut hority and only because that public authority made it possible, I say that
a literary sin to write on such a subject with pesaion, then I em a
proud sinner! I do feel the pounding blood. And I do not use ice-water for ink.
And I em entirely without apology, to to. Sparrow or anyone else.
. • ■ ; ■

--- PAGE BREAK ---pesaion, then I em a
proud sinner! I do feel the pounding blood. And I do not use ice-water for ink.
And I em entirely without apology, to to. Sparrow or anyone else.
. • ■ ; ■

--- PAGE BREAK ---

At only one point does he include direct quotation from my writing. It
cores out this wsyx bracketed, in that strange integrity of Mr. Sparrow's,
with Mr. Joesten, for purposes that are unsubtle to the discriminating and
informed reader:
" 'The staff of the ^onntssion aid not shun lying to the Commission
itself,’he writes,' ana neither was deterred by perjury or its subornation’;
as for the FBI, its report inculpating Oswald ’is a tissue so thin and a
polemic so undisguised that it would demean the labors of a hick police force
investigating the purloining of a dessicated fliunder’."
V/hat is lacking here in Mr. Sparrow’s "critique" is a statement that
the staff lawyers did not lie to the Commission; that either was embarrassed
by perjury end its subornation; that the FBI report was in any way a fair,
reasonably and honest document. Unlike ^r. Sparrow, my work is specific. I make
no charges without proving them. There was perjury and its subornation, and it
was known; the staff did lie, and I provided direct quotation?, .vith citations,
in quotation marks; and what I said of the FBI report is less than the
direct quotations of it warrant. If Ir. Sparrow is not troubled by an FBI
report, supposed to be definitive and made in pusr pursuances of strict
Presidential instruction pretends to account for the assassination with no
reference whatsoever to wto shots that had been fired and pretends to account
for what happened, must plead guilty. I am, indeed, troubled by this!
'

--- PAGE BREAK ---r the assassination with no
reference whatsoever to wto shots that had been fired and pretends to account
for what happened, must plead guilty. I am, indeed, troubled by this!
'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In all SO,000 ords of his alleged study, Air. Sparrow finds ample space
for an assortment of slanders and libels against me, but not a single error does
he even claim that I made* This, surely, is a new concept of criticism, the equal
of his new concept of law and justice:the Eerren eport is right because it says
it is*
This is the man who concludes his article with a compleint about hrax
"the recklessness,f of those who say and prove the barren Commission was wrong
are guilty of heaping "almost unlimited Calumny’1 on them ’’under a 18W that
allows almost unlimited calumny of public officials, at whatever cost to the
reputations of the in ocent."
His scholarship is amply reflected in his article: he has not a single
quotation of the evidence but ample reference to works of sycophancy. Those
h’i
works of which he approves are those in agreement with his preconception. Ahis
leads him to what he may yet be le9s than proud of, as we shall see.
He ’’evaluates” me on the basis of one bonk that he read in manuscript in
1965. It is to him more than anyone else that I owe its failure to achieve
English publication, saw to that. He does list it V/EOTEWASH: THE REPORT ON
THE PARPEN REPORT, in his bibliography.
But how ’’scholarly*’ is he when in his text he says, ”11 r. "Teisberg has pub-
lished three” books and he does not tjlaim to have read two of them (though he
does allude to evidence in one of these that he does not credit to it -and doesn’t
dispute it, ither*.)? How”scholarly” and complete is he-and in this great verbal
9
outburst, the one thing he h8d was spece- when he doesn't even identify them;
/
Indeed, how accurate is he when I published four books hell ahead of
the fourth
publication of his article, the last a month before the two he mentions in
his postscript*
/
The fact is there is no scholarship at all in his writing. It is a
^elf-demeaning lickspittle Predic8,fced upon fear and hate and firmly based upon
- . ■ • ' '
.he mentions in
his postscript*
/
The fact is there is no scholarship at all in his writing. It is a
^elf-demeaning lickspittle Predic8,fced upon fear and hate and firmly based upon
- . ■ • ' '
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
ignorance, 1t has the probity of the lawyer who demands imnni
axquital ofor his client without trial because, after all, his client
says he is innocent. Is anything else necessary*
/
In the absence of specification of error - which he cancot make first,
because there is no major error in my work end second because he is too
uninformed to be able to p he resorts to an unoriginal device, says,
"Mr. Lane and Mr. ^eisberg say" and then proceeds to forget about what
"Mr. Welaberg says" -in every, single easel In not one does he quote me1.
Instead he lumps me in with some of the wildest things he has dredged up,
knowing full well they are neither what I say or think.
It is not as though ^r. Sparrow is unaware of his nakedness. He seeks to
cover it, like the ■^rnperor. hide his total separation from the evidence,
to mask his failure to invoke it to support his claims, which he cannot do,
he stoops to this cheap device to pretend otherwise:
"A moment’s reflection," he writes, "shows that to answer their charges
individually would take up volumes at least as long as the books that contain them.
And misrepresentation ts is too often like the hydra: cut ofT one of its
heads and a score of others take its place; the task is never-ending."
The misrepresentations ar? Sparrow’s, as I shall show from his own
writing, not 8s completely as possible but enough to establish who is truthful
and fhir, who has honest intent -and who hasn’t.
v ' "

--- PAGE BREAK ---ar? Sparrow’s, as I shall show from his own
writing, not 8s completely as possible but enough to establish who is truthful
and fhir, who has honest intent -and who hasn’t.
v ' "

--- PAGE BREAK ---

He
There is a complaint I am constrained to resister. Sfcawlxs cites es his
only proof of "evidence of association" (by which he really means a devious
conspiracy of some undescribed sort, th* best kind for a writer like Mr.
Sparrow to concern himself with), &he fact thet I Supplied material to
Jim Garrison, the District Attorney ’’ of Mew_Orleans. Aside from my open
wonder about how terrible it is for a writer who has done the original
work to help public authority, I real.y thinker. Sparrow intended a
reflection otf Mr. Gerrj[son rather than me. But, then, maybe he doesn’t,
excellent
for he makes* no reference to the introduction fir, Garrison wrote for my
fourth book, OSWALD IN KB7 ORLEANS: CASE FOR CONSPIRACY YITH m: CIA. On
the other bend, had Mr. Sparrow acknowledged the existence of the foreword,
could he pretend the book did not exist!
0
Instead, he has other prten pretenses, particularly that Mr. Garriosn
is in accord iwht the writings of Messrs. Fopkin and ^oesten, bith of whom
specialize in unoriginal writing, save for the generous XExtrxjDiaiwxx '
applications of ov=rsctive end irresponsible imaginatuons to whet others
had published before they wrote. If Mr. Sparrow were really informed cn
the subject, the evidence, or the critical writing, he’d certainly at least
suspect that Ur. Koesten’s freat BMtfiJfe output is considerably facilitated erld
expedited by thn time he saves in not having to consult the 26 volumes, which
I believe he does not have and which I BQ confident he quotes from secondary
sources. But it might be a little much for Ur. Sparrow to chide Ur. Joesten
for this in such a glov/ing display of his own unencumbrance. Thus he forgoes
a vibale viable criticism.
MXXXGBZX is onzHgx BE sx ax orzxopkinx ix zwugzsztlngx zxhxtxaxx
^SBioisdx&EZJiid^xwaExaxzioyBdztoxErestBZHzrEBsScmzanisXiimxgB^jxetexzMrxz
tea rxis axzx zx z® txtszx