gcMtffllUlWtf

--- PAGE BREAK ---

b) A covering statement of January 16, 1969 by Burke
Marshall, as spokesman of the executors of John F. Kennedy.
c) An affidavit of five pages, signed by James B.
Rhoads, and dated January 16, 1969.
d) A letter of seven pages, signed by Burke Marshall,
on behalf of the Executors of the Estate of John F. Kennedy,
and dated October 29, 1966, and hereafter referred to as
» 2
the "Letter Agreement of 1966."
e) A memorandum of five pages, signed by Dr. James
J. ^fumes, Dr. J. Thornton Boswell, and Dr. Pierre A. Finck,
dated January 26, 1967, and hereafter referred to as the
"Supplementary Report of 1967."
f) A letter of one page from Dr. J. Thornton Boswell
to Attorney General Ramsey Clark, dated January 26, 1968.
g) A memorandum of sixteen pages, signed by Dr. William
H. Carnes, Dr. Russell S. Fisher, Dr. Russell H. Morgan, and
Dr. Alan R. Moritz, dated individually from March 28, 1968 to
April 9, 1968, and hereinafter referred to as the "1968 Panel
Review."
In his original request, the District Attorney of
Orleans Parish alleged that the "aforedescribed photographs
T
and x-rays are necessary and material to the prosecution of
the above-entitled cause" and that he "has substantial evidence
indicating that the aforedescribed photographs and x-rays will
reveal that John F. Kennedy was struck by bullets fired from
at least two directions."
-2-

--- PAGE BREAK ---s substantial evidence
indicating that the aforedescribed photographs and x-rays will
reveal that John F. Kennedy was struck by bullets fired from
at least two directions."
-2-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

At the hearing on January 17, the Court ruled that the
District Attorney's prima facie showing of need for the photo-
graphs and X-rays had been overcome by the Government's
pleading of January 16, 1969. In the Court's words, "the ball
had been returned to the District Attorney's court." The Court
gave the District Attorney two weeks in which to produce some
of his substantial evidence that shots came from more than one
direction.
This reply will provide such evidence and also make
certain additional replies to the Government's pleading of
January 16, 1969.
-3-

--- PAGE BREAK ---t shots came from more than one
direction.
This reply will provide such evidence and also make
certain additional replies to the Government's pleading of
January 16, 1969.
-3-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

*
PART I
. SUBSTANTIAL EVIDENCE THAT JOHN F. KENNEDY WAS
STRUCK WITH BULLETS FROM AT LEAST TWO
DIFFERENT DIRECTIONS
For the sake of accuracy, be denoted
"direction" in the sense it is used in the present context
refers both to the horizontal and vertical planes. In the
same way that two bullets entering the President's body from
street level at angles of 20° and 60° from the front would be
considered coming from two "directions," two bullets entering
the President's body from directly behind but from angles of
20° and 60° downward from the horizontal plane would be
considered coming from two different "directions."
(1) Statement bv Dr. Robert N. McClelland,
Assistant Professor cf Surcrery, Parkland
Hospital, Dallas, Texas.
At pages 11 and 12 of Volume XVII of the Warren
Commission Bearings, a diligent reader will find a very dim
reproduction of a hand written account of President Kennedy's
admission and treatment at Parkland Hospital. The account was
written on November 22, 1963, by the senior surgeon who
actually attended President Kennedy, i.e.. Dr. Robert N.
McClelland. The penultimate sentence is of particular
interest:
"The cause of death was due to massive head and
brain injury from a gunshot wound of the left
temple." (Emphasis added)
-4-
J

--- PAGE BREAK ---penultimate sentence is of particular
interest:
"The cause of death was due to massive head and
brain injury from a gunshot wound of the left
temple." (Emphasis added)
-4-
J

--- PAGE BREAK ---

w («/
;|1
The whole of Dr. McClelland's reoort is reproduced as
Appendix A to this reply pleading.
(2) Statement by Dr. Robert Forman,
Dr. Robert Forman is Chairman of the Department of
Sociology and Anthropology, Wisconsin State University,
Oshkosh, Wisconsin. Dr. Forman has supplied the District
Attorney of Orleans Parish with a scientific monograph en-
titled "The First Shot: A New Line of Evidence? Challenging
the Warren Report." W th Dr. Forman's permission, this mono-
graph is reproduced in its entirety (with accompanying
photographs) as Appendix B to this reply pleading.
Upon reading the monograph, the Court will see that
Dr. Forman's training and knowledge as a distinguished
anthropologist, gives him a whole new insight into the
problem of the direction of the missiles? he concentrates
upon the lateral as well as vertical angles of the shots in
relation to the bone structure of the human body.
In brief, here is Dr. Forman's thesis of bullets from
*
' more than one direction:
.
a) The warreni? Report says that there were
three shots, all fired from one gun, by one person
(Oswald), from one location (6th floor. Southeast
corner, of the Book Depository) within a period of
6 seconds.
b) As to the shots, the Warren Report says
that (i) one missed completely, (ii) another
inflicted the fatal head wound of the President,
and (iii) one shot went thru the President's neck,
then went through Governor Connally's chest and
wrist and entered his thigh. This latter bullet
has been labeled as Commission Exhibit 399 and
frequently referred to as the "Magic Bullet."
-5-

--- PAGE BREAK ---h Governor Connally's chest and
wrist and entered his thigh. This latter bullet
has been labeled as Commission Exhibit 399 and
frequently referred to as the "Magic Bullet."
-5-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

c) If the Magic Bullet could not have done
all ascribed to it by the Commission there would
have to be a fourth shot from Oswald*s gun within
the 6 seconds or a second assassin. It is gen-
erally conceded that a fourth shot from Oswald's gun
would be an impossibility within the time limit.
Hence, the Magic Bullet is crucial. Could it have
done what was required of it?
d) According to the original autopsy, the
Warren Commission Report, and all other known
authorities, the missile which went thru
President Kennedy's neck did not strike bone.
e) A bullet from directly behind and exiting
below the Adams apple would shatter the neck vertebrae.
f) Examining the human skeleton, for a shot to
enter the neck from "behind" and exit from the area
of the Adams apple, it must enter at a sideward
angle of 30° - 45°. In other words, the Magic Bullet
entered at a considerable lateral angle. Yet, had it
been fired from Oswald's alleged position it would
have entered at a considerably less angle from be-
hind.
Kennedy on a course toward his left and downward
and having struck no bone, could not possibly have
hit Governor Connally, especially in the right arm
pit. Depending on its exact vertical and horizontal
angles, it would either have hit Mrs. Connally, the
driver of the car, or no one.
h) Hence, the "Magic Bullet" theory is
impossible from an anatomical standpoint; hence,
there must have been at least a fourth shot; and
hence, there must have been at least a second
assassin.
Dr. Forman's monograph, as noted above, is included
as Appendix B to this pleading. Further, Dr. Forman has
consented to make himself available at the Court's
convenience for direct and cross examination.
(3) Dr. Cyril M. Wecht is Research Professor of Law
and Director of the Institute of Forensic Sciences, Duquesne
University School of Law, and Chief Forensic Pathologist,
-6-nd cross examination.
(3) Dr. Cyril M. Wecht is Research Professor of Law
and Director of the Institute of Forensic Sciences, Duquesne
University School of Law, and Chief Forensic Pathologist,
-6-

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
(3) Dr. Cyril M. Wecht is Research Professor of Law
and Director of the Institute of Forensic Sciences, Duquesne
University School of Law, and Chief Forensic Pathologist,
-6-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

*•/
Allegheny County Coroner’s office. In February, 1967,
he was elected Secretary of the Pathology and Biology
Section of the American Academy of Forensic Sciences. He is
also Director of the Pittsburgh Institute of Legal Medicine.
Dr. Wecht, who is both a practicing doctor and
practicing lawyer, has long been interested in the assassina-
tion of President John F. Kennedy. In mid-1967 he published
a "Critique of President Kennedy's Autopsy" (printed in Six
Seconds in Dallas by Professor Josiah Thompson, Bernard Geis.
Associates & Random House, at pp. 278-284). Dr. Wecht's Critique
is reproduced in full as Appendix C to this reply pleading.
Following are a few highlights of the Critiques
"The official conclusion of the military
pathologists that a bullet entered the back of the
President's neck and emerged from his throat, along
with the 'single bullet theory' which it spawned, is
brought into question by four different clusters of
evidence:
(1) The location of the back wound....
(2) Size of the throat wound
(3) Lack of metal traces on the Presi-
dent's tie and shirt front....
(4) The Zapruder film
"In February 1966 I gave a talk to the American-
Academy of Frensic Sciences which covered many of
the points touched on in this paper. At that time,
in spite of^missions and deficiencies already apparent
in the official autopsy report, I nevertheless con-
cluded my talk by saying that I agreed with the
essential findings of the Warren Commission. Some
eighteen months later, I must now say that I wish
I had not written that final paragraph. For no longer
can 1 agree with the essential findings of either
the Warren Report or the autopsy on which it was
based."
Dr. Wecht is still of the same opinion and has
expressed a willingness to come and so testify before
this Court at its convenience. As noted above. Dr. Wecht's
-7-autopsy on which it was
based."
Dr. Wecht is still of the same opinion and has
expressed a willingness to come and so testify before
this Court at its convenience. As noted above. Dr. Wecht's
-7-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

u&vu

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PART II
REPLY TO MAJOR CONTENTIONS IN GOVERNMENT1S
PLEADING OF JANUARY 16, 1969
/In order to understand more fully the magnitude of
the following contention, the Court's attention is called
to Appendix D of this reply which contains a brief
chronological account of the autopsy photographs and X-rays
from November 22, 1963, to date^
(1) Introduction by the Government in its pleadings of
the Letter Agreement of October 29, 1966, would
appear to be an attempt to convince the Court
that the said photographs and X-rays came within
44 USC 397: whereas, in fact, the photographs and
X-ravs mav have been transferred to the Archives
some eighteen months earlier and may never have
been either the property of or in the custody of
the executors of John F, Kennedy,
According to the Government's pleading (page 2), "Dr.
James B. Rhoads has custody of the materials requested in
his official capacity as Archivist of the United States, pur-
suant to a letter agreement entered into by the legal
representative of the Executors of the estate of John F.
Kennedy and the Administrator of General Services on October
29, 1966."
says: "Said photographs and X-rays were transferred to the
custody of the United States of America by the executors of
the estate of the late President John F. Kennedy by letter
agreement dated October 29, 1966, executed by Burke Marshall on
behalf of the executors of the estate of John F. Kennedy, and by
And Dr. Rhoad3 affidavit of January 16, 1969 (at page 1)

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt dated October 29, 1966, executed by Burke Marshall on
behalf of the executors of the estate of John F. Kennedy, and by
And Dr. Rhoad3 affidavit of January 16, 1969 (at page 1)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sll
Lawson B. Knott, Jr., Administrator of General Services.”
However, at page 5 of the Report of the 1968
Panel Review, chich was made a part^of^thje Government's
own pleadings, in reference to "Inventory of Material Examined?
Black and White colored prints and transparencies" the
following curious and unexplaine d sentence is found:
"All of the above were listed in a memorandum of
transfer, located in the National Archives, and
dated April 26, 196^."
Presumably, this transfer was from the Secret Service?
the Question is to whom? To Robert F. Kennedy? To the
"executors of John F. Kennedy?" To the National Archives
itself? If to either of the former, under what authority
was the transfer made, as the photographs and X-rays were
part of the Bethesda Naval Hospital autopsy and, under Navy
Regulations, were to be retained by the Navy in its permanent
files. If the transfer were to the Archives, the letter of
October 29, 1966, would, at best, appear to be misleading,
and, in any event, irrelevant as to 44 U.S.C. 397.
This raises another interesting and relevant question:
if the photographs and X-rays were in the custody of the
Secret Service from November 22, 1963 until April 25,
1965, why was Chief Justice Warren and the Commission
absolutely denied access to them, especially in v iew of
Executive Order 11130 and S.J. Res. 137, 88th Cong.,
which required the Secret S0rvice (along with all Government
Agencies) to give to the Commission any and all documents and
other information in their possession.
-10-

--- PAGE BREAK ---th Cong.,
which required the Secret S0rvice (along with all Government
Agencies) to give to the Commission any and all documents and
other information in their possession.
-10-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is also interesting to note that the agent of the
Kennedy family, Burke Marshall, was apparently not informed
of the 1968 Panel Review until after it had been completed;
at some subsequent date, the results were "described"to
him. (See Statement of Burke Marshall of January 16, 1969).
Did he, in fact, see it before he told the members of the
family of its existence and proposed public release?
(2) The 1968 Panel Review does not, as alleged in
the Government's pleadings, confirm the
oricrinal autopsv findings, but, on the contrary,
provides new and more serious questions as to the
number of missile wounds and the directions from
which the missiles came.
a) Crucial ambiguities in the original autopsv.
There have been several ambiguous points re the X-rays taken
at the autopsy.
Were they taken of the whole body? According to the
1968 Panel Review (pages 2 and 3), "The Autopsy Report stated
that X-rays had been made of the entire body of the deceased.
The Panel's inventory disclosed X-ray films of the entire
body except for the lower arms, wrists and hands and the
lower legs, ankles and feet." Were X-rays taken of the entire
body and, if so, why were they not shown in their entirety
to the 1968 Review Panel?
When and by whom were the X-rays developed? At the
beginning of his testimony. Commander Numes observed that
the;photographs and X-rays were exposed in the morgue of the Naval
Medical Center on this night /November 22/, and they were not

--- PAGE BREAK ---g of his testimony. Commander Numes observed that
the;photographs and X-rays were exposed in the morgue of the Naval
Medical Center on this night /November 22/, and they were not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

!
I
developed, neither the X-rays nor the photographs" (Hearings,
Vol. 2, p. 351). This tends to be confirmed by the fact that
the autopsy doctors did not see and/or report the metallic
fragments in the neck which were subsequently reported by
the 1968 Panel Review. However, later in his testimony
(Hearings, Vol 2, pp. 364, 372) Dr. Humes speaks as if the
X-rays had been developed and were used in the course of the
autopsy. Still later (Page 1 of his Supplementary Review of
1967), Dr. Humes says that the X-rays were examined that same
evening. What X-rays? Of the whole body? The "main" parts
of the body? He also adds, “All X-rays and photographic
plates were delivered that evening to Secret Service personnel."
Plates? How about undeveloped films? To whom were they
delivered? On whose orders or authority? Was an inventory
made at that time? Was there a receipt?
All of these questions remain unanswered to this day.
Additionally, the original autopsy was filled
with ambiguous phrases, such as “wound presumably of entry"
and "wound presumably of exit." At one point, the autopsy
says, "As far as pan be ascertained this missile struck no bony
structures in its path through the body." (Emphasis added).
If X-rays were taken, developed and seen, how can this
ambiguity remain? If this "Magic Bullet" had struck bone, it
would have fractured the bone, shattered itself, caused an
enlarged exit wound, and, in all likelihood, have changed
course.
-12-

--- PAGE BREAK ---in? If this "Magic Bullet" had struck bone, it
would have fractured the bone, shattered itself, caused an
enlarged exit wound, and, in all likelihood, have changed
course.
-12-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ID) Ambiguity left after the 1967 Supplementary
Review by the Autoosv doctors.
Although the X-rays and photographs had been examined
by Dr*. Hume* and Boswell on Novembar 1, 1966, they wore
reguested by the Attorney General to re-examine them to
see if they were "consistent with the autopsy report."
(1967 Review, page 1). This review took place on January 20,
1967. Instead of clearing up the ambiguities, it added
certain new ones. For example, at page 4, the doctors say
that there is "no evidence of a bullet or a major portion of a
bullet in the body." Were there minor portions? How minor?
Where? How many?
And, although the Review speaks in detail of the size
of the entrance wound of the neck (page 3) there is no mention
whatever of the size of the exit wound of the neck!
4!
c) Ambiguities left bv the 1968 Panel Review
It should be noted that the four eminent pathologists
who conducted the 1968 Review were necessarily operating
under a number of serious handicaps:
— They were, of course, unable to examine the
body upon which the autopsy had been made.
They were, admittedly, unfamiliar with a
most complex matter involving wounds to two
individuals.
— They were not supplied with full body X-rays.
-- They were supplied with only part of the extant
X-rays and photographs as inventoried on
October 29, 1965 (Compare p. 5. of tne 1968
Panel Review with Inventory in Appendix B of
Burke Marshall's letter of Optober 29, 1965).
-13-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ys and photographs as inventoried on
October 29, 1965 (Compare p. 5. of tne 1968
Panel Review with Inventory in Appendix B of
Burke Marshall's letter of Optober 29, 1965).
-13-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They were unable in the two days at their dis-
posal to examine more than a very small fraction
of material available in the 27 Volumes of
Report Hearings, and Exhibits.
Two crucial X-rays, #1 and #2 of the
cranial cavity, that they were shown were
damaged somewhat. (See page 12 of the
Panel Review).
Under all of these handicaps it is not surprising
that the 1968 Panel failed to clarify the ambiguous points
then present. Nor is it too surprising that they, in fact,
brought to light certain new mysteries which tend to
undermine the original autopsy and the Warren Commission Report
Here are a few:
Page 8 - "In the central portion of /the canal's/
base there can be seen a gray brown rectangular structure
measuring approximately 13 x 20 mm. Its identity cannot be
established by the Panel. "What is this sizeable (3/4 x 1/2 indjO
unidentified mass in the President's skull?
Page 10 - "Distributed through the right cerebral
hemisphere are numerous small, irregular metallic fragments,
most of which are less than 1 mm. in maximum dimension."
(Emphasis added). How many larger than 1 mm? How large?
Page 13 - “On film #13, a small round opaque structure,
a little more than 1 mm. in dameter, is visible just to the
right of the midline~at the level of the first sacral segment
of the spine. Its smooth characteristics are not similar to
those of the projectile fragments seen in the X-rays of
the skull and neck."
• -14- . *

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the first sacral segment
of the spine. Its smooth characteristics are not similar to
those of the projectile fragments seen in the X-rays of
the skull and neck."
• -14- . *

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Page 13 - The Panel reports the hole in the back of
the President's coat almost on inch higher than the hole as
reported by the FBI.
There are several significant ambiguities in the
Report of the 1968 Panel Review. For examples
Page 15 - The absence of metallic fragments in the
left cerebral hemisphere orbelow the level of the frontal fossa
on the right side together with the absence of any holes in the
skull to the left of the midline or in its base and the
absence of any penetrating injury of the left hemisphere
eliminate with reasonable certainty the possibility of a
projectile having passed through the head in any direction
other than from back to front as described in preceding sections
of this report. (Emphasis added).
Page 16 - Although the precise path of the bullet could
undoubtedly have been demonstrated by complete dissection of the
soft tissue between the two cutaneous wounds, there is no
reason to believe that the information disclosed thereby would
alter significantly the conclusions expressed in this report.
(Emphasis added).
The "Summary" of the 1968 Panel Revies is worth
quoting in toto because it is very carefully hedged about
with more ambiguities:
Summary 7
Examination of the clothing and of the
photographs and X-rays taken at autopsy reveal
that President Kennedy was struck by two bullets
fired from above and behind him, one of which
traversed the base of the neck on the right side
without striking bone and the other of which
entered the skull from behind and exploded its
right side.
-15-

--- PAGE BREAK ---him, one of which
traversed the base of the neck on the right side
without striking bone and the other of which
entered the skull from behind and exploded its
right side.
-15-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The photographs and X-rays discussed herein
support the above-quoted portions of the original
Autopsy Report and the above-quoted medical con-
clusions of the Warren Commission Report.
(P. 16, Emphasis added).
Does the word "support" mean confirm?
The "support" is strictly limited to the "above-quoted
portions of the original Autopsy Report and the above-quoted
medical conclsuions of the Warren Commission Report." These
"portions" and "medical conclusions" are herewith quoted in
their entirety:
The Autopsy report also described the decedent's wounds
as follows:
"The fatal missile entered the skull above
and to the right of rhe external occipital
protuberance. A portion of the projectile
traversed the cranial cavity in a posterior-
anterior direction (see lateral skull roentgeno-
grams) depositing minute particles along its
path. A portion of theprojectile made its exit
through the parietal bone on the right carrying
with it portions of cerebrum, skull and scalp.
The two wounds of the skull combined with the force
of the missle produced extensive fragmentation of
the smull, laceration of the. superior sagittal
sinus, and of the right cerebral hemisphere.
The other missile entered the right superior
posterior thorax above the scapula and traversed
the soft tissues of the supra-scapular and the
supra-clavicular portions of the base of the
right side of the neck. This missile produced
contusions of the right apical parietal pleura
and of the apical portion of the right upper
lobe of the lung. The missile contused the
strap muscles of the right side of the neck,
damaged the trachea and made its exit through
the anterior surface of the neck. As far as
can be ascertained this missile struck no bony
structures in its path through the body.
-16-of the neck,
damaged the trachea and made its exit through
the anterior surface of the neck. As far as
can be ascertained this missile struck no bony
structures in its path through the body.
-16-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lv\
In addition, it is our opinion that the
wound of the skull produced such extensive damage
to the brain as to preclude the possibility of
the deceased surviving this jjijury."
The medical conclusions of tif ^rren Commission Report
(p. 19) concerning President Kennedy’s wounds are as follows:
"The nature of the bullet wounds suffered
by President Kennedy * * * and the location of
the car at the time of the shots establish that
the bullets were fired from above and behind the
Presidential limousine, striking the President
* * * as follows:
President Kennedy was first struck by a bullet
which entered at the back of his neck and exited
through the lower front portion of his neck, caus-
ing a wound which would not necessarily have been
lethal. The President was struck a second time
by a bullet which entered the right rear portion
fo his head, causing a massive and fatal wound.”
In essence, what the Panel is saying is that it agrees
that two missiles struck President Kennedy from some point
"behind” and "above” the President.
The Panel does not say at any juncture that these
were the only wounds received by the President; some of
its reported evidence in fact points in the other direction.
Further, the Panel never considered Governor Connally s
wounds and made no comment whatever on the central question
of the Validity of the "Magic Bullet Theory” from a medical
viewpoint.
Further, it limited its support to only the medical,
conclusions contained in a highly edited passage in the
Commission's Report.
-17-

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bullet Theory” from a medical
viewpoint.
Further, it limited its support to only the medical,
conclusions contained in a highly edited passage in the
Commission's Report.
-17-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

As eminent scientists, the four Panel pathologists
were wise to so hedge their findings.
*****
The Government's pleadings taken as a whole utterly
destroy the basic thesis of the Warren Commission Report
(i.e., Oswald, one assassin, one rifle, three shots) by
demonstrating the impossibility of the "Magic Bullet Tneory"
upon which the whole thesis lies.
The pleadings aonfirm that the neck wound (or back
wound) entered from the right and on a downward course and that
it did not strike bone.
To inflict all of Governor Connally's wounds, the
Magic Bullet, upon exi^inf the President's throat would have
to change course radically upward and to the right in order
to strike Governor Connally in the right arm pit,- then, it would
have to change course radically again, downward and to the
left, break a rib, trjf^sit the chest, demolish a wrist, and
enter Governor Connally's thigh ... and still remain almost
pristine. In addition to the lead left in Governor Connally's
chest and wrist, the 1968 Panel says that some lead was left
in President Kennedy's neck (p. 13). This could not be the
"Magic Bullet", Commission Exhibit 399.
d) Debris from President's head croes to left, not right.
It should be noted that most of the debris caused by
the shattering of the President's head flew to the left,
covering Mrs. Kennedy and the motorcycle escort on the left.
-18-

--- PAGE BREAK ---It should be noted that most of the debris caused by
the shattering of the President's head flew to the left,
covering Mrs. Kennedy and the motorcycle escort on the left.
-18-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is completely consistent with Dr. McClelland's statement
of a wonnd on the left temple.
e) Right to Privacy.
In its pleadings, the Government has contended strongly
that any public use (even for purposes of a criminal trial) of
the President's X-rays and photographs would be an invasion of
privacy. Yet, the Warren Commission itself had no apparent
hesitancy in publishing the X-rays and photographs of Governor
Connally's wonnds. Is a murdered President entitled to more
"privacy" than a living Governor, especially when it comes to
a question of determining the guilt o£ innocence of a person
criminally charged with conspiring to commit his murder?
f) Authenticity.
As the Court must realize by this point, the Government's
pleadings of January 16, 1969, raise certain questions as to
the authenticity of the documents in question. These are ques-
tions which did not appear worthy of attention prior to January
16th, but which now must be taken into account.
(a) Change of Possession: Previously it
had been thought that the Secret Service, to whom the photo-
graphs and X-rays had been curiously handed on November 22, 1963,
had retained them only briefly, and that they had been promptly
(if irregularly) turned over to the executors of the estate
of John F. Kennedy. Now we are not ajt^ll sure, as the only
evidence -of transfer between November 22, 1963, and this date
is reference in the Government's pleading (1968 Panel Review,
p. 5) to a "memorandum of transfer, located in the National
-19-

--- PAGE BREAK ---transfer between November 22, 1963, and this date
is reference in the Government's pleading (1968 Panel Review,
p. 5) to a "memorandum of transfer, located in the National
-19-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Archives,and dated April 26, 1965.” Custody, possession, and
ownership of the documents before and after this date is an
unknown quantity. In other words, there is no chain of
possession.
b) Missing documents. From the inventory of what
was shown to the 1968 Panel (see pp. 5-6 of 1968 Panel Review)
many photographs and X-rays as taken on November 22, 1968,
appear to be missing. Incredible as it may seem, either
there were no photographs taken of the front of the body or
these photographs were ruined in the process of development
or they simply were not shown to the 1968 Panel. Further,
(see pages 2 and 3 of 1968 Panel Review) although X-rays of
the entire body were taken, the Panel was not shown X-rays
of the lower arms, hands, lower legs, or feet? in gunshot
deaths this is peculiar and possibly of great significance,
as bullets have a habit of traversing the body in un expected
ways.
c) Radical inconsistencies. Radical incon-
sistencies have begun to appear between descriptions of the
wounds by eye witnesses at the autopsy, by the autopsy doctors,
and by the 1968 Review panelists.
For example, the "back wound" keeps moving up from the
position attributed to it by autopsy witnesses, such as
government agents Hill and Kellerman. Sven the Review
Panelists place the hole in the President's coat an inch
higher than did the FBI. Measurements of a hole in a coat
-20-

--- PAGE BREAK ---as
government agents Hill and Kellerman. Sven the Review
Panelists place the hole in the President's coat an inch
higher than did the FBI. Measurements of a hole in a coat
-20-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

should be reasonably accurate and immutable .#. but not in
this case.
More important, is the change in the position of the head
wound, according to the original autopsy ( , p. 6)
the bullet entered to the right and a "short distance" above
the occipital protuberance. Yet the 1968 Review Panelists
now place it at 100 mm above the occipital protuberance.
This is a change of approximately four inches and the entrance
wound now appears to be moved in such a way as to be nearer
the too of the head than the back of the head. Could the
autopsy doctors and 1968 Review Panelists have been examining
the same X-rays? If so, how could their descriptions be so
radically different?
Likewise, the 1968 Review Panelists describe the
entrance wound in the head as ranging from 8 to 20 mm in dia-
meter. Yet Oswald's rife fired bullets of 6 mm. This, too,
is curious as entrance wounds normally are approximately the
size of the calibre of the bullet. Could this possibly
have been an exit wound or an entrance wound by a bullet of
larger calibre.
The above three elements of chain of possession, missing
documents, and inexplicable inconsistencies do lead to the
possibility that, consciously or accidentally, certain changes
in this document have been made between November 22, 1963, and
the present date.
If such*changes have been made, the photographs and
X-rays are of intensified interest. If no changes have
I
-21-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ve been made between November 22, 1963, and
the present date.
If such*changes have been made, the photographs and
X-rays are of intensified interest. If no changes have
I
-21-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

occurred, they are still necessary to the proper prosectuion
of Clay L. Shaw, because (as shown above) there is substantial
evidence that the photographs and X-rays will show that
John F. Kennedy was shot from more than one direction.
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the request is renewed to com-
pel Dr. James B. Rhoads to attend the trial of Clay L. Shad,
now in process in New Orleans, and to bring and produce all
of the photographs and X-rays taken at the autopsy of President
John F. Kennedy on November 22, 1963.
If the Court deems it necessary to have f urther hearings
on this motion, it is urged that the date be set in the immediate
future, as the trial in question in New Orleans is proceeding,
and the said photographs and X-rays are necessary to its proper
prosecution. When such hearing is set, the District Attorney of
Orleans Parish is prepared to produce Dr. Robert Forman and Dr.
Cyril Wecht for direct and cross examination.
It is requested that at that time the government be in^
*• *
structed to produce for questioning at least one of the 1967
Review Panelists, as well as Burke Marshall and the Administrator
of General Services (to explain to the Court the chain of
possession of the photograph and X-rays from November 22, 1963
to date). . •
Bernard Fensterwald, Jr.
Counsel representing the
District Attorney, Orleans
Parish, State of Louisiana
-22-