Testimony - Howard Leslie BRENNAN, Marxh 24, 196l, (3H140-61) 184-6; 211)
Shaquou sat pue u ogsstuu, oua ssoua tm Jo pury oua uoeq ueuug peg
gave represented him asbeing,the Commission would have had little or
no pproblem with him. He was described by Cong. Ford as the most impor.
tant witness toappear before the Commission in the article.the Cong.
signed for LIFE Magazine 0ctober 2, 1964.
Brennan is an important witness, but not at all in the sense'sug-
gested by Cong.Ford. He is, as pepresented by the Comnission, the only
actual eyewitness. He is the only one, acoording to the Commissionls
report, able to give a description of the assassin. In the report the
Commisaion is careful,aware of Brennan's weakness, to stipulate it
does notdepend upon him alone.:The fact is, and the fact becomes clesr
in Brennans testimony, that so far as the Commission is concerned and
so far as Brennan is concerned, he is, in fact, the only eyewitness.
The importance of Brennan as a witness is that he constitutes a
witness about the Commission rather than as an eyewitness. I/doubt if
by now Brennan actually knows what he did or did not see.He did not
seewhat hetestified to andwhat the Commisaion quoted him as having
seen。It was a physical impossibility.But the manner in which the
Commissian handled Brennan and his testimony, and tspecially what the
Commission excludes and ignores in its handling of Brennan,is ample
witness to the Commission's approach, bias, methods and integrity.or
lackofit。
Actually,Brennan was called tothe stand 3 times in a single day。
By comparison, Constable Weitzman who found the.gun in company with
Deputy Booone wa s never called before the commission. Only a time-
wasting and unessential examination oftherecords of appearances of
all the witnesses will indicate whether this is so, but I doubt very much
if the Commission found it necessary to call a single witness 3 times
in thecourseofa singledayofhearings。

--- PAGE BREAK ---all the witnesses will indicate whether this is so, but I doubt very much
if the Commission found it necessary to call a single witness 3 times
in thecourseofa singledayofhearings。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2-Brennan
Toset Brennan'stestimonyin context,at approximately12:45or
roughly lo minutes after the assassination,the police broadcast a de-
scription of agsuspect。In its report tbe Commission never specifically
states the source of thas eyewitness description.There is no evidence
source of its eyewitness description。The Commission handledthis situ-
was "most probably" the source of the. police broadcast。The importance
ofspecific andirrefutableknowledgeofthesourceofthisdescription
is hardly:subject to exaggeration。 To cite just one possibility, that
of conspiracy。Could a conspirator have given a false description to tne
police?
Brennan had given astatement tha dayofthe assassination in the
sheriff's office.It is in Vo. XIx.on p.47o and is about an half-page
long. When he appeared before the Cormission, 4 members, incYuding the
Chairman, were present, together with J.Lee Rankin, general counsel;
Joseph A.Ball, David W.Belin, and Norman Redlich, assistant counsel,
and Charles Murray, "observer". Mr. Belin conducted the examination.
Brennan identifies himself as a 45-year-old married steamfitter.
cafeteria
He had lunch at noon in the saxakwxkaxxat the corner of Main and Record,
left at 12:18 and walked to the corner of Houston and Elm,which he
estimates took about 4minutes(p.lll).He observed aman having an
epileptic seizure until the man was removed by an ambulance,and then
"walked over to'this retainer wall of this litile park pool and jumped
 o sx  o d      d 0u o 
Depository Building taken from Dealey Plaza and fron the right of the
center of the Depository Building as it is face。 It is Exhibit 477. He
is then shown Exhibig478 which he identifies as "That is the retaining
wall and myself sitting on it at Houston and Elm。" This picture was

--- PAGE BREAK ---ding as it is face。 It is Exhibit 477. He
is then shown Exhibig478 which he identifies as "That is the retaining
wall and myself sitting on it at Houston and Elm。" This picture was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3-Brennan
taken when "the photographer was standing on the front steps of the
Texas School Book Depository .o. on the 20th of March." He is then
handed "a negative which has been marked as Cmmmission Exhibit l79!
and described by Belin as "a negative from a moving picture film. And
I will hand you a magnifying glass - the negative has been enlarged.
Tpisnegative appearstobeapicture ofthePresidentialmotorcadeon
should be pertinent to ask why,especially when thenegativehad already
the.negative was. Brennan's reply was, "yes.I am sitting at the same
position as I was in the picture taken Friday, with the exception, I he.
lieve, my hand is resting on the wall, and Friday mynhand, I believe,
ur saat anof “Ttom, 'sfes uTrog 6osuodsor uI " got fu uo Sutaser sem
this picture,Exhibit,479,I notice, are not dangling on the front side
there,isthatcorrect?"(p.Ki42)
Brennan's reply was an abrupt and unqualified denial.He said
briefly, "No." He may have had something else in mind, but he actually
said that Belin was not correct。Next Belin asked a description of the
clothingBrennan was wearing.
"Gray khaki work clothes, with a dark gray hard helmet." Belin
then says (inaccurately),"Your head Ahere appears to be the highest in
the group,a little bit left of center in the upper part of the picture,
is that correct?! Beennan affirmed, and he ssid the scene was as he
rememberadit。
It is not possible to identify Brennan as Brennan from Exhibit 479.
It is not clear enough in the picture.None of the features can be

--- PAGE BREAK ---and he ssid the scene was as he
rememberadit。
It is not possible to identify Brennan as Brennan from Exhibit 479.
It is not clear enough in the picture.None of the features can be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4Brennan
distinguished,nor is it possible for me,with a magnifying glsss,to
see any evidence that Brennan is, in fact, sitting. I am not saying
that Brennan wasn't there; I do not know。I am saying this picture as
reproduced doesn!t prove it. I also believe it does not prove he was
sittingon thewall。
Conveniently,.when asked what he did, Brennan recalas observing
the crowd "and the people in different building windows";which he might,
indeed,have done,but it is just.too convenient,just too unlikely。
in which he says, "In particular, I saw-this one man on the sixth floor
which left the window to my knawledge a couple of times." When shown
Exhibit 477 and asked to circle the "particular window", Breanan replied,
"Well, I am confused here, the way this shows. But I believe this is the
sixth floor,the way those windows are built there right at the present。
I am confusedwhether this is the same window."Belin who, it would
witness that I will come to in a moment, said, "You mean a because some
windows are open below it?" and Brennan said,"No.The way the building
is built, it seems like this is more or less a long window with a divider
in the midale."Belin covered up the blunder fast.
What had happened was that,instead of showing a picture already
in evidence, the Dillard pictures,with the men in the windows on the
5th floor and the B 6th window open at the right place and with the.
boxes stacked up,the Commission had made a photograph which showed only
4 open windows in the entire south face of the building。 Three of these
are where the men were,the 4th is at the extreme end of the same flpor.
The window at which Brennan said he saw this man was left closed and
blinds or curtains behind it seemed to be drawn. But note that Brennan

--- PAGE BREAK ---is at the extreme end of the same flpor.
The window at which Brennan said he saw this man was left closed and
blinds or curtains behind it seemed to be drawn. But note that Brennan

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5-Brennan
was surprised that the windows Φ peared in pairs。Although it is not
a major point,this would seem to bear heavily on his credibility as a
witness.Here is tho man who looked and saw all of the things he said
se9, but he never noticed that the entire building is built with the
windowsinpaira。
Asked by Belin to mark the window in whieh the man was,Bfennan
did and marked it with the letter "A".He then marked with a"B" the
window below in which he said he saw the colored men. You guessed it,
Larry. He was wrong. It was not easy to be as wrong as he was, which
is completely wrong; but Brennan, this unimpeachable character,this
"most important" witness to face the Commission, was more than egual to
the task.In fact, he could completely upset the law of averages。
Shown below the 6th floor windows, on the 5th floor, are adjoining
pairs of windows with 3 of the 4 open。Apparently the rehearsal of
Brennan was sone thing beyond his intellectual capacity. The only one
of the 4 windows that was completely and 1o0 percent wrong was the one
he marked as the one at which the colored men were.Of them,Brennan
down,which is the fifth floor,colored guys。In particular,I only
y
for him to have identified 2 of the 3 Negroes, presumably totally unknown
to him (I dont suppose the pictures that were available helped in his
identification at all), but in Dillard Exbibit C, in bhe report on p.66,
clearly there are 2 open windows below the one from which Oswald is
alleged to have fired the shot.There is one Negro in each of the two。
On the day of the assassination, in fact, moments only after the assas-
sination, as is shown clearly in Dillard Exhibit D, on p.67 of the report,

--- PAGE BREAK ---is one Negro in each of the two。
On the day of the assassination, in fact, moments only after the assas-
sination, as is shown clearly in Dillard Exhibit D, on p.67 of the report,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6-Brennan
3 of these 4 windows were open,the same 3 that were open on Exhibit 477。
Only one was closed,the same one that was closed on Exhiibit 477; and the
closed one,thatls the one Brennan picked。In the 4th open window there
also was another Negro employee looking out. This is made clear in
Exhibit 485 which appears in the report on p.69.It is part of the
Commission'sreconstruction.
When you have friends like Brennan, who needs enemies?
Not that he doesn't want to be helpful.Note the next paragraph
a distance of Eim and Main Street (a physical impossibility- they
parallel each other), as it came on to Houston and turnedthe corner at
Houston and Elm, going down the incline towards the railroad underpass.
And after the President had passed my position, I really couldn't say how
that I positively thought was a backrire."
Whoever described abackfire as a"crack"and whyshould a witness
abackfire?
He thought it was a firecracker thrown from the Depository (p.l43)。
Naturally, this caused him to look up. "And this man that I saw pre
vious was aiming for his μ last shot." Rax
Perhaps a litlle apprehensively, Belin asked, "Would you describe
just exactly what you saw when you saw him this last time?!
Brennan to the rescue. Hels going to be the big hero and prove
everything. He said, "well, as it appeared to me he wes standing up and
resting against the left window sill with gun shouldered to his right
shoulder, holding the gun with his left hand and taking positive ain and
fired his last shot。 As I calculate a couple of seconds. He drew the

--- PAGE BREAK ---sill with gun shouldered to his right
shoulder, holding the gun with his left hand and taking positive ain and
fired his last shot。 As I calculate a couple of seconds. He drew the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7-Brinnan
8.S
gun back from the window xn though he was drawing it bacl bo his side and
his mark, and then he disappeared。 And, at the same moment, I was diving
wall that is a little higher on the Houston side."
If the man bad been standing up, dirty as those windows were, Brennan
could have seen nothing much above his knees. If he was standing, he
couldn!t possibly have fired the rifle except through the window. The
Dillard photographs prove this window was open only half-way in the bot-
tom half, or only a quarter at most of the entire window area was open.
Tho windcw sill was perhaps a foot from the floor. How he could have
been standing and resting against theleft window sill.asBrennan de
scribed is beyond imagination.The onlynthing that is left possible to
imagine is that, in rehearsing his testimony,he wam!t edited a little。
And in eddition to all of that,the Commission'sownreconstruction
shows that, &t the very least, in the course of firing, the assassin
would have bean blocked from view by the building.In fact, it is doubt-
ful if, from the Commission's recm struction, Brennan could have seen even
the assassin's hands.But ifphe could,it is notlikely that he saw any-
thing past the wrist.(Exhibit 887, report p.99; and this picture was
taken with theboxesremoved.)
if it had a scope, he said, "I did not observe a scope." Obviously, the
scope had to be visible, even if the face werenlt。 And if the face had
been visible, then the scope had to be more visible for, of course, the
face was behind the scope. Perhaps worried about Brennan's testimony of
the man standing up, Belin asked, "what ao you believe was the position
of the people on the fifth floor that you saw -M standing or sitting?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---worried about Brennan's testimony of
the man standing up, Belin asked, "what ao you believe was the position
of the people on the fifth floor that you saw -M standing or sitting?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8.Brennan
windowsill leaning out." Belin then wanted to know, "At the time you
Brennan
to therencue.
"well,Icould see-atonetimehecame
tothe window and he sat sideways on the window siil.
Thatwasprevious
si
to Prelsdent Kennedy getting there.And I could see practically his
whole body, from his hips up.But at the time he was firing A the gun,
a possibility from his belt up."
the sizth floor. Entirely aside from the fact that it was bloclked aby
boxes, it wouid not have been possible,because the window was halfway
closed,for Brennan to have seen anything ir the man had sat in the
window sill, which is a complete impossibility. Exemine, for example

in the parallel windows at the extreme eastendofthe5th floor,oneof
whom is airectly underneath the assassin's window.
These men, as the
Conmission's reconstruetion shows, were actually on their knees. Yet
even on their knews, with the windows open almost as wide as they will
go, their heads are well above the midline of the lower half of pthe
window..They are not only on their mees,but as Exhibit 485 of p.69
ofthe report shows,at least one of themhashis bodyat a considerable
anglewhich shortensthe distance it wouldoccupyon the vertical plane。
In the light of this,is it necessary to cormment on Brennan's"Icould
see, practically his whole body, froin his hips up?"y
It doesnit get any better when Belin asks how much of the gun
7G
Brennan saw. "I calculate X& to 85 percent", Brennan replied, although
a few questions above he had not seen the telescopic sight, which would
have been visible with a lot less than 70 to 85 percentshowing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---X& to 85 percent", Brennan replied, although
a few questions above he had not seen the telescopic sight, which would
have been visible with a lot less than 70 to 85 percentshowing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9-Brennan
IfBelin was tying to remind Brennan of somethirg Brennan had for-
gotten, in the next exchange, he didn't succeed。 His que stion was "Now,
ug to the time ofq the shots,did you observe anything else that you
Brennan replied, "well, not of q any importance. I don't remembe? any-
thing else except - ". Possibly by this time Belin was afraid for he
interrupted to ask, "Let me ask you this. How many shots did you hear?"
Brennan again was direct and to the point, "Positively two. I do not
recall a second shot - ", at which point Belin kept it from getting out
of hand by saying,"By a second shot, you mean a middle shot betwecn the
time/you heard the first mise and the last noise?!
Mr.Murray. the observer, was there; but if he was doing any ob-
serving,he wasn't in Oswald's interest.
If Brennan heard.2 shots,how could he talk about a shot between
s
right.I don't know what made mefthink that there was firecrackers
throwed out of the Book Store unless I did hear the second shot,because
Ipositively thought the first shot wasa backfire,and subconsciously
I must have heard a second shot, but I do not recall it. I could not
swear.toit。"
Who can blame Belin for the hasty switch, "could you describe the
man you saw in the window on the sixth floor?n
"To my best description, a man in his early thirties, fair complexion,
slender but neat, neat slender, possibly 5-foot 10," Brennan said.
"About what weight?" Belin prompted, with only slightly more success,
for Brennan replied, "oh, at - I calculated, I think, from l60 to 175
pounds。"
Still pulling it out,Belin wanted to know,"A white man?"(p.l44)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ted, with only slightly more success,
for Brennan replied, "oh, at - I calculated, I think, from l60 to 175
pounds。"
Still pulling it out,Belin wanted to know,"A white man?"(p.l44)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10-Brennan
Brennan agreed.
Nowletus corpare thiswith the description in the affidavit
Brennan signed in the sherirf!s office on November 22 (19 H470);
whereas above hehaddeclined tosayhowfar the Presidentiscarhad
gone, in the affidavit he said "about 5o yards from the intersoction."
the Presidentisback was in line dith the lastwindow I havepeviously
described ...". The last window he had pre viously described was the
in
window on the very corner or the building,the window Rxau which the
alleged assassin was, and a window that the Presidential car passed be-
fore/it completed making its turn. His description was,"a white man
in/his early thirties, slender,nice looking,slender,and.would weighy
about 165 to 175pounds.He had on light colored clothing,but deti
nitely not a suit." No height is given in the original affidavit.
But
Zhe description broadcast.by the police the Commission has found
(report,p.l44) "most probably" was Brennan's.The Cormmission at this
point in the report noted the discrepancy in weight between Brennan's
2versions,and adrits that the height was omitted。 Then how didthe
police get'the height for their descriptions? Even inquoting Brennan
in the report on p.llt,the Commission eeits his testimomy and puts it
within quotation marks.The other editorial arrangements make it seem
as though Brennan was a precise and accurate observer, and he was any-
thing but that。
Brennan was closer to hic original version in testifying about the
clothing which he described as "light colored clothes, more of a khaki
color." Leave out the "khaki" and itls pretty close to his original
affidavit which said, "He had on light colored clothing but definitely
not a suit."

--- PAGE BREAK ---red clothes, more of a khaki
color." Leave out the "khaki" and itls pretty close to his original
affidavit which said, "He had on light colored clothing but definitely
not a suit."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1lBrennan
The Cormissicn, which was careful in teh report not to quote the
police broadcast,ignores another and important part of this broadcast.
There are other minor differences, such as Brennan's "in his early
thirties" as compared to the police broadcast of "approximatagy 3o".
But the important thing the Commission has deliberately ignored was
indicated by Bronnan himself in backing off from any description of
the weapon.In restricting itself to Brennan's alleged description of
the alleged assassin, the Commission was able to ignore this.However,
the police broadcast on Channel l at ay time that cannot be precisely
computed before 12:l46 also includes "armed with what is thought to be
a3030 rif1e."(17H 397)
Belin returned to Brernan!s longest speech thus far,at the top of
p.ll4, which he concl uded by saying, "And, at the same moment, I was
diving off of that firewall and tothe right for bullet protection.o
to ask Brennan why he jumped. Brennan explained, "Well, it occurred to
me that there might bemore than one person, that it was a plot which
could mean several people.and.I knew beyond reasonable doubt that there
were going to be bullets flying from every direction."What Brennan
"knea beyond "reasonable doubt", as a matter of fact, never did happen.
What Belin has succeeded in doing here is drawsing attention away
fran a much more significant flaw in the earlier testimony of Brennan
about diving off that wall.The "at the same moment" that Brennan was
talking about, while he was diving off the wall, he was, according to
the testimony,watching the witness and observing what he had testified
to。 About Brennan, it is almost believable, but in order to have accom-
plished this feat, he necessarily had to have eyes on both sides of his
body.He could not at one and the sane time be observing an assassin
to the north and hurling his body to the south.have accom-
plished this feat, he necessarily had to have eyes on both sides of his
body.He could not at one and the sane time be observing an assassin
to the north and hurling his body to the south.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12-Bheanan
Apparently Brennan was able to overcome this first of his fears
officers running toward the west side of the building,he said,"I knew
I had to get someone quick to tell them where the man was. So I ran or
Iwalked-thero is.a possibilityI ran,because I have the habit of,
when something has to be done in a hurry,I run.(what a picture this
ofothers)And there was one officer standing at the corner of the Texas
Book Store on the street.!Because "It didn't seem to me he was going
in any direction,”Brennan asked him toget"someone in charge,a Sece t
Service man or an FBI." No ordinary cop would do for Brennan.He had
togoright to thetop。
Does this suggest a reason the Conmission has carefully avoided
printing any of the numerous pictures available of the area Brennan
described, inmnediately in front of the Depository, where he talked to
this poaiceman?Is it possible a witness other than Brennan might be
identified talking to a police official who might also be identified?
But if Brennan is to be believed,the policeman did take him to the
Secret Service,for he said that after the policeman "had to give some
orders or something on the east side of the building on Houston Street
(maybe it wasnit just an ordinary everydsy policeman). And then he had
taken me to,I believe, Mr.Sorrels, an automobile sitting in front of
the Texas Book Store..o..related my information and there was a few
minutes of discussion, and Mr. Sorrels had taken me then across the
street to the sheriffls building."
Asked"Didyou describe theman that
you saw in the window?",the very positive Mr.Brennan who has been so
excessively definite about everything else, could say only, "Yess I be-
lieve I did." Now we have the description that was "most probably"
hadgivenit。ow?",the very positive Mr.Brennan who has been so
excessively definite about everything else, could say only, "Yess I be-
lieve I did." Now we have the description that was "most probably"
hadgivenit。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13-Brennan
It will be interesting to check this against the ststements by
SorrelZs. (p.l65)
AsthetwoNegroe'shehadmentionedseeingin thewindowsdashed
from the building,Brennan said he identified them and "Mr.Sorrels
or the Secret Service man stopped them."
There is no stopping Brennan. Whenasked "Is there anything else
now up to the time you got down to the Dallas Police Station?" he said,
"Well, nothing except that up until that time, through my entire life,
I could never remember what a colored person looked Like if he got out
ofmy sight.AndIalways thoughtthat-ifIhad toidentifyacolored
person I could not. But by coincidence that one time I did recognize
those two boys." However, he doesn't recall whether these two Negroes
said in his presence that they had, in fact,been in the 5th loor windows
He went to the lineup where he was introduced to "Captain Fritz.in
Mr.Sorrels'office".Here Belin backtracked to ask/y if Brennan knew
the name of the officer to whom he spoke outside the Book Depository.
Brennan didntt.(p.ll6)
Then asked if hewas sure of the names of theSecret Service men he
talked to, Brennan said, "I do not know the other man's name."
Then Belin:"You believe one of them was Sorrels?"
Brennan:"I believe one of them was Sorrels。"
Brennan: "That is at the building/"
Whatever Mr. Belin was about to say for the record, he didnt, for
he said merely, "yes, sir."
Another obvious lawyer's trick followed immediately when Mr.Belin
said, "By the way, Mr. Brennan, I note that you have glasses with you
heretoday.
Were you wearing glasses at the time of bhe incident that
you related here?"y

--- PAGE BREAK ---diately when Mr.Belin
said, "By the way, Mr. Brennan, I note that you have glasses with you
heretoday.
Were you wearing glasses at the time of bhe incident that
you related here?"y

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14-Brennan
From the picture referred to ean ier,unless Brennan wore frame
less glasses,it didn't seem as though he wore any.But it gave Brennan
his platform. His reply was, "No. I only use glesses to see fine print
and more especially the Bible and blueprint."Then Belin elicits the
This left Brennan's vision not as good as it was。
There is no questioning about the nature of this acaident..It nay
have just been an accident, but it shouid not have been an occupational
one because Brennan is a steamfitter.
Butadded tothe otherreports
coming outor Dalaas about.some of the more important witnesses,the
thrgets to the Euins' family,the shcoting orWarren Reynolds thrugh the
head, and even in acity where one hospital has 4 or5 gunshots wounds
a night,this seems like an unusually high attrition rate arong the
CommissionIswitnesses。
After a page of aiversion,Mr。Belin goes back to Friday night at
 .           
lineup at which he said there were 7or possibly only 6.Asked what he
said, he replied, "I told Mr. Sorrels and Captain Fritz at that time that
Oswald.br the man in the lineup thetI identified locking more like a
and he also admits that he had,in the meantime, seen Oswald's picture.
(p。14.7)
Pushed a little bit - it was necesssry for Belin to do so - and
asked "Nof, is there anything else you told the officers ...", Brennan
concedes, "vell, I told them I could not make a positive identification."
Aue Tte4 cto4e1 roaa nof p1p “4eu4 woua pto4 nof uoumu 'sfes uoug u1tog
officer or investigating person anything different?" to which Brennan

--- PAGE BREAK ---d not make a positive identification."
Aue Tte4 cto4e1 roaa nof p1p “4eu4 woua pto4 nof uoumu 'sfes uoug u1tog
officer or investigating person anything different?" to which Brennan

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15_Brennan
replied he had. He doesn't recall when, he won!t swaar to the name of
the person to whom he did it,but he thinks it was a Secret Sorvice man
named Wiliiams from Houston.But "he could have been an FBI."This is
Brennanls version ofowhatothe agmt told hin,"you said you coulan!t
make a positive identification./ Did you do that for security reasons
personally, or couldn't you?" Brennan's version here of Brennan's
-x ue dog pnsy nJtosAu pue fttueg fu - suoseot fatanoes ctog ssot to
planation, it was this°"I believe at that time, and I still believe it
was a Conmunist activity, and I felt like there haanlt been more than
one eyewitness, and if it got to be a known fact that I wasn an eyewitness,
my family or I,
, either one, might not be safe."
Brennanadmitsheknew Oswald had alreadybeen arrestedfor the
murder of officer Tippit and there was no prospect of his being released.
Butwhat had happened to change his mind he isasked,and he replied，
"After Oswald was killed, I was relieved quite a bit that as far as pres-
sure on myseif of somebody not wanting me to identify anybody, there was
no longer that immeaiate danger."
Fe is not asked why, then, he aidnt immedig&ely go to the police
and te11 them.(p.148)
when asked how far he was foom the windcw, Brennan is not the man
in
to say he didn't know or that/his presence the Commission has measured
18
it; instead,he said,"well,εt that time,I calcuaated ll0-foot at an
angle. But closer surveillance I believe it will run close to l22 to
126 feet at an angle." When Belin explained that they together had paced
the distance the previous Friday, Brennan wouidnit let him finish the
sentence.At the point where Belin gets to the approximate distance,
Brennan interrupts to say, "93-foot。"

--- PAGE BREAK ---aced
the distance the previous Friday, Brennan wouidnit let him finish the
sentence.At the point where Belin gets to the approximate distance,
Brennan interrupts to say, "93-foot。"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16_Brcnnan
Cong.Ford interrupts at this point to say that he thinks Brennan
gives him Exhibit 36l and tells him that if he turns it upside dcwn 1t
will work out fine。（Note to Larry:'This is not a joke;its literally
true.X They just made it upside down.）Brennan does it, including the
(6i7T°C)
After he finished putting the marks on, including where he talked
to the police, the Secret Service, otc., Belin asks, "Now, are these
accurate or approximate locations, Mr.Brennan?"Brennan!s disappoint-
ment, and perhaps a feeling of lese majeste, is clear in his statement,
"Well, donlt you have photographs of ne talking to the SecrotService men
right here?" Belin didn't. "You should have," Brennan informed him. Xk

less
xkaxa than helpful. He continued, explaining that while he didnt knou
balieve Me. Lish who requested that he cut those films or get them cut
of the FBI. I believeyou might know about then. Souebody cut those
films, because a number of times later the same filns were shown, and
that part was cut." Lish, he said, was with the FBI: Belin thanled
him very much for his information and immediately changed the subject.
But in any event, ie Brennanls to be belicved, not cnly Gid the police
know that the shots bad come fron the 6th floor window, but also the
FBI and the Secret Service, and irnediately. Yet there is no evidence
that either of these agencies or any agents ever saw to it that an

--- PAGE BREAK ---ome fron the 6th floor window, but also the
FBI and the Secret Service, and irnediately. Yet there is no evidence
that either of these agencies or any agents ever saw to it that an

--- PAGE BREAK ---

:7.Brennan
immmediate systcmatic soarch was made or saw to itAthat the building
was sealed.I doubt if any of the FBI, Secret Service or police people
are anxious for the pictures to be found and for them to be identified
asresponsible for nct causing an immediate search ofthe 6th floor
arca and for not immediately quarantining the buiiding. (p.l50)
Belin, who hadn't really wanted to go intoExhibit 36l to begin
with, appears finished with it now, but I am not.I want.to point out
that among the inaccuracies in this chart are the failure to locate
the arcade and the wall'which are the objects of such extensive refer-
ence in testimony,depositions and exhibits by so many vitnesses the
Commlssion chose to ignore or disbelieve, who identified the area of
these two stmuctures as the sourde of at least the initialbullat。
With a magnirying glass. Thore are 2 picturos showing large areas that
are approximately 1 inch by l inch.obviously, they also show nothing。
mark
Bwennan is then asked to mak his route insofar as it is possible
upon Exhibit l78, which he does,and by the time all of this rlgemarole
is over, 2 pages have been wasted. They contribute nothing.
Rut here he alters his story about what he did to tale protection
from the shots。He didnit go over the wall to the south, ho went around
it to the east。He isithen asked to mark the spot he went arter tho
ficer with the letter "r",but I don't see them on this exhibit, even
witha megnifyincglass.
Thenpe is askedto shot on the picture the
spot "which is where you said you went to the car". He tten points out
a place (p.l5l） which is the wrong place because it ia on the wrong
street, and when Belin eorrects him, he says, "oh, is that right?" and
then says that Belin is correct.When they finaily decide on the place,p.l5l） which is the wrong place because it ia on the wrong
street, and when Belin eorrects him, he says, "oh, is that right?" and
then says that Belin is correct.When they finaily decide on the place,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18-Brennan
also
Brennan is told to mark it with an "r" which xsay does not appear on
Exhibit477.
Belin next wants to know if, when Brennan sau the gun in the window,
"did you see any objects of any kind in the window, or near the window?"
Unhelprully yelpful, Brennan roplied, "Yes.Through the window, which
boxes." Brennan's oyes certainly were good before he got sandblasted!
and
The picture shous the tip edge of a boz xa 8 cavern of blackness beyond
it.Adlitionally, Brennan was looking up at a rather steep angle;
nothing shous through any or the windows, and the window he's talking
about, only the bottom half of the bottom half was open.
Next Belin shows him Ezhibits l80 and l8l, pictures of the Deposl-
tory!s south wall showing the windows in question. Lxhibit h82 isI an
enlargement of l81. Belin begins by pushing his luck too far,.end asks
Brennan,
"tirst of all, on Exhibits h81 end 482, do you recognize any
two persons
pf these reagku in the fifth flonr window as people you saw tbere?"
Brennan said, "No; I do not recognize 太hmeZux them. As positita identi
fication I cannot recognize them."Then he corrects himself because
it is obvious he muat heve known them, and says, "Now,I see where there
is & possibility I did make a mistake.I believe these two colored
boys was in this windou, end I believe I showed on that other oxhibit
that they were in this window." Belin wants to drop it; he says, "A1l
right.y I am going to hand you now - " That's as far as he got before
ouc 9toa fou4 qou4 s1 pTus I quzua ftuo oui, *fes c4 po4dnrtoqur uauueng
this about them, but he had incorrectly marked i an exhibit to this effect.
Belin understood and helped him correct the first mistake by saying, "You

--- PAGE BREAK ---i, *fes c4 po4dnrtoqur uauueng
this about them, but he had incorrectly marked i an exhibit to this effect.
Belin understood and helped him correct the first mistake by saying, "You

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19Bonnan
But evcn with the aetual photograph taken at the timo in front of
hin, Bronnan is beyond help. He says, "rhat I am not positivo of. I
just remember that they were over one window fron below him,which at
that tine I might have thought this was one window over."
Prom the reconrd, in the language, if you'il ezcuse the expression,
it is not possiblo to untangle this.. It is nonetheless clear that the
"most important" witness aidn't know. what he was talking about and
couldn't even be led into rectifying his error when it was called to
it when he had the incontrovertible rgk proof of his orror in his hands.
By nou, Belin has ta help him. He says, "All right. Let me ask you
this.On Ezhibit l81,does the condition o the'openirg of the windoas
November 22?" Brennan replies, "yes,/Ehese do." Pelin said, "you are.
pointing to the fifth.floor windows now?"(p.l52)
Brennan entangles himself further.
"But I'don't recallethis Window
at the time or  the shooting being that low."
Hith the windows in which the colored boys being open in one case,
as wide as possible,and in the othor case, almost that wide,poor
Belin
Rxzanar could do nothing but say,"Now, by this window you are pointing
to the window on the sixth floor?n
the letten "A" around this window.I
Instead of dropping it thore,he
asks Brennan, "how high do you belicve it was open?" and Brennan replies,
"I believe that at the time he was firing, it was open just like this.",
windowsonthe
which Belin interprets in English as "just like the/firth floor inmedi-
atelybelow?n
"rhat is right," says Brennan. Belin shifts to another
blunder ard asks, "I note in window "A" there appear to be some boxes

--- PAGE BREAK ---lish as "just like the/firth floor inmedi-
atelybelow?n
"rhat is right," says Brennan. Belin shifts to another
blunder ard asks, "I note in window "A" there appear to be some boxes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20Brennan
in the window. To bhe bost of your recolleetion, whnt is ths faet as:
ornot
to whether/khusa thoso boaea as shown in this exhibit appear to be simi
lar to the ones you saw on Jovenber 22?u He should have known bettar
than totryto straightenthat one out.
Bronnan's roply was, "No; I
could see moro boxes."
rIa the window or behind tho window? Belin wants to know, and Bren
nan answezs, "Behind the window.Belin then says,"I em talking in che
window itsele", and Bronnan says, "No, no.That is I donit remenber
abox ia thewirdow,these boxes I remenbor are stacked up betind the
window, and bhey wore zigzaggod,kind of step down,and thore wus a
spacb it looked lire back of here."
8 on Sursugod oxn nof mon, "gfes xs pue 4pua sgotdroguT rrteg
space which would bo on the cast slde,is thet right?ana Brennan says
that is right. Belin then says, "whon you say you dontt roneuber . 
Ican seo those boxes there non.I dont know whether you can seo them
or not. It seems like I can seo the boxes in thab picturo.An I rightg
What coula Belln say?He replied,"I don't know,.sir.Ican'b soo them
on Exhibit h71. Zhat could be the dirty window here." Brennan says,
"Rere they are here. Thoso bozes thore." Belin, knowing full woll that
Exhibit g482,to waich Brennan has pointod, is a very considerable on
largonent and nonetheless the boxes in the baokground are oven there
barely visible, says, "veil, here is Bxhibit h82. First cf all,1 se8
a box on Exhibit h62,right in the window."Brennan aatd, FYes; I
don't renouber that box." How this is a box that was right in the sun
right in the front of the bindow.
fa surgoq ou uogegatas rnrssooons e uodn seyTaqs Arroury urtog
asking. "Do you recall that it definitely was not there, or just you
don't recall whether it was or was not there." Even the court reportersurgoq ou uogegatas rnrssooons e uodn seyTaqs Arroury urtog
asking. "Do you recall that it definitely was not there, or just you
don't recall whether it was or was not there." Even the court reporter

--- PAGE BREAK ---rnrssooons e uodn seyTaqs Arroury urtog
asking. "Do you recall that it definitely was not there, or just you
don't recall whether it was or was not there." Even the court reporter

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21-Brennan
knew this wasnt kh question。Brennan sa_id,"I do not recall that
being there. So, therefore, I could not say it definitely wasn't there."
Belin sums it up, "You cannot say whether it was or was not?" and
Brennan says, "No." Belin then asks him to yark Exhibit l82 with an
arrow at the point where he saw, or thinks he saw, boxes. When that
is done,he launches into an explanation of the source of exhibits
480,481 and l82,what his plans are with regard to the photographer,
when he is going to Dallas and what he is going to do there, and explains
also the antecedents of exhibit 479,one of the frames of the Zapruder
film, end then switches Brennan entirely away from the disaster of the
boxes,what he sawland what he didn't see。For Brennan has succeeded
inswearing that the onlything he likely could have seen with any
clarity in the window is the thing he didn't see。
He should have left the windows alone, too.But he didn't;.he
asked if "from the time you first saw the Fresidential motorcade turning
north on Houston from Main, did you observe the window from which you
say you saw the last shot fired at any time prior to the time you saw
the rifle in the window?" Brennan said he did. Belin then says,"well,
what I am saying is this.You saw the motorcade turn?"(p.l53)
Mr.Brennan, "No; not after I saw the motorcade,I aid not observe
a man or rifle in the window/" of course, this constituted a denial of
everything hehad said。.Belin then saidg "Did you observe the window
atalluntilafteryou heard that first sound which was abackfire or
firecracker,at least you thought it was?"Brennan, who had said heid
seen a man in the window 2 or 3 times, replied,"No." Belin starts all
over again. He says, "well, let the record be clear. The first sound
motorcycle"。Belin asked,"And then you later said something Aabout aman in the window 2 or 3 times, replied,"No." Belin starts all
over again. He says, "well, let the record be clear. The first sound
motorcycle"。Belin asked,"And then you later said something Aabout a

--- PAGE BREAK ---or 3 times, replied,"No." Belin starts all
over again. He says, "well, let the record be clear. The first sound
motorcycle"。Belin asked,"And then you later said something Aabout a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22_Brennan
firecracker。Did that have reference to the first.shot, or sone thing
in between the first and last?"Actually, in Brennan's earlier testi-
mony (p.ll3) the "backfire" and the "firecracker" were both one. First,
he thought it was a "backfire" and then a "firecracker"。 His reply to
the question was, "I positively thought that the first shot was a back-
fire of a motorcycle。And then something made me think that someone was
throwing firecrackers from the Texas Book Store, and a possibility it
was the second shot..But I glanced up or looked up and I saw this man
taking aim for his last shot.The first shot and last shot is my only
positive recolleetion of two shots." Obviously, if he heard three noises,
kkaugbk the first one was a backfire or firecracker,the next one was
the first shot and the next onewas not onlythesecond shot but it was
alsothelastshot.
At this point Mr. McCloy wants his own kind of clarification, and
asks,"Did you see the flash of what was either the second or the third
shot?" Brennan didn't. MeCloy persisted, "Could you see that he had
discharged the fifle?" Brennans reply was not too simple. It was, "No.
For some reason I did not get an echo at any time. The first shot was
positive and clear and the last shot was positive and clear, with no echo
on my part." I don?t know what this has to do with seeing, but MeCloy
said, "Yes." And when Brennan says, "last shot," he means what to him 
you saw him aimn which Brennan said he did, and then McCloy said, "Did
you see the rifle discharge, did you see the recoil or the flash?"
Brennandidn!t。
Brennan always wanted to be perfect。 When Dulles asked if he could
see "who or what he was aiming at?", Brennan replied, "Subconsciously
I knew what he was firing at.But immediately I looked towards wherenan always wanted to be perfect。 When Dulles asked if he could
see "who or what he was aiming at?", Brennan replied, "Subconsciously
I knew what he was firing at.But immediately I looked towards where

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23.-Brennan
President Kennedy's car should be, and there was something obstructing
my view. I could not see the President or his car at that time.% And
that I should have been able to see it.I could not see it." This is
office,he does not mention taking hisgeyes off the window from the
time of the second shot, or as it was to him, the first shot, having
ore
looked up just befan that, thinking someone was throwing firecrackers,
and hef certainly implies he never took his eyes off,concluding his
affidavit in this respect by saying, "I was looking at the man in this
window at.the time of the last explosion.He then described how the
man let the gun down to his side,as he says he saw it, etc. Nor has
he referred to looking in the direction of the President in his testi-
mony up to this point.Belin asks Brennan if he remembered "on one of
your interviews bith the FBI, they record a statement that you estimated
the shots were fired ay appproximately 90 yards.", or approximately 3
times the distance it actually was.  Belin continues, "At that time did
you make that statement to the FBI - and this would be on 22 November.
To the best ofyour recollection?" If it was on 22 November, it was not
in the statement he made in the sheriffis office, unless he made more
thanoneandonlyoneisused.
Brennan cannot make a mistake. He says, "There was a mistake in
the FBI recording there." He said that he was talking about the dis-
tance from the gun to President Kennedy, the President Kennedy he couldn!t
C
see. This obvious error he explained as follows: "No; I dould not (see
him)。 But I could see before and aater." Belin then re fers to another
part of this interview quoting Brennan as having attended a lineup, "at

--- PAGE BREAK ---ned as follows: "No; I dould not (see
him)。 But I could see before and aater." Belin then re fers to another
part of this interview quoting Brennan as having attended a lineup, "at

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24Brennan
He asked if that was an accurate recording. Brennan says,"Yes; I be-
lieve - " and here Belin interrupts him, asking if that part of the FBI
statement is correct, to which Brennan agrees. Belin then says, "What
Belin immediately interrupts with a "No" which he follows this way:
"what was the fact. Could you or could’ you not actually identify this
person as the man you saw firing the rifle?" Brennan said, "I believed
I could with all fairness and sincerity.As you asked me the question
before, had I saw those pictures of Oswald prior, which naturally I don't
though
know whether it confused me or made me feel as kkwgkx I was taking unfair
advantage or what。But with all fairness,I could have positively iden-
tified the man." Belin then refers to a December 17 interview with the
in a lineup you felt positive identification was not necessary, because
it was your understanding that Oswald had already been charged with the
you had observedhispicture ontelevisionprior tothe timeofidentifi-
cation,and that that tended to cloud any identification/made of Oswald
you
at the police department.Now,does this December 17 interview accg-
rately record whst you told the FBI with regard to that matter of identie
fication?" Brennan said, "I believe it does." Note the conflict here,
with his earlier teatimony about fearing he and his family might become.
the victims of a Communist plot. Note also he said that as soon as Oswald

--- PAGE BREAK ---it does." Note the conflict here,
with his earlier teatimony about fearing he and his family might become.
the victims of a Communist plot. Note also he said that as soon as Oswald

--- PAGE BREAK ---

25-Brennan
was killed, he no longer had that fear and the fear was the only thing
that kept him from making positive identification.
Brennan was also interviewed by the FBI on January 7.In para-
phrasing it,Belin indicates how either he or the FBI helped Brennan
along with the problem of Brennan's having seen Oswald's picture on
not helppyou retain the original impression of the man in the.window
With the rifle, but that upon seeing Lee Harvey Oswald in the police
in the window.Now,is that what you told the man on January 7-that
Oswald most resembled the man that you had seen in the window?"zxRaxkawka区
Does
mkxzk Brennan agreed,foalowing which Belin wanted to know,"Sogas that
mean you could notgive him apositive identification at that time,but
could merely say he most resembled the man in the window?n
Before continuing, I want to note that seeing Oswald on television,
hel
in the context of not htzping Brennan retain his original impression,
did help him know who the police wanted identified。 What is the legal
situationwith respecttoalineupin which themanknown tobewanted
bythe police has his picture broadcast aswidely as possible and in
which the peopleasked tomakethe identification in thelineuphave
seen thispicture?
Butforpersonal reasons I didn't feellike that at thatmomentit was
compulsory and I did not want to give apositive identification at that
time。
This is in reference to the Jauary 7 interview.At that time
Brennan!s personal reasons, which he alleged to have been fear of Com-
munist retaliation,no longer existed as he himselo had testified and