May 28, 1968 
TO: ‘ JIM GARRISON, District Attorney 
FROM: ANDREW J. SCIAMBRA, Assistant District Attorney 
RE: interview with PAUL TAYLOR, 4110*5 Freret Street 
TAYLOR informed us that he had been interviewed twice before 
regarding his meeting LEE HARVEY. OSWALD at Thompson s Restaurant 
on St Charles Avenue.'once by our office and once by two men who 
said they ware from the Federal government, sometime after the 
Garrison investigation became public. 
He said that at the time he met OSWALD at Thompson's Restaurant 
ha. TAYLOR, was driving a Yellow Cab and it was on one of his 
Stops at Thompson's for coffee that he first met OSWALD He 
said OSWALD always had on a white shirt and black tie an or 
reason he assumed that he was a cab driver. Ha said these thres 
0„ CQur -T=ctings with OSWALD ware spread over about a period of 
a~montn and were sometime during tha Summer of 1963. He said one 
dav ha hapoened to be drinking coffaa and saw this individual 
sitting at* the table next to him and just nodded and said nal.o 
and OSWALD said hi and ha then said, "How's it going" or son=tr._.. 
to that affect and OSWALD said, "All right." He said tha three 
or four times that he did see OSWALD at Thompson’s this was about 
the extent of the conversation between them, just a casual hello 
and a friendly question or two relating to the weather or so 
forth. He said that the two men that came to see him first called 
him at the Yellow Cab company and then came to see him at 
Thomoson’s Rastaurant. Ha said one man showed him a Federal 
fentification card and the other man showed him a blue card witn 
rad letters or. it signifying that ha was with tha CIA. Ha said 
the CIA man had also said that he was an ex-Marina. Tha two 
T?cd = -"”1 men csnsrallv asked him cuastions relating to OSWALD are 
about" tha tires that"ha saw him. at Thompson’s, wanting to_kno,' if 
ha was with anybody or had mentioned anybody’s name. 
' them no, and that his meetings with OSWALD were pure coir.eia.:.r=. 
:! TAYLOF; told them that he did not know the person's name was uEE 
HAFVE'-' OSWALD as he never had the occasion to ask his name. 
TAYLOR said that he immediately recognised the picture of OSWALD 
in the newspaper after the assassination as tha person he had see 
at Thompson's about three or four times. TAYLOR said that OSWALD 
was always alone and never mentioned anybody's name and only 
exchanged pleasantries. He said the three or four times that he 
did see OSWALD he would say it was around-2:30 _or_3^00 in the 
afternoon. He said ha has no idea how the two Federal men found 
out that he had ever seen OSWALD but ha believes that a person, 
named BOB GUSMAN who is a forest ranger and who a 1'ways hangs act 
aroua^nSSjagsoaT’s may have been the person who told the governor 
that, ha did 5£S 0SV7ALB. 
TAYLOR said he found out from the newspaper that OSWALD lived up | 
y, = 4900 block of Magazine and that his landlord was JESSij 
GARNER. He knows GARNER from driving a cab.that, ha did 5£S 0SV7ALB. 
TAYLOR said he found out from the newspaper that OSWALD lived up | 
y, = 4900 block of Magazine and that his landlord was JESSij 
GARNER. He knows GARNER from driving a cab.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

iipage -2- 
While looking through our pictures TAYLOR said that he doesn t 
recognize pictures of BANISTER or SHAW or THORNLEY even though he 
savs^THORNLEY looks quite a hit like LEE HARVEY OSWALD. He says 
toft to believes he has seen BECKHAM, NOVEL and BRINGUIER in 
Thompson’s from time to time, never together, always alone. 
I 
.4