iti


tetciecaiestascidasdinast


TATHHITHITITTTTETITITRTRTTIT AT Red TAT


PEROLTERTIP TIAL LLU ee ea


7?


yr


The
Chief Points of Difference


Between the


Catholic and Protestant
Creeds


BY THE /.


REV, F.uLAUN


NEW YORK
JOSEPH F. WAGNER


7”


— Mihil @dstat


REMIGIUS LAFORT, S.T.D. _
Censor


Emprimatur


JOHN CARDINAL FARLEY _ ; 1A :
Archbishop of New York


New York, October 18, 1915


ta :
° | ) Kail } | i

THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, CAMBRIDGE, U.S.A.

2
Loam 4 ( ey ;
rd Bre adhe f


EDITOR’S PREFACE


A THOROUGH discussion of the points of difference is what
is chiefly required by bona fide inquirers from without the
fold, and to such inquirers this book is dedicated. It is
hoped that to such inquirers no expression in this book
will appear aggressive. In the impersonal atmosphere of a
book of this kind, plain speaking is required and permis-
sible, but there was far from the mind of the author any
intention to be unkind or uncharitable. The attacks upon
erroneous belief should not be misunderstood to be attacks
on erroneous believers.

Also to inquirers from within the fold this book will be
helpful, in enlightening them upon important matters of
faith, and in enabling them to enlighten others who, with a
good will, ask them for information.


CONTENTS


PEVeeere isi THE Teun DOCTRINE?!) Ph ew 8 kes
Saenoucel caching: Uniforms. aco Mier, wien ei od ot laberl'c
BEBTEIOTIES Meri ee io, emia as Ma eoten sm Up ae s Aeaa et


PGMoaNOL Ol the BIDE.) 15551121 eee dateetaens Moyea vr boberel Me
UDCMN ULM ALOie satiate 0.9 Ast ty Ra eee ie AERO) £7, Pome
PENCE SULTADSIALION \ .) Sl. Ue eases petite ea el Roe
Beermerpietation of the Bible e2.c SA Paice Se 8- peat
maeviciial taterpretation ss; vcs moun te hoe halle
sepeusient,to-Read the Bible (vi % ahi.) year. aS):
uewbipie in-the Middle Ages > 3 <2.) et oe oa as
Protestant: Opinion of the Bible ac ee
Rete SAGILIONS. f/f). 6 oy oye RM ea come nna hy Ay


III. THe CaurcH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY .....


MOREE LOC ODE). af ath eae a dvb suit habs
Sore ree PADACY sie ies SHES sae Od hoa ans
Peeserimaoye Olroty Peter arn rer ne tote wh vs ko cy coteeee
Papal Jurisdiction and Influence. ... 2. 2.0.0...
mene apacy and Civilizations |. (640s hace we aches
The Papacy and Civil Government ..... Neha ates
menaApAacy anc the Gniurciers iesr sh rs Pcs ris ahew fe
Panareenralhi bility: hommes £18) gato ncn WCE aina corny
he: Powers Of: CHER Ope saa pees do's fice steers ce ione opel be
Spiritual and Temporal Authority... .9.0 6). 26... 18
PersecuLions Ol LICTCHiGsmm wince alk amie amentont wits
Perecuuons Of Catholics rien ae it a elie hah ay seme


Dee RORGIVENESS OB) SINS fall vice face ue onlin v etilanne eee
SUT CON RL Sen i eR GOS Yl Talat See ORY a NC eae Me


piMneckordl VENESS.OL Oils MWe) brea Giityw ar ia haiti brats
PREUICCTNICES Eis hos be OIE VR a ese taal mara ace a Coie eagle
POUPALOL Vie I cise we TER a Re ee LW ihe a en ghe mes
Indulgences Applied to Soulsin Purgatory ......
The Protestant: Plenary Indulgence). . 2 3.20. oe. .


vi CONTENTS


Page

V..Farra AND) Goop WorkKS)))) say aisle davieais | oan 98
The Objectiof Faith so. 0) Ric ae ces ne IOL
The Catholic Understanding’ of Faith 2°... \o) Se 103
Faith and Good Works.) 2e ae aie el 105
The Commandments of God and of the Church . . . . 107
Outward: Practices |. aaa ee ees Ns faeces ac Oe Sak
The Evangelical Counsels) cGy ies i ee ee pies
Self-Righteousness, 00 /0)-)e)..Waesiete teas toni teh ooo 116
VI.) Tar VENERATION (OF SAINTS) GeUa ie (sla heel cla ae IQ
The' Veneration of Mary) [oN sisi ue ie yee eae I2I
The'Immaculate Conception 7002) se) yo ee 125
Relics:of the Saints (0) iia sn re) er 126
Pilgrimages yh... 00 '0 Nab Mat MRM eae ale ta ge 129
VI. THE SACRAMENTS .).0)0)0 005 sie Sans i). lo i 131
Sacraments and Blessings... ...... ee ieee tae
Confirmation) (0) 6) (i Uiguinig pie ce inieti site Ll) ae a 139
Holy! Orders io/:3). ic) aA at ree 140
The Sacrament of Penancesi eid eS i 144
Protestant’ Confession of Sins)! 2). Pre tt:
Compulsory Confession) 1). yn se 147
The Clergy and Auricular Confession . 2.) 2. age 149
satisfaction for'Sins: (hiatal ity aie ose ee 152
Matrimony: (23) 0.00 0 (pai tet hele I55
Indissolubility of Marridge (000): 5/1.) 2"). 54 2 157
Compulsory Celibacy hc.) bi an 160
Extreme Unction))). 0/4075) ee 162
Baptism wise Pee ee A 164
The Holy Eucharist 0/62) 7 ae ane 165
‘Transubstantiation ii). .e io) tee ee ie es ee 167
Che Sacrifice of the Mass ')!!3)./2i)) ae ee oe 170
Priesthood; ee eee ce) ey eae ee oe: eh Yeh aetna
The Renewal of; Christ’sjSacrifice’. °2°J)/.) Sy eee 172
The Office of the Priesthood ...... 6 | at al 176
Mass ‘and Sermon) ea os AT Sk Hae Wenn Nap heen 178
The Fruits of the Mass. ..... eile ab iitah 82, hs GR I79


The Chief Points of Difference


BETWEEN THE CATHOLIC AND PROTESTANT
CREEDS


I. WHERE IS THE TRUE DOCTRINE?


The Protestant Assertion. We call ourselves evangelical Christians,
because we adhere to the teaching of the Gospel contained in Holy
Scripture. After being long in obscurity, these saving truths were
brought into prominence again by the Reformation.


The Catholic Reply. We Catholics believe and confess
that Jesus Christ, the Son of God and our only Redeemer
and Mediator, founded one holy Church which, being Christ’s
own institution, has in every age preserved the truths that
He revealed, pure and inviolate.

We believe and confess that this Church neither is nor
can be any other than the Catholic Church, which can prove
itself to have been always the One, Holy, Catholic or uni-
versal, and Apostolic communion of those who hold the
true faith in Christ.

The Catholic Church has ever adhered to the Gospel,
which would have perished long ago but for the Church,
whereas Protestantism dates only from the sixteenth cen-
tury.

Dr. Martin Luther, the leader in the Reformation, did
not bring to light truths that had been forgotten; what he
did was to substitute his own opinions for ancient truths.
He did not rediscover the Bible, but altered and expounded
it to suit his own views, thus giving rise to many errors.
He was not divinely commissioned, but assumed the right to
judge and reform God’s Church.


2 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


The Protestant Assertion. The Bible had long been almost forgotten,
and in its place all kinds of innovations and all manner of false doctrine
regarding the most important articles of faith had been accepted by the
Church. These innovations and erroneous doctrines are still upheld
by the Roman Catholic Church.


The Catholic Reply. Christ uttered the promises: “I am
with you all days, even to the consummation of the world”
(Matth. xxviii, 20), and: “The Spirit of truth . . . shall
abide with you” (John xiv, 17, cf. xvi, 13). Hence the Gospel
could never bé lost, and the Catholic Church has preserved
Christ’s doctrine as the truth necessary to salvation not
only in the letter, but in the spirit (2 Cor. iii, 6). With un-
erring decision she has detected and exposed all false teach-
ers who adhered to the letter rather than to the spirit of
Christ. She has never accepted any erroneous doctrine and,
therefore, whoever asserts that she still upholds such doc-
trines, calumniates her.


The Protestant Assertion. The most important points upon which
the Roman Catholic Church teaches false doctrines are the follow-
ing: I. Holy Scripture; II. The Church and her authority; III. The
forgiveness of sins; IV. Faith and good works; V. The worship of
saints; VI. The Holy Eucharist.


These points will be dealt with individually in the fol-
lowing chapters.


COMMENTARY


If we as Catholics were to admit that the Holy Church,
founded on earth by Christ, could ever have forgotten or
lost His Gospel, we should be denying the truth of our Lord’s
own words. Far from forgetting the Gospel, the Church
has made countless sacrifices in order to preserve the truths
entrusted to her, and she has kept them intact down to the
present day. It was she that gave the Holy Bible to Chris-
tians, and she has ever been its faithful guardian. She alone
can know and testify to the character of the Bible, for she
existed before it did and she alone was appointed by God
to protect and interpret it. She knew the story of our Lord’s


WHERE IS THE TRUE DOCTRINE? 3


life and knew all His doctrines before a word of them had
been committed to writing; she used the Our Father before
it could be read in St. Matthew’s Gospel; she administered
baptism and the other sacraments in conformity with Christ’s
instructions before any of the Apostles had compiled a
record of them. Guided by the Holy Spirit she has ever been
most vigilant to prevent any tampering with the word of
God. She has preferred to undergo grievous persecution
rather than tolerate any error in faith. Never have any kinds
of innovations devised by men, and false doctrines regarding
the most important articles of faith been accepted by the
Catholic Church in place of God’s holy word.

Thus it is a complete distortion of the truth for Protes-
tants to declare that they are evangelical Christians because
they adhere to the teaching of the Gospel, which, they assert,
was and is ignored by the Catholic Church. The truth is
rather that now for nearly two thousand years Catholics have
loyally adhered to the Gospel teaching given by Christ to
His Church and preserved in her by the Apostles and their
successors. The Protestant Church came into existence
only in the sixteenth century, and none of the tenets in
which Protestantism differs from Catholicism can be shown
to be based upon the Gospel of Christ.


Catholic Teaching Uniform


Protestants say that it is necessary to distinguish carefully between
the genuinely Christian element in Catholicism, as it appears in the writ-
ings of many Catholic theologians, in some popular devotional works,
and in the lives of some Catholics, and, on the other hand, the ‘‘Roman
errors” which in the course of time have found their way into the Church,
chiefly through the fault of the Popes, and which have recently gained
the ascendency.


In answer to this statement we maintain that there is
no difference at all between “genuinely Christian” and
“Roman” Catholicism. Neither the Popes nor the much
slandered Jesuits have another catechism than that in
general use, nor do they teach other articles of faith, other
morality, or another way to heaven than those inculcated


4 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


by the learned and edifying Catholic works extolled by
Protestants. In every age there have been lukewarm
Catholics ready to make concessions to outsiders, instead
of holding fast to the real doctrines and acknowledging the
claims of the Catholic Church. Such persons have alto-
gether ceased to belong to her, and hence they are prone
to go forth from our midst (1 John ii, 19); whereas naturally
those who antagonize the Catholic faith find it to their pur-
pose to regard such persons as genuine Catholics.

Let there be no misunderstanding about the matter: the
object of hostility and hatred is not any alleged erroneous
teaching of the Popes nor the asserted cunning of the Jesuits,
but it is invariably the Catholic Church, the Church founded
by Christ Himself, and her One, Holy, Catholic, and Apos-
tolic doctrine. :


Protestants say that in every age there have been among Catholics
wise and prudent teachers, and not a few good Christians who put to
shame many “‘evangelical’’ Christians, with whom they are united in
charity since they approximate closely to them in the faith. On the
other hand, Catholics dominated by the spirit of the Popes regard Protes-
tants as heretics, that is to say, not as true Christians, worthy only of
abhorrence, and this feeling of hostility reveals itself in public life and
daily intercourse.


It is true that in every age there have been great saints
among Catholics, and men such as St. Benedict, St. Francis
of Assisi, St. Charles Borromeo, St. Francis Xavier have
never been counted their own by “ evangelical’? Christians.
These great saints were far from professing the doctrines
characteristic of Protestantism; they all laboured with un-
feigned humility to perfect their own souls; they served
God zealously with good works, but they were invariably
scrupulously obedient to the Catholic Church.

A Catholic who truly lives and thinks according to the
spirit of his Church will never abhor one who professes an-
other faith, nor will he treat such a man as an enemy. He
is able to distinguish between the error and the person who
errs, Just as he can discriminate between culpable and


WHERE IS THE TRUE DOCTRINE? 5


inculpable ignorance. The Church, being the divinely ap-
pointed teacher of truth, can under no circumstances what-
ever accept any other truth than that revealed to her by
God. Should she call error truth, she would be false to the
words of Christ, to the testimony of the Apostles, and to
herself, and when any one by his own fault persists obsti-
nately in error she deals with him in accordance with the
rules laid down even by Christ and the Apostles (Cf., e.g.,
Titus iii, 10).

The Catholic Church, far from teaching us to abhor as
heretics those who have grown up in inculpable error, bids
us love them as brethren; it would be a grievous sin against
Christian charity to persecute those who do not agree with
us on matters of religion. We will not discuss here the ques-
tion as to where indeed hostility and hatred prevail against
people professing another faith.

Protestants say that there is a great difference between the state-
ments found in ancient ecclesiastical documents or made at the present
day by honest Catholics, on the one hand, and the innovations introduced
by the papacy into the public worship of the Church on the other. For
instance, they maintain that in the decisions of the Council of Trent
the doctrine of indulgences and of the merit of good works is not stated
nearly so bluntly as in the papal bulls. They admit that the official
utterances of the Church contain much that is good and beautiful,
though it is intermingled, they say, with erroneous and disastrous teach-
ing. They recognize the presence of this beneficial element particu-
larly in our Catholic catechisms and devotional works.


In reply to this assertion we may say emphatically that
the Pope can introduce nothing contrary to faith into the
public worship of the Church, and hence there cannot possi-
bly be any discrepancy between the teaching of the Church
and the faith of honest Catholics. It is a strange fallacy to
suppose that papal bulls may contain a doctrine differing
from that taught by the Council of Trent or from that uni-
versally accepted and handed down in the Church. No
Catholic catechism in any part of the world contains a sen-
tence contrary to a papal bull. In marked contrast to this
unity it is known that Protestant catechisms and religious


6 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


works of every kind agree in their doctrine neither with one
another, nor with the teaching of the Reformation, nor with
the obvious meaning of Holy Scripture; while Catholics
have not a single article of faith that has not at all times been
universally accepted and upheld by the Catholic Church.
In a “Protestant Protest against the Evangelical Alliance”
(Volkszeitung, 1899, No. 181) Dr. Max Oberbreyer wrote:
“In our camp there are incessant disputes regarding the
chief matters of faith. Was not Leo XIII, the great advo-
cate of peace, perfectly right when he contrasted the solid
unity of the world-wide Catholic Church with our divisions?
Fieldmarshal Moltke, a truly loyal Protestant, declared
that the fact that the Catholic Church possessed a supreme
head assured her preéminence on account of her certainty
regarding dogma. Moltke’s inference was that Protestants
must eventually return to the Catholic Church, but many
Protestants of our day hope to prop up the crumbling ruins
of Protestantism by stirring up the masses against Rome.
Their efforts will fail, for the violent assaults of Protestant
preachers tend to disgust many of their own persuasion and
convince them that a church that resorts to vituperation
and slander cannot possibly be the true Church of Christ.”

The utmost pains are taken by our antagonists to inspire
the young with a horror of Rome, to fill them with a blind
hatred of the papacy and with contempt for everything
Catholic, so that they may never be tempted to make in-
quiries for themselves and to find out what the Church really
is and what are her history and her aims.


Ceremonies


Protestants say that ceremonies constitute the chief part of Catholi-
cism and that in them there is a large admixture of superstition. Such
Catholics as are true Christians cannot of course be satisfied with merely
external ceremonies, and have recourse therefore to the remains of evan-
gelical truth that still linger in their Church. People of this class happily
always exist, and so long as they do not influence the Catholic Church as
a whole, the Popes allow them to serve God quietly; indeed, they are
often employed in converting the heathen or in winning Protestants over
to Catholicism. As soon, however, as they become prominent in the


WHERE IS THE TRUE DOCTRINE? 7


Catholic Church they meet with persecution, and no pains are spared to
induce them to abandon the truth and to make an at least ostensible
recantation of their alleged errors. Mournful instances of such a line of
action occur in the history of men such as Francis Speira, Fénelon,
Noailles, the Jansenists, Sailer, and his followers, Boos, etc.

If the members of the Protestant Church could boast of no other ad-
vantage than freedom from the burden laid on conscience, which op-
presses the noblest and best Roman Catholics, they would have good
reason for thankfulness.


A Protestant might certainly be amazed at the astuteness
of Rome and aghast at the action of the Popes, if they used
precisely the honest and pious Catholics, “so long as these
do not influence the Catholic Church as a whole,” to en-
snare worthy evangelicals, and submitted these same per-
sons to persecution “as soon as they become prominent in
the Church.”

Does the Protestant who utters these accusations believe
men like Fénelon and Sailer to have been at heart inclined
to Protestantism? Let him read Fénelon’s Treatise on the
Authority of the Sovereign Pontiff. Can he imagine Fénelon’s
submission to the decision condemning one of his works to
have been extorted from him by force, when the great
bishop himself wrote on the subject: “In what way did I
offend those who charge that it costs me a great effort to
subject my feeble intellect to the authority of the Holy See” ?

What justification is there for the statement that true
Christians, anxious for their own salvation, cannot find
peace of mind in the doctrines of Catholicism and are forced
to have recourse to the remnants of evangelical truth still
lingering in the Catholic Church?

Such a statement is an utter misrepresentation of the
truth. We are told that some remnants of evangelical truth
still linger in the Catholic Church, when in matter of fact all
the really evangelical truths retained by non-Catholic sects
have been drawn from the Catholic Church, the Church
which has neither lost nor obscured any single one of them.
If it were otherwise, Christ’s own promise that the Holy
Ghost should guide His Church into a// truth would not be


8 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


fulfilled. Luther discovered neither new nor forgotten —
truths; he did nothing but deny and abandon much that
had been believed and practised in the Church of Christ
from the time of the Apostles onward. If the Catholic
Church were to vanish out of the world it would leave a gap
that nothing else could fill. No one would be then in a posi-
tion to declare with certainty who Christ was, what the
Bible is, or what constitutes grace and sin. It would be im-
possible to discover the truth amidst the inextricable con-
fusion of opinions put forward by Protestant theologians
and preachers. If their opinions and theories, however, were.
all to vanish, would the world be deprived of any truth?

We are told, further, that ceremonies form the chief part
of the Catholic religion and that there is in them a large ad-
mixture of superstition. Never have ceremonies been of
paramount importance in the Catholic Church. She is,
however, wisely aware that her members are human beings
made up of body and soul, and that access to the soul is
gained through the senses. One cannot draw water with-
out a vessel to hold it, nor can one receive truth unless it is
clothed in words, nor grace without a visible sign. Outward
forms of some kind or another are indispensable to the mind
of man. The Catholic Church has ever aimed at supplying
precious vessels to contain her priceless treasures, and for
this reason she surrounds her public worship with stately
ceremonial intended to lead the minds of her children to
appreciate and thankfully accept what is bestowed and
symbolized by the outward forms. Ceremonies are the
means of raising men’s thoughts to God and of bringing
down divine graces; they are not an end in themselves. Of
course, no Catholic can quiet his conscience with purely ex-
ternal rites; every child learns this in his catechism. The
Catholic Church exerts herself to combat any superstition
that may become attached to the outward performance of
ritual; it is a well-known fact that a tendency to supersti-
tion is deeply rooted in the masses and easily spread. Protes-
tantism has surely not succeeded in eliminating it.


WHERE IS THE TRUE DOCTRINE? 9


Liberty of Conscience


Further, we are told that if Protestants could boast of no
other advantage than freedom from the burden laid on the
conscience of Catholics, they would have good reason for
thankfulness.

Do Protestants really enjoy complete freedom from every
constraint of thought? Is a Protestant candidate for con-
firmation allowed to interpret the Bible in his own way, and
may he act in accordance with his opinion? [If he is taught
to do so he may not, it is true, become a Catholic, but neither
will he long continue to be a Protestant or even a Christian.
Any one desirous of knowing Luther’s views on liberty of
conscience should study his works, as also the constitutions
of the various evangelical churches. In his Table Talks
(Latin ed., p. 288) Luther says: “After admonishing a per-
son two or three times, I will denounce him from the pulpit
as excommunicate, should he not obey me; so that he may
be regarded as a dog, and if he die thus, he may like a dog
be buried in a dungheap.” In the regulations of an early
Protestant sovereign, Duke Christian, severe penalties are
imposed upon the excommunicate, no one is permitted to
eat or drink with them, they must not be admitted at an
inn, they are to be buried in unconsecrated ground, and are
to be cursed and damned with all the devils in hell (Zelle
ed., p. 91). In other regulations for the evangelical churches
there are similar passages regarding the treatment of heretics
and notorious sinners (Bohmer, Jus eccl. Protest., 5, 30,
§ 5s). Did not Luther actually exhort his followers “to
seize the pope and all the rabble of adherents to his idolatry,
and tear out their tongues by the roots, as blasphemers
against God,” and “‘to drown all the papal rabble, all the
abominable knaves together”? The leaders of the Ref-
ormation regarded it as a matter of course that the Catholic
Church ought to be completely destroyed and exterminated.
Loud in their condemnation of restraints on conscience,
they themselves imposed such restraints without scruple.


Ke) THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


Déllinger remarks that it is quite a mistake to describe the
Reformation as aiming at liberty of conscience; its tendency
was in the opposite direction (Kirche, p. 68).

Protestants would do well to refrain from asserting that
liberty of conscience is found only in their midst, and re-
straint prevalent in the Catholic Church, but people at the
present day like to hear the same things that Luther told
the people of his time. “What gave Protestantism its great
attraction,” writes Ddllinger (who is surely an intelligent
and impartial witness), “‘was that its teaching revealed an
easier road to heaven... .”’ It was willingly assumed that
the people had been deprived of the sweet consolation
afforded by the Gospel, in place of which was put the un-
comfortable doctrine that they were bound to keep the
commandments of God. According to Brenz, a Protestant
writer, freedom from the obligation of penance and of fast-
ing was the bait that won the common people over to
Protestantism. They were not slow to identify liberty of
conscience, and the new religion itself with freedom to disre-
gard all ecclesiastical and moral laws. Luther himself says
(Gal. Brief, Walch, 3, 1173) that “‘the Catholic theologians
are asses if they maintain that Christ abolished only the
ceremonies of the Old Testament and not also the ten
commandments.”

What is really the constraint imposed upon the conscience
of a Catholic? None other but God’s own word and com-
mandment, and Christianity consists precisely in the vol-
untary acceptation by man of a divine revelation, of divine
commandments, and of a Church divinely, founded for the
purpose of bringing men to salvation. Whoever accepts this
definition must necessarily regard God’s revelations and laws
as binding upon his conscience. This is far more obvious
than that a soldier, who has of his own accord enlisted in
the army, must endure all hardships and restraints of
military service. A Catholic knows that in obeying the
Church he is obeying God; this is why in Holy Scrip-
ture and in the writings of the Fathers, refusal of belief


WHERE IS THE TRUE DOCTRINE? It


and disobedience to the Church of Christ was regarded as
a grievous sin.

Our pious and noble men are not under constraint, for it
is an honour and a joy, not a burdensome duty, to obey
God’s word and His Holy Church. The yoke that we bear
is easy and the burden laid upon us is light and sweet.
Half-hearted and lukewarm Christians who long for for-
bidden fruits may indeed be heard to complain, but they
belong not to our pious and noble members. These are
rather the countless saints of every age, of both sexes, and
of all nations; they all at the hour of death rejoiced at hav-
ing been permitted to live and die as children of the Catholic
Church. Read the story of their lives and see if you can
discover any feeling of restraint imposed upon their con-
science, or of any other feeling than tender love, heartfelt
gratitude, and loyal submission to their holy mother, the
Church. Read the experiences of those who, after growing
up as Protestants, have returned to the bosom of the Church.
Did Luther ever feel such happiness after he abandoned
her? He tells quite a different story when he relates how
his heart quaked, how he could not himself believe what he
preached to others (Kisl. Tischr., 76, 415). The last years
of his life were disturbed by anxieties, doubts, and by qualms
of conscience. We may read in the second volume of Dél-
linger’s History of the Reformation what sort of consolation
the new religion had for Melanchthon and many others of
the early preachers and adherents of Protestantism.


i. HOLY SCRIPTURE


The Protestant Assertion. The Roman Catholic Church teaches
erroneous doctrines regarding the Bible, inasmuch as she maintains it
to be of itself insufficient to guide us in the way of salvation and that it
needs the support of tradition, viz., of ecclesiastical customs, practices,
and regulations.


The Catholic Reply. The Catholic Church teaches that
the Bible is a collection of books, written under the inspira-
tion of the Holy Spirit, and containing therefore the word
of God. Many Protestants have ceased to believe this.
It is true that the Catholic Church maintains the Bible to
be of itself insufficient to guide us in the way of salvation.
Christ however did not order His Apostles to distribute
Bibles, but to preach; nor did He bid His followers to read,
but to hear the word of God (cf. Matth. xxviii, 19; Luke x,
16). When we speak of tradition we do not mean “eccle-
siastical customs, practices, and regulations,” which are of
human origin, but revealed truths, taught orally by the
Apostles and handed down from generation to generation.

Moreover, every Protestant who reads the Bible has pre-
viously received some oral instruction which serves for his
criterion in interpreting what he reads.


The Protestant Assertion. Holy Scripture is enough to guide us in the
way of salvation, for ‘‘all scripture inspired of God is profitable to teach,
to reprove, to correct, to instruct in justice, that the man of God may be
perfect, furnished to every good work” (2 Tim. iii, 15-17). On the other
hand, the word of God does not refer us to human regulations such as
the Catholic traditions, but warns us against them since they lead us
astray and are fraught with danger to our souls (Matth. xv, 9; Gal.i, 9).


The Catholic Reply. The Catholic Church fully endorses
St. Paul’s words to Timothy, but they do not mean that the
Bible alone will secure the salvation of every individual who


HOLY SCRIPTURE 13


reads it. Timothy himself owed his faith in Christ to the
Apostle’s preaching, not to reading the Old Testament, and
the New Testament did not yet exist. In Matth. xv, 9 our
Lord is warning the people against the doctrines of the
Pharisees, but He refers to the genuine traditions of the Jews
in Matth. xxiii, 2. In Gal. i, 9 St. Paul speaks of false
teachers, not of the doctrines of the Church and the Apostles;
on the contrary, he expressly exhorts the Christians to ad-
here to the latter. Again, in 2 Thess. ii, 14 he writes: “‘ There-
fore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which you
have learned, whether by word or by our epistle.” We are
not referred to rules laid down by men but solely to God’s
word; but we value and respect the word of God equally,
whether recorded in writing or handed down orally.


Translations of the Bible


The Protestant Assertion. The Roman Catholic Church teaches erro-
neous doctrines when she maintains that a simple Christian cannot un-
derstand Holy Scripture, and therefore may, by reading it, be led into
fatal error. For this reason it is considered inexpedient for the laity to
read the Bible, and the Popes have frequently prohibited its translation
into the vernacular and have condemned and suppressed such translations.


The Catholic Reply. We read in Holy Scripture itself that
it is not easily understood. In several instances Christ’s
disciples failed to understand passages of the Old Testament
(cf. Luke xxiv, 25; Acts viii, 27-35), and His own hearers
misunderstood what our Lord said (cf. Luke vili, 10; John
_vi, 61, etc.). Experience shows that the indiscriminate read-
ing of the Bible has caused many people to fall into lamen-
table errors. The Catholic Church has never taught that it
is inexpedient for the laity to read the Bible. She has,
however, with great prudence laid down rules for the use of
Holy Scripture. No Pope has ever in general terms for-
_ bidden it to be translated, but improper translations, likely
to foster and spread erroneous doctrines, have from time to
time been suppressed. In acting thus the Popes properly
protected the word of God against falsification.


14 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


The Protestant Assertion. The Protestant Church teaches that Holy
Scripture contains all that it is necessary to know and to believe in order
to attain salvation, and that it contains this, moreover, in a form intelli-
gible to any reader honestly in search of truth. Therefore, if men are to
be able to die a blessed death, it behooves them to read the Bible, to grow
in the comprehension of it, to believe it, and to live in accordance with
its teaching.


The Catholic Reply. If Holy Scripture dispensed the truth
in so obvious a form, it follows that every reader would in-
evitably discover in it the same truth. This is not the case
even with regard to the chief articles of faith. The Catholic
Church has always taught that it is most beneficial and ex-
pedient for all who have sufficient education and are in the
right dispositions to read and meditate upon Holy Scrip-
ture, especially the Gospels.


The Protestant Assertion. The Bible is intended for the poor and ig-
norant as well as for the learned, for “‘the testimony of the Lord is faith-
ful, giving wisdom to little ones” (Ps. xviii, 8); it is to be read by the
young as well as the old, since St. Paul praises Timothy for having from
infancy known the Holy Scriptures (2 Tim. iii, 15), and we read in Ps.
cxvill, 9g: “By what doth a young man correct his way? Even by keeping
Thy words.”


The Catholic Reply. In the Catholic Church there is for
learned and unlearned alike precisely the same faith, the
same teaching on morals, and the same reverence for
Holy Scripture. Amongst Protestants, however, the Bible
is made to yield different standards for learned and
unlearned.

In the Psalms the expressions “the word of the Lord”
and the “testimony of the Lord” do not refer exclusively
to the written word, but even if this were the case the pas-
sages quoted would mean nothing more than that this word
is good and beneficial. The Holy Scriptures which Timothy
knew from his infancy must have been the Old Testament.
He learnt through oral instruction the references to Christ
in the Old Testament.

Many Protestants, especially those teaching the young,


HOLY SCRIPTURE 1s


do not believe that the reading of all parts of the Bible is
good for children. Catholic children are well instructed in
Holy Scripture, as it forms the basis of all their religious
teaching.


COMMENTARY


The Catholic Church values and reverences the Bible as
a divinely inspired book, whereas modern Protestant scholars
regard it as of purely human origin. It is held by them that
scientific theologians of the present day are convinced that
the Holy Scriptures were not inspired by God, that many
classical works of Greek, Roman, and later origin are superior
to the Old Testament; that the Bible is full of errors and con-
tradictions, and even in instructing the young it should be
emphasized that it is not infallible. Against this view Pope
Leo XIII in 1893 proclaimed publicly that God Himself
was the original author of the Bible, and that it points out
with certainty the way of salvation. Is then the Bible
treated nowadays with greater respect by Protestants or by
Catholics? In addition to Holy Scripture we accept, of
course, oral tradition; this, however, is not a collection of
human regulations, but, like the Bible, divinely revealed
truth. Without tradition no one would know what properly
belongs to Holy Scripture, and it is only when the genuine
ecclesiastical tradition is set aside that false human tradi-
tion takes its place. For instance, a person who believes
St. John’s Gospel to be divinely inspired but rejects the books
of Machabees, bases his belief not on Holy Scripture, in
which there is not a word on the subject, but on Luther;
consequently he relies on the word of a human being. St.
Peter warned the faithful that in St. Paul’s epistles “are
certain things hard to be understood, which the unlearned
and unstable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures, to
their own destruction” (2 Peter iii, 16).

Moreover, a great and saintly scholar such as St. Augus-
tine (ep. 119, cap. 21) acknowledges frankly that in Holy
Scripture there is more that he cannot understand than


16 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


what he can comprehend, and he adds that from the earliest
times uninstructed and superficial persons have been apt to
misinterpret the Bible. It cannot therefore be a book easily
understood by every one. Luther himself complained that
every sect appropriated the Scriptures and interpreted them
according to its own views, so that finally the Bible fell into
disrepute, even came to be called an heretical book, because
all heresies had arisen from it and all heretics quoted it.
(Sermon against turbulent spirits.)


The Canon of the Bible


Protestants assert that, since the Council of Trent, Roman Catho-
lics have had to regard the so-called apocryphal books as being of equal
importance with the other books of Holy Scripture. The Protestant
Church holds that this is improper, because those books were not in-
cluded among their sacred writings by the Jews nor by the primitive
Christian Church.


In reply we remark:


(a) The books in question are not apocryphal, in the sense


of spurious, although Luther called them so. These books,
viz., Baruch, Tobias, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus,


Machabees, and portions of Esther and Daniel have come -


down to us only in Greek and not in Hebrew, but it is known
that among the Jews the Greek text was the standard. It
was the Greek text that the Apostles themselves used, and
this text included these books. It is known, moreover, that
in the third century Baruch was read in the synagogues,
and in the Talmud Ecclesiasticus is mentioned. with the
Law and the Prophets. In the second century B.c. these
books were universally regarded as canonical.
(6) These books were considered sacred by the Christian
Church from the very beginning, and no less importance was
ascribed to them than to the earlier books of the Bible. An
examination of the writings of the Fathers will show that they
used and quoted these books no less than the other parts of the
Bible; even so early an author as St. Clement of Rome made
use of them; they occur in the most ancient translations, such


HOLY SCRIPTURE 17


as the Greek Septuagint, which dates from the third cen-
tury B.C., as well as in the oldest Latin, Syriac, and Arme-
nian versions. The Oriental sects, severed in the first cen-
turies from the unity of the Church, regard these books as
canonical. The Council of Hippo (393) and the Council of
Carthage (397) included, like the Council of Trent, these
books among the Holy Scriptures handed down by the
Fathers, and in the year 405 Pope Innocent I officially con-
firmed this canon. How then can any one assert that these
books were put on a level with the rest of Holy Scripture
only since the Council of Trent (1545-1563)? Such a state-
ment involves a perversion of facts.

(c) No innovation was made at the Council of-Trent nor
were there any books added to the canon, but the Council
proceeded with regard to the Bible as with other matters,
and defined the primitive Christian truth plainly and in-
telligibly as an article of faith. Not only was the Council
entitled to do this, but it was imperative for men to know
with certainty which books belong to Holy Scripture and
therefore contain divinely revealed truth.

(d) Luther, on the contrary, had no right to reject any
books nor to designate them as apocryphal, i.e., books that
have not the authority of Holy Scripture. It was not his
privilege to decide regarding the authenticity of the Scrip-
tures, and he might just as well have rejected every other
book in the Bible. This is actually what Luther’s followers
are now doing. Protestant professors of theology, whose
duty it is to train young men for the ministry, speak of the
book of Genesis as a collection of myths and legends; they
regard the prophets as eccentric, or even more or less de-
mented enthusiasts, who thought that by stern denun-
ciation and malediction they could best serve the terrible
God of Israel. The books of Chronicles are assumed to
have no claim to authenticity; St. Paul is regarded as a
prejudiced Jewish theologian whose writings teem with
contradictions, whilst St. John’s teaching is said by them to
border very closely on heresy. In short, the books of the


18 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


Bible are treated as purely literary productions, inferior to
many classical writings; they are said to be ingenious fabri-
cations, etc.,etc. The foregoing are only a few of the opinions
expressed by modern Protestant critics who might as well
apply to the whole Bible Luther’s definition of the so-called
apocryphal books, viz., “books, once regarded as forming
part of Holy Scripture, but now acknowledged to be full of
legends and fables.”

The Catholic Church has a claim upon our gratitude not
only, but upon that of every pious Protestant who still looks
upon the Bible as the word of God and the source of divine
truth. Amidst the storms and conflicts of centuries she
alone has preserved the whole collection of sacred books,
not tolerating the excision of a single book, chapter, or
letter.


The Vulgate


Protestants assert that, since the Council of Trent, the Roman Catho-
lic Church has assigned to the Latin translation of the Bible, known as the
Vulgate, an importance equal to that of the original text, and in all her
public utterances uses it to furnish conclusive evidence in support of her
doctrines. So thoroughly is this the case that, where an error occurs in
the Vulgate, it must not be corrected in accordance with the original.
For instance, in Gen. iii, 15, the Hebrew text reads: ‘‘God said unto the
serpent ... I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and be-
tween thy seed and her seed, he (or zt) shall bruise thy head”; but the
Vulgate runs: ‘‘ske shall crush thy head.” Protestants maintain that our
theologians avail themselves of this mistranslation to prove that Mary,
and not her divine Son, was to destroy the serpent. They recognize
the great value of the Vulgate, but say that its numerous mistakes make
it necessary for any one wishing to ascertain the truth to go back to the
original.


What have Catholics to say on this subject?

(a) The name Vulgate means “generally used.” This
translation was made by St. Jerome during the years 390-
405. He took the greatest pains to secure its accuracy and
to render the Hebrew and Greek text with the utmost
fidelity into Latin. As time went on, this translation was
universally adopted as peculiarly excellent.


HOLY SCRIPTURE 19


(6) The Council of Trent declared it to be most expedient
for Catholics to know which of all the Latin editions then
in circulation was to be regarded as the one officially sanc-
tioned. Therefore the Council decided that the ancient
Vulgate edition, which had for many centuries been used in
the Church, should be accepted as authentic and that no
one under any pretext whatever should reject the same.

(c) It is therefore incorrect to say that only since the
Council of Trent has the Vulgate been recognized as the
translation true to the meaning of Holy Scripture.

(dq) This translation is described as authentic. In legal
language this term is applied to a document acknowledged
to be genuine and trustworthy, so that when a translation
is called authentic we mean that it conveys essentially the
same meaning as the original. But, by calling the Vulgate
an authentic translation, the Church had no intention of
declaring it to be preferable to the Greek or Hebrew original
texts of Holy Scripture, nor that it was free from all mis-
takes, nor that it was forbidden to correct such mistakes in
conformity with the original text.

(e) The Council merely declared the Vulgate to be the
best of all existing Latin versions of the Bible, and forbade
another Latin translation to be quoted in public disserta-
tions, sermons, or lectures in support of any doctrine affect-
ing faith or morals.

It was very necessary that such a definite rule should be
laid down, since between the years 1515 and 1580 there ap-
peared no fewer than 181 Latin translations of the whole
Bible or of individual books in it, these versions being more
or less inaccurate. The Council said nothing as to the use
of the Hebrew and Greek texts, for it was taken for granted
as an incontestable fact that these texts were eminently
authentic. Evidence in support of this statement is sup-
plied by such men as Vega, Salmeron, and Pallavicini, who
were present at the proceedings of the Council. Rugerius,
secretary to the Apostolic See, writes as follows: “How
could God-fearing men bear to assent, should any one de-


20 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


clare that the Hebrew text of Holy Scripture was thence-
forth discarded, — that text inspired by the Holy Ghost,
_ written by the prophets, and quoted and expounded by
Christ, — that text whence, as from a fountain, all other
versions proceed, and from which all are descended?”

Within our own time Pope Leo XIII, in his encyclical
Providentissimus Deus (Nov., 1893), urged theologians to
be zealous in studying the Bible in the languages in which
it was originally written.

(f) The Council of Trent did not pronounce the Vulgate
to be free from all errors, as is proved by the testimony of
Pope Marcellus II, who assisted at the Council as’ Papal
Legate, and also by the fact that both Sixtus V and Clement
VIII caused several mistakes to be corrected. These mis-
takes were verbal inaccuracies and did not affect matters
of faith or morals. The Church does nor profess to teach
languages, but, where truth necessary to salvation is con-
cerned, she decides what is right or wrong.

The idea that mistakes in the Vulgate may not be amended
in accordance with the original text is quite erroneous.
Verbal or grammatical errors may certainly be corrected,
but it has never been shown that the Vulgate diverges from
the original on points of importance and matters of faith.
We may be sure that no purely human work has ever been
more closely examined and sharply criticized than the Vul-
gate translation.


(g) Protestants fancy that they are pointing out an ob-


vious mistranslation when they refer to the passage in
Genesis where the promise of a Redeemer is made for the
first time. They say that the Hebrew reads the masculine
pronoun, whereas St. Jerome, by substituting the feminine,
has given Catholic theologians the opportunity of referring
the promise to the Virgin Mary.

We acknowledge that the passage is expressed in the Vul-
gate otherwise than in our printed Hebrew Bibles, but it is
uncertain whether the reading of the Hebrew text used by
St. Jerome was identical with that which we now possess.


HOLY SCRIPTURE oy


Some scholars regard the identity as very doubtful, and we
know that St. Jerome never intentionally mistranslated any
part of the Bible. It is quite a mistake to suppose that this
divergency from the Hebrew text has in any way affected
or obscured the Catholic doctrine regarding our Redeemer
and His blessed mother. Every student of theology is in-
formed that there is a discrepancy between the Vulgate
rendering and the original, and a statement to this effect
will be found in every Catholic commentary on the Bible.
Some Catholic scholars accept the masculine pronoun, but
nevertheless find in the passage an allusion to the immacu-
late mother of our Redeemer, whilst, on the other hand,
Delitzsch and Keil, who are Protestants, admit that the
Vulgate rendering is not incompatible with the meaning.

What, we may ask, did St. Jerome intend to express by
his translation?

God said to the serpent: “I will put enmity between thee
and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed, he
(or it) shall crush thy head.” The masculine pronoun refers
grammatically to the seed of the woman, not to any definite
person, but the Greek translators, whose version is accepted
by Jews and Christians alike, made it refer, not to the seed
generally but to one person, so that we have here a plain
allusion to the promised Redeemer. No one ever found
fault with this rendering, as it really expressed the meaning
of God’s words.

But St. Jerome substituted a feminine pronoun, which
must refer, not to the woman’s seed but to the woman her-
self; hence the passage means that God’s grace destined
woman alone to be the means of bringing the Redeemer
into the world, just as she had brought sin into it. In the
original we read that her seed, not the seed of man, should
crush the serpent’s head. Now apart from Jesus Christ no
one can be termed the seed of a woman, in the Biblical sense.
A non-Catholic commentator (Pember, Die ersten Zeittalter
der Erde) writes: “In this earliest prophecy we find it stated
that our Lord was to be born of a virgin,” and he continues:


22 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


“Tf our translators had understood this correctly, they
would not, in Is. vii, 14 and Matth. i, 23, have departed
from the original by writing “a virgin” instead of “‘the
virgin, shall conceive and bear a Son.”

Therefore Luther’s translation of these prophecies of
Isaias is in two places wrong in its wording and deeper
significance, whereas St. Jerome’s conveys a profound sug-
gestion of the primitive Christian belief in the mysterious
meaning of this promise, which contains the first allusion to
a Redeemer.

(hk) The passage just discussed is the only one in which
Protestants profess to discover an erroneous translation in
the Vulgate, and otherwise they attach much importance
to it. Teuffel, a renowned scholar (Rémische Literatur, 3,
433), calls it a masterpiece from the linguistic point of view,
and with regard to its meaning and substance it is ad-
mitted to be in perfect agreement with revealed truth. Can
as much be said for other translations, especially Luther’s?


Luther’s Translation


Is the Protestant who opens Luther’s Bible sure of find-
ing in it the genuine words of Holy Scripture? Ddllinger
(Kirche und Kirchen) says that it teems with mistransla-
tions which seriously affect the meaning, and that in order
to gain support for his own doctrines Luther in several in-
stances intentionally altered the words of the Apostles,
particularly in St. Paul’s epistles. De Wette, a conscien-
tious Protestant, affirms that in the prophetic books and
elsewhere in the Old Testament, Luther’s translation is so
faulty as often to convey no intelligible meaning at all.
What was the opinion of it formed by Zwingli, another
leader of the Reformation? He writes: “Luther is an
abominable twister and shameful distorter of God’s word,
. . . he scratched out of Holy Scripture all passages con-
trary to his teaching” (de sacr. 3). For instance, in order
to establish his doctrine regarding good works, he inserted


HOLY SCRIPTURE 23


the word “alone” in Romans iii, 28, and a modern Prot-
estant writer says that it is absolutely impossible to under-
stand Luther’s translation of St. Paul’s epistle to the Romans
or the first epistle to the Corinthians (Baumgarten, Predigt-


problem, 1904, p. 24).


Inter pretation of the Bible


With regard to expounding Holy Scripture, Protestants declare that
while it is the doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church that she alone in-
terprets the Bible aright, no clear statement was made by the Council
of Trent as to the particular person who is to give the interpretation.
Cardinal Bellarmine comments that the Church, viz., the Pope with a
Council, decides what is the true meaning of Holy Scripture, yet the
same writer remarks in another passage that infallibility is the preroga-
tive of the Pope alone, not of a Council nor of an assembly of bishops.
Hence in the Roman Catholic Church, councils and bishops have fre-
quently been condemned, in proof that power to interpret Scripture
infallibly is not connected with their office, so that all ultimately depends
upon the Pope’s decision. Protestants profess to know that when the
Popes have given an interpretation, it often involved such a reprehensi-
ble abuse of the Bible that even a Catholic with any regard for the
truth is unable to deny this fact.


Let us begin with the last assertion, and say at once that
in our opinion it is extremely reprehensible to make an ac-
cusation in support of which no evidence can be adduced.
It is impossible to point out any actual instance of abuse of
Holy Scripture by any Pope engaged in the interpretation
of its meaning. Had such a thing ever occurred, Catholics
should certainly have heard of it. Let us now consider the
assertions that the Council of Trent did not declare clearly
who in the Church possesses the power to decide what is
the correct interpretation of Scripture, and that the Pope
alone exercises the right of interpretation, often in an un-
justifiable manner. Protestants imagine that the Popes
may expound the Bible just as they please, and that a Cath-
olic is bound to accept their views as infallible. As a matter
of fact, there was no need for the Council to discuss the ques-
tion who in the Church possesses the power to correctly
interpret Holy Scripture on points affecting doctrines of


24 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


faith and morals, and such were the points under considera-
tion. It could well presume it as generally known that there
was a teaching office in the Catholic Church, and that every
one knew who held it. There is an explicit statement in the
Roman Catechism, compiled upon the conclusion of the
Council at the command of Pope Pius V.: “The Son of God
appointed some to be apostles, others to be prophets, and
others to be shepherds and teachers, who were to make
known the word of life, that we might be no more like chil-
dren tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind
of doctrine (Eph. iv, 14), but might be built upon the firm
foundation of the faith into an habitation of God in the
Spirit (Eph. ii, 22). In order however that no one might
regard the word of God as merely the doctrine of men, but
should receive it as the word of Christ (for this it indeed is),
our Redeemer imparted so great a dignity to the teaching
office of the Church, that He said: ‘He that heareth you,
heareth me; and he that despiseth you, despiseth me’ (Luke
x, 16). These words applied not only to the persons to whom
our Saviour addressed them, but to all their legitimate suc-
cessors in this teaching office, and He promised to remain
with them all days, even to the consummation of the world
(Matth. xxviii, 20).” (Introduction to the Roman Cate-
-chism, §§ 3 and 4.) Thus the legitimate successors of the
Apostles exercise the authority to teach as long as they are
in communion with the supreme Head of the Church.

An individual bishop, a council not in communion with the
Holy See, even a Pope not speaking officially as the chief
teacher of the Church, they all may err. But the teaching
office of the Church has at all times existed, it has main-
tained the truth of God against erring bishops such as
Cyprian and Fénelon, against councils not in harmony with
the ancient teaching of the Church, such as the Council
of Bale in 1431, and even against a Pope (Honorius) who
transgressed the true ecclesiastical law by his imprudent
treatment of heretics, although he did not err in a point of
faith. It is a remarkable fact that the adherents of each


HOLY SCRIPTURE | 25


heresy acknowledge the Catholic Church to have acted
wisely in defending the truth against heretics of an earlier
age, although refusing to admit the justice of her attitude
towards themselves. Yet the Church has dealt with Luther’s
doctrines precisely as she dealt with those of Arius and Nes-
torius. She examines the teachings, whether they be of
God, and denounces error as error, because she exists and
has received authority from God for that very purpose. In
a civil court of justice the judge’s duty is to define and apply
the law. The code of laws cannot define and apply itself.
An individual may read and study the law, but he must not
decide his own case in accordance with his individual concep-
tion of it. It is obvious to every one that it cannot be other-
wise, and we are all aware that certain men are appointed
to be judges, that they sit in courts and give sentence
independently of the opinions of contestants. Furthermore,
there is a supreme court from whose decision no further
appeal can be made, and every subject of the state has
to submit to this court even if he previously believed it
permissible to differ with the judge of the lower court. Yet
Protestants refuse to recognize a similar arrangement in
the Church of God, the greatest institution on earth, and
the one possessing the loftiest aims. They maintain that
there should be no supreme teaching authority, one able to
decide disputed points by irrevocable decrees. Had it not
existed, what would in course of time have become of the
truths taught by Christ? All of them would have perished,
or would at least have lost every claim to recognition. It
is absolutely necessary that there be a teaching authority
in the Church, not simply regarded as competent to decide
every question concerning the interpretation of the word of
God but really so empowered by Him to speak with infalli-
ble accuracy and continually under His guidance. When
this teaching authority or its highest representative, the
Holy Father, decides what interpretation is to be given to
Holy Scripture, it does not claim to be superior to the word
of God, no more than the judge claims to be superior to the


26 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


law, but it is above the private opinions of the faithful, no
matter how pious and learned they may be, and it is in a
position to detect and condemn any error that might other-
wise find acceptance.

When we reflect that the organic Church dates from Pen-
tecost, and that portions of the Bible were not written until
a hundred years later, is it an exaggeration to assert — in-
deed, were it not rank fallacy to disown the fact — that the
Church of the New Law antedates the authorship of the
New Testament? And this being accepted, is she not the
“author and mother,” and therefore (aside from divine ap-
pointment) the interpreter, of the work of her own children?

Dr. Philip M. Rhinelander, Bishop of the Episcopal Dio-
cese of Pennsylvania, said exactly this in a lecture delivered
July 8, r911, in Cambridge, Mass., and quoted by the Boston
Republic. “It is the Roman Catholic view and treatment
of the Bible that has been vindicated at every point by the
often excessively anti-Catholic examination of the student”;
and because of this “‘leading critics have finally come to the
opinion that since the Bible comes from the Church, it must
be restored to the Church — for proper interpretation, of
course — in order that it may be understood.”


In order to prove the Catholic Church incapable of interpreting Holy
Scripture, Protestants say: “If the Council of Trent made the inter-
pretation of the Bible dependent upon the agreement of the Fathers,
it is equivalent to an admission that the Fathers of the Church are
not always in accord.” ‘They refer in this connection to Professor
Mohler’s book on the dogmatic differences between Catholics and
Protestants.


A reader who has not Mohler’s book nor the decisions of
the Council at hand, might suppose the Council of Trent to
have laid it down as an absolute rule that Holy Scripture
must be interpreted in accordance with the unanimous
teaching of the Fathers, and that Mohler has shown that
they are never unanimous. If this were true, the Catholic
would indeed be in a bad fix. But if we examine the two
books in question we find that the Council of Trent forbids


HOLY SCRIPTURE 27


any one, relying upon his own knowledge, to interpret Holy
Scripture on any point of faith or morals in accordance with
his own views, as opposed to the meaning assigned and ac-
cepted by our holy mother, the Church, or opposed to the
unanimous testimony of the Fathers. It is quite plain that
here, too, the Council is referring only to interpretations of
Holy Scripture which affect the faith and morals of Chris-
tians, and Mohler himself states that all Fathers of the
Church agree on these points, and could not do otherwise.
He writes: “Apart from the interpretation of a few classical
passages, it would be difficult to say on what subjects they
are all agreed, except that they all derive from the Bible
the same doctrines on faith and morals, although each does
so after his own fashion, and thus some have produced works
that are for all time models of what exegetics should be,
others are men of merely average capacity, whilst in the case
of others, their good will and their love of our Saviour con-
stitute their only claim to our veneration.”’ In another pas-
sage Mohler foresees that in the future similar comment
will apply to Catholic writers on Holy Scripture, “but, like
the Fathers of the Church, they will all discover in the Bible
the same dogmas and the same moral teaching” (2d ed., § 36).

The Fathers are absolutely unanimous as to the Catholic
faith. If we studied all the hundreds of volumes in the
Patrology we should find that they all held the same belief
and bore testimony to it. All declare Jesus Christ to be
really the Son of God, true God and true Man. Mary is
His virgin Mother, the Mother of God, and consequently
entitled to our veneration. Jesus founded a visible Church,
gave to her a visible Head, made her the infallible teacher
of revealed truth, and required all who would be saved to
belong to her body. These are articles of faith upon which
absolute unanimity prevails among the Fathers, a unanimity
so striking that it alone has caused many non-Catholics to
return to the true faith. The fact that the patristic writers
do not agree on other, minor, points shows that Catholics
are at liberty to examine and interpret Holy Scripture with-


28 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


out restriction, always provided they do not question the
teaching of the Church on matters of faith and morals, and
even here the faith of the Church and the tradition of the
Fathers are trustworthy guides rather than impediments.
Every one needs some guide in reading the Bible, for should
he discover in it another faith than that taught by Christ,
preached by the Apostles, held by the Fathers and defended
by the blood of martyrs, it would not be the true faith by
which alone he can be saved.
(i) It is absolutely false and misleading to say:


““We know that the Son of God nowhere bestowed on any body of
men or any individual sole authority to interpret the Bible.”


We know that the Church must have power to teach and that
from the time of the Apostles this teaching office has existed
in the Catholic Church, having been instituted by Christ
who made her a stronghold of truth, resting on St. Peter as
on an immovable rock. Moreover, He gave the Apostles
authority to teach, and the power to interpret the Bible is
included in this authority. We are convinced that if the
Church had not possessed this teaching office divine truth
and Holy Scripture would long ago have perished, since
Satan himself may be numbered amongst the exponents of
the Bible (Matth. iv, 6).

““We must confess that there are scores of preachers now
in Protestant pulpits conceitedly dealing out destructive
criticism and cunningly undermining the faith of the people,
who would be promptly silenced by Catholic authority.
How strange the times and how humiliating to our reformed
profession!” (Rev. E. P. Marvin, in the Episcopal Re-
corder.)


Indwidual Interpretation


Protestants attempt to prove from the Bible the doctrine that every
Christian ought to find out his faith by searching the Scriptures. They
maintain that Christ said to every one, ‘‘Search the scriptures” (John
v, 39), and that the Apostles would have approved had any man, after
hearing them preach, examined the Old Testament to see if their doctrine


HOLY SCRIPTURE 29


were in accordance with it (Acts xvii, 11). They say, further, that the
words of Christ and His Apostles and prophets give light unto the
simple and are “living and effectual, . . . reaching unto the division
of the soul and the spirit” (Hebr. iv, 12).


With regard to the words: ‘Search the scriptures,” a
Protestant, the learned Seldon, remarked that they have
had a disastrous effect upon the world. If Christ addressed
them to His disciples, did He mean that every man, woman,
and child ought to read and interpret the Bible? If we ex-
amine the passage in which they occur, and consider their
context in St. John’s Gospel, we shall see that our Lord did
not address these words even to His disciples, far less to all
men universally as some Protestants allege, but only to the
unbelieving Pharisees. It was to them that He said: ‘You
search the scriptures, for you think in them to have life
everlasting; and the same are they that give testimony of
me; and you will not come to me, that you may have life.”
Our Lord’s meaning was that the Pharisees searched the
Scriptures, but had formed from them an idea of the Messias
totally unlike the picture of the real Redeemer as fore-
shadowed in the Old Testament. Being misled by this mis-
taken idea, derived erroneously from the Scriptures, they
failed to recognize Christ as their Redeemer, and did not
attain to everlasting life through Him, because they assumed
to have found it in the Holy Scriptures alone. Unhappily
there are many people at the present day who make the
same mistake.

Our Lord recognizes the importance of the Old Testa-
ment Scriptures which give testimony of Him, but He
points out that a misunderstanding of them leads neither
to Him nor to life eternal. In uttering these words
He certainly had no intention of bidding every one read
the Bible.

Such is the interpretation given by the best commentators,
both Catholic (see Schanz, Joh.-Evangelium, p. 257) and
Protestant (see Stage, Neues Testament ad loc.). It is im-
portant to notice the concluding words of our Lord’s ad-


30 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


dress to the Pharisees: “Think not that I will accuse you
to the Father. There is one that accuseth you, Moses, in
whom you trust. For if you did believe Moses, you would
perhaps believe me also, for he wrote of me. But if you do
not believe his writings, how will you believe my words?”
The Church that He founded, and in which He, the Son of
God, lives on even to the end of the world, might well use
the same language towards her antagonists. She might say:
“Think not that I will accuse you to the Father — your
accusers are the prophets and apostles. If you believed
them you would believe me also, for they wrote of me. But
if you do not believe their writings how will you believe
me?”

A further mistaken assertion is that the Apostles would
have commended their hearers, had they referred to the
Scriptures in order to test the accuracy of their doctrine.
We read in Acts xvii, 11, that certain Jews in Berea received
the word with all eagerness, daily searching the Scriptures
whether these things were so. It does not, however, follow
that Christian believers were bound to do the same. St.
Paul was preaching to unbelievers, quoting the prophecies
relating to a Redeemer, and the Jews referred to the Old
Testament to verify his quotations. It was not through
searching the Scriptures, but by listening to the Apostles’
words that they received the faith. When St. Paul was ad-
dressing Christian congregations, and not Jews, he never
suggested their examining written documents to see if he
was teaching true doctrines, but he confirmed the churches,
commanding them to keep the precepts of the Apostles,
and delivered to them the decrees that were decreed by the
Apostles and ancients at Jerusalem; and the churches were
confirmed in faith (Acts xv, 41; xvi, 4, 5).

As to the words of Holy Scripture being a light to enlighten
the simple-minded, the Catholic Church is far from denying
that this is the case, but neither in Hebr. iv, 12 nor in other
similar passages does she discover any recommendation of
indiscriminate Bible reading.


' HOLY SCRIPTURE 31


Some Protestants are willing to admit that there have been misin-
terpretations of Holy Scripture, but they believe that God has raised
up men in every age capable of giving the correct interpretation, men
like Martin Luther, Wesley, etc.


If Protestants admit that there are many erroneous in-
terpretations of Holy Scripture, how are they to know which
is the correct interpretation? Do they not realize that it is
impossible for more than one interpretation of a given pas-
sage to be true and correct?

At the Last Supper our Saviour said: ‘This is my Body.”
After uttering these words, what He held in His hands was
either truly His Body or it was not; and if it was not, Christ
did not mean what He said. Only one of these alternatives
can be true, and in reading the Gospel you are perhaps un-
decided as to which is correct. You are liable to error, and
many of your predecessors, men perhaps even more earnest
than you in the quest of truth, /ave erred, in abil of possess-
ing the Bible.

Your Protestant friends bid you search the Scriptures,
and tell you they alone can reveal the right path to follow,
but in your own heart you feel that you are in a state of
danger and uncertainty, and likely to go astray; in fact
these friends add to your difficulties by their admission that
it is possible to err in the interpretation of the Bible. In
your perplexity you feel the need of authoritative interpre-
tation. But where are you to go for the truth? Must you
have recourse to exponents such as Martin Luther, Wycliffe,
or Wesley? No, these are individuals quite as liable to make
mistakes as you yourself, and it is admitted even by their
disciples that they have often blundered. If you, for
instance, asked Harnack or any other modern Protestant
scholar for his opinion of Luther’s interpretation of the
Bible, you would not be edified by their reply. You would
be still more amazed to learn of all the mistakes and contra-
dictions into which Luther fell. :

Nevertheless let us see what Luther holds as to what our
Lord did at the Last Supper. In his earlier works he says


32 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


quite bluntly that you must not believe the bread to have
been changed into the Body of Christ, but later he taught
a very extraordinary doctrine, viz., that Christ did not
actually change the bread but gave to the Apostles His Body
in and with the bread. Later still, Luther found a way out
and pointed out that Christ as man is everywhere present,
therefore He is present in the Sacrament, and hence He can
say: “This is my Body.”

If none of these interpretations satisfy you, you
may be referred for others to the writings of other
Protestant commentators, but whichever you choose to
adopt, it is the explanation given by some human in-
dividual and not simply the statement found in Holy
Scripture. Where then can you find certainty regarding
the word of God?

Since it is universally granted that individuals may err
in interpreting the Bible, must not our Lord necessarily
have entrusted His Word to some infallible authority, able
to recognize, maintain,.and teach with certainty the true
meaning? Is it not in fact an inestimable benefit that He
did so? Considered merely from the human point of view,
the Catholic Church, with her uninterrupted tradition and
her unchanging deposit of faith, is far more trustworthy an
exponent than Luther or any other individual commentator,
since they explain the Bible in accordance with their own
opinions. We Catholics should indeed be both blind and
ungrateful, if we failed to appreciate the great advantage
that we enjoy.


The Right to Read the Bible


Protestants are fond of declaring that since the thirteenth century
the Popes have discouraged and forbidden the study of Holy Scripture,
and they mention Pius IV, Sixtus V, Urban VIII, and Pius VII espe-
cially as having done so. The papacy, we are told, wishes Christians
not to read the Bible and to have as little access to it as possible, so that
they may retain the belief in papal doctrines. Protestants say they owe
much gratitude to God, and should implore Him to preserve to them and
their posterity that greatest of privileges, the right to read the Bible.


HOLY SCRIPTURE 33


(a) Is it recorded anywhere in Holy Scripture that the
right to read the Bible is the greatest privilege enjoyed by
Christians? “Master,” said the rich young man, “what
must I do to be saved?” Was he told to read the Bible?
“Which is the first commandment in the law?” asked the
Pharisees. Was the reply “Read the Bible’? In the Ser-
mon on the Mount our Lord taught His disciples the new
law; did He say, “Blessed are those that read the Bible’?
When He founded His Church did He say that the Scrip-
tures were the rock? Did He charge the Apostles to go
forth into all the world and distribute Bibles? Is there in
the Bible itself a word as to the necessity of reading it?
No, Holy Scripture does not say anything at all on the
subject.

(b) For centuries, in fact ever since the time of Luther,
Protestants have stuck to the zealously promulgated fable
that the Popes are sworn enemies of the Bible, and have for-
bidden Catholics under heavy penalties to read it. ‘This
accusation is quite groundless; no Pope has ever feared the
Bible nor forbidden its use in the Catholic Church. It is
quite clear from historical records that in the primitive
Church people were encouraged to read the Scriptures; even
Protestants do not question this fact. But, some one may
ask, why did not the early Christians, our forefathers in the
faith, or the learned doctors filled with the Holy Spirit, or
the heroic martyrs who died rather than surrender their
holy books to their persecutors, find in the Bible some of
the things that Luther discovered? Because they possessed
greater humility, and did not presume to set themselves up
as judges of the word of God, but recognized the Church
founded by Christ as alone competent to interpret the Scrip-
tures. They were of the same mind as St. Augustine who
said, ‘‘I should not believe the Gospel, unless the authority
of the Catholic Church impelled me to do so” (Ep. fund.,
c. 5), and, ‘‘Let any one, who fears to be misled by the ob-
scurity of Holy Scripture, have recourse to the Church,
which is pointed out to him in the Scriptures” (c. Crescon.


34 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


Donat., I, 33, 39). No one ever knew and loved the Bible
better than St. Jerome who made it universally accessible
by his translations and elucidations, and yet he writes (ad
Paulin., c. 7) that ‘every garrulous woman, every puerile
old man, every busybody, recklessly meddle with Holy
Scripture and presume to teach others before they them-
selves have learnt.”” He goes on to complain that some
scholars completely misinterpreted Holy Scripture accord-
ing to their own ideas, adding that it is exceedingly wrong
to distort the sense when it is at variance with one’s own
opinions. This goes to show that already in St. Jerome’s
time individuals were not allowed to read and interpret the
Bible as they chose, although Protestants claim this to have
been the case, so that they may represent the subsequent
action of the Holy See as an encroachment upon the rights
of Christians.

(c) Why did the Popes forbid certain translations of the
Bible to be circulated and read? In order to protect the
Bible against falsification and Christianity against error,
Pius IV laid down the following rule: “‘Since experience has
shown that, if the use of the Holy Bible in the vernacular
be allowed to every one without distinction, there results
therefrom, in consequence of the rashness of men, more
harm than advantage, let all submit in this matter to the
judgment of their spiritual superiors, who have the right
to allow the reading of the sacred scriptures, translated into
the vernacular by Catholics, to such as will derive from this
reading no injury of any kind, but an increase of faith and
piety.”

Whenever the Catholic Church deems it expedient to
assign certain limitations to the reading of translations of
the Bible, she fears, not for herself, but for ignorant readers.
If the Popes had really wished to conceal the truth from
Christians in general, they would have done better to forbid
scholars to read the Bible in Hebrew or Greek, since the
truth would be more certainly discovered in the original
text than in a translation. But no restrictions have ever


HOLY SCRIPTURE 35


been imposed upon reading the Bible in the original lan-
guages.

In course of time, the free practice of Bible reading became
a token of rebellion against the ancient Church, especially
among the Waldensians and Albigenses. Men began to find
all sorts of doctrines in the Bible. The Anabaptists, for in-
stance, discovered that every imaginable form of licentious-
ness could be justified from the Bible. Such grave disorders
compelled the Catholic Church to take stringent measures
for their repression.


The Bible in the Middle Ages


It is a common tale, accepted by most Protestants as incon-
testably true, that in the Catholic Church the Bible was de-
spised and neglected until Luther restored it to honour.

To this fairy tale the Living Church (Episcopal) editorially
replies: ‘Luther did not discover the Word of God to the
Germans, despite the Protestant delusion to that effect.
Those who have cared to learn have long ago known that
many editions of the Bible were published in Germany in
German and Latin before Luther’s time.”

“Before the time of Luther the Bible had already been
translated and printed in both High and Low Dutch” (Men-
zel’s History of Germany).

As a matter of fact, Catholics have never neglected the
Bible nor do they disregard it at the present day. No one
who has ever read a mediaeval book or sermon can possibly
imagine that in the Middle Ages people despised and ig-
nored the word of God. As long ago as 1861, a writer in a
Protestant newspaper said: “In the darkness of the Middle
Ages, when a Bible cost as many pounds as it now costs
pence, unfamiliarity with the Bible and inability to answer
religious questions were not as widespread as they are
among the present generation.”’ During the Middle Ages
the Bible was translated into many languages and was widely
circulated. In 1294 a complete French translation was made,
but single books of Holy Scripture had long before this date


36 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


been translated and circulated among the faithful. Before the
time of Luther there were in existence two hundred transla-
tions into the vernacular, and between the invention of print-
ing and Luther’s first appearance at least twenty translations
of the Bible into German were printed. The fact that the
Reformation was contemporaneous with the invention of the
printing press has given Protestants the opportunity to
claim the credit for the increased output of Bibles in the ver-
nacular, which was really the immediate and direct result of
the invention of printing. Between 1471 and 1500 seventeen
editions of an Italian Bible appeared, and in 1538 there was
another revised edition of it, besides many others. In every
case these Bibles were sanctioned by the Church, which per-
mitted them to be printed, published, and circulated. Surely
no one can suppose that there would have been so many edi-
tions had people been forbidden to read the Bible!

Even Adolf Harnack admits to be false the assertion “that
Catholicism forbids laymen to read the Bible.” Emphati-
cally he adds (and in italics): “On the contrary, Catholicism
has at all times undoubtedly regarded Bible reading as use-
ful and salutary for every man in the abstract, and is still of
the same opinion” (Bible Reading in the Early Church).

To-day, when there are ‘‘nearly seven hundred sects in
England alone, each of them proving a whole system of
theology and morals from the Bible” (London Times, May
13, 1884), and when “the Bible and the Bible alone” is the
rule of faith of many earnest religious people, is it not em-
barrassing for them to remember that for many centuries
this salvation-through-the-Bible was generally impossible?
Impossible because, although as we have seen, the people
were encouraged to read them, it cannot be expected that
every home was provided with copies of the sacred writings
in an age when trained and patient hands were obliged to
transcribe the inspired words to parchment rolls.

How do matters stand at the present day? Do Protestants
really believe Catholics to be unaware that the Bible contains
the word of God, or to be deprived of any truth recorded in


HOLY SCRIPTURE 37


Holy Scripture? Every Catholic child is required to learn
the catechism and Bible history, both derived from and
based upon Holy Scripture. The Council of Trent advo-
cated the study and interpretation of the Scriptures, and the
Popes recommend accurate translations. It was with the full
consent of Leo XIII that in 1900 a society was established
in Rome for the purpose of circulating among the people
a correct translation of the New Testament at a very low
price. On November 29, 1903, Pius X addressed words of
commendation and encouragement to the members of this
society, laying stress upon the fact that the reading of the
Gospel was a safeguard of the faith.

In the Catholic Church Holy Scripture has at all times
been treated with reverence as the word of God. Saints
knelt when they read it, and every Catholic can study it
without let or hindrance, provided he does so for the purpose
of edification and with a pure intention. He must, however,
assure himself that the book before him is really the word of
God, correctly translated and expounded as it has been in
the Church from the time of the Apostles onward. This
assurance is supplied by the approbation of a Catholic
bishop, which is the only condition the Popes now insist upon.

By putting wise and necessary restrictions upon the read-
ing of translations of the Bible, the Church shows her re-
spect not only but even her jealous care for Holy Scripture.
A Catholic who does not believe Holy Scripture to have
been revealed by God, who does not believe that its teaching,
rightly understood and expounded, will bring him to God,
errs on a point of faith, and, whether he be priest or layman,
if he persists in this error or attempts to propagate it, he will
be excluded from the Church.


Protestant Opinion of the Bible


What, however, do many Protestants of the present day
think of the Bible? Father Ignatius, an Anglican, expressed
the most profound admiration for Leo XITI’s encyclical on
the Study of Holy Scripture, and described as a magnificent


38 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


act of faith the Pope’s assertion that the Bible, being inspired
by the Holy Spirit, was free from all error. He pointed out
also that Protestants of every variety depreciate the Bible
and do their best to undermine all faith in it, whilst the
Roman Pontiff comes forward as its champion, offering
consolation to those who are oppressed with sorrow at the
conflicting doctrines taught in the world (Catholic Times,


1893).


(d) Protestants appear to take peculiar offence at the vigorous oppo-
sition of the Popes to the so-called Bible Societies.


It should be borne in mind that a Bible Society is not the
same thing as the Bible, nor did Christ say to the members
of such societies, “He that despiseth you, despiseth me.”
One may disapprove of abuses in the butter trade and yet
appreciate good butter; he will be anxious to protect it
against adulteration. In the same way, one may have the
greatest admiration for the Bible and yet oppose certain
actions of Bible Societies. A well-known Protestant (Pro-
fessor Leo) remarks on this subject: ‘“‘The Pope calls the
Bible Society a pest, and he is right. If I were in his place,
I should do the same, for the Bible is but the sheep’s skin
under which the wolf is concealed.” Other prominent Prot-
estants have spoken in similar terms of these societies (cf.
Perrone, de loc. theol., p. 2, c. 4, § 277).

The first Bible Society was founded in London in 1804, its
aim being to exercise an apostolate by circulating the Bible
amongst pagans, Mahommedans, and Christians. It is ob-
viously impossible to spread the Gospel amongst the heathen
by merely distributing Bibles (Rom. x, 14), and it was surely
the duty of the Popes to emphatically forbid utterly unau-
thorized men to carry on amongst Catholics a proselytizing
for Protestantism under the pretext of giving them the Gos-
pel, which in truth they possessed from the earliest age.
Moreover, the emissaries of these Bible Societies publicly
declared that they aimed at overthrowing the authority of
the Popes and at converting Catholics, and they distributed


HOLY SCRIPTURE | 39


not only Protestant Bibles, but tracts full of vehement at-
tacks upon Catholic faith, and containing misrepresentations
and calumnies of the Catholic Church.


Oral Traditions


Protestants maintain that Roman Catholics are bound to accept, as
on a level with Holy Scripture, all sorts of oral traditions said to date from
the time of the Apostles and to have been preserved in all their purity.
Most of these traditions are rejected by Protestants, as not only mani-
festly opposed to the word of God but also because for the most part
they originated some centuries after the death of the Apostles.


The two objections against oral traditions require proof
before they can be given any weight. The Council of Trent
declares explicitly that no traditions are to be accepted, be-
lieved, and respected except such as the Apostles received
from the lips of Christ and such as were handed down by the
Apostles under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. These
traditions alone must not be rejected.

Catholic traditions regarding the Mass, Purgatory, papal
supremacy, etc., are not opposed to Holy Scripture. On the
contrary, they are all based upon the word of God and by no
means repugnant to it. If non-Catholics tell us that they
can find no allusion to these things in their Bibles, this proves
nothing except that Holy Scripture by itself does not teach
all doctrines clearly and beyond misinterpretation. If two
people assign different interpretations to a legal enactment,
they must have recourse to some higher authority to settle
the matter. We Catholics have such a supreme authority to
decide the true meaning of Holy Scripture and of oral tradi-
tion, viz., our Holy Church, in which Christ lives on in
accordance with His promise: ‘“‘I am with you all days, even
to the consummation of the world.” He cannot fail to guide
her into all truth.

It is certain that our divine Lord Himself employed no
other means but oral instruction of making His doctrines
known. He bequeathed not a single word in writing to His
followers, and yet He entrusted all His words and teaching


40 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


to His Church to be her inalienable possession. It is certain,
moreover, that He charged the Apostles to teach, not to write
(Matth. xxviii, 18; Luke x, 16). It is certain, too, that the
Holy Scriptures are not so ancient as the oral tradition of
the truth, and that the Apostles, even when some special
purpose caused them to write, nevertheless regarded oral in-
struction as the means designed by God for the propagation
of the faith, and they impressed upon their converts the im-
portance of adhering to the doctrines they had been taught
orally. Both in ancient and modern times, heathen nations
have received the faith and have clung to it loyally, although
it reached them solely through the channel of Apostolic tra-
dition. Finally, it is certain that the Fathers of the Church
always appealed to the tradition, handed down pure and un-
defiled from one generation to another, just as it was given
in the first instance, by Christ to the Apostles, and they ap-
pealed to it successfully against heretical teachers. Catholics
have not allowed human ordinances to make their way into
the deposit of faith received from the Apostles; their living
and universal consciousness of the faith would have rendered
this impossible, and Christ’s promise of guidance by the
Holy Ghost would have failed. ‘Those, however, who rank
human wisdom higher than the word of God, those who have
cut themselves off from the unity of the old faith, are the
Protestants. The Holy Scriptures with their inexhaustible
wealth of doctrine belong to the Catholic Church. She was
entrusted with them and she has been true to the trust. Ever
since Protestants claimed the Bible as their own, it has by
them been misinterpreted, mutilated, and dishonoured. We
Catholics are the heirs of the Apostles who, like their divine
Master, taught their followers to hold fast to the truth, warning
them at the same time against false prophets, against new-
fangled doctrines, and schism. Hence we, the same as our
forefathers, adhere to the word of God, which will be handed
down in our Church, in Holy Scripture, and in the ancient tra-
ditions to the end of the world, for our Lord said: ‘‘ Heaven
and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.”


Il. THE CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL
“ AUTHORITY


The Protestant Assertion. According to Catholic doctrine the only true
Church, the Church in which alone salvation can be found, is the visible
community of Christians under the rule of the Roman Pontiff. Every
member of this Church must make outward profession of the faith that
she teaches and conform to her ordinances.


The Catholic Reply. We read in Holy Scripture that Christ
founded a visible Church and commanded men to obey her
(John xx, 21; Matth. xxviii, 18, etc.). Moreover, we read
that He Himself appointed one man to be the visible head of
this one visible Church (Matth. xvi, 18, etc.; John xxi, 15-
17). Hence it is true that we believe the Church of Christ
to be the visible community of all the faithful, who recognize
the Roman Pontiff as the supreme head of the Church ap-
pointed by Christ.

The Church does not teach that a merely outward member-
ship of her body is sufficient to ensure salvation. A merely
outward member of the Church would resemble a lifeless
limb on a living body. Nor does she say that all who are not
outwardly her members are therefore excluded from salvation.
Many are in error through no fault of their own; they serve
God to the best of their knowledge and inwardly belong to
His Church; hence they can be saved.


The Protestant Assertion. The true Church consists of the invisible
communion existing between all who believe in Christ, no matter what
outward form of religion they profess.


The Catholic Reply. The theory of an invisible Church is
opposed to the plain statements made -by Christ and the
Apostles. In Holy Scripture the Church is always said to be
visible as well as invisible. St. Paul, for instance, frequently


42 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


speaks of the Church as the body of Christ. Just as Christ
performed His work of redemption in a visible body, so will He
continue the work in a visible Church to the end of the world.

It is not a matter of indifference which religion a man pro-
fesses, for not every religious body supplies to its members
the means of receiving the true faith and of living a life
pleasing to God.


Protestanis maintain that they possess the Gospel of Jesus Christ in
all its purity and the sacraments as He instituted them.


The Catholic Reply. It is impossible that the various exist-
ing religious bodies that call themselves Churches should all
equally proceed from Christ and lead men to Him. Protes-
tants seem to describe their Church, which they allege to be
that which Christ founded, sometimes as visible, sometimes
as invisible; surely there is some discrepancy here! It is,
moreover, false to assert that in the Protestant Churches the
Gospel of Christ is preached in all its purity, and the sacra-
ments administered according to our Lord’s institution. The
name of “Protestant” is given to all those who have cut
themselves off from the one holy Church of Christ, although
they may agree on no other point except their severance from
the Catholic Church. If we rely upon the statements made
by Protestants, we may venture to say that never has the
Gospel of our divine Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ been so
corrupted, never have the sacraments been so neglected and
reduced in number, as by the various Protestant sects at the
present time. The Catholic Church, on the contrary, can
adduce historical evidence to prove that she alone has faith-
fully preserved the Gospel of Christ in its integrity as she
received it, and that she has always administered the seven
sacraments according to our Saviour’s desires.


Authority of the Pope


Protestants assert that Catholics give the following account of the au-
thority of the Church: Supreme and unlimited power over the Church
is in the hands of the Pope, the successor of Peter the Apostle and Vicar


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 43


of Christ. But the Pope possesses authority also over the whole world,
and every human being is subject to this authority and unless he ac-
knowledges it he need not hope for salvation. Hence in matters of faith
and morals the Pope is infallible, and what he teaches and orders must
be believed and carried out with absolute fidelity. He has power to re-
lease men from their vows, to appoint and depose kings, to distribute
the countries of the world according to his wishes, and to coerce unbeliev-
ers and heretics by the agency of secular governments or even to order
their extirpation.


The Catholic Reply. We believe and confess that Christ
Himself (Matth. xvi, 18) conferred upon St. Peter the privi-
lege of acting as His representative in governing His Church,
and as this office is essential to the continued existence of the
Church the privilege must pass on to the legitimate succes-
sors of St. Peter.

Further, we believe that the supreme teaching office in
the Church, the pillar and ground of the truth (1 Tim. iii,
15) must be infallible (Luke xxii, 31, etc.).

We are only then absolutely bound to believe and do what
the Pope teaches and orders when he acts in his capacity
as the chief shepherd and teacher of the Church and gives
a decision, applicable to the whole Church, on a matter
which is imperatively necessary for us to believe or obey
in order to be saved.

On the other hand, the Pope claims not a positive privi-
lege of temporal power, far less a dominion over the entire
world. Christ said: “Preach the Gospel to every creature;
he that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved, but he
that believeth not, shall be condemned” (Mark xvi, 15, 16).
Hence our Lord desires all who wish to be saved to submit
to the teaching authority of the Church, but it is a silly
calumny to say that for this reason Catholics ascribe to the
Popes the power to assign the countries of the world, to
depose kings, etc. False assertions of this kind are made
only in order to inspire ignorant Protestants with hatred
and horror of Catholicism, and especially of the Holy Father.
“The Roman See has never taught that Catholics are not
bound to keep their word in dealing with non-Catholics,


AA THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


nor that it is lawful to break an oath taken to non-Catholic
monarchs, nor that the Pope may interfere with the rights
and property of secular rulers” (Cardinal Antonelli).


The Protestant Church, on the contrary, teaches that Jesus Christ is
the sole Head of His Church and needs no one to act as His representa-
tive, since He will abide with His followers in word and spirit, in His
sacraments and graces, even to the end of the world. He appointed min-
isters to preach the doctrines taught by the Apostles and prophets and to
edify both themselves and their congregations by means of the Gospel,
and these ministers are entitled to control the outward discipline of the
Church. But they have no right to appoint or depose kings, to exercise
secular power, to release men from their oaths, to stir up riots, or to per-
secute those of another faith with fire and sword.


The Catholic Reply. Whether or no the Church requires
any one to act as the representative of Christ, is a matter
for Christ and not for us to decide. He is, of course, the
one supreme, invisible Head of the Church and will abide
with her unto the end. It was in order to accomplish this
design that He appointed a visible ministry (John xx, 21;
Matth. xxviii, 19), whose office is not, however, only to
preach, as Luther imagined, but to be the teachers, priests,
and shepherds of all Catholics, and our priesthood can be
traced back in an unbroken line to the Apostles.

We are quite ready to admit that Protestant ministers
have no power of government nor have they any right to
persecute men of another faith; but why have they, never-
theless, on many occasions shown great cruelty and intoler-
ance towards those who do not agree with them, and why
do they still continue to malign and slander the Catholics?


COMMENTARY


It is quite certain that one religion is not as good as an-
other, and it is of the utmost importance for us to be sure
that we belong to the one Church founded by Christ.

1. Christ founded only one Church whereby all men
might be saved; cf. John x, 16: ‘There shall be one fold and
one shepherd;” Matth. xvi, 18: “Upon this rock I will build


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 45


my church;” Ephes. iv, 4-6: ‘‘One body and one spirit .. .
one Lord, one faith, one baptism: One God and Father of
all.’ St. Cyprian (died 258) says: “There is one God, one
Christ, one Church, and one See, founded by the word of the
Lord upon the rock.”

2. Our Holy Catholic Church can make the following
statements about herself and the testimony of Christianity
in all ages will vouch for their truth: —

“I am the only teacher of truth appointed by God; I am
the only steward of His divine gifts of grace, and the only
safe guide to eternal life, for (¢) I am one, since everywhere
I teach the same doctrine, administer the same sacraments,
and acknowledge the same supreme Head. If contempo-
raries of Luther, of St. Augustine, and of the Apostles,
respectively, could now come forward, they would recog-
nize my doctrine as the word of God, my seven sacraments
as true channels of grace, my supreme Head as the lawful
successor of Peter, and me myself as the same mother who
watched over their childhood.

(6) “I am holy, for my Founder is holy, and it is my task
to lead all my children to Him, the Holy One. I have never
taught error nor falsified the means of salvation. Innumer-
able saints in every age have been my sons and daughters.

(c) “I am Catholic, intended for men in every age, of
every nation, and of every rank. There has never been a time
when I was unknown, nor a nation to which I was not sent.

(d) “I am Apostolic, carrying on from age to age the
light of truth kindled by Christ and conveyed to me through
the Apostles. I keep pure and unadulterate the stream of
graces that flows from the foot of the Cross.”

3. Just before His ascension our Lord said briefly and
emphatically, “‘He that believeth not shall be condemned”
(Mark xvi, 16; cf. John iii, 18, 36). He founded one Church
and said of-her, ‘‘If a man will not hear the Church, let him
be to thee as the heathen and publican” (Matth. xviii, 17),
and gave her authority to bind and to loose on earth and in
heaven (Matth. xviii, 18). The Catholic Church knows


46 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


and can prove herself to be this one Church founded by
Christ, hence she can never admit that her Lord and Master
has any bride except herself since she alone is holy and with-
out blemish (cf. Ephes. v, 25-27). Her children have always
been firmly convinced of the truth expressed by St. Cyprian
when he says, “‘No man can have God as his Father, who
has not the Church as his mother”’ (de unit. eccl., c. 6), and
‘Outside the Church there is no salvation.’”’ When there-
fore the Catholic Church claims that in her alone salvation
is to be found, she is acting in conformity with our Lord’s
words and is no more to be accused of presumption than is
our Lord for speaking of Himself as the Son of God.

Since salvation is to be found in the Catholic Church
alone, she invites all to enter her fold in accordance with her
Master’s command, but she condemns none who without
their fault do not outwardly belong to her. If any one od-
stinately cuts himself off from her communion and renounces
her doctrines he ceases to walk in the way of life, and even
St. John, who insists so much on the duty of charity, for-
bids his disciples to receive such a person into their houses
or to salute him (John ii, 10). Any one, however, who acts
according to the dictates of his own conscience and errs
through no fault of his own may be saved. But he may be
saved, not by his adhering to false doctrines by which the
truth is obscured but rather because he possesses some re-
mains of the one ancient Catholic truth, for such remnants
of the faith are preserved even by the Christians separated
from the Catholic Church, and resemble an inheritance
carried by a wanderer away from his home into foreign
countries.

Origin of the Papacy

With regard to the papacy, Protestants acknowledge that the early

bishops of Rome were highly respected, but they deny that in the primi-


tive Church Rome occupied the position that she now does, of mother
and mistress (magistra) of all other churches.


In reply it may be pointed out that unity in faith and
communion cannot exist unless there is a visible centre and


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 47


a common ruler. Wherever in the world men unite for any
common purpose there must be a centre of unity. Even in
the Protestant national churches there is a governing body,
but in their case it cannot claim any divine origin and com-
mission. Where was in the early ages of the Catholic Church
this indispensable centre of unity, without which she would
inevitably have perished during the centuries of persecu-
tion or have succumbed to the attacks of heretics? Whither
did men turn in search of the supreme arbiter, whose utter-
ances upheld the truth? It is impossible to discover in the
writings of the Fathers or in those of any other early author,
whether friend or foe, a single allusion to any centre of unity
except Rome, or to any head of the Christian Church except
the Pope, the Bishop of Rome.

Even if no direct statement to this effect existed it would
not be reasonable to assume that it was otherwise. But we
have evidence enough to show that the early Christians re-
garded the Roman Church as their mother and mistress
precisely as we do to-day. Even Professor Harnack, a
famous Protestant theologian, admits that in the first three
centuries the bishops of Rome possessed an unmistakable
primacy of jurisdiction over the whole Church (Dogmen-
gesch., I, p. 404, etc.).

Sti. Ignatius, a disciple of the Anoctles: calls the Church
of Rome the “president of the bond of charity,” ie., of
Christendom; a dispute at Corinth was settled by St.
Clement, the Bishop of Rome, even during the lifetime of
St. John the Evangelist; St. Irenaeus tells us that every
church is bound to agree with the Roman Church on
account of her preéminent position; St. Cyprian calls
the Roman Church “the mother,” and says that he
who forsakes the See of Peter must not imagine himself
to belong to the Church, since the Roman See occupies
the first place. In short, the whole of ancient Christianity
is permeated by the idea expressed by St. Ambrose in the
words, Ubi Petrus, ibi ecclesia, ‘‘wherever Peter is, there is
the Church.”


48 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


Protestants maintain, however, that the supremacy of Rome was long
in question, that finally only a few isolated communities in other coun-
tries professed allegiance to the Roman bishop; it was not until the em-
perors became Christians that the supremacy of the bishops of Rome
was universally recognized. Gregory the Great declared, about the year
600, that whoever arrogated to himself the title of “‘universal bishop”
was a forerunner of Antichrist, and therefore he could not have regarded
himself as having unlimited spiritual jurisdiction over Christendom. _


No evidence is forthcoming in support of the assertion
that the churches of Christendom submitted to the Bishop
of Rome only at a later stage. What motive could they have
had for thus voluntarily submitting to him if they had not
from the beginning regarded him as their lawful superior?
Experience shows that individuals and communities are
far more apt to seek independence than to become subject
to a common head. The writings of the early Fathers
abound in admonitions to those disposed to sever themselves
from Catholic unity, and they lay great stress upon the
necessity of union with the Church and the Bishop of Rome.
Even heretics in every age have desired union with Rome;
for instance, in the year 160 Marcion, a Gnostic, appealed to
the Pope. If once the Bishop of Rome solemnly declared
that any man had fallen away from the faith of the Apostles
and the ancient Church, that person was no longer regarded
as a true Christian by any Christian community in the world.
Thus, in the second century, Pope Hyginus excommunicated
Cerdo and Valentine as heretics. After teachers of heresy
had tried in vain to win over the Popes to their way of think~
ing, they invariably displayed utmost hostility to Rome.

It certainly did not occcur to the Roman Pontiffs to exalt
themselves above the whole of Christendom, but they, like
all the faithful from the Apostolic age onward, were per-
fectly aware that in accordance with the will of Christ they
were called to occupy the highest position in His Church
of which they were the visible head. They did not arrogate
this honour to themselves but received it from Christ. It is
foolish to assert, in spite of all evidence to the contrary,
that only after the lapse of six centuries all the bishops began


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 49


to regard the Bishop of Rome as their spiritual head, that
even Gregory the Great was unaware of any special preroga-
tive belonging to the Popes! Gregory recognized most fully
his position as supreme head of the Church, and was energetic
in enforcing its recognition by others. He would not allow
John the Faster, the bishop of Constantinople, to assume
the title of oecumenical or Catholic patriarch because it
might give rise to misunderstandings, and he declared em-
phatically that the Pope had the right to call himself the
universal or Catholic bishop; and while the Popes had not
used this title, it had been conferred upon them by the
Council of Chalcedon. The bishop of Constantinople openly
and repeatedly acknowledged his see to be subject to that
of Rome (Greg., M. epist., 1. ix, cp. 12, ad Joannem Syrac.


episc).
The Primacy of St. Peter


Protestants maintain that a change took place soon after the time of
Gregory the Great and that then the Bishop of Rome became the Pope,
basing his claim to supremacy upon the fact that our Lord founded His
Church on St. Peter. But the other Apostles received the same powers as
St. Peter (Matth. xviii, 18), and he even allowed himself to be corrected
by St. Paul. According to many Protestants St. Peter was never Bishop
of Rome and therefore the Popes cannot pretend to be his successors;
yet it was owing to this fiction that the papacy acquired the vast power
it possessed under Gregory VII, Innocent III, and Boniface VIII, and
to this day the Popes uphold the same claim.


‘“‘A change took place soon after the time of Gregory the
Great.”’ How was this possible? Our opponents suppose
that the Church could without a visible head emerge tri-
umphant from the centuries of greatest inward and outward
conflict, and then suddenly all Christendom consented to
acknowledge voluntarily the supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome, without a protest on the part of any other bishop,
without question as to Rome’s right to take precedence. Such
a thing is inconceivable; the rock must always have been
there, otherwise in the early centuries of Christianity the
gates of hell would many times have prevailed against the


50 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


Church, and the same rock stood firm in the Middle Ages
as it does to-day. Each successive generation clung closely
to it, but fresh foes devised fresh modes of attack, necessi-
tating recourse in many cases to fresh methods of defence.

It is quite a mistake to imagine that it occurred to the
bishops of Rome, after the time of Gregory the Great, to base
upon our Lord’s words to St. Peter (Matth. xvi. 18, 19) a
claim to be entitled to govern the whole Church. Such a
claim would have been rejected with scorn, had it not.
always existed from the time of the Apostles onward and had
it not been universally recognized as justified by our Lord’s
commands. At the present time many thoughtful Protes-
tants admit the truth of this argument. For instance,
Schelling (Phil. der Offenb., II, 301) says: “Christ’s words
decide once for all the foremost position occupied by Peter
among the Apostles; nothing short of the blindness induced
by party spirit could make any one fail to perceive this fact.”

That the other Apostles also possessed great powers we
Catholics know perfectly well, and we reverence these powers
which are still enjoyed by our bishops and which Christ
undoubtedly intended to continue in His Church. But did
the other Apostles possess all the authority bestowed upon
Peter? No; to him alone were addressed the words, ‘‘Thou
art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church,” to
last not for one generation only, but as long as the gates of
hell assail it; “I will give to thee the keys of the Kingdom
of heaven’’; ‘‘Feed my lambs, feed my sheep.”

What do Protestants think is proved by the fact that St.
Paul withstood St. Peter to his face (Gal. ii, 11)? We must
understand first why he did so. He blamed St. Peter for
yielding to the prejudices of Jewish converts, as also St.
James and others had done. Any one else was free to act
as he chose in such a matter, but Peter, on account of his
exalted position, was bound to set an example and not to
mislead others, and therefore St. Paul rebuked him whereas
he did not remonstrate with St. James. Even at the present
day every bishop, and in some circumstances every Catholic,


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 51


has a right to put forward his own well-grounded opinion
in opposition to that of the Holy Father and to offer resist-
ance to any manifest injustice on his part. Such is the teach-
ing of Bellarmine, one of the most ardent supporters of
papal authority (de Rom. Pont., II, 29). St. Paul was not
singular in availing himself of this right, and his example
has been followed by many great saints such as St. Bernard,
St. Catharine of Siena, and St. Bridget, whose action in this
respect has been no obstacle to their canonization, nor did
St. Paul’s rebuke at Antioch cause any breach between him
and St. Peter or prejudice the reverence paid to the latter
in the Church.

Some Protestants declare that St. Peter was never Bishop
of Rome, and that therefore the Popes cannot claim to be his
successors. This is an extraordinary statement. If it is cor-
rect, who then was the first Pope and where did he come from?
Did he suddenly take possession of a see that did not exist,
exercise an office that had never been instituted? Even
though the title of ‘“Pope”’ was not given to St. Peter and his
immediate successors, he was regarded by the early Church
in precisely the same way as we to-day regard Benedict XV,
i.e., as the visible head of the Church appointed by Christ.
All of St. Peter’s successors have been recognized as such,
and although individually they discharged the duties of their
office in various ways adapted to the circumstances of the
age and the needs of the Church, they were all convinced
that they were appointed by Christ to guide and govern the
Church as His representatives, and all Christians in commun-
ion with them knew in every age that where Peter is, there
is the Church founded upon the rock (Jerome, ep. 15 e¢ 16).

A Protestant scholar writes as follows: “If the prince of
the Apostles ever set foot in the eternal city, he certainly came
not as an ordinary traveller but in virtue of his Apostolic
power, and his martyrdom was but the glorious conclusion of
the active work done in accordance with his calling amongst
the people of Rome. Further, if episcopacy is of divine in-
stitution — and many Protestants believe it to be so — the


52 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


claim of the Roman Church to trace back the line of her bish-
ops to the Apostle Peter does not appear unreasonable”
(Lipsius, Zeitschrift fiir prot. Theol., 1876, p. 562).

It is both true and untrue to say that the claims put forward
by Gregory VII, Innocent III, and Boniface VIII are still
made by the Popes of the present day. It is quite correct and
obvious to every thoughtful person that the present Pope
claims the rights inseparable from the government of the


Church throughout the world just as every previous Pope.
has done. If he acted otherwise, he would not be discharging ©


the functions of his office.


Papal Jurisdiction and Influence


It is, however, a mistake to include amongst these rights
claimed by the Popes now, ail the jurisdiction in secular mat-
ters ever held or claimed by any Pope. In the Middle Ages
the Pope was acknowledged by common consent to be the
greatest benefactor of nations and the defender of civil and
national rights and liberty. Hence the then existing inter-
national law conferred upon him very far-reaching powers in
civil matters, and when these powers were exercised wisely
and vigorously the nations submitted voluntarily to the
Pope’s orders, in which they saw no illegal oppression but
rather beneficent measures for their defence. These powers,
however, were not directly connected with the government
of the Church, and they have been withdrawn as Pope Pius
TX publicly declared in 1871, so that the Popes now no longer
either possess or claim them. It is foolish to alarm people by
speaking of the extraordinary powers of interference in civil
life which the Pope is said to claim. Under the energetic and
imposing rule of Popes like Gregory VII, Innocent III, and
Boniface VIII the papacy was outwardly mighty, but these
men aimed at promoting only the highest interests of man-
kind, not at enslaving nations or the human intellect. They
desired to secure the triumph of truth and the liberty of na-
tions and to protect the Church against arrogant princes.
They wished the Church of Christ to be free and to protect


|
|
|


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 53


her, so that in accordance with her divine commission she
might lead all men along the surest way to everlasting
salvation.

Bohmer, the renowned historian, remarks that in the Mid-—
dle Ages the Pope was not at all what unhappily many writers
assume him to have been, viz., a monster enthroned in St.
Peter’s at Rome, ready to hurl into the abyss any living
creature that would not slavishly cringe before him.

Not one but many volumes would have to be written if all
the misrepresentations, distortions, and faisifications, inten-
tional and unintentional, of Catholic doctrine and historical
facts were to be corrected. Many books have indeed been
written on this subject, but they are useless as long as people
wilfully close their ears to the truth. Some calumnies and
misrepresentations never fail to bob up again no matter how
often they have been proved false.

It seems more profitable to make regarding the papacy a
few statements that are acknowledged to be historically
true, although Protestants seldom hear these things, so great
is their fear of the subject.

Herder, who was by no means particularly well disposed
towards the Catholic Church and the papacy, was forced by
the study of history to confess that the Pope might justly
exclaim to every age: “But for me, you would not be as ad-
vanced as you are.”’ This is literally true.

Dr. Robert Ellis Thompson, a Presbyterian minister and
head of the Central High School in Philadelphia, said recently:
“The Protestant historians are coming more and more to
recognize the splendid services the Papacy rendered to Chris-
tendom in rescuing the Church of Christ from the slavish
dependence upon the civil power which is seen in the Greek
communion, and especially in Russia. .

“Thus on foundation laid by the great Popes was built
that independence of the Church from civil control which
is the basis of American religious liberty.”’

To whom does the whole of Christendom owe the faith and
the high standard of morals and education that is the out-


54 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


come of that faith? The first of all missionaries was the first
Pope on the first Pentecost, and his immediate successors
sealed their testimony to Christ with their blood. They
resisted, with equal steadfastness, the persecutions that
assailed them from without and the terrible force of false
doctrines that would have destroyed the spirit of Christ —
within the Church. Even from the beginning they showed
themselves to be the rock of truth, and but for them all
morality and faith, all Christ’s words and works would have
inevitably perished and left no trace on earth. Sometimes
Christian rulers have allied themselves with teachers of heresy
and threatened the Church with violence, using ambitious but
faithless prelates to further their designs and to interfere with
the government of the Church. The Popes invariably with-
stood this danger, and at the cost of terrible struggles they
upheld the liberty of the Church and at the same time vigor-
ously defended the freedom of nations. Non-Catholic writers,
if they are impartial in their judgments, acknowledge how
much we now owe to the great Popes of the Middle Ages.
Herder, for instance, says: “‘It was through the Pope that
England, as well as the greater part of Germany, and the
Kingdoms of the North, Poland, and Hungary, became
Christian countries. It was due to him that Europe was not
overrun permanently by Huns, Saracens, Tartars, Turks, and
Mongolians. But for the Roman hierarchy, Europe would
probably have fallen a prey to despots; it would have been
the scene of incessant warfare, unless indeed the Mongolians
had reduced it to a desert.’’ Von Miiller asks, ‘‘What would
have become of us without the Popes?” and supplies the
answer, “‘We should have fared like the Turks.”

Dr. Kip (Rev. Wm. Ingraham Kip, D.D., later Bishop of
the Episcopal Church in California) frankly and sorrowfully
admits that it is, indeed, in a spirit of prejudice “that those
outside her fold are accustomed to estimate everything which
relates to the Church of Rome. They look at her course
through the Middle Ages, and denounce it all as one long
period of evil and darkness. And yet, at that time, the


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 55


Church — changed as she may have been from her early
purity — was the only antagonist of the ignorance and vice,
which characterized the feudal system. It was a conflict of
mental with physical power, and by the victory she gained,
the world was rescued from a debasing despotism, the triumph
of which would have plunged our race into hopeless slavery.
. . . No one, indeed, can read the writers of the ‘Ages’
which we call ‘Dark,’ without feeling that beneath the sur-
face was a depth of devotion, and a degree of intellectual
light, for which they have never received due credit” (Christ-
mas Holydays in Rome, p. 282).

Only those who are blinded by ignorance and prejudice
can fail to see that the Popes not only faithfully guarded the
priceless treasure of faith and were unwearied in their efforts
to make it more widely known, but they also preserved
morality, civilization, and culture against all the assaults of
enemies, and bestowed these gifts upon the nations of Europe.
“Education for all’? were the words uttered by Innocent III
ages before they became the war cry of the foes of Holy
Church and of the people. The Popes desired all to receive
education and did their utmost to put it within reach of the
labourer as well as the king’s son, for as another Pope,
Alexander III, declared, we ought not to sell for money a gift
_ bestowed on us by heaven, but offer it gratis to all.

There have never been more vigorous and resolute sup-
porters of liberty than the Popes. Gregory I, Eugenius IV,
Sixtus IV, Pius IT, Innocent VIII, and others issued orders
for the suppression of slavery. Paul III, Urban VIII, Bene-
dict XIV, Pius VII, and Gregory XVI advocated the setting
free of negro slaves and upheld the rights of the Indians and
other pagan nations. As recently as May 5, 1888, Leo XIII
declared that the abolition of slavery in Brazil had been the
gift most welcome to him on the occasion of his jubilee as a
priest.

In the Pope, Christian nations have always found their
most efficient and often their only protector against violence
and injustice. Those who reproach the Popes for having


56 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


dared to oppose secular rulers are most ungrateful as well as
unreasonable. That the Popes ventured to act as they did
is most honourable to them. What would have become of
Church and state if the Popes had been cowardly enough to
raise no protest against unjust deeds on the parts of kings and
princes and had been content to flatter them? They stood like
St. John before Herod and withstood the mighty of this
world, saying when occasion arose, ‘‘It is not lawful.” In
their dealings with all men they used the language of truth
and justice and boldly reminded kings and emperors of their
sacred obligations towards God and their subjects, whilst at
the same time the papacy gave powerful support to secular
government. ‘The Popes never failed to insist upon the prin-
ciple, ‘‘ Fear God, honour the king,” enunciated by St. Peter,
the first occupant of the See of Rome (1 Peter ii, 17). As St.
Augustine says of the Church, they taught kings to care for
their people and admonished the people to obey their kings
(de moribus Eccl. cath., 1, 30). They added to the title of king
the beautiful words “‘by the grace of God.”. Whenever the
secular power begins to be contemptuous of support, it is on
the verge of its downfall. This view is expressed by Prou-
dhon, a modern revolutionary, who writes as follows of the
much maligned Boniface VIII: “The kings went so far as
to lay violent hands upon the Pope. They believed that they
no longer needed any support except that afforded by the
sword and the justice of their cause. From that time on-
ward the monarchy tended to decline, for when the Church
was disregarded the principle of authority was shaken to its
foundations. ‘Thenceforth every citizen could defy the king
and say: ‘Who are you, that I should obey you?’” (Con-
fessions d’un révolutionnaire.)


The Papacy and Civilizatton


The nations of the present day boast of their knowledge
of truth, of their civilization and orderly life, but the light
in which they walk would not illumine their way had it not


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 57


been kindled at that sacred fire brought down by Christ from
heaven, — that fire which no one on earth has so faithfully
maintained and watched over as the Roman Pontiffs, al-
though they are frequently ignored and actually despised as
hostile to the light. The papacy is still with us, imposing in
its dignity in spite of all hatred and opposition and although
it has in every age been assailed with all the violence and dia-
bolical cunning which men could devise. No name is so fre-
quently mentioned in every language spoken in the world as
that of the Holy Father, and though he has no army to enforce
his commands and extend his dominion, there is no one whose
utterances are received so reverently and obeyed so loyally,
or for whom so many thousands of hearts feel such intense
love and veneration.

Where is the chief stronghold of the truths of Christianity
which afforded strength and consolation to our forefathers in
every generation? Every one acquainted with the tendencies
of the age must acknowledge it to be in Rome. Hardly any
one outside the Catholic Church now ventures to speak of
religious topics as if perfectly convinced of their truth. In
these sad times there is no positive faith in Christ as indeed
the Son of God and our only Saviour, no faith in the efficacy
of His death on the Cross or in the imperative duty to follow
His example, no faith in freedom of will or purity of heart
except in the Church of which the Roman Pontiff is the su-
preme teacher and pastor.

If we consider all these facts, and observe how the papacy
has outlasted the greatest empires and survived the most
furious onsets, we are forced to ask how this could possibly
be if it were really founded upon a system of deception.

The very existence of the papacy is the best evidence of
its divine institution. The unworthiness of an occupant of
the Holy See has not been permitted to frustrate God’s
design in establishing this supreme office or to diminish the
value of the treasures intrusted to his charge. At the Council
of Ephesus not a protest was raised when Philip the legate
proclaimed what has invariably been the faith of the Catholic


58 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


Church: ‘‘It is a fact, recognized in every century, that St.
Peter, the Prince and chief of the Apostles, the pillar of the
faith and foundation stone of the Catholic Church, received
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and in the person of his
successors still lives and governs.”

Lord Macaulay says of the Papacy:

“There is not, and there never was, on this earth, a work
of human policy so well deserving of examination as the Ro-
man Catholic Church. The history of that Church joins
together the two great ages of human civilization. No other
institution is left standing which carries the mind back to
the times when the smoke of sacrifice rose from the Pantheon,
and when camelopards and tigers bounded in the Flavian
amphitheater. The proudest royal houses are but of yester-
day, when compared with the line of the Supreme Pontiffs.
That line we trace back in an unbroken series, from the Pope
who crowned Napoleon in the nineteenth century, to the
Pope who crowned Pepin in the eighth; and far beyond the
time of Pepin the august dynasty extends, till it is lost in the
twilight of fable. The republic of Venice came next in an-
tiquity. But the republic of Venice was modern when com-
pared with the Papacy; and the republic of Venice is gone,
and the Papacy remains. ‘The Papacy remains, not in decay,
not a mere antique; but full of life and youthful vigor. The
Catholic Church is still sending forth to the furthest ends of
the world missionaries as zealous as those who landed in
Kent with Augustin; and still confronting hostile kings with
the same spirit with which she confronted Attila. The num-
ber of her children is greater than in any former age. Her
acquisitions in the New World have more than compensated
her for what she has lost in the Old. Her spiritual ascendency
extends over the vast countries which lie between the plains
of the Missouri and Cape Horn — countries which, a cen-
tury hence, may not improbably contain a population as
large as that which now inhabits Europe. The members of
her community are certainly not fewer than a hundred and
fifty millions; and it will be difficult to show that all the other


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 6509


Christian sects united amount to a hundred and twenty mil-
lions [census of 1840}. Nor do we see any sign which indi-
cates that the term of her long dominion is approaching. .
She saw the commencement of all the governments and of
all the ecclesiastical establishments that now exist in the
world; and we feel no assurance that she is not destined to
see the end of them all. She was great and respected before
the Saxon had set foot on Britain — before the Frank had
passed the Rhine — when Grecian eloquence still flourished
at Antioch — when idols were still worshiped in the temple of
Mecca. And she may still exist in undiminished vigor when
some traveler from New Zealand shall, in the midst of a
vast solitude, take his stand on a broken arch of London
Bridge to sketch the ruins of S. Paul’s” (Miscellanies).


The Papacy and Civil Government


Protestants assert that the civil government has often come into con-
flict with the papacy in consequence of the demands made by the Popes.


No one denies that the Jewish and Roman authorities often
opposed Christ and His Apostles, and that our Lord more than
once foretold to His disciples that they would be dragged
before kings and rulers for His name’s sake. We should be
justified, therefore, in viewing with distrust any form of
church government that in all respects had invariably been
in complete accord with the secular power.

Of sovereigns excommunicated in the Middle Ages by the
Popes, we hear much of the German emperors, Henry IV and
Frederick II; the former aroused universal indignation by
oppressing his people, and incurred the sentence of excom-
munication because he bestowed bishoprics on his own favour-
ites or sold them to the highest bidders. He even presumed
to order Pope Gregory VII to relinquish his see. The princes
and bishops of Germany fully approved of the Pope’s action,
and finally, in order to save his throne, Henry came as a
penitent to Canossa and was there released from the ban
laid upon him. He was not, however, forced by the Pope


60 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


to come, but rather did so in opposition to the Holy Father’s
desire. Even Protestant historians admit that Gregory VII
had the right on his side. Gregorovius, an historian hostile
to the papacy, calls the incident at Canossa the triumph of
moral force over savage despotism and acknowledges that
the monarchy was degraded, not by the Pope but by the
emperor.

Frederick II was excommunicated because with the help
of Saracen princes he plundered churches and monasteries,
appropriated the possessions of the Church, made no secret
of his unbelief, and failed to keep the solemn oath by which
he had pledged himself to go on a Crusade. Under certain
circumstances it was taken for granted that the Popes had
power to depose as well as to excommunicate secular rulers;
this involved no usurpation of power, but was recognized by
secular governments as a right belonging to the papacy.


The Papacy and the Church


Protestants assert that the pretensions of the papacy have led to dis-
putes with general councils, bishops, and scholars, and in corrobora-
tion of this statement they refer to the condemnation of the Councils of
Constance and Bale.


The Council of Bale was not a general council, nor was
that of Constance, when the sessions were held in which the
relation of the council to the Pope was under discussion.
These are historicalfacts. Even in the primitive Church there
were divisions and heresies, so it need arouse no surprise if
subsequently also bishops, both individually and in councils,
as well as Catholic scholars came into conflict with the Popes.
It does not follow, however, that in so doing they necessarily
had the right on their side.


Protestants tell us that the utterances of the Popes are enough to
reveal the true character of the papacy, and they quote the following
and similar passages: ‘‘We declare, assert, and decide that all creatures
are subject to the Roman Pontiff, and without this belief none need hope
for salvation.” ‘‘The Roman Pontiff is the vicegerent of God and
Christ on earth. He possesses plenitude of power over all nations and
states, he can judge every man, but has no judge superior to himself.”


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 61


It seems unreasonable to quote detached sentences,
written at a time when opinions prevailed such as we are
unable now to appreciate. Would it not be more sensible
to refer to the encyclicals of a Pope like Leo XIII, who
discussed the relation between the spiritual and tem-
poral power? Protestants suppose that it makes no
difference whence they take their quotations, since the
Popes have abandoned none of their pretensions and
Benedict XV would now claim the same rights as Boni-
face VIII. This is certainly true as far as the essen-
tial rights of the papacy are concerned, for no Pope
can relinquish any of the prerogatives attached by
Christ to his office. He must guard what has been trans-
mitted to him, otherwise he would be unfaithful to
his sacred duties and to the Church of Christ. But in
their attitude towards the civil government the Popes
must adapt themselves to the age in which they live.
It would be foolish to suggest that the Popes of the first
three centuries assumed the same position towards the
Roman emperors as was assumed by those of the Middle
Ages towards the German emperors. It is no less foolish to
try to make people believe that the utterances of a mediaeval
Pope against the secular government of his day are appli-
cable to the present time.

As a matter of fact, however, the words of Boniface VII
convey just what St. Cyprian, St. Augustine, and St. Jerome
had taught long before, and what was a legitimate deduc-
tion from our Lord’s words spoken when He instituted the
office of chief bishop (Matth. xvi, 18), viz., that the only
sure way to salvation was in the Church founded by Him-
self on the rock of Peter. If the Pope judges any man he
does so only with regard to things belonging to his office,
such as faith, unbelief, virtue, or sin; and he never judges
arbitrarily but in accordance with the unchanging laws of
God. There must be a supreme judge and it is his duty to
act thus, and the greater his power the greater is his respon-
sibility. His official verdicts cannot be criticized by any


62 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


higher authority on earth, but the whole Church witnesses
his actions and knows what powers her supreme head is
authorized to use.


Papal Infallibility


Protestants are fond of discussing the dogma of papal infallibility,
proclaimed by the Vatican Council in spite of the opposition offered by
many eminent and learned bishops. They maintain that according to
this dogma the Pope can alter the rules laid down by Christ and the
Apostles and introduce new doctrines unknown to the early Church. He
has a right to control all the discipline, worship, and ceremonies of the
Church; he can utter and revoke sentence of excommunication; he can
lay nations under an interdict and release them from it. He claims the
right to appoint all bishops and has power to remove them; he calls
general councils, presides over them, and confirms or repudiates their
proceedings; moreover, it is within his prerogative to demand contribu-
tions from the property of the Church. Everything, both great and small,
in the Church is subject to his supervision.


The Vatican Council did nothing more than declare to be
a dogma of faith something which had been held without
question by our forefathers. The infallibility of the supreme
_ teacher appointed by Christ, on matters affecting faith and
morals, is only a logical result of the foundation of the one
Church for the purpose of affording all men a sure way of
salvation. If the truth revealed by God was not to perish,
if the food of souls was to be imparted and the right way of
life taught to all men, there must be some one able to de-
cide with infallible certainty what Christ taught and wished.
Our Lord’s aim was that all men might be saved, hence He
must desire means to exist for the realization of this aim; in
other words He must intend that there be one infallible
teacher in His Church. It was for this reason that He prayed
(Luke xxii, 31, 32) that St. Peter’s faith might never fail
and bade him, being once converted, confirm his brethren.
Déllinger interprets this commission according to Catholic
doctrine, and says: “The See of Peter was to be a stronghold
of truth, a bulwark of firm faith for the support of all, for
our Lord’s words and prayer did not apply merely to one
individual at one particular moment, but to the whole Church


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 63


and its future needs; they both laid the foundation and built
upon it. Looking forward over all future ages, Christ prayed
in similar fashion for the unity of all members of His Church,
in order that this unity should ever bear eloquent testimony
before the whole world to the truth of His divine mission.”

Reasonable men perceive that there must be some one
centre of unity in the Church and that this can be preserved
only by means of an infallible teaching authority. Thus
E. von Hartmann says: “Papal infallibility is the long-
desired culmination of the unity of faith in the Catholic
Church, and all argument to the contrary is unmeaning on
the lips of those who regard the Pope as the successor
of Peter, and Peter as the author of infallibly inspired
epistles.”’

Even Luther recognized the need of an infallible supreme
teacher of truth, and decided that he would himself occupy
this position. He says: “‘There is no angel in heaven, still
less is there a man on earth, capable and bold enough to
criticize my doctrine. He who refuses to accept it, cannot
be saved, and he who thinks otherwise is destined for hell”
(Works, Wittenberg ed., II, Erlang., 28, 144). Luther cer-
tainly owed it to his followers to bring forward some proof
of his right to use such language, whereas the infallibility
of the Pope rests upon the same immovable foundation as
the Church herself.

Protestants tell us that many eminent and learned bishops
opposed the definition of papal infallibility as a dogma of
faith; no doubt they would have considered these bishops
still more eminent and learned if they had persisted in their
opposition after the definition was promulgated. Protestants
perhaps are not aware that before every session of a council
the Holy Ghost is invoked and begged to assist the members
in discovering and stating all the obstacles to the definition
of a dogma. Therefore it is not only permissible but obliga-
tory for the assembled bishops to state their difficulties.
Yet one of them, the Bishop of Cuenca in Spain, who was
universally acknowledged to be a very learned man, was


64 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


not contradicted by any one when he said, amidst general
applause, that the objections raised to the definition were
put forward by persons who were far from refusing to ac-
cept the doctrine of infallibility, but wished to elicit the
grounds for it in order that the truth might be more clearly
revealed. Therefore every one was perfectly free to say
what he liked against the definition, and nevertheless it was
unanimously declared to be a divinely revealed truth. From
the merely human point of view we can hardly imagine a
better guarantee for its accuracy. It is a manifest distortion
of the truth on the part of Protestants to declare that the
Pope alters the law of Christ and the Apostles and intro-
duces newfangled doctrines unknown to our forefathers.
The Vatican Council made the following explicit statement
on this subject (sess. 4, cap. 4): “In accordance with the cir-
cumstances of the time, the Roman Pontiffs have always
propounded for our belief those doctrines which they, by
God’s aid, recognized as in harmony with Holy Scripture
and the tradition of the Apostles. For the Holy Ghost was
promised to St. Peter’s successors not in order that they by
His revelation should make known a new doctrine, but in
order that by His assistance they should carefully preserve
and faithfully interpret the revealed truth handed down by
the Apostles, i.e., the deposit of faith.” The gift of infalli-
bility is bestowed upon the Pope that he may safeguard
the teaching of Christ and the Apostles, and allow no new
doctrines to find their way into the ancient faith handed down
to us by the early Church; it is most assuredly not intended
to enable him to introduce doctrines that he himself has
devised.

To a Catholic it seems childish to enumerate the powers
exercised by the Pope. All his authority is due to the posi-
tion that he occupies in the Church. It would lead us too
far from the subject to discuss in detail the ecclesiastical
points to which allusion is made; moreover, what can it
matter to a Protestant, who cares nothing about the Pope,
whether he regulates the breviary or the ritual of the Church


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 65


or claims a share in her possessions? Every Protestant may
rest assured that the Pope’s demands are moderate in com-
parison with those of some secular governments.


The Powers of the Pope


The Pope is alleged by Protestants to claim the following powers as
his rights: Supreme dominion over every individual soul, exercised by
means of indulgences and anathemas (the latter terrible word is sup-
posed to mean abandoning the soul to hell and Satan); power to de-
termine the lot of the dead. We are told that the Pope ordered the an-
gels to bear to Paradise the souls of such as died on pilgrimage to Rome,
that he is constantly calling souls out of purgatory, and that we are
bound to recognize and invoke as saints all whom the Pope declares
to be such. This is supposed to be the power of the keys, ascribed to
the Pope, and we are asked where in Holy Scripture we can discover
that the Son of God instituted such a papacy, bestowed upon it such
authority, and made us subject to it.


No, such statements are not to be found in Holy Scripture,
nor are we told that we are to be subject to a papacy of this
sort nor that our salvation is assured. All that we find is
that Christ instituted the office of supreme teacher, priest,
and shepherd, and bade us submit to it if we wish to be saved.
The Bible contains nothing at all on the subject of the
Protestant Churches and their systems of government. Not
only is it impossible to discover in Holy Scripture any trace
of such a papacy as the Protestants describe, but it is equally
impossible to discover such a thing in any Catholic Catechism
or in the mind of any Catholic. Christ did indeed most
solemnly and without restriction give the keys of the king-
dom of heaven to St. Peter (Matth. xvi, 19), but when the
state intrusts to the governor the keys of a prison, no one
supposes that he can imprison and release men as he chooses.
When a sovereign gives the keys of the treasury to an official,
is it that he may use the money as he likes? Certainly not.
In every case the person holding the keys is bound to use
them in accordance with the wishes and orders of the owner
who intrusted him with them, and the Pope can exercise his
authority only in accordance with the wishes and instruc-


66 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


tions of Christ. No Catholic is ignorant of this fact. The
Pope cannot close the gate of heaven against any one who
desires to be saved and honestly does what God requires
of him, nor can he open that gate to any obstinate and im-
penitent sinner. The Pope cannot command any angel to
bear to Paradise the soul of one who has died in the state of
mortal sin even though he was on a pilgrimage to Rome,
nor can he hand over to the devil the soul of one who has
died in the state of grace. Nor is he able to release souls
from purgatory and to raise to the altars as saints men whom
God has not sanctified. No Pope has ever claimed to possess
such powers.

The question of indulgences will be discussed later. As
to anathemas, St. Paul pronounced an anathema against
every preacher of heresy (Gal. i, 9), and even speaks of de-
livering a notorious sinner in Corinth over to Satan (1 Cor.
v, 5). When the Pope pronounces sentence of excommunica-
tion he solemnly declares that the person concerned is cut
off from the communion of the Church and her means of
grace, but he by no means condemns him to eternal perdi-
tion. He tells the excommunicated person that he is not on
the road leading to life everlasting, and this is necessary in
order that the faithful may be put on their guard. It is not
the Pope who hands over an obstinate heretic or an impeni-
tent sinner to Satan, but the heretic or sinner himself by
his heresy or sins which separate him from the truth and
grace of Christ. No Pope has ever uttered a sentence of
eternal damnation against any man, whereas it is a notorious
fact that Luther cursed the Pope, the bishop, and all who
did not agree with him. For instance, he addressed Schwenk-
feld thus: “‘May the Lord curse thee, thou Satan, and may
thy spirit, that calleth thee, and the way that thou runnest,
and all who have dealings with thee, be damned with thee
and thy blasphemies”’ (Table Talk, 74, 6).

If ever a Pope has prayed that angels might carry to
heaven the souls of those who died on a pilgrimage to Rome,
and if he happens to use words that might convey the idea


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 67


that he calls upon the angels to do so— though I know of
no such utterance — every Catholic understands that the
Pope has neither the wish nor the authority to command
angels to carry direct to Paradise a soul that is still contami-
nated with grievous sin. Should a pilgrim die on the way
to Rome, where he hopes to receive the benefits that the
Pope has a right to bestow, the Pope is entitled to allow that
pilgrim to receive the benefits as fully as if the pilgrimage
had been completed, assuming, of course, that the man is
worthy of their reception.

We shall have occasion later on to discuss the worship of
saints. For the present it is enough to point out that no
Pope ever can or will declare any one to be a saint, unless
God Himself shows him to be so by conferring upon him
extraordinary graces. No Pope, for instance, could canonize
Henry VIII, nor has any Pope ever declared him to be
damned. If you choose to consider Henry VIII a saint, well
and good, but what guarantee have you that your opinion
is correct? If we honour Francis of Assisi, or Benedict, or
any one else as a saint, we wish to have assurance that we
are not venerating some unworthy person, and we derive
this assurance from the Holy Father’s words. We know
that he never declares any one to be a saint except after a
most searching investigation and the removal of every
possible doubt.

A Catholic looks upon the Pope as a loving Father who
desires only to guide the souls intrusted to his charge along
the way of salvation, who sympathizes with all in error, who
longs for all to attain to the knowledge of the one truth, who
prays and urges us to pray for all men, for those in authority,
for pagans, Jews, and heretics, and who is the safeguard of
truth and justice, mercy and love. Thus does every Catholic
regard one whom a Protestant fancies to be a monster de-
stroying the souls and bodies of men. If the Protestant
were right, surely no one would be a Catholic. If the Pope
resembled the false descriptions often given of him, no one
would blame us should we abandon him; we need fear no


68 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


persecution, but, on the contrary, many would applaud our
action. As it is, however, we cling to the Pope with unfeigned
affection, and this would be impossible if he were really
what Protestants believe him to be. They assert that he
lives in greater splendour than the mightiest monarchs, that
his power is to theirs what the light of the sun is to that of
the moon. “Secular rulers ought to know that they cannot
hold office unless they are subservient to the Pope,” etc., etc.
We have already seen that formerly Catholic nations volun-
tarily ascribed to the Pope many rights that modern states
do not accord to him, and the Popes have accepted these
limitations to their power. It is both foolish and mislead-
ing to apply to the age in which we live, words uttered by
some Pope under quite different circumstances.


Spiritual and Temporal Authority


The Popes and the Catholic Church have always taught
that both the spiritual and temporal powers exist in accord-
ance with God’s will, and that each in its own sphere derives
its authority from Him who said, “All power is given me in —
heaven and on earth.”’ Wedo not maintain that the Pope’s
spiritual authority is superior to the state’s temporal power,
but we do believe that the kingdom of which Christ acknowl-
edged Himself King, and which He appointed the Pope to gov-
ern as His representative, is superior to a state governed by
such a man as Pilate; yet there is no natural antagonism
between these two kingdoms, and it is God’s will that they
should coédperate in guiding men to their true goal in this life
and the next. Every Christian sovereign is bound to fulfil
the law of Christ and to govern his people in the spirit of
Christ. In the Middle Ages kings and emperors often treated
the Church as their servant rather than as their mother, and
then the Popes enforced their rights vigorously, thus showing
themselves to be benefactors of the people. Johann von
Miiller, a famous historian writes: ‘‘Gregory, Alexander, and
Innocent raised a barrier against the tide that threatened


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 69


to overflow the whole world. Their fatherly care raised up |
the hierarchy and insured the liberty of the various states.”

Some years ago Woodrow Wilson, now President of the
United States, delivered an address before the student body
of Princeton University, lucidly setting forth the enormous
service rendered by the Church to civil government during
the Middle Ages. He said in part: “No society is renewed
from the top; every society is renewed from the bottom. I
can give you an illustration, concerning that that has always
interested me profoundly. The only reason why government
did not suffer dry rot in the Middle Ages under the aristo-
cratic systems which governed them, was that the men who
were the efficient instruments of government — most of the
officials of government — the men who were efficient — were
drawn from the Church, from that great Church body which
we now distinguish from other church bodies as the Roman
Catholic Church.

“The Roman Catholic Church then, as now, was a great
democracy. There was no peasant so humble that he might
not become a priest and no priest so obscure that he might
not become the Pope of Christendom.

“Every chancellery in Europe, every court in Europe,
was ruled by these learned, trained, and accomplished men,
the priesthood of that great and then dominant Church.

“So, what kept government alive in the Middle Ages was
this constant rise of sap from the bottom, from the ranks,
from the rank and file of the great body of the people through
the open channels of the Roman Catholic priesthood.”

No Pope has ever pretended that he could distribute the
kingdoms as he pleased; if he claimed the right to do so, he
might simply have taken possession of them. We never
heard that a Pope appointed a sovereign against the will of
anation. It would be well if Protestants studied the passages
in Leo XIII’s encyclicals, in which he lays down clearly the
true relation between Church and state. (See especially the
encyclical dated January 10, 1890, on the Duties of Chris-
tians as Citizens.)


70 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


Instead of referring to such contemporary utterances, how-
ever, Protestants prefer to quote sentences torn from their
context, breathing the spirit of ages long past.

It is anabsolute falsehood and calumny toassert that no oath
sworn to heretics and heretical sovereigns and no compact or
treaty made with them is binding in the eyes of the Popes.

There is another terrible charge frequently brought against
the papacy, viz., that whoever refused allegiance to it was
at its mercy and had to expect to undergo tortures worse than
death. The constant references to the trials of the Walden-
sians and of heretics in Spain, France, England, etc., aim at
increasing misinformation about Catholicism and at arous-
ing bitter hatred against it.

Again, we are told that the Pope claims over all baptized
persons the rights of ownership. These rights, however, sim-
ply consist in the fact that all validly baptized infants have
received Catholic baptism, for there is no other. Luther hap-
pily kept the old Catholic form of baptism so that the in-
fant who receives it, receives also the sanctifying grace which
Christ connected with the sacrament, and the child is really
received into the new life in which God is his father and the
ancient Catholic and Apostolic Church his mother. Thus
in a certain sense it is true that he belongs to the Pope and
the Catholic Church, whether aware of it or not, until he
voluntarily adopts some other faith. Even then he may con-
tinue in inculpable error and live according to his conscience,
so that inwardly, though not outwardly, he is a member of the
one Church of Christ. But, it may be asked, how does this
unconscious membership of the Church reveal itself in the
life of a baptized child or of a person in inculpable error?
Surely it is in the fact that the way of salvation is open to
them, and the Pope is far from wishing to persecute and con-
demn such persons; on the contrary the Church teaches that
all those who have been baptized are her children, and she
does this in order not to be forced to condemn them but
rather to proclaim that even those can be saved who are not
outwardly in communion with her.


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 71


Persecutions of Heretics


What can we say, however, of the terrible persecutions in
which the Popes are alleged to have shed the blood of count-
less heretics? If there were to-day no power on earth capable
of resisting them, would they not again proceed to torture
and put to the rack all good Protestants?

The Church has certainly always tried to destroy error
and must continue to do so, for Holy Scripture teaches that
heresy, unbelief, and falling away from the faith are invaria-
bly grievous sins. “If any one preach to you a gospel be-
sides that which you have received, let him be anathema”
(Gal. i, 9). “If any man come to you, and bring not this
doctrine, receive him not into the house, nor say to him ‘God
speed you’; for he that saith unto him ‘God speed you’ com-
municateth with his wicked works”’ (2 John, 10, 11). These
are the words of Apostles, and St. Paul in another passage
threatens the Corinthians that he may have to deal with them
more severely, “according to the power which the Lord hath
given me unto edification and not unto destruction” (2 Cor.
Xili, 10).

The Church is bound to preserve the faith intrusted to her;
she exists in order to defend it, and she can never sanction the
teaching of a doctrine at variance with that which she has
received. When St. Paul heard that Hymeneus and Alexan-
der had made shipwreck concerning the faith, he did not say,
“Let them believe whatever they like,” but he ‘delivered
them up to Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme”’
(1 Tim. i, 30). Those who refuse to believe the words of
Christ ‘shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, . . . and
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone ... and the
smoke of their torments shall ascend up for ever and ever,
neither have they rest day nor night.”

This terrible threat was not uttered by a Pope, but may
be found in the Bible which Protestants profess to believe,
and it is addressed to all who by their own fault abandon the
true faith which can be but one. Is it not, therefore, a matter


q2 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


of the utmost importance to ascertain whether you possess
this one true faith? And does it not behoove the Church, as
guardian of this faith, to do her utmost to protect it and the
faithful committed to her charge and to drive off the wolf when
he approaches the sheepfold? Like St. Paul, the Church
possesses this power for edification and not for destruction.

The Church is bound, therefore, to resist false doctrine, but
the extirpation of the erring is not the best means of attaining
this end. Unhappily this means was in past ages sanctioned
and employed, but three remarks may be made on this
subject: —

1. The bloody persecutions of heretics did not originate
with the Catholic Church. In Roman law, with which the
Popes had nothing to do, heresy was a serious offence against
the state, ‘‘as it is far worse to offend God’s majesty than the
temporal power” (I. 63, cod.. Theo., 16, 5). Forfeiture of
possessions, exile, and even death were the penalties im-
posed by the civil courts for this offence. ‘The first person
condemned to death was Priscillianus in 385, but St. Martin
implored the emperor not to allow the sentence to be carried
out, and Pope Siricius also disapproved of it.

After the Roman empire with its legal system had passed
away, the Popes undertook the task of reforming the ad-
ministration of justice, and performed it in a way that has
called forth the admiration of many non-Catholic scholars.
Hinschius, a famous Protestant scholar, acknowledges the
absolute justice of the proceedings of the Inquisition,
although to uneducated persons the very name suggests an
iniquitous means of obtaining a conviction at any cost.

Frederick Barbarossa and Frederick II put heretics to
death, but Pope Innocent III, while allowing the emperors
to persecute them, forbade torture. The Spanish Inquisition,
of which we hear so much, was used by the sovereigns as a
means of destroying persons they disliked, and the Popes did
all in their power to check any injustice perpetrated by this
court (cf. Hefele, Cardinal Ximenes).

As long as the Waldensians did not rise in rebellion, Pope


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 73


Innocent III allowed them to hold meetings in Metz and to
read the Bible. Before the Battle of Cappel, Clement VIT in-
terceded for the Zwinglians, Pius V warned Philip IT of Spain
against shedding blood in the Netherlands, and the so-called
dragonnades, a form of persecution inflicted upon Protes-
tants in France, were condemned by Paul ITI, Francis I, and
Innocent XI.

2. Although the Catholic Church and the Popes in their
official capacity never had recourse to violent persecution of
non-Catholics and never taught that sanguinary measures
were permissible, we shall see that from the point of view of
the rulers in the days when these persecutions took place, the
means employed were in many cases quite justifiable. Among
the Catholic nations of the Middle Ages, it was regarded as a
most serious offence against the civil government for a man
to fall away from the unity of faith, and consequently this
offence, like many others, was punishable by death. This
opinion was held even by the Hohenstaufens and other
sovereigns notorious for their conflicts with the papacy. In
many cases the false teachers were bitterly opposed to the
civil order and incurred punishment on this account. D6l-
linger, for instance, says that the Cathari and Albigenses
attacked marriage, family life, and the rights of property,
and if they had triumphed the people would have lapsed into
barbarism and pagan immorality. Was it not, therefore, in-
cumbent upon all well-disposed persons to offer resistance
and, if necessary, to have recourse to extreme measures in
order to protect themselves against such a disaster?

3. An impartial study of history shows that whenever non-
Catholics wielded the temporal power, they on their part
treated Catholics with unparalleled severity and displayed
intense fanaticism against them. We hear much of the suffer-
ings of the Waldensians; why are the Cathari and Albigenses
mentioned less frequently? The Waldensians were persecuted
after they had allied themselves with these sects whose
repression was a matter of absolute necessity for the state,
for they went about plundering, killing, and destroying


74 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


churches, and by their doctrines they undermined the foun-
dations of both ecclesiastical and civil life. It is most unfair
to blame Catholicism for the cruelty that unhappily was
shown in the struggle against them, and it is particularly
unjust to regard the Popes as responsible for it (cf. Schmidt,
Histoire des Cathares, etc., 1849). It can be read in Protestant
books that, as late as 1655, four thousand innocent Walden-
sians were butchered in Piedmont, whereas the truth is that
they began to attack and kill their Catholic neighbours, and in
the fighting that ensued a few hundred, and not four thousand,
Waldensians were slain. In the Church Times, an Anglican
newspaper (1890, no. 385, p. 355), the accounts of this battle
given by Leger, a Waldensian minister, are denounced as
infamous calumnies.


Persecutions of Catholics


We hear much of the persecution that Protestants had to

undergo, but comparatively little of the sufferings of faithful
Catholics at the hands of Protestants. Luther himself says
that rulers, princes, and lords, who belong to the canker of the
Roman Sodom, ought to be assailed with all sorts of weapons,
until men can wash their hands in their blood (Wittenb. ed.,
I, 51 and 9, 24b). Zwingli used to say of all who did not
agree with him, that the Gospel thirsted for their blood.
Calvin desired the institution of an ‘inquisition for the exter-
mination of the race of heretics”; and between 1542 and 1546
the town council in Geneva banished seventy-six and put to
death fifty-eight persons on the ground of their faith, whilst
-between eight and nine hundred others were arrested and
thrown into prison where new tortures were constantly de-
vised for them. Even Melanchthon praised Calvin for having
burnt Servetus (ep. 187 inter Calvini).

In England Henry VIII caused thirty thousand people to
be put to death on ‘account of the Catholic faith. Cobbett,
a Protestant historian, says of Queen Elizabeth: “Talk of
Catholic persecution and cruelty! Where are you to find per-
secution and cruelty like this inflicted by Catholic princes?”


CHURCH AND ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 75


Within the space of six weeks she caused fifty thousand Cath-
olics to be persecuted merely for the sake of their religion,
and during the last twenty years of her reign no less than
one hundred and forty-two priests were hanged, drawn, and
quartered in England, whilst sixty-two prominent Catholic
laymen also suffered martyrdom.

The events in France that preceded the horrible massacre
of St. Bartholomew’s night (which was organized solely by
Queen Catherine) were such as to justify the adoption of
stringent measures against the Huguenots, and the Church
by no means recommended or sanctioned such proceedings.
In the town of Orthoz the Huguenots had mercilessly butch-
ered three thousand harmless Catholics; at St. Sever they
had hurled two hundred priests down a precipice; Baron
des Adrets forced his own children to wash their hands in
Catholic blood, and Briquemant, one of the leaders of the
Huguenots, used to wear a necklace made of the ears of
slaughtered priests.

It is well known that Catholics were fiercely persecuted
in the Netherlands, and in the northern kingdoms of Europe
most severe penalties were inflicted upon them.

What right then have Protestants to accuse any one else
of cruel persecutions? Would it not be better to let the sins
and blunders of the past be forgotten? No one is justified in
exciting the rabble by representing the Popes as responsible
for all the bloodshed in past centuries, and as desirous to
resume their work of butchery. Does any reasonable person
really believe such statements to be true? Those who make
them do ill service to the cause of truth, justice, and
charity. ‘Thousands of good Protestants know that the
Pope is not the monster of cruelty and falsehood that he is
painted. As Catholics we feel pain and sorrow at the
abuse hurled at our Church and her supreme head, but our
loyalty and love remain unaffected, and neither lies nor cal-
umnies, neither bloodshed nor violence will make us abandon
her.


IV. THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS


Protestants assert that the doctrines taught by the Roman Catholic
Church regarding the forgiveness of sins are erroneous, inasmuch as
she maintains that the punishment due to sin is remitted, not solely
on the ground of Christ’s merits but also on that of the superabundant
merits of the saints and in return for good works performed by the
sinner. She teaches, moreover, that the Pope claims power to appor-
tion the merits of Christ and the saints, and thus to remit the punish-
ment due to sin in this world and to relieve the souls in purgatory.


The Catholic Reply. The Catholic Church teaches that
every sin, even the smallest, can be forgiven only through
the merits of the death of our Lord on the Cross. In bap-
tism all stain of sin is removed in virtue of these merits,
but sins committed after baptism are forgiven in the Sacra-
ment of Penance, again solely in virtue of Christ’s merits.
We read in Holy Scripture, however, that a debt of temporal
punishment remains to be paid even after our sins are for-
given (2 Kings xii, 13, etc.). The everlasting punishment is
remitted through our Saviour’s merits, but the sinner himself
must suffer the temporal punishment. In consequence of
the Communion of Saints the merits of one can be applied
to another, and the Church does this when she grants an
indulgence (Matth. xvi, 19).

The Pope cannot assign the merits of Christ’s death to
whomsoever he will, but only to such who with contrite
hearts desire to participate in them; and to these, if their
sins and the everlasting punishment due them have been
remitted, the Pope can grant remission of the temporal pun-
ishment by way of indulgence.

Indulgences can be applied to the souls in purgatory only
by way of intercession. ‘Our good works benefit those
only who in this life have deserved to be thus benefited” (St.
Augustine, Enchiridion, cap. 110).


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS 7


Protestants who base their doctrine upon Holy Scripture believe
that sins are forgiven solely through the merits of Christ, for Isaias
says, ‘‘The chastisement of our peace was upon him”? (lili, 5), and St.
John writes, ‘‘The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin”


(x John i, 7).


The Catholic Reply. This is precisely what the Catholic
Church teaches with regard to Christ’s merits. Luther de-
nied, however, that any sanctification and renewal of the
inner man was connected with the forgiveness of sins.


The Protestant Doctrine regarding the merits of the saints is that all
require forgiveness and are saved through the blood of the Lamb (Apoc.
vii, 14). Now people who need to have their own debts paid by another,
are not able to pay those of others. Hence our Lord said to His disci-
ples: ‘‘You also, when you shall have done all those things that are
commanded you, say: ‘We are unprofitable servants; we have done
that which we ought to do’” (Luke xvii, 10).


The Catholic Reply is that of course all the saints owe their
salvation to the Blood of Christ, and no one can make satis-
faction for the sins of another; no Catholic questions these
facts. But St. Paul wrote: ‘I rejoice in my sufferings for
you, and fill up those things that are wanting of the sufferings
of Christ, in my flesh for His body, which is the Church”
(Col. i, 24). Hence it is possible for one Christian to suffer
instead of another, and if his own debts are paid out of an
unmerited treasure of grace, he may pass on to his poorer
brethren some of the abundance that he has received. All
his merit is derived from Christ’s merit, just as all the
properties of the grape are derived from its growth on the
vine.


Protestants maintain that according to Catholic doctrine purgatory
is the place where those who die in faith and charity without, however,
having attained to perfection, are detained, in order to be cleansed by
suffering from every sin and to make satisfaction to God’s justice for
every fault for which they have not atoned in this life. This doctrine,
like that of the superabundant merits of the saints, is the basis upon
which the theory of indulgences rests, and is used as a means of gain-
ing power and of extorting money from the deluded creatures who
believe it.


78 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


The Catholic Reply. Our belief in the existence of a place
of purgation is based upon reason, upon Holy Scripture, and
the oldest Christian traditions (2 Mach. xii, 40-46). Our
Lord, too, speaks of sins that shall not be forgiven either in
this world or in the world to come (Matth. xii, 32). There
must therefore be sins which can still be forgiven after death.
That the doctrine regarding purgatory is used as a means of
gaining money and influence is a malicious and spiteful mis-
representation of fact. ae


\


\
Protestants declare that there is nothing about purgatory in Holy
Scripture, and that this doctrine is opposed to clear statements in the
Bible such as Apoc. xiv, 13.


The Catholic Reply. Yet Martin Luther said in his Leip-
zig disputation that he was certain of the existence of purga-
tory, and that it behooved men to help the poor souls detained
there (Wittenberg ed., part 7, f. 7, and 132). We read in the
Bible that it is a holy and wholesome thought to pray for
the dead, that they may be loosed from sins (2 Mach. xii, 46).
The fourteenth chapter of the Apocalypse contains a descrip-
tion of the Church and those who persecute her at the end of
the world, not at the close of the individual life. On the day
of judgment all who have died in the Lord will undoubtedly
rest from their labours. The Catholic doctrine is not at all
incompatible with Apoc. xiv.


COMMENTARY


The Council of Trent excluded from the Catholic Church
any who should maintain that man could be justified by his
own works . . . independently of the grace of Jesus Christ
(sess. 6, can. 1).

We must, therefore, seek elsewhere the difference between
the Catholic and the Protestant teaching on the subject of
forgiveness of sins.

The Catholic Church teaches, in accordance with Holy
Scripture, that the justification of a sinner can be effected only
through the merits of Christ. But she teaches further that


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS 79


by God’s grace the sinner really becomes just, being inwardly
renewed and sanctified, as St. Paul writes to the Corinthians
(x Cor. vi, 11), “ You are washed, you are sanctified, you are
justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,” and to the
Romans (viii, 1), ““There is therefore now no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus” (cf. also Tit. iii, 5). The
Church tells us that in each baptized Christian a new life
begins in which, by codperation with grace, he can lay up a
treasure in heaven (Matth. xix, 21). Nothing displeasing to
God remains after baptism, for concupiscence is not sin but a
consequence of sin; sometimes indeed it is called sin, but it
is so only in the sense that it is a result of and incentive to sin.
Whoever retains his baptismal innocence needs no indul-
gences and has no purgatory to undergo.

Indulgences affect the temporal punishment imposed by
God after the sins committed by a baptized person have
been forgiven (2 Kings xii, 13, 14). The Catholic Church
declares that Christ bestowed upon her the power (Matth.
Xvi, 19) to release men from these penalties, but when she
uses this power she again does nothing but to apply the
merits of Christ to penitent sinners whose offences have al-
ready been pardoned by God, as St. Paul writes, ““What I
have pardoned . . . for your sakes have I done it in the
person of Christ” (2 Cor. ii, 10).

When Catholics speak of the superabundant merits of the
saints, in virtue whereof we can obtain remission of punish-
ment due to our sins, they have no intention of setting these
merits at all on a level with our Lord’s, for those of the saints
are only real and efficacious inasmuch as Christ Himself lived
and worked in them (cf. Col.i, 24). When rightly understood,
this teaching of the Church, which after all is not a dogma of
faith, is far from underrating our Lord’s merits and is based
upon the living union between the Church and Christ who is
her Head.

Luther and his followers departed from the doctrine taught
in all the previous centuries, and maintained that baptism
and regeneration do not really remove the natural sinfulness


80 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


of man, who continues to be a sinner steeped in wickedness
and damnable in God’s sight. The righteousness of Christ is
merely imputed to him, he is declared just, without in reality
being so, and his sins are covered up, not removed. This
doctrine is manifestly opposed to Holy Scripture (Rom.
viii, 1). We may say that Protestantism promises to every
one the most perfect plenary indulgence, since it is only
necessary for a sinner to believe that merits not his own are
imputed to him, so that they cover up his sins and uncon-
ditionally deliver him from all the consequences of sin in time
and in eternity. There is no idea of the duty or possibility
of his rendering himself worthy to receive such a boon.
Sin

Protestants maintain that they take a much more serious view than
Catholics do of the corruption of the human heart, since they do not
believe its natural sinfulness to be removed by baptism, and think
that the warfare between the flesh and the spirit goes on incessantly,
whilst even the regenerate crucify their lusts and concupiscences (Gal.
v, 16-24). According to Catholic teaching, the Apostles term lust
‘sin’? merely because it is the outcome of sin and disposes men to sin,


whereas Protestants do not presume to declare anything not to be sin
to which the Bible gives this name.


Thus Protestants claim to take a more serious view than
we do of the corruption of the human heart! We need not dis-
cuss this point, but let us rather consider whether the Protes-
tant doctrines regarding sin and redemption are more true,
more in harmony with the word of God, and more sure to lead
men to their eternal goal than are the doctrines of the Catholic
Church. We shall soon discover that this is not the case.

The first fundamental mistake made by Protestantism is
to ignore completely the moral nature of man. If the Protes-
tant teaching were well established, it would deprive man of
every reasonable disposition to recognize God as his own
final end, and of all free will either to resist or codperate with
God’s grace. Thus Luther says: ‘All that we do, is done not
of our own free will, but of necessity” (de serv. arb. Opp. lat.,
iii, f. 177); ‘‘We must do everything as God wills us to do


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS. 81


it, and our free will does nothing, since it is non-existent”
(Witt. ed., 6, p. 460). Melanchthon enlarges upon this theory
and writes: “God does everything, good and bad; He was the
author of the treachery of Judas as well as of the conversion
of Paul” (Ep. ad Rom., cap. 8., 1522 ed.). The Reformers
held that man’s whole nature was sin and nothing else. The
justice of Christ was imputed to him only outwardly, but on
this account man was no longer held guilty of sin. This doc-
trine may have originated in a profound sense of human
sinfulness but it is one-sided and exaggerated. It denies the
capability of man to improve and to become really just and
the friend of God, although this is indeed possible only through
Christ’s merits. It is likely to encourage him to sin and to
‘abandon all efforts to lead a moral life; in fact Luther him-
‘self used to say, ‘Sin stoutly, but believe yet more stoutly.”
Some Protestants have seen that this theory of the persistence
of natural sinfulness even in the just is a gross exaggeration,
and this has led them to deny that human nature is corrupt
at all and to reject the doctrine of original sin.
The Catholic Church falls into neither extreme. She takes
a most serious view of all sin, — of the sins committed by the
angels and by Adam as well as of the personal sins of men;
nor does she overlook the terrible consequences of sin, in-
cluding those of original sin. She certainly does not view sin
lightly nor our struggles against it. No one can listen to the
instructions given at missions and retreats without being
aware of this fact. Nor does the Church make forgiveness
so simple and easy a matter as it would be if she merely said,
“Believe that Christ’s merits are imputed to you, and then
all the evil results of your sin will be removed and you will
no longer be held guilty of it.” No, she requires of us serious
and voluntary codperation with God’s grace, real conversion,
abandonment of sin, and the conquest of our inclination to
sin. She perceives the full malice and force of sin, but she
does not fail to see the magnitude and power of God’s grace.
“Where sin abounded, grace did more abound” (Rom. v,
20). She does not think lightly of sin, but she recognizes the


82 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


omnipotence of divine grace. She believes that when Christ
said to a leper, ‘Be thou cleansed,” the man was really
cured of his disease; and, in the same way, that when He
says to a sinner, ‘‘Thy sins are forgiven thee,” the sins are as
completely removed as the leprosy was in the former in-
stance. St. John baptized with water, Christ baptizes with
fire and the Holy Spirit, and this baptism is the beginning of
a new life, the resurrection from spiritual death. Nothing
worthy of condemnation is left in those who are in Christ
Jesus, for the Spirit bestows life in Him and delivers them
from the law of sin and death (Rom. viii, 1, 2). The Church
regards one who is justified as really risen with Christ and,
being thus united with Christ, as able to perform good works
acceptable in God’s sight.

Having been taught by her divine Founder the true nature
of sin, the Church does not presume to give this name to con-
cupiscence which continues to exist even in baptized per-
sons and is not really sin. It is true that St. Paul calls it sin
in Rom. vii, but here, as in many other passages of Holy
Scripture, it behooves us not to take the words too literally
but to study St. Paul’s teaching as a whole. In this chapter
the Apostle depicts the unhappy state of an unbaptized per-
son who is still contaminated with original sin, and in the
next he extols the grace of Christ that can awaken such a
person to a new life in which nothing is left worthy of condem-
nation, since sin is slain and the man becomes a child of God
and an heir to heaven. In none of St. Paul’s epistles is there
any suggestion of a natural sinfulness remaining as actual sin
in those who are justified, and although he speaks of concupis-
cence as sin, Catholics have never felt any doubt as to his
meaning. St. James (i, 15) states the relation between con-
cupiscence and sin quite plainly where he says, “‘ When con-
cupiscence hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin.” Midway
between evil desires and sin stands man’s free will; he can
yield to or resist the temptation; if he yields, sin results, but
God summons every one to resist. St. Augustine points out
that St. James distinguishes concupiscence and sin as being


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS | 83


mother and daughter (adv. Jul., 1. 6, c. 15, n. 47) and remarks
that concupiscence is called sin because it is a sin to yield to tt
(de perf. just.,n. 44). In the same way St. Paul says of one
who receives the Lord’s Body unworthily that he “eateth
and drinketh judgment to himself.’”? He does not mean that
Holy Communion is actually judgment or condemnation,
but he speaks of it thus, because it brings condemnation upon
an unworthy communicant. So he calls concupiscence sin,
because whoever does not resist it, sins. The Council of
Trent declared with perfect truth (sess. 5, cap. 5) that the
Catholic Church had never understood this passage to mean
that concupiscence was actually a sin in the regenerate, but
only that concupiscence was called sin because it was the
outcome of sin and disposed a man to commit actual sin.

The Council of Trent recognized most fully that the war-
fare between the flesh and the spirit is unending, — no Cath-
olic would deny it; but warfare is not sin; it involves the
possibility of defeat, but also the possibility and hope of vic-
tory. He who succumbs to the dominion of sin, ceases to
fight.

What would Luther say to the assertion that the regener-
ate crucify their lusts and concupiscences? He wrote: “‘Why
should we torment ourselves with the attempt to make people
good? Why should we trouble to keep the ten command-
ments, as they are unprofitable for salvation?” (Table Talk,
Aurif.,{. 178) and again: “Only fools struggle to resist con-
cupiscence with prayer, fasting, and other mortifications, for
it is easy enough to get rid of temptations”’ (viz., by yielding
to them). Luther’s own words are significant, “provided
women and girls are to be had” (Works, Jena, II, 216 b).
The Catholic Church is in earnest when she insists upon cruci-
fying the flesh; this doctrine has gained her much opposi-
tion, and many, thinking it too hard, have forsaken her in
consequence. Yet the saints in the Catholic Church have
always been conspicuous for their heroism in crucifying their
lusts.


84 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


The Catholic View of Sin


Another assertion made by Protestants is that the Roman Catholic
Church, and the Jesuit moral in particular, tends to minimize offences
which even a Turk or a pagan would regard as sins. They say that the
Pope sanctions the publication of books in which we read that excuses
can be made for murder, adultery, immorality, fraud, and perjury.


We should be inclined to take the opposite view and to say
that in the eyes of Protestants calumny is no sin provided it
is directed against Catholics and especially against the Jesuits.
‘“There is something repellent,” said a non-Catholic in the
News-Advertiser, Vancouver, B. C., “‘in the way in which
some ministers discuss the Roman Catholic Church... .
The rancor exhibited by certain clerics toward what they
are pleased to term ‘Rome and all her works,’ would be amus-
ing if it were not so thoroughly malicious. I do not believe
the Jews to be more bitterly persecuted than the Church of
Rome. Persons go out of their way to abuse the Pope, and
the charming reverence given to Christ’s Mother and to the
saints. It is a Church with many beautiful teachings, and
I do not find its ministers railing at other religious institu-
tions. Why, if religion be Christian, should some minister

. mount to his pulpit to abuse his brother? It is illogical.
And it wakes in every free, just mind a desire to see fair play
— to speak the free word, to view with wide eyes the great
sad, heaving world which contains so much suffering and so
-much love, and in which forever the generous and weary
figure of the Christ hangs suspended ’twixt earth and
heaven.”

It is an outrageous calumny to say that either the Catholic
Church as a whole or any influential party in the Church
teaches that such sins are permissible or even excusable.

Protestants need only refer to any Catholic Catechism and
to any explanation of the same, or to The Perfect Christian by
St. Alphonsus, who is so often falsely represented as palliat-
ing vice, to see how Catholic children and Catholics in general
are taught to feel hatred and abhorrence of all, even trifling,


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS 85


sins. It is impossible to find a single Catholic book of in-
struction or a single Catholic priest or catechist in the
whole world who would venture to say that, under any cir-
cumstances whatever, murder, adultery, and perjury were
only venial sins or not sins at all. The Jesuits, in harmony
with the whole Church, teach that hatred, enmity, envy, un-
charitableness, and voluntary indulgence in impure thoughts
and desires are undoubtedly sinful, and that whosoever
looks on a woman to lust after her, hath already committed
adultery with her in his heart (Matth. v, 28), as our
Lord taught. How then is it possible that the same persons
should palliate or permit actions resulting from these evil
thoughts?

What-are we to say regarding the alleged books, sanctioned
by the Pope and the ecclesiastical authorities, said to contain
such abominable doctrines, inducing Catholics to regard as
excusable some offences which even Turks and pagans know
to be sins?

It is unhappily true that such books exist, and they poison
the minds of thousands who cease to consider as sin that
which is really sinful and leads to destruction. But these
books are not used in the instruction of Catholic children, nor
are they employed by Catholic confessors as a guide in the
proper discharge of their judicial functions, nor, forsooth, are
they published with the sanction of the Pope and the eccle-
siastical authorities. The Catholic Church is often criticized
for her hostility towards this kind of infidel literature, but
the books to which Protestants refer are those written on the
Catholic moral code for the instruction of confessors.

With regard to these books, inasmuch as they really contain
Catholic doctrine, we may say they are in accordance with
the principles of evangelical morality, and are written, not
in order to lead the innocent astray, but in order to aid con-
fessors in saving souls and in guarding them from sin. The
writers have no intention of palliating any sin whatever,
but of showing confessors how to judge of the magnitude of
sins according to the principles of reason and the divine law,


86 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


- To a confessor, books of this kind are as useful and neces-
sary as textbooks of medicine are to a physician or books on
law to a judge. One of these books, written by Father Gury,
a Jesuit, has been described by Protestants as full of re-
volting doctrines, an abyss of filth and coarseness; but Georg
Evers, a convert, formerly a Protestant minister, says of this
work: ‘‘For the sake of gaining information, I read the
chapter on the Sixth Commandment in Gury’s book. What
I found stated (in Latin), for priests dealing with difficult
cases, stands in the same relation to Luther’s disgusting ob-
scenities as the advice given by a good, moral physician to
the impure conversation of wantons.”’

It is a most complete distortion of the true facts to say
that the Church of Rome under Jesuit influence teaches sin
to be excusable, whereas Protestantism views it much more
seriously. On the contrary, the Catholic Church, including
the Jesuits, recognizes the full malice of sin as being a volun-
tary and infinite wrong committed against God. The Cath-
olic Church makes light of no sin, and she teaches that the ~
only sure way of overcoming it is to be pure and honest even
in small matters; she cherishes virtue such as the world

-does not know, and she leads the elect on to the highest
point of sanctity.


The Forgiveness of Sin


Protestants acknowledge that the so-called Tridentine decree con-
tains much that is true regarding the forgiveness of sins, but they as-
cribe this fact to the presence at the Council of many honest men who,
they imagine, were really evangelicals at heart. They maintain that
the decisions on this article of faith were expressed in ambiguous lan-
guage owing to the presence of some who held other opinions. Neverthe-
less the Council of Trent teaches that sins are only partially removed by
the merits of Christ, and partially by those of the saints and by the sat-
isfaction made by the sinner himself; such a doctrine being, according
to the Protestant view, opposed to Holy Scripture (Ps. xlix (xlviii), 8, 9;
Ephes. ii, 8, 9).


What extraordinary ideas on the subject of Catholicism
possess the minds of those who are not of our faith! The


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS 87


Council of Trent was convoked chiefly in order to put an end
to various abuses in the Church, and to defend the ancient
truths of Catholicism against modern assailants, most of
whom were followers of Luther. Yet these Protestants im-
agine that many persons present at the Council were really
evangelical at heart. If by evangelical they mean believers
in the Gospel of Christ, then not only many but all of the
learned men assembled at Trent were genuinely evangelical,
as are the Pope and all good Catholics, including the Jesuits,
at the present day. But not a single one of them was a
Protestant; they all unanimously held the old Catholic faith
based on Scripture and tradition. If one point in this faith
finds favour with a Protestant, who fails to discover in it
any of the horrible misrepresentations which he has from
childhood associated with Catholicism, he at once assumes
that it is not Catholic doctrine at all but a fragment of Protes-
tantism. It would be more correct to take a contrary view.
Protestants often retain more of the Catholic truth than they
themselves are aware of, and on many points hold thoroughly
Catholic opinions. All that is good, noble, pure, and holy
in the teaching of the Reformers, was carried with them
when they forsook the Catholic Church, their early home.
There is no ambiguity in the decisions of the Council of
Trent; they contain the true doctrine, stated clearly in all
its aspects and bearings. They plainly ascribe all the merit
in the forgiveness of sins to Jesus Christ, our Mediator and
Redeemer, but they do not deny that a sinner possesses free
will whereby he can coéperate in the work of his salvation.
There is an inexplicable confusion in the minds of Protes-
tants between the guilt of sin and the punishment due to it.
The Council of Trent declared it to be the Catholic belief that
no human merit suffices to release a sinner from even a slight
sin. Great care was taken not to suggest in any way a failure
to appreciate the importance of Christ’s satisfaction or to
diminish and limit its efficacy. Yet no sinner can share in this
satisfaction unless he himself codperate with it. There is clear
evidence in Holy Scripture that the temporal punishment


88 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


due to sin may remain after the sin itself is forgiven (e.g.,
2 Kings xii, 13). The Church formerly imposed very severe
penances upon sinners and, like St. John the Baptist,
required them to bring forth fruit worthy of penance, yet
this satisfaction derived all its value from Christ, since we are
unable to do anything of ourselves, although we can do all
things in Christ who strengtheneth us (2 Cor. iii, 5; Phil. iv.
13). In Christ we live, and in Him we merit, and if we suffer
with Him, we shall be also glorified with Him (Rom. viii, 17).
How can Protestants boast that the regenerate amongst
them crucify their lusts and passions, and at the same time
reproach the Catholic Church for ascribing some value and
importance to our suffering in union with the atonement
made by Jesus Christ?

It is a misrepresentation to assert that Catholics believe
the merits of Christ to suffice only partially for the removal
of sins, so that the merits of the saints and the satisfaction
made by the sinner himself are required in addition. The
Council of Trent declared that all our glory is in Christ, in
whom we bring forth fruit worthy of penance, which derives
all its efficacy from Him, and through Him is offered to and
accepted by our heavenly Father. The merits of the saints
are not mentioned at all in connection with personal penance,
and we are far from supposing that they are needed to aug-
ment those of Christ. We read, however, in Holy Scripture
that God would have spared Sodom at Abraham’s interces-
sion, had there been ten just men in the city.

Finally, when Protestants say that Catholic doctrine is
manifestly contrary to Holy Scripture, and refer to two pas-
sages in support of their assertion, we may reply that in
Ephes. ui, 8, 9 St. Paul’s meaning is: Jesus alone is our Re-
deemer, His grace alone saved us without our previously
meriting anything. No Catholic denies this, but the words
contain no reference at all to the value of penitential works
performed by a sinner who falls into sin after baptism and by
God’s grace repents and is converted. The Protestant trans-
lation of Ps. xlix (xlviii), 8 is, “None of them can by any


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS 89


means redeem his brother.” The reference is to redemption
from sin, but the context of the Psalm shows that the author
was speaking of death.


Indulgences


Protestants believe that the Popes claim to have received power
from Christ to remit the temporal punishment required by divine jus-
tice, by drawing on the treasury of the Church, i.e., on the supera-
bundant merits of Christ and the saints. They can also by the same
means afford alleviation and release to the souls in purgatory through
the mediation of the living. A papal indulgence is, according to Protes-
tants, the remission of so many days’ or years’ detention in purgatory;
sometimes part of the gzz/i is remitted, but at other times the Pope
forgives all sins indiscriminately. Sometimes the living enjoy the
benefits of an indulgence, but more frequently they obtain these bene-
fits for the dead, and the latter kind of indulgence is the most important
and most highly prized.


It is true that the Popes, acting as the vicars of Christ,
claim\to have authority to remit the temporal punishment
due to sin, but their claim is based upon our Lord’s words to
St. Peter: ‘‘Whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, it shall be
loosed also in heaven” (Matth. xvi, 19). These words refer
to all that can hinder the soul’s entrance to heaven, and there-
fore include temporal punishment. The history of Moses
and of David shows that such punishment is imposed by God
even when the sin is forgiven. All the Fathers of the Church,
as even Calvin admits, unanimously declare that a forgiven
sinner still has to make satisfaction. In the ordinary course
of things the sinner has to endure his punishment, but it may
be remitted as a special favour. Every child knows this
who, by displaying greater love and more perfect obedience,
tries to please its parents and prevent them from inflicting
punishment. Every criminal knows that the sovereign can
use his right to pardon and commute, diminish or quash the
sentence pronounced against him. Hence it is surely not
surprising that the supreme head of the Church should claim
a similar privilege. In the Sacraments of Baptism and Pen-
ance he has full authority to release a sinner from the eternal


a


90 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


punishment due to sin; he acts in the name of Jesus Christ,
and applies the merits of Christ to every sinner who does
what is required of him; why then should not the Pope be
able to remit less severe penalties? Protestants assume that
they can avail themselves of all the merits of Christ, and that
they are free from all guilt and punishment if they only be-
lieve the justice of Christ to be imputed to them. Thus they
really grant the most complete plenary indulgence to them-
selves unconditionally, whereas a Catholic, although he re-
lies equally upon the merits of Christ, expects them to be
conferred upon him only in the manner prescribed by our
Lord Himself.

Protestants are apt entirely to overlook the fact that in-
dulgences are granted under quite definite conditions. They
seem to fancy that the Pope bestows them just as he likes,
although he is bound to act in this, as in other matters, only
as Christ’s representative and in accordance with His will.
All Catholic theologians are agreed in thinking that it is not
permissible to grant indulgences without sufficient reason,
and they would be invalid should a Pope attempt to grant
them thus. Indulgences of a thousand years are, as Benedict
XIV declared, probably not genuine. Another point over-
looked by Protestants is that any one anxious to gain an in-
dulgence must faithfully comply with certain conditions, the
first being invariably that he must be in the state of grace.
If the punishment due to his sins is to be remitted, those sins
must previously be removed by means of true contrition or,
in the case of grievous sins, by means of the Sacrament of
Penance. No indulgence renders superfluous contrition, pen-
ance, and true purpose of amendment; the fact that the
punishment is diminished or remitted ought to stimulate the
sinner to make fresh efforts to overcome his faults. The
prescribed good works have to be faithfully performed, and
the chief of these is prayer for the welfare of Holy Church.
Finally, as Tetzel, the much calumniated preacher of indul-
gences, said, “the people ought constantly to be reminded
that God saves us, not for the good works that we do, but in


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS op


His own most holy compassion” (Janssen, An meine Kritiker,
14), and that ‘‘no one deserves an indulgence, although he
may be truly penitent and in charity with God, and who-
ever does good works for love of God, directs them towards
God in his life.”

It is an outrageous falsehood to say that the Pope some-
times remits part of the guilt of sin, and at other times remits
the sins altogether. Let me repeat again most emphatically
that the Pope, when he grants an indulgence, has no intention
of forgiving any sin either partially or completely.


Purgatory


Protestants say that of all indulgences those applicable to the souls
in purgatory are/the most important and most highly prized. They
declare.that the Catholic doctrine regarding purgatory is an insult to
Jesus Christ, who has made atonement for our sins, and that those who
believe souls to be purified by the tortures of purgatory forget that
amendment is not the necessary result of suffering.


Is it not a fact that many Protestants pray for the dead and
that even in funeral orations they refer to faults not wholly
eradicated during life? Is this not a proof of the persistence
of the old Catholic feeling with regard to the departed? We
trust that they are too good for hell, but perhaps they are
not yet fit for heaven whither nothing unclean can gain ad-
mission. If they are still unable to enjoy the beatific vision,
ought death to be a barrier to the charity that never faileth?
St. Paul hoped to be delivered from captivity by the prayers
of the faithful (Philemon 22), and prayed that the Lord would
grant unto Onesimus “to find mercy in that day” (2 Tim.
i, 18), and in the same way every Christian hopes by his
prayers to help those dear to him even after their earthly life
is over. At first Luther did not deny the existence of purga-
tory, and believed that the departed could benefit by the
prayers of their survivors, but subsequently his other doc-
trines forced him to oppose the constant faith of the Church,
based though it is on both the Old and the New Testament,
and he finally taught that there was no purgatory. St. Au-


Q2 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


gustine, referring to Matth. xii, 32, says, ‘‘there is forgiveness
of sins also in the next life,”’ and, ‘“The prayer of the righteous
is heard in aid of those Christians who have departed from
this life, and are not so wicked as to be condemned, nor so
good as to be able immediately to enter heaven” (de civ. Det,
Prarvicmo,):

What can be said in answer to the statement that faith in
purgatory is an insult to Jesus Christ? A sinner insults
Christ by his evil works, and it is precisely on this account
that he suffers the punishment which he deserves, that God
may be glorified and receive the honour due to Him.

Jeremy Taylor, the famous Protestant Bishop, author of
Holy Living and Holy Dying, and incidentally an inveterate
opponent of many of our cherished doctrines, on the subject
of prayers for the dead admitted a complete acceptance: ©

**It is very considerable, that since our blessed Saviour did
reprove all the evil doctrines and traditions of the scribes
and Pharisees, and did argue concerning the dead and the
resurrection against the Sadducees, yet He spake no word
against this public practice of intercession, but left it as He
found it; which He who came to declare to us all the will of
His Father would not have done if it had not been innocent,
pious, and full of charity” (Selections from Theology, Section
XX). Elsewhere he says: ‘‘The dead people, even to the
day of judgment, are the subject of a misery, the object of
God’s mercy, and therefore fit to be commemorated in the
duties of our piety and charity. . . . It being certain that
they have a need of mercy, and it being uncertain how great
their need is, it may concern the prudence of charity, to be
the more earnest, as not knowing the greatness of their .
necessity”’ (Lbid.).

Again, we are charged with forgetting that amendment is
not a necessary result of suffering. The flames of hell are not
intended to effect amendment but to punish, and the pains
of purgatory are also punitive. No amount of punishment
improves one who is hardened in vice, yet we do not on that
account close our prisons, and a loving child who thought-


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS 93


lessly or recklessly has offended its parents may certainly be
improved by punishment. The penance which a sinner, con-
scious of his guilt, accepts without hesitation, really purges
and cleanses him. We sce here the difference between hell
and purgatory.

William Mallock writes: “‘As to this doctrine of Purga-
tory — which has so long been a stumbling block to the
whole Protestant world — time goes on, and the view men
take of it is changing. It is becoming fast recognized on all
sides that a zs the only doctrine that can bring a belief in future
rewards and punishments into anything like accordance with
our notions of what is just and reasonable. So far from its
being a superfluous superstition, it is seen to be just what is
demanded at once by reason and morality, and a belief in it
to be not only an intellectual assent, but a partial harmoniz-
ing of the whole moral ideal” (Zs Life Worth Living? Chap.
XI).


Indulgences Applied io Souls in Purgatory


Protestants tell us that the sufferings of purgatory are described as
excruciating, but nevertheless the Popes make it quite easy for people
in this world to deliver their relatives and friends from this place of tor-
ment by means of innumerable indulgences.


The Popes have defined nothing with regard to the alleged
excruciating sufferings of purgatory, and we do not know of
what they consist; though the common sense of Christians
certainly suggests that to a soul who loves God and aspires
to Him as her highest good, it must be intense pain to be held
back from Him by the consequences of her own folly and sin.

Power to grant indulgences was given to the papacy by its
Founder, and the possibility of applying them by way of inter-
cession to the souls in purgatory is in harmony with the uni-
versal belief of Christians in the Communion of Saints and
in the value of intercessory prayer. ‘The members of the
primitive Church were firmly convinced that ‘“‘the continual
prayer of a just man availeth much” (James v, 16).

Whether or no the Popes have made it very easy to release


04 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


souls from purgatory is another question. It is not for us to
decide whether God is really willing to accept our good works
when they are the outcome of our faith and charity, nor do
we know how far He does so in each individual case, nor
whether He applies them to the souls in purgatory. Condi-
tions must be fulfilled, both on our side and on that of the
departed, if it is to be possible. The Catholic Church does
not represent it as an easy matter to gain a plenary indulgence
for oneself. It requires absolute freedom from even venial
sin and from all attachment to sin, and in the same way the
soul, to whom we intend to apply an indulgence, must be in
a fit state to receive this benefit.

We are assured that when we pray with confidence our
prayer is not in vain, and we know that in the third century
St. Perpetua, being in prison, prayed for her dead brother,
for she wrote, ‘‘I trusted that my prayers would alleviate his
torments” (cf. Cap. 7 of her Acts, in which she relates how
her brother appeared to her, thus confirming her belief that
he had really been released through her intercession).


These alleged false doctrines of the Catholic Church are, according
to Protestants, what induced Luther to come to the rescue of poor de-
luded people, sunk in superstition or vice, and to publish his ninety-five
theses, in which he declares faith and repentance to be the way of
forgiveness.


This is a mistake; it was not the Catholic doctrine regard-
ing indulgences that aroused Luther’s indignation, but the
caricature of this doctrine as generally drawn by non-Cath-
olics. Does not the seventy-first of Luther’s theses contain
the clear statement: ‘Let him who speaks against the truth
of the papal indulgence be cursed and condemned’’? Did not
Luther himself assure Tetzel during his illness that the strife
had not begun about him, but was “‘a child of quite different
parentage”? (de Wette, I, 336.)

Nor was Luther incited to his rebellion by the abuses con-
nected with preaching the indulgences. We Catholics are
quite aware that there were abuses, and that misunderstand-


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS 95


ings of the nature of indulgences prevailed, and the Popes
had recognized these facts and taken measures to check the
evil. If Luther had really protested against abuses and mis-
understandings, he would have a claim upon our gratitude.
But the truth is that he only used these things as a welcome
excuse for inveighing against the Holy See and its authority,
and for openly proclaiming his own erroneous opinions on
the subject of justification by faith alone. In order to rep-
resent Luther as coming to the rescue of poor misguided
souls, Protestants assume that the Catholic doctrine regard-
ing indulgences had plunged the people into superstition and
vice, but such was by no means the case. Tetzel gave in-
structions to those who were preaching the indulgence, that
they must impress upon the faithful the fact that every indul-
gence is granted primarily for the glory of God, and that no
one can gain an indulgence who is not truly penitent and
filled with love of God, and he went on to say: ‘‘The indul-
gence is gained by such as are in a state of true contrition and
charity, which do not suffer them to remain idle and inactive,
but spur them on to serve God.” “It is certain that the in-
dulgence is gained by Christian, God-fearing, and pious
people and not by the indolent and reckless” (Janssen, An
meine Kritiker, 14).

Cardinal Wiseman was in Rome on the occasion of a com-
paratively recent proclamation of an indulgence, and in
writing to some friends he expressed the wish that they
could have seen the crowds outside the confessionals and the
innumerable communicants at the altars. Stolen property
was, he said, returned, and hardened sinners were converted.
_ He thought that his correspondents, had they witnessed all
this, could have judged for themselves whether or no the
proclamation of an indulgence really encouraged men to com-
mit sins with impunity.


The Protestant Plenary Indulgence


It is, I repeat, absolutely false to say that the proclama-
tion of an indulgence ever plunged unhappy souls into vice


96 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


or impiety, yet such a statement is frequently made for the
purpose of keeping alive the prejudices against Catholicism.
History proves that the people were misled and plunged into
vice by a preaching of quite another kind, viz., by the ser-
mons of Luther himself and his followers. He did indeed pro-
claim a plenary indulgence, when he taught that a man need
only have faith in order to go straight to heaven, neither con-
trition nor good works being required of him. Such an indul-
gence as this could not, of course, be applied to the departed,
as it rendered purgatory altogether unnecessary. Luther soon
discovered the effect that this teaching had upon the people,
and complained bitterly of it. “‘We live,” he wrote towards
the close of his life, “‘in Sodom and Babylon, and among all
classes lawlessness, together with all kinds of vice, sins, and
scandals, is now much greater than ever before.” ‘‘Who
would have begun to preach, if we had known beforehand
that so much misery and wickedness would result from it?”
(Janssen, op. cit., 33.) Béhmer, a Protestant writer, called
the Reformation the source of all the evils from which we now
suffer. Droysen, an antagonist of the Catholic Church,
makes the following confession: ‘Through the ecclesiastical
revolution there arose fearful disorders and confusion; the
writings of the Reformers abound in pitiful lamentations over
the growth of wickedness, usury, licentiousness, and every
kind of sin” (op. cit.). No one could read carefully all the
evidence on this subject that Janssen has collected, without
arriving at an opinion different from that usually held by
Protestants on the subject of the results of Catholic and
Lutheran teaching respectively. Lutheranism requires a be-
liever to feel absolute certainty of salvation; Catholicism
teaches that no one in this world can possess complete assur-
ance that he is saved, but that all oyght to work out their
salvation with fear and trembling, as St. Paul says: “TI am
not conscious to myself of anything, yet am I not hereby
justified, but He that judgeth me is the Lord”’ (1 Cor. iv, 4).
The teaching of the Catholic Church on the subject of in-
dulgences leads neither to despondency nor to carelessness,


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS 97


but it encourages a spirit of penance and so brings men to
Christ. No Catholic ever expects to secure his salvation by
means of indulgences. He may never have tried to gain one
and yet be saved, for an indulgence is a benefit, a favour, the
remission of the temporal punishment due to sin, but it is
nothing more. A good Catholic no doubt values indulgences
for what they are worth, but both in life and in death he re-
lies solely upon God and his holy faith.

If there were no judicial authority in the Church, and if
the utterances of her supreme ruler had no value in the sight
of God, why should Christ have spoken of power to bind and
to loose, and of feeding His sheep? We know well enough
that papal bulls condemn no one, that God alone will be the
judge of our souls, yet at the same time we trust that He had
some purpose in committing us, during our life on earth,
to the charge of those to whom He said, ‘‘He that heareth
you, heareth me, and he that despiseth you, despiseth me.”
Supposing our own conscience should urge us to adopt Lu-
ther’s tenets, is it not possible that God might judge us other-
wise than we should judge ourselves? Every Catholic knows
who it is that has atoned for his sins and saved him from
eternal damnation; he relies upon Christ alone, not on any
indulgence, nor on the merits of any saint, nor upon any sat-
isfaction that he himself can make. He knows, however, that
he will not be taken to heaven as if he were an inanimate clod
with no will of its own, and he recognizes purgatory as cre-
ated by God, in His justice and love, in order that men may
be saved. Purgatory was not invented by one of the Popes,
but was designed by Him who cannot endure that anything
unclean should enter heaven, and yet will not extinguish the
smoking flax. Every Catholic believes that charity does not
end at death. He is far from supposing that he is free to sin
lustily, if only he has plenty of faith and gets plenty of indul-
gences or induces others to gain them for him. He knows to
whom heis answerable, and he has been taught asa child to say,
whenever he hears Holy Mass: “‘ My Jesus, I will live for Thee;
my Jesus, I will die for Thee; living and dying I am Thine.”


V. FAITH AND GOOD WORKS


Protestants assert that, according to Roman Catholic doctrine, faith
is nothing more than a belief in the revelations and promises of God. .


The Catholic Reply. The Catholic Church teaches that
there is such a thing as dead faith, which excludes hope and
charity, and even the devils possess this faith (James il, 19),
but it does not suffice for salvation. Justifying faith must
include heartfelt confidence in God and the charity whence
contrition and purpose of amendment proceed.


The Protestant Doctrine is that faith is not merely a belief in God’s
revelations and promises, but is at the same time a heartfelt confidence
that God in His mercy, for the sake of Christ’s merits, will deign to
have compassion upon us and make us just and blessed, as St. Paul
says, “‘With the heart we believe unto justice” (Rom. x, 10). True faith
worketh by charity (Gal. v, 6), and is fruitful in good works (James
EO)


The Catholic Reply. This is not Luther’s doctrine, for he
taught that salvation was by faith alone, i.e., by the confi-
dence felt by the sinner that God had forgiven him. Luther
insisted upon excluding charity and good works from faith.
The statement given above is the Catholic definition of faith,
the only difference being that the Catholic Church does not,
like Luther, ascribe to faith power to justify and save.


Protestants maintain that the Roman Church teaches that by means |
of good works we can make satisfaction for our sins, thus ensuring their
forgiveness and our salvation.


The Catholic Reply. Such a doctrine is altogether contrary
to the Council of Trent, which condemned all who taught
that man could be justified by his own works without
divine grace (sess. 6, can. 1), The Catholic Church insists


FAITH AND GOOD WORKS 99


that man cannot be saved by faith alone, i.e., by dead faith,
but she insists also that he cannot be saved by works alone,
although good works are expedient, necessary, and meritori-
ous. The necessity and meritorious character of good works
is taught on almost every page of Holy Scripture, but espe-
cially in Matth. xxv and James ii.


Protestants believe that a man in the state of grace may perform really
good works without being able to atone for his sins and deserve salva-
tion, for St. Paul says: ‘‘By grace you are saved through faith, and
that not of yourselves, for it is the gift of God, not of works, that no
man may glory” (Ephes. ii, 8, 9).


The Catholic Reply. On the last day our Judge will admit
to heaven those who have done good works, and exclude those
who have neglected to do them (Matth. xxv). Hence the
saints will owe their salvation to their own works conjointly
with our Saviour’s grace. St. Paul’s words in Ephes. ii refer
plainly to works performed by Christians before their con-
version, hence these works could not be the outcome of faith.


Protestants assert that Catholics extol, as good works, almsgiving,
fasting, saying the rosary, going on pilgrimages, visiting certain churches,
the practice of various mortifications, taking religious vows, founding
religious houses, and altogether observing the rules laid down by the
Church,


The Catholic Reply. This is a most misleading statement
of what we believe; it suggests that, in our opinion, all the
merit of good works consists in the mechanical performance
of outward actions, that the rules laid down by the Church
take precedence of God’s commandments, and that it is a
matter of indifference for what reason the good works are
performed, whether for love of God, or from a sense of our
own sinfulness, or from force of habit, or even from motives
of hypocrisy.

The real teaching of the Catholic Church is this: A work is
rendered good in the sense of meritorious by the grace of
God which prompts its performance; hence in order to be
good in this sense, a work must be performed by one in the


100 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


state of grace, it must be in accordance with God’s will, and
must be done with the intention of pleasing Him (Matth.
vi, 1). The good works especially extolled by the Catholic
Church, as well as in Holy Scripture, are prayer, fasting,
and almsgiving (Tob. xii, 8; Matth. vi), obedience to the
commandments of God, fulfilment of one’s duties in life,
and patience in suffering.


Protestants tell us that they describe as good works those which
proceed from the conversion of the heart to God (such conversion being
effected by the Holy Spirit), and also those which are performed in
compliance with God’s law as contained in the Bible.


The Catholic Reply. This again is Catholic doctrine. Lu-
ther, however, ‘and his followers recognized no true conver-
sion of the heart to God, effected by the Holy Spirit; they
thought it impossible to fulfil the law of God, and regarded
good works as useless, if not actually harmful.


COMMENTARY


Luther taught explicitly that justification is alone by faith
that lays hold of Christ through the words of Holy Scrip-
ture, and not by the faith that includes charity (Werke,
Wittenb., i, 47); those who wish to add love to faith are, in
Luther’s opinion, ‘‘ignorant and blundering asses.”? When
Melanchthon quietly reminded him of St. Paul’s words re-
garding the necessity of charity, Luther called him a Mame-
luke for agreeing with the papists in laying stress upon the
codperation of charity and hope (Plank, Gesch. d. Enisteh.,
vi, 80). Luther would not tolerate any allusion to good works
and goes so far as to say: “‘ Faith that is connected with works
does not justify; however trivial the works may be, it ceases
to be faith” (Epp. Aurif., tom. I, fol. 345 b). When some
one remarked that faith ought to be living and active, he
called this assertion “a wretched, patched-up phrase”
(Werke, Walch, XVII, 840).

At the present time Protestants admit the truth of much
which Luther most decidedly rejected, and we should view


FAITH AND GOOD WORKS IOI


this action with joy, if only the very truths that the Catholic
Church always has upheld and defended were not now brought
forward as the triumphant results of the Reformation.

Luther did not trouble about a true conversion of the heart
to God, effected by the Holy Spirit. He wrote that a Chris-
tian was not under the law but free, not only from the Pope’s
abominations and the blasphemous enactments of men, but
also from all the control that God’s law had over us (Ep. ad
Gal., Wittenb., Werke, I, 229): ‘‘ Christ gave us no command-
ments” (f. 216), and “‘if you should imagine Christ to be a
judge or legislator, ready to demand an account of the manner
in which you have spent your life, you may be perfectly sure
that it is not’Christ, but the very devil himself” (216 b).
The Pope was obliged to condemn Luther’s theory that a just
man sinned whenever he did a good work, and that a good
work was at least a venial sin (Wittenb., VII, 117 b).


The Object of Faith


Protestants give the following as one of the chief differences between
their doctrines and those of the Roman Catholic Church: Protestants
regard faith as an acceptation of God’s word revealed in Holy Scrip-
ture, whilst Roman Catholics, though they accept God’s word as an
object of faith, lay stress on the importance of believing everything
taught by the Holy Roman Church.


This statement creates in the mind of the reader an impres-
sion that Catholicism sets human on a level with divine utter-
ances, or even allows the former to take precedence of the
latter. Yet the Vatican Council declared faith to be a super-
natural virtue by means of which we accept, in reliance upon
God’s grace, whatever He has revealed, and we believe it, ,
not because our reason recognizes it as the truth, but be-
cause God’s word is eminently worthy of credence. The word
of God, in the full meaning of the term, is for us Catholics the
sole object of faith. .

Because God’s revelations were revealed and intrusted to
men, and because Christ appointed His Church to be the
infallible guardian and teacher of the faith, as is plain from


102 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


Holy Scripture, we believe what the Holy Roman Church
calls upon us to believe. We believe in the word of God as
it is recorded in the Bible and preserved in the tradition of the
Church, but these are not two distinct objects of belief, nor
is one the word of God and the other the word of man, but
we accept the whole word of God from the Church to whom
it was intrusted. This word cannot vary and be adapted to
the opinions of men, and the Church cannot teach anything
else but what God has spoken and revealed, nor can she ever
contradict what stands written in Holy Scripture any more
than an ambassador can alter the message that he is sent to
deliver, or a judge give a sentence not in accordance with the
law that it is his duty to interpret and enforce.

As God does not speak to each individual, we should have
no means of attaining to a full and assured faith unless we
possessed an infallible teacher of faith and an interpreter of
the written word of God. Every bond of union between the
faithful would soon be severed, and every reason for assured
faith would vanish, if the Church ceased to insist upon unity
and if our adherence to her doctrines were made optional.
Hence St. Paul earnestly appeals to the Corinthians, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, ‘‘all to speak the same thing,
that there be no schisms,” and to be “‘in the same mind and
in the same judgment” (1 Cor. i, 10).

This necessary unanimity in faith is possible then only
when it is derived from the divine word preserved in the
Church of Christ. Who has ever derived his faith from Holy
Scripture alone? Not the Apostles or their contemporaries
and disciples; nor did even Luther receive the Bible by itself,
with the interpretation assigned to it for centuries in the
Catholic Church. Indeed, he himself desired his followers
not to believe the Bible alone, but to accept his views upon
it. “Twill not have my teaching criticized by any one,” he
wrote, “not even by angels. Whoever refuses to accept it,
cannot be saved” (Werke, Erlangen, 28, 144). And again:
“No human being ever taught like Luther.” ‘I, Dr. Martin
Luther,” he said, ‘‘ will have it so, I am wiser than the whole


FAITH AND GOOD WORKS 103


world” (Wittenb. ed., V, 107). When some one reproached
him for inserting the word alone in his translation of Romans
ili, 28, he said: “‘If a papist tries to make a fuss about this
word, tell him outright that Martin Luther intends it to
stand. A papist and an ass are one and the same thing”
(Deutsche Werke, V, 171). In fact he declared frankly: “T
care nothing for all the texts of Scripture [which speak of good
works], Christ is on this [i.e., my] side”’ (Wittenb., ed. I, 146,
147). Luther required the preachers of his doctrines to con-
form exactly to his views (Plank, Gesch. des prot. Lehrbegriffs,
II, 385, 387; IV, 67). Therefore his followers were not al-
lowed to believe the Bible alone, but also Luther’s opinions
and interpretations. Luther asserted, though he could not
prove, his own infallibility, in opposition to the real infalli-
bility “Of the teaching authority in the Catholic Church based
on Scripture and tradition, and in opposition also to Holy
Scripture itself.

Most Protestants of the present day do not believe merely
what they find in the Bible, but they accept the teaching of
many men, for which the Bible contains no justification.
They put faith in Luther, or in their own ministers, or in
some modern line of thought, or in their own prejudices in-
herited from their forefathers. We Catholics, however, put
faith only in the truth revealed by God, and in accepting
this we hope to receive God’s grace, to please Him, and to find
salvation.


The Catholic Understanding of Faith


Protestants tell us that it is questionable whether, according to
Catholic doctrine, earnest confidence in God’s mercy forms part of the
right faith. Faith may indeed be the first step towards justification,
but it does not go far, since the Council of Trent affirmed it to be possi-
ble for a man to be a Christian and possess this faith without having
any life, charity, or enjoyment of divine grace.


Holy Scripture contains several clear allusions to a dead
faith, compatible with the state of God’s wrath, for the devils
possess faith of this kind. It is, however, worthless for sal-


104 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE —


vation, being like a dead body without a soul. As soon as
God’s grace begins to affect the sinner, it behooves him vol-
untarily to codperate with it, for it rests with him whether
God’s gift is really to be his salvation or to remain dead and
unprofitable. His faith must be quickened to life, and fear,
contrition, purpose of amendment, confidence in and, above
all, love of God must be added to it. Faith, alive through
charity, is the root and foundation of justification; and when
it is brought into relation with justification and salvation,
hearty confidence in God’s grace and true love of God must
inevitably be associated with it.

Luther’s real views regarding justification by faith alone
are obscure. On the one hand he denies that faith can remain
dead, since he believes it to be exclusively God’s work in
man. A sinner cannot, in Luther’s opinion, voluntarily ac-
cept the faith, but his will is like a horse that submits to the
rider whether he be God or the devil. Hence faith once be-
stowed by God cannot remain dead. On the other hand
Luther was most careful to eliminate from faith all activity
manifesting itself in hope or charity; in faith, as he con-
ceived of it, there was to be nothing human, nothing volun-
tary, nothing pleasing to God. “Faith alone justifies,” was .
his dogma, “‘faith which apprehends Christ through the word,
not the kind of faith which includes charity”’ (Deutsche Werke,
Wittenberg, I, f. 47 b). Therefore, according to Luther,
charity ought to be altogether excluded as having nothing to
do with the work of justification.

This was indeed a new faith, unknown to previous genera-
tions, a kind of faith that was not the dead faith capable of
remaining in the soul, though charity, grace, and supernatu-
ral life may all be lacking, nor yet a faith quickened by char-
ity and manifesting itself actively in good works. What sort
of faith then was this new faith of Luther’s? It was undoubt-
edly a dead faith, such as St. James describes; Luther’s art
had no power to call it to life. There is no intermediate state
between life and death, and Luther’s faith was dead, incapa-
ble of leading to salvation. His own followers, happily ob-


FAITH AND GOOD WORKS 105


livious of his real opinions, have to a great extent abandoned
this doctrine upon which Luther himself insisted most em-
phatically, and have returned to the old Catholic view of
faith. ‘They are far from acknowledging this to be the case,
for they persist in regarding the Catholic Church as the
mother of all error and Catholic doctrines as falsehoods de-
vised by men. Hence on this, as on other points, they mis-
represent the Catholic Church, and attack, as being monstrous
errors, doctrines that she has never taught, whilst they extol,
as truths peculiar to Protestantism, things that they really
owe to Catholic teaching.


Faith and Good Works


|
Protestants tell us that it is the special glory of their Church to teach
that men are justified and saved solely through faith in Jesus Christ and
not through any merit due to good works. They declare that Roman
Catholicism attaches vast importance to good works, and teaches that
by their means sin can be completely removed, and further graces and
even eternal life can be merited.


The Catholic teaching on the subject of good works is per-
fectly clear, but Protestants do not state it intelligibly.
What we understand by good works are all the actions and
sufferings collectively of one who is a child of God, being re-
generate through grace, or all the good fruits which Christ
said every good tree must bring forth (Matth. vii, 17). We
know that our good works are possible, real, and meritori-
ous solely through God’s grace and the infinite merits of Jesus
Christ; but at the same time we are aware that, in virtue of
possessing free will, we can accept or refuse the grace offered
us by God; we can cooperate faithfully with it and put the
talents given us out to usury, or we may receive grace in
vain (2 Cor. vi, 1), and bury our talent in the earth. Hence
we strive “by good works to make sure our calling and elec-
tion” (2 Peter i, 10), and are convinced that if we neglect to
do good works, we shall lose grace and fail to gain eternal life,
but if we are zealous in their performance, we shall not only
show our obedience but merit also a reward in heaven, for


106 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


St. Paul tells us that every man shall receive his own reward
according to his labour (1 Cor. iii, 8), and our Lord Himself
speaks of the joys of heaven as a reward. By our own exer-
tions we could never gain this reward, and we feel how far all
our works fall short of what God’s grace purposes and is able
to effect in us and by our agency. We know that we may well
describe ourselves as unprofitable servants, but nevertheless
when we faithfully codperate voluntarily with God’s grace,
we are acting in conformity with His will and doing what is
pleasing and meritorious in His sight. This is the teaching of
divine revelation, and so farfrom supplying us with any ground
for vainglory it impels us to serve God with thankful hearts,
and to love Him who first loved us.

The Protestant doctrine appears to us most confused and
out of harmony with Holy Scripture. It is quite a mistake to
say that Catholicism teaches that sin can be completely re-
moved by means of good works; the Church would repudi-
ate such a doctrine, for she tells us that we are saved solely
through faith in Christ and through His merits.

Luther maintained that by faith alone salvation was pos-
sible, such faith being independent of all good works and
of charity, besides all that proceeds from charity. He
believed man to be incapable of doing anything to please
God, and considered even our best actions to be sins. The
Gospel, in Luther’s opinion, tells us what Christ has done for
men, not what it is the duty of men to do. A pious man sins
in all his good works, and a good work performed in the best
possible way is still a sin. Hence from one point of view
Luther cried, “Away with all good works!” but on the other
hand, he could not altogether ignore the explicit statements
of Holy Scripture and the voice of conscience, so he opened a
sort of backdoor to the good works that he had apparently
discarded. According to the regulations for the Protestant
Church in Wiirttemberg good works ought to be performed
in testimony of obedience and gratitude, and as the good
fruits of penance, but not ‘‘with any idea that thereby we
atone to God for our sins.”


FAITH AND GOOD WORKS 107


Surely it is impossible to reconcile these doctrines! How
can there be good fruits where there is no good seed? Yet
every seed of charity which might produce good works is to
be absolutely excluded from the work of justification. And
why should there be “ good fruits of penance” where there is
no thought of really making atonement for sin? Our Lord
Himself compared a Christian working in God’s service with
men labouring in a vineyard (Matth. xx, 1-16); why did the
labourers go to the vineyard if they did not expect to earn
the stipulated wages?

For any one to assert that faith alone, exclusive of good
works, can justify seems as unreasonable as it would be for a
musician to say: ‘‘My talents and genius alone make me an
artist;\I can dispense with all my instruments, with my piano
and violin, for my art does not reside in them; they are un-
necessary or even injurious toit.’’ It is, of course, true that
he is an artist because he possesses certain natural gifts, and
without them the most expensive piano in the world would
not make him a musician. But still he must exercise his
talents, he must study in order to develop them. He can
neither retain nor display his powers unless he has an in-
strument and uses it with tireless industry. So is it with
the life of a Christian. The ability to be a Christian comes to
him solely through God’s grace, and in order to preserve this
ability he must have faith, which is as necessary to him as
talent is to a musician, and is an unmerited gift of God just
as much as an artistic genius is a gift. But-the musician can-
not develop and display his talent without an instrument, nor
can a Christian develop and display his faith without good
works.


The Commandments of God and of the Church


Protestants often say that with regard to good works there is a wide
discrepancy between the teaching of the “better sort of Catholicism”
and that of the papacy and its supporters. They acknowledge that
much that is admirable may be found in the catechisms and devotional
works of the Catholic Church, especially in the Following of Christ,
but they maintain that the rules laid down by the Popes and the ordi-


108 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


nary practices of the Church are very different. The commandments
of God are treated as of secondary importance compared with those of the
Church. Great stress is laid upon the observance of the prescribed
holidays and upon attendance at Mass, which is said in Latin. The
sermon is regarded as unimportant. There are, moreover, the so-
called fast-days on which all kinds of dainties may be eaten and only
flesh meat is forbidden. Great efficacy is ascribed to the repetition of
certain forms of prayer, and this is a prominent part of the religious
life. We very often read in papal documents that those who attend
missions and make some sacrifice of money receive complete forgiveness
for all their sins, etc. Such are the good works extolled and recom-
mended by the papacy.


Statements such as the above enable us to see how difficult,
how almost impossible, it is for people ignorant of our faith to
understand our spiritual amd moral life. Where a Catholic
recognizes harmony, they perceive nothing but jarring dis-
cords; a Catholic welcomes advice as tending to the salva-
tion of his soul, or as revealing the will of God, to which he
submits as willingly as a soldier to his officer’s word of com-
mand, or a traveller to his guide’s instructions, or a child to his
parents’ orders, but a non-Catholic talks about human legis-
lation and oppressive constraint. When a soul, eager to be
saved, asks the holy Catholic Church, ‘‘What must I do that
I may have life everlasting?” it receives instruction and
guidance. If it asks further, “The commandments I have
kept from my youth, what is yet wanting to me?” the
Church points out the higher way, that it may lay up treas-
ure in heaven according to our Lord’s words (Matth. xix, 21).
The Church shows the sinner the path of penance, she stimu-
lates all to unwearied zeal; she admonishes the holy to
become yet more holy; for all she has some instruction, coun-
sel, or command. She gives milk to babes and meat to the
strong, and in all that she does and orders her only aim is to
lead souls safely to Christ. But what advice or help can
Protestantism supply to one desirous of attaining to perfec-
tion and salvation? Nothing but, “Believe, and do what you
like; it is for you to order your own ways; only beware of
believing or doing anything that might eventually lead you


FAITH AND GOOD WORKS 109g


to Catholicism.”’ This accounts for the restlessness of many
dissatisfied souls, for their constant quest of fresh paths to
salvation, and for their incessant search for new fountains
after they have forsaken the old springs. It is false to say that
there is a wide discrepancy between the teaching of the better
sort of Catholicism and that of the papacy and its support-
ers. The Following of Christ is one of the fairest blossoms of
Catholic moral theology, and no Pope has ever found fault
with this book; on the contrary, all have agreed in recom-
mending it as most useful in helping men to lead a good and
truly Catholic life. The catechisms and books of devotion
alluded to by Protestants were compiled by the supporters
of the papacy and published with the sanction of the bishops.
All alike-teach most emphatically that the essence of Chris-
tian perfection and the way of salvation consist in loving
God above all things and in following the example of our Lord
Jesus Christ. There are other things which are more or less
necessary means of attaining these ends, but they do not con-
stitute perfection.

It is, therefore, equally untrue to say that the command-
ments of God are, in accordance with papal regulations, re-
garded as of secondary importance compared with those of
the Church. If a music teacher tells his pupil to practise
scales every day he does not imply that a musician’s perfec-
tion consists in this exercise, but he considers that scales con-
duce to perfection and therefore he takes care that they
shall not be neglected. If a physician orders a patient to re-
frain from certain kinds of food, no one is so foolish as to sup-
pose that the physician cares less for his patient’s health than
for these directions. The rules and commandments of the
Church, like God’s commandments, serve the sole aim of
training us to live as children of God and Holy Church, of
promoting the welfare of our souls, and of guiding us to per-
fection. They are never the main thing, but are always only
necessary means towards that end. A glance into any Cath-
olic Catechism would suffice to convince any one that, in
the moral instruction given to children, far more attention is


110 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


paid to the commandments of God than to those of the
Church.

We are certainly required to observe the holidays of obli-
gation; but did not our Lord Himself observe the Jewish
festivals? That assistance at Holy Mass is an essential
part of the observance of a festival is a matter of course to
any one who understands what the Mass is to Catholics, and
who reads (Acts xx, 7) how, even in Apostolic days, Chris-
tians used to assemble not only to hear instructions but for
the breaking of bread. St. Justin, who lived in the second
century, tells us what they meant by this “breaking of bread.”
Protestants speak of Mass as being recited or performed, but
most of it is read in a low voice, and Catholics follow in
spirit even when they do not understand the Latin words.
There is no lack of prayer books and devotional works, and
the sermon is always in the vernacular. Protestants reproach
us with regarding the latter as of little importance; the
charge has been refuted many times but is constantly re-
vived. The altar, and not the pulpit, is the central point in
Catholic churches, but in every age the sermon has formed
an important part of our worship, and the Council of Trent
issued stringent orders that sermons should be preached on
every Sunday and festival, and still more often, if necessary,
in Lent and Advent. Moreover the faithful are to be admon-
ished to hear the word of God expounded in their own parish
church (sess. 24, cap. 4, can. 7 de ref.). Protestants object
to our fast-days, and yet there is plenty of justification for
them in the Bible (Joel ii, 12; Tob. xii, 8; Deut. ix, 18; Matth.
Xvii, 20; iv. 2; Acts xiv, 22). How they ought to be ob-
served according to the spirit of the Church is taught in every
catechism and by the life of almost any saint. No reference
will be found there to all those dainties in which we are sup-
posed to indulge on fast-days; and those who criticize our
fasts, seem to have no idea of the distinction between fasting
and abstinence from flesh meat.


FAITH AND GOOD WORKS III


Outward Practices


We are accused of attaching over great importance to the
repetition of certain forms of prayer. Christ Himself as-
cribed the greatest possible power to prayer, and the Our
Father, our Lord’s own prayer, is the one most frequently
used, although there is surely nothing un-Christian in using
other forms of prayer or in preparing for the hour of death.
It would undoubtedly be superstitious to ascribe any efficacy
to the mere words, if they are uttered with no attention or
devotion.

Some mention must be made of the old calumny that the
Pope promises full forgiveness of all sins to such as subscribe
to the°se-ealled missions, etc. Even educated Protestants
seem to believe that this is a fact, but not one Catholic, how-
ever ignorant, imagines any such absurdity.

Our antagonists display great ingenuity in representing
our holy religion as a senseless medley of foolish outward
practices and of rules made by men. They lay hold of some
few points of Catholic observance, distort them, and then
declare them to be the highly extolled good works that the
Pope recommends. They are mistaken, however, and the
fruits of the really good works in the Catholic Church may
be seen by those who, impartially and without prejudice,
study the lives of her saints. How many martyrs and confes-
sors, missionaries and virgins, and servants of the sick and
poor have sanctified themselves in every rank of life by means
of poverty, self-sacrifice, humiliation, and labour, and have
been brought by the Catholic Church to Jesus, the divine
Shepherd of souls! Where are the fruits of Luther’s famous
doctrine that good works are impossible, useless, or even
detrimental to salvation? Luther answers this question him-
self (second sermon on first Sunday of Advent): “As a re-
sult of this doctrine [that faith alone is necessary for salva-
tion] the world as it grows older, grows more wicked, and
people are now possessed by seven devils, whereas previously
they were possessed by only one.’ On another occasion


112 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


(Wittenb., German ed., part 7, p. 241 b) he complained that
the devil often reproached him with having taught what was
wrong, and having disturbed the state of the churches,
which under the papacy was calm and peaceful. ‘I cannot
deny,’ he added, “that I am often filled with fear and anx-
iety.”” Those who had forsaken the ancient Church were
finally compelled to abandon Luther’s teaching on the sub-
ject of good works, and to return more or less to the Catholic
doctrine that he had despised; life would otherwise have
ceased to be possible. ‘They were, however, very careful not
to describe their changed opinions as Catholic, and so they
took pains to misrepresent what the Catholic Church really
taught. What Luther once said in another sense is perfectly
true: “‘Unless the Pope fed us, as well as his own people, we
should all die of hunger” (Table Talk, p. 269 a, Latin ed.).


The Evangelical Counsels


Protestants assert that in addition to requiring good works, the
Catholic Church teaches that there are works of supererogation. If
for instance any one goes into a monastery, he has, according to Roman
Catholic opinion, abandoned the world, and secured assurance of sal-
vation for others as well as himself, since, in taking the vows of religion,
he does more than is actually demanded of him, and so lays up a store
of merit which he does not need personally. Power is given to the Pope
to use this treasury of the Church for the relief of the souls in purgatory.


In statements such as these it is hardly possible to recognize
the truly biblical, Catholic doctrine regarding the evangelical
counsels and their significance. Such a misrepresentation
serves as a scarecrow to young Protestants, and is designed
to prevent them from ever associating with people who be-
lieve in works of supererogation.

In speaking of Protestantism, Schopenhauer, who knew
it intimately and was certainly not friendly to the Catholic
Church, said that it had eliminated the central doctrine of
Christianity and was gradually adopting the theory that a
loving Father created the world for men’s enjoyment, and
if only they conform in some respects to His will, He intends
to provide a much more beautiful world for them hereafter.


FAITH AND GOOD WORKS 113


“This may be a good religion,’ adds Schopenhauer, ‘for
well-to-do, married, and enlightened Protestant ministers, but
it is not Christianity.”” Catholicism, on the contrary, re-
quires each individual to be in earnest with regard to the strict
obligations imposed by the Gospel. We know that there are
various gifts and that what suits one, does not suit another.
A man may be an excellent soldier and yet not be fit to com-
mand anarmy; another may be a first-rate farmer although
he is a poor writer. Men differ in their tastes, talents, dis-
position, and vocation; and the Catholic moral law, which
is based on the Bible, recognizes this fact. The Church
teaches that all are called to perfection, and are bound to
strive after it as long as they live (Matth. v, 48). Each, how-
ever, ought to be perfect in his own state of life. Some can
eeelairn with St. Paul, ‘The charity of Christ presseth us”
(2 Cor. v, 14), and tues follow the Apostle’s admonition and
seek the better gifts of grace and more perfect charity (1 Cor.
Xll, 31, and xili), asking with the rich young man, “ Master,
what good shall I do, that I may have life everlasting?” If
such as these receive the answer, “Keep the command-
ments,” they are not satisfied, but ask again, ‘What is yet
wanting tome?” They long to do more than their bounden
duty. Slavish souls work only under compulsion; a bureau-
crat’s life is regulated by formal precepts and he is contented
to do his ordinary routine, but even in secular callings there
are many who do far more than is strictly required of them.
Human society bestows on such men orders and distinctions,
monuments are erected in their honour, and their names are
recorded in history. In the Church of Christ, too, the Holy
Ghost impels many favoured souls to higher efforts, and in-
spires them with the desire to do, sacrifice, and suffer every-
thing for love of Christ and for the salvation of souls, — their
own, primarily, but also those of others, that thus they may
win all for Christ. Can it be expected of Holy Church that
she should treat these children of hers as Luther would have
her do? He declared that whoever maintained good works
and vows to be efficacious, was under the influence of the


114 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


devil and false to the faith (Wittenb., vi, 200 b), and warned
people not to be too good: ‘‘Why should we worry ourselves
with the attempt to make men pious?” (Table Talk, Latin
ed., 290, and ed. Aurifaber, 178.) According to Luther the
Church ought not to describe as perfect a life wholly dedicated
to the service of God, nor ought she to call those who desire
to lead such a life “her joy and her crown.”’ Would any king
treat his most loyal and devoted servants thus? About four-
teen hundred years ago Salvianus made a remark that still
holds good: ‘‘Hatred against the religious orders increases
in proportion to the decay of religion among the nations.”
Why does any Catholic enter a monastery? Not in order
to obtain perfect certainty of salvation, for many may go to
perdition in spite of having worn the religious habit. Still
less does he fancy that he will have nothing to do but lead
an easy existence within the monastery walls, paying a merely
external obedience to the rules of the Order; such a life
would be no better than life out in the world. Nor does he
dream of being able henceforth to sell his works of superero-
gation. What pitiful little minds those people must possess
who can invent such charges! No; a Catholic enters a monas-
tery in order to serve God with the greatest possible appli-
cation, in accordance with his own vocation and inclinations,
to tread most faithfully the narrow way that leads to heaven,
to bear his cross, to deny himself, and to follow Christ who
had not where to lay His head, who lived a pure and celibate
life, and for our sake became obedient even unto death.
How does he pass his time in the monastery? In voluntary
poverty, for our Saviour said to the rich young man, “If thou
wilt be perfect, go, sell what thou hast and give to the poor
. and come, follow me” (Matth. xix, 21). He leads a
chaste and frugal life, for Christ said, ‘‘There are eunuchs,
who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of
heaven; he that can take, let him take it” (Matth. xix, 12),
and St. Paul wrote, “‘I would that all men were even as my-
self [i.e., unmarried] . . . Concerning virgins, I have no
commandment of the Lord, but I give counsel,” etc. (see 1


a a a lt
- Se


FAITH AND GOOD WORKS IIs


Cor. vii). Finally every one in a monastery has to deny him-
self and practise absolute obedience to his spiritual superior,
thus becoming like Him who came, not to do His own will,
but the will of Him that sent Him. A soldier swears to be
loyal to his king, and in the same way, after an adequate pro-
bation, a religious binds himself voluntarily by solemn vows
to serve God and observe these three evangelical counsels.

It is enough to mention the Orders founded respectively
by St. Benedict and St. Francis, and the work done by St.
Vincent de Paul, for my readers to acknowledge at once that


the Church, civilization, and human society in general all owe
them a great debt of gratitude. Can a root be bad that pro-


duces such charming and luxurious blossoms of virtue and
purity, such precious fruits of charity, designed to alleviate
every imaginable form of suffering? It is indeed true that
the innumerable servants and handmaids of Christ, who have
devoted all their time and faculties to following their divine
Master’s example, have obtained salvation for many besides
themselves and have stored up a wealth of merit in which
others participate. But neither they nor the Church bar-
gain and trade with their good works. They codperate loyally
with the graces that come to them through Christ’s merits
alone, and they transmit them freely to others. ‘They are like
a fertile field that produces, for the support of the needy, the
fruits that the sun has ripened.

The late Vice-President Sherman, addressing the gradu-
ating class at Nazareth, Michigan, May 18, 1911, said in
part:

“To me the Catholic Sisterhood seems to be one of the
strongest proofs of the existence of a hereafter. I speak not
as a member of the Catholic Church, or a sectarian, or a
member of any religious belief. These noble women have
given up all that they have in this world, their wealth, their
homes, their friends, their hearts, their lives, and have de-
voted all their energies and entire attention to the rearing of
others’ children, to the guiding of youths and to the turning
of mature minds to loftier sentiments with no hope whatever


116 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


of any reward, except that which they hope for in the great
beyond.

“There is no more potent demonstration of the existence
. of God than the work of the Sisters. All praise, all honor to
the great army of the Catholic Sisterhoods!”

Lina Eckenstein, in the preface to her work on Woman
Under Monasticism, says: “The attitude of mind which had
been harbored and cultivated in the cloister, must be reck-
oned among the most civilizing influences which have helped
to develop mental and moral strength in Western Europe.” —


Self-Righteousness


Protestants proceed to say, further, that the ease with which Cath-
olics can do penance and make satisfaction, in conjunction with their
lamentable theory regarding works of supererogation, gives rise on the
one hand to a frivolous spirit that takes God’s commandments and their
fulfilment far too lightly, and, on the other hand, to a self-righteous
arrogance that relies for salvation upon good works of one’s own selection.


A statement such as this makes one wonder whether Prot-
estants ever read the lives of Catholic saints. No one who
had ever done so could produce such a distorted misrep-
resentation of Catholic life and activity. What saint or
preacher ever taught that we might take God’s command-
ments and their fulfilment lightly? Did any saint ever live
in self-righteous arrogance, relying upon good works of his
own selection? An examination of the whole Acta Sanctorum
would not result in the discovery of a single saint of this kind.
There are, unhappily, Catholics who take God’s command-
ments lightly, but even they would hardly imagine themselves
to be on the right road on this account, and it is certain that
Catholicism combats, rather than encourages, self-righteous
arrogance. Professor Harnack, a Protestant theologian,
bears the following testimony to our Church: ‘“Con-
fidence in God, unfeigned humility, certainty of salvation,
and devotion to the service of the brethren are all to be
found in the ‘Catholic Church; numerous brethren take up
the cross of Christ and through the practice of self-condem-


FAITH AND GOOD WORKS 117


nation attain to joy in God, such as Paul and Augustine
experienced.”

It is strange that Protestants are unable to believe in the
existence of really moral virtue and greatness apart from self-
righteousness, and cannot see that striving after perfection
is the necessary condition of all religious life, whereas to
fancy oneself to have reached the climax of perfection would
be to deal it its deathblow.

It is in the Bible that we find the good works enumerated
to which God promises a glorious reward; yet we have been
bitterly reproached for discovering in Holy Scripture any-
thing about duties and rewards. It is a strange fact that the
people who used to cry, ‘‘Down with your false and evil doc-
trine of good works, whereby you flatter yourselves that you
can please God; we glory only in the justice of Christ,” —
these very people now boast of possessing what they once
abused us for having. They must not take it too much amiss ~
if we prefer to adhere to:the old Catholic teaching and refrain
from adopting the new Protestant theory.

To a Catholic the good works recommended in Luther’s
Catechism — for we may disregard his other works — are of a
rather startling character. For instance, the following pas-
sage occurs in his Longer Catechism: ‘‘When nature, as im-
planted in us by God, impels us and is resisted, it is impossible
to live chastely in a state of celibacy.” It may be true enough
that we are poor miserable Christians, subject to the ordi-
nances of men, and so blinded as to need many prayers.
No one can fail to benefit by prayers offered with a good in-
tention, but it is hardly likely that our Protestant fellow
Christians pray much for us; nor do they follow Luther’s
admonition, uttered on his deathbed: ‘Pray for our Lord
God (!) and His Gospel, that it may be well with Him, for the
Council of Trent and the Pope himself are angry with Him”’
(Historie und Predigt des Colius zu Eisleben, 1546). Protes-
tants are more disposed to abuse and hate us than to pray for
us; for instance, in Luther’s ‘prayer’? (Sdmtl. Werke, Erl.,
Xxv, 107) occur the words, “Ii I am to say, ‘ Hallowed be


118 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


Thy Name,’ I must add, ‘Accursed, damned, and dishonoured
be the names of papists.’ If I am to say, ‘Thy kingdom
come,’ I must add, ‘Accursed, damned, and destroyed be the
papacy.’ This is the prayer that I offer unceasingly with
heart and voice every day.”

It must be acknowledged, moreover, that this proposal to
pray for us savours somewhat of the prayer mentioned in
Luke xviii, 11. We poor publicans are first abused as blind
and deluded people who fancy ourselves able to help others
by our works of supererogation, and in the same breath our
opponents tell us that they propose to help us by means of
intercessory prayer on our behalf, such prayer being a work
of supererogation!


VI. THE VENERATION OF SAINTS


The Pretestant Assertion. According to Roman Catholic doctrine,
it is a duty to invoke the saints, to have recourse to their help and in-
tercession, to regard their relics as sacred, and to show suitable honour
to their statues and pictures. Roman Catholics are taught to rely
particularly upon the Mother of Jesus Christ, who is called the Queen
of Heaven and Ruler of the World, and who is believed to have been,
from her birth onwards, uncontaminated with original sin. It is a duty
to’ kneel in prayer to this Queen of Heaven and to others, whom the
Catholic Church has raised to the dignity of saints, and to expect help
andthe cure of disease at places where their relics are preserved, or
even from miraculous medals and statues of Mary.


The Catholic Reply. 1. The Catholic Church does not
teach that we must invoke the saints, but only that we may
do so, and that it is a good and beneficial practice, because
we rely upon reason and Holy Scripture and believe that the
saints take an interest in their brethren here on earth (Luke
xv, 10) and pray for them (2 Mach. xv, 14). 2. As to the
Mother of Jesus Christ, whom we are supposed to worship
as a divine person and as our only Redeemer, we are indeed
taught to put great confidence in her, but we rely chiefly on
her divine Son. We trust that Mary, the much loved Mother
of God, will intercede for us, but we know that Jesus alone
can save us. 3. If the Apostles of Christ are to be rulers and
judges in His kingdom, without detriment to His honour,
there can be no harm in calling the Mother of our heavenly
King Queen and ruler of heaven; we do so in a childlike spirit
of reverence, and every Catholic understands what is meant.
4. That Mary was conceived without original sin is only the
necessary result of her position in the scheme of our redemp-
tion. The contrary opinion has never prevailed among
Christians. 5. The Catholic Church does not raise the dead
to the dignity of saints, but, after a long and careful investi-


120 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


gation, she allows us to venerate as holy some of her mem-
bers whom God Himself has sanctified. 6. With regard to
statues and pictures, the Council of Trent decided that due
honour should be shown them; not that we believe there to
be anything divine about them, nor that we ought to rely
upon them, but simply because in honouring them we wor-
ship Christ and testify our reverence for the saints.

Charles Kingsley wrote: ‘‘Why should not those who are
gone to the Lord beactually nearer us, not farther from us, in the


heavenly world; praying for us, and it may be influencing and —


guiding us in a hundred ways, of which we, in our prison-house
of mortality,can not dream?” (Letters and Memories, II, 264).


According to Protestant Doctrine it is proper to respect the memory of
good and holy persons, and especially of our Lord’s Mother; we may
consider how they died and imitate their faith, but nowhere in Holy
Scripture are we told to address any petition to a departed saint; we
ought rather to have recourse to Jesus Christ, the one Mediator between
God and man (1 Tim. ii, 5), who is able to hear us and promises that He
will not cast out those who come to Him (John vi, 37).


The Catholic Reply. The first part of the preceding para-
graph states the Catholic practice with regard to the saints.
If in addition to honouring them we ask their intercession,
we do so in reliance upon the words of Holy Scripture, where
we read that “the continual prayer of a just man availeth
much” (James v, 16). St. Paul had no intention of denying
that Christ was the only Mediator between God and man
when he asked his converts to pray for him (e.g., 1 Thess. v,
25), nor has the Catholic who now asks some saint to inter-
cede for him any idea of denying it. He distrusts his own
worthiness, but not God’s omnipotence and mercy.


COMMENTARY


The Catholic doctrine on the subject of invocation of the saints is said
to encourage their worship, which is detrimental to God’s glory and to
that of our only Mediator, Jesus Christ.


Hence the explicit statement made by the Council of Trent,
and reproduced in all Catholic books of instruction, is as-


THE VENERATION OF SAINTS 121


sumed to have no weight. Asa matter of fact, the veneration
that we pay to the saints, and especially to the dear Mother
of God, ought to lead us to Christ and not away from Him.
The saints are the choicest fruits of His redeeming Blood;
they are His friends and loyal servants; and now in heaven
they love their fellow servants as ardently as they did on
earth. Hence we honour them and ask their prayers, knowing
well that both our reverence for them and their intercession
for us are results of the reconciliation effected by Jesus Christ
who unites all the redeemed in the bond of brotherhood.
This is why in all her prayers, even when she invokes the in-
tercession of the saints, the Church invariably turns to God
Himself, and concludes with the words, “Through Jesus
Christ our Lord.” Protestants would have to lay aside one
of their most effectual weapons against us, were they to rec-
ognize the truth on this subject, and perceive that the Cath-
olic Church honours, loves, and adores Jesus Christ as the
one Mediator, whereas by many Protestants, even by preach-
ers and professors, He is now no longer regarded as divine,
and is hardly honoured as a saint. This fact is enough to
prove that the veneration of saints, practised in the Catholic
Church, has not, in the course of nineteen centuries, led that
Church away from Christ. Worthy Protestants are not al-
lowed to know all this, and over and over again, in Sunday
schools and from the pulpit, they are told that we Catholics
deprive Christ of the honour due to Him, that we worship
idols and pray to the saints and to Mary. Very few converts
to Catholicism escape having remarks of this kind thrust
upon them.

Dr. Schaff says: “To say that Papists are idolators is a
colossal slander on the oldest and largest Church in Christen-
dom, and is untrue, unjust, uncharitable and unchristian”’
(Creed Revisions, p. 36).


The Veneration of Mary


Protestants maintain that in invoking Mary we infringe upon the
honour of God. In the Roman Breviary Mary is addressed thus: ‘“‘Thou


122 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


art the only hope of sinners, through thee we hope for forgiveness of our
offences, in thee we have the fullest hope of reward.’’ (The beautiful
old hymn Ave Maris stella is quoted in support of the Protestant charges,
in spite of its containing the words: Swmat per te preces, Qui pro nobis
natus, Tulit esse tuus.) Moreover Catholics speak of Mary as ‘“‘Queen of
all creatures,’ ‘‘Eternal source of healing,” ‘‘ Refuge for all who have
recourse to her.”?’ A Roman Catholic priest must suggest to a dying man
the following ejaculations: “Into Thy hands I commend my spirit;
Lord Jesus, receive my soul. Holy Mary, pray for me; Mary, Mother
of grace and Mother of mercy, do thou defend me from the enemy, and
receive me at the hour of death.”

' Ever since the time of the Council of Trent, Mariolatry has been
increasing and culminated under Pius TX who declared: ‘‘Our salva-
tion rests upon the holy Virgin, since God deposited in her all the fulness
of good, so that, if any hope and any spiritual healing exist for us, we
receive them solely and alone from her.’”’ A Protestant, hearing these
words, asks with a sigh what has become of our Saviour.


We, who still believe in our Saviour, feel inclined to ask in
our turn, “From whom did we receive Him? From whom
have we derived all our information regarding His wonderful
conception and birth? Was it not from her through whom
our heavenly Father bestowed Him upon us sinners? He
rested on the lap of His virgin Mother both in the stable at
Bethlehem and at the foot of the cross.”?> We might almost
go so far as to ask, ““What becomes of our Saviour among
those who refuse to honour Mary as the virgin Mother of
God? Does He not lose, in consequence of their refusal, the
divine honour that is His due?” In hymns and the pious
effusions of devout souls, it is true that expressions occur
which must be understood according to the spirit in which
they are written, but in the Roman Breviary and Missal
there is not a single prayer addressed to any saint or to the
Blessed Virgin personally. All are addressed to God, and all
are petitions for the graces which Christ alone merited on our
behalf. For instance, the prayer said at the Angelus is:
“Pour forth, O Lord, Thy grace into our hearts, that we, to
whom the incarnation of Christ Thy Son was made known by
the message of an angel, may, by His Passion and Cross, be
brought to the glory of His resurrection, through the same
Christ our Lord.”’ On the feast of the Immaculate Concep-


THE VENERATION OF SAINTS 523


tion the Church prays: “‘O God, who by the Virgin’s Immac-
ulate Conception didst prepare a worthy dwelling for Thy
Son, we beseech Thee, that Thou, who by the death of that
same Son of Thine, foreseen by Thee, didst preserve her from
every stain, wouldst grant that by her intercession we also
may be purified, and so come to Thee. Through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord.” This is the prayer used on a great
festival in honour of our Lady, and throughout it refers to
Christ; how is it then possible to ask, “‘What has become of
our Saviour?”

We are told that ever since the time of the Council of
Trent Mariolatry has been increasing, and culminated under
Pius IX. Protestants ought to realize that Mariolatry began
with the angel’s salutation, and cannot rise to any higher point
than was reached when God, in His gracious design, chose
Mary to be the Mother of our Lord. It is worth while per-
haps to quote what Luther says in his exposition of the Mag-
nificat: ‘‘Thesé great things were that Mary had become
Mother of God, and when this took place so many great fa-
vours were conferred upon her that no one can understand
them. For there resulted from it all the honour and glory that
she alone of the whole human race is exalted above all others
[may we not call such a person ‘‘Queen” over all the rest?]
and none is equal to her, and that she has one Son in common
with our heavenly Father, and such a Son! When we speak
of her as Mother of God, no one could say anything greater
of her or to her, not though he had as many tongues as there
are leaves and blades of grass, stars in heaven and grains of
sand on the seashore.”’

Preaching in the Collegiate Baptist Church in New York,
in 1912, Rev. Dr. Oscar Haywood said that there had been
mischievous reactions in religious thought since the Reforma-
tion. ‘“‘Oneof those,” hesaid, ‘‘hasresultedin the creation of a
prejudice with respect to the Holy Virgin. Her name is rarely
mentioned in a Protestant Church. We have dispossessed
her of that honour and glory which is hers by divine right.”’

The Western Christian Advocate (Methodist) likewise de-


124 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


plores this dethronement of Mary: ‘We cannot recall ever
having heard a sermon preached from our Protestant pulpits
upon the character of Mary, and the subject would seem al-
most to be tabooed, lest the preacher be misunderstood. Mary
of Nazareth is scarcely mentioned even in any list of the
world’s greatest women, and yet she gave birth to the world’s
Redeemer, watched over His infancy, trained Him in boy-
hood when He was subject to His parents, and it was in her
home that Jesus lived. .. . Why should not Protestants,
then, look upon her as a type and representative of the high-
est and holiest womanhood?”

Long centuries before the Council of Trent, the liturgy of _
St. James was in use in Jerusalem, and it contained the fol-
lowing prayer uttered by the priest: ‘“‘O Mother of our Lord
Jesus Christ, intercede for me with thine only Son, that He
may pardon my sins, and accept this sacrifice offered by my
sinful hands.”” The Fathers of the Church vie with one an-
other in honouring the Mother of God, and the invocations in
the Breviary, to which Protestants object so strongly, are
extremely ancient. In the name of all the bishops assem-
bled at the Council of Ephesus in 431, St. Cyril addressed a
prayer to our Lady, in which he called her “the venerable
jewel of the whole world, the support of the true faith, the
firm foundation of all churches, the Mother of God, through
whom the entire universe attains to a knowledge of the
truth,” etc. St. Bernard gives a beautiful explanation of
our reason for calling Mary the Star of the Sea.

How deep, tender, and true is our love of Mary! In her
honour poetry has produced its choicest blossoms and art its
masterpieces. We shall never allow carping criticism to
diminish our devotion to her, for we are convinced that
those who attempt to rob us of Mary the Mother, would in
the end deprive us also of Christ her divine Son. St. Bernard
was never weary of praising our Lady, but did he on that
account think little of our Lord? No, it was he who extolled
the sacred Name of Jesus in the sweetest strains. St. Athana-
sius stands almost unrivalled in his triumphant defence of


THE VENERATION OF SAINTS 125


the divinity of Christ by word of mouth and in writing,
amidst indescribable sufferings, and his love and enthu-
siasm for our Saviour were not diminished by his profound
reverence for the Mother of God. All the great doctors,
saints, and heroes of antiquity loved and praised, honoured
and invoked Mary the immaculate Mother, but they did not
therefore forget Christ. It would be well if at the present
day our Saviour were known, loved, and served as He was
in the past by those who reverenced His dear Mother most
deeply. Protestants need not ask us what has become of
our Saviour; we are in good company and on the right path
whenever we say an Ave Maria.

John Ruskin was sensible of the gracious influence of “‘the
Madonna” on the lives and characters of women: “I am
persuaded that the worship of the Madonna has been one
of the noblest and most vital graces, and has never been
otherwise than productive of true holiness of life and purity
of character” (Fors Clavigera, II, Letter XLI).


The Immaculate Conception


We are told further that Pius IX raised the theory of our Lady’s
Immaculate Conception to the rank of a dogma of the Catholic Church,
but travellers to Rome, even during the reign of his predecessor, had
opportunity to convince themselves that festivals in honour of Mary
were observed with as much or even more splendour and solemnity as
the greatest Christian holidays.


The contrast emphasized in this statement is rather ob-
scure. Of course festivals in honour of our Lady were ob-
served in Rome before 1854; they were observed even more
than a thousand years before that date. It is certain that the
feast of the Annunciation was observed in 656 as “the feast
of the Blessed Virgin,” and it is highly probable that the
feast of the Immaculate Conception was celebrated about
that period (Marténe, de antiq. eccl. rit., III, 557). It is also
true that in Rome festivals are observed with more splendour
than the greatest Christian festivals in Protestant churches.
Do Protestants suppose that on such occasions Catholics


126 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


-never think of Christ, and kneel in adoration of Mary
alone? If a Protestant, who abhors every kind of Catholic
festival, asserts that feasts of our Lady were observed in
Rome during the reign of Pius IX’s predecessor with even
more splendour than the greatest Christian holidays, such
an assertion leads to nothing, although it may perhaps in-
tensify the belief, carefully fostered in young Protestants, that
Roman Catholics are idolaters.

On December 8, 1854, amidst the enthusiastic applause of
the Catholic Church, the dogma of the Immaculate Concep-
tion was solemnly defined by Pius IX, who proclaimed as a
revealed truth, consistent with Holy Scripture and tradition,
what had previously been only a matter of pious belief, al-
though long investigations had resulted in establishing its
truth, and Catholics had at all times felt that any contrary
opinion was untenable. The definition of this dogma did not
cause any Catholic to waver in his faith in Christ as our only
Mediator, nor did it make any one rely less upon our Lord’s
merits. So far from this dogma being derogatory to the
honour of Christ, it increases the glory of Him who, by His
precious Blood alone, purchased this signal favour for His
Mother. Ten years after his revolt against the Church,
Luther still believed in the Immaculate Conception of Mary,
for he wrote: ‘Other human beings are conceived in sin, but
Mary was conceived full of grace. The angel could not have
said, ‘Blessed art thou,’ if she had ever lain under the
curse’? (Walch, II, 2616).

‘If in any place veneration of the saints is put on a level
with the service of God, and if the homage due to God alone
is offered to a saint, this is not the result of the Catholic
faith but in direct opposition to it; and to condemn such prac-
tices is right and praiseworthy. They do not occur, however,
among properly instructed Catholics.


Relics of the Saints


With regard to the veneration of relics Protestants remind us that
their genuineness is often called in question, as in the case of the Holy


a
THE VENERATION OF SAINTS 127


Coat. Yet it is notorious that people come in thousands to visit such
relics, especially at the times when special indulgences are granted to
pilgrims. .


People are always fond of honouring the memory of great
and popular persons. ‘They reverence Luther’s Bible, for
which the Emperor Leopold paid one hundred and fify pounds
in order to display his partiality for the Lutheran party. But
we are discussing the relics of Christians who were remarkable
for sanctity displayed in the service of God; we need not con-
cern ourselves with Lutheran relics. We read in one of the ear-
liest Christian records, the account of the martyrdom of St.
Ignatius (about 110.A.D.), that thesaint’s bones were wrapped
in linen and preserved as a priceless treasure. St. Augustine
tells us of many miracles that took place at the tombs of the
martyrs, and similar marvels have recurred in every age of the
Church. In the Bible we read that contact with the bones of
Eliseus restored a dead man to life (4 Kings xiii, 21), and that
when handkerchiefs and aprons belonging to St. Paul were
brought to the sick, their diseases departed from them (Acts
xix, 12). St. Peter’s very shadow delivered the sick from their
infirmities (Acts v, 15), and Luther himself asked, ‘‘Who
can challenge the fact that God works miracles through the
names of His saints?” (Unterricht, Wittenb. ed., VII, 7 b.)

The editor of the Methodist periodical, the Christian
Herald, tells a correspondent (Dec. 20, 1911) that “to assume
that the day of miracles is past, would be to assume that the
Divine power is shortened.”

We know of course that some relics are spurious or of
doubtful authenticity, but this no more affects the venera-
tion of relics than the fact that there is bad money inter-
feres with the circulation of good coin.

Protestants say that the common popular belief ascribes to relics,
and to miraculous representations of our Lady, the same sort of power
as the ancient Greeks and Romans ascribed to the statues of their gods.
The Council of Trent forbade any one to assume that statues and pic-
tures possess miraculous powers, but the authorities of the Catholic


Church allow pilgrimages to statues of Mary in churches under their
control. More than once eminent men in the Catholic Church, on


128 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


hearing of miracles ascribed to such figures, have suggested, though
unsuccessfully, that there might be some codperation of diabolical forces.
Nevertheless, the Popes have invariably taken churches containing
such statues under their protection, and have gone so far at least as to
say that the holy Mother of God permits her wonders to be seen there.
Finally we are told that weeping, moving, and miraculous statues con-
tinue to attract the poor and ignorant whose pastors fail to warn them
against such things, and thousands still make pilgrimages in order to
pray to them.


We may perhaps express our regret that poor ignorant
Protestants still continue to be encouraged by their pastors
to look upon Catholics, not merely as idolaters but actually
as devil-worshippers. Eminent Catholics have suggested —
or so it is said — that the devil haunts places of pilgrimage,
making statues of our Lady move and weep, and even working
miracles in front of them. Yet we bend the knee before
him and adore him present in the statues; we may not real-
ize what we are doing, but we are practically acting like the
pagans of old. Protestants persist in saying that the statue
of our Lady at Einsiedeln can be set in motion by means of
wires; the statement may be disproved a thousand times,
but still they believe it.

The great French preacher Bourdaloue (Pensées div. sur
la fot) speaks of people who oppose religion by raising objec-
tions of this kind, continually copying and repeating the
charges brought forward by others, and imagining that their
assertions will effect our downfall. Such people show, he says,
their inability to venture upon a serious attack on religion.
Some point of no importance, not affecting our religion as a
whole, is singled out for attack; it may be some devotional
exercise, some ceremony, or custom that attracts their
notice, and that might and would be altered at once if it really
endangered our faith in God and our hope in our Redeemer.
Against this comparative trifle they expend all their efforts
and eloquence. Our religion undoubtedly rests on a sure foun-
dation, since men dare to attack it only from a safe distance.

The Catholic doctrine regarding statues and pictures and
the honour paid to them was enunciated very clearly by the


THE VENERATION OF SAINTS 120


Council of Trent, which forbade us to believe that there is in
them anything divine, or any force for the sake of which we
venerate them. The Council ordered us not to expect fa-
vours from them nor to rely on them, but to give all the
honour to those whom they represent. This is the doctrine
of the Catholic Church. Where are the weeping, moving, and
wonder-working statues? Has any one ever seen them?
Protestants accuse us of going in hundreds of thousands to
visit them, but we Catholics should be at a loss to say where
one such statue exists.


Pilgrimages


Pilgrimages are not ordered by the Church, but are the
outcome of a\sentiment common to mankind, and maybe
productive of much good if they are performed in a proper
spirit.

It is a fact that there are places privileged by nature, and
possessing health-giving waters and a salubrious climate.
It is also a fact that there are places that exercise a kind of
spiritual attraction, so that a Christian believes that he can
pray there better than elsewhere, either because he can con-
template some venerable picture, or because he will enjoy
unusual calm and opportunity for recollection, or because
he will find there some experienced counsellor to advise him.

Do not lovers of art make pilgrimages to places where their
artistic sense 1s stimulated and gratified? Has not the house
formerly occupied by some great poet power to attract his
admirers? Why may not Catholics be allowed to seek spirit-
ual refreshment at their places of pilgrimage? And why can-
not the authorities be trusted to take care that this ancient
Christian custom does not degenerate into superstition?
Whether Protestants believe it or not, God alone is the object
of all worship at our places of pilgrimage, and it is scandalous
that those, who profess to be Christians like ourselves, should
speak of Catholics as idolaters.

What does Luther say of the part played by the devil in
his own work? He tells us that he licked more than one block


130 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


of salt with the devil (Sermon, ‘‘Reminiscence’’), and that the
devil slept with him more frequently than his wife (Table
Talk, {. 158). He learned how to abolish the holy Sacrifice
of the Mass from no one but the devil himself (Op. Jen., VI,
f. 82). When the devil reproached him with his sins, Luther
sent him away, saying, “My dear devil, pray for me, and
others in similar temptations shall also say, ‘Holy devil, pray
for us’” (Table Talk, 286, 287, Frankf., f. 289, 292). In one
short work written against the Duke of Brunswick, Luther
mentions the devil one hundred and forty-six times.
Finally, before leaving the subject, we may perhaps point
out that many who object to our veneration of saints are
impelled to do so, not so much by zeal for Christ’s honour as
by a kind of jealousy due to the fact that Protestantism pro-
duces no saints. Lavater, one of the shining lights of the
Protestant Church, in writing to L. von Stolberg, a convert
to Catholicism, says: “‘ You have saints, I admit, and we have
none, or at least none like yours,’ Gregorovius, a famous
Protestant historian, says (Rom. Tagebuch): “‘They stand in
admiration before those giants of Catholicism, the saints,
but they do not ask how it comes to pass that Protestantism
produces none. They suspect the mysterious depth and force
of Catholicism, but they are afraid to come too near it; and
so they pass it by with a timid and wistful glance. They


gloat over the ages of decadence, for then they can look .


shocked as they speak of the corruption of the papacy, for
nothing of the sort occurs in their midst. From the height of
their shallow and pitiful moralism, devoid of all strength
and stability, they pronounce their charitable judgment in
which as a rule they declare that they will be quite satisfied
and at ease, if only the Church is completely destroyed.”


VII. THE SACRAMENTS


The Protestant Assertion. With regard to the Holy Eucharist, Protes-
tants differ from Catholics on three important points, and condemn the
papal doctrines on the subject of: transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of
the Mass, and Communion in one kind.


The Catholic Reply. ‘These are not merely papal doctrines
that are condemned by Protestants, but the plain teaching of
Jesus Christ Himself to which all Christians adhered prior
to the Reformation. The Reformers substituted their own
human views and doctrines, that are in many cases contradic-
tory, for the word of God is handed down from antiquity.
The Catholic Church simply accepts our Lord’s words,
“This is my Body,” whereas Protestants assign all sorts of
artificial meanings to them.


The Protestant Assertion. The Roman Catholic Church teaches
with regard to transubstantiation that when the priest utters the words
of consecration over the host and the chalice, the bread and wine are
changed into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, so that their sub-
stance is completely altered. This change is called transubstantiation;
it accounts for the care and reverence displayed in touching the con
secrated host.


The Catholic Reply. The Catholic Church simply accepts
our Lord’s words, “‘This is my Body.” She believes that by
His almighty word Christ changed the bread into His holy
Body and the wine into His holy Blood, and that He gave His
Apostles power to do the same. Hence, when we adore the
Blessed Sacrament, we certainly do not worship bread but
Christ, who is truly, really, and substantially present under
the species of bread.


The Protestant Churches teach, on the other hand, that at Holy Com-
munion the true Body and Blood of Christ are received together with


132 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


the bread and wine, as St. Paul says in 1 Cor. x, 16. Therefore in Holy
Communion the bread and wine are not mere appearances, deceiving the
senses, but they are true, visible signs with which the invisible gift of
the Body and Blood of Christ is bestowed. If we receive them with con-
trite and believing hearts, we obtain remission of sins and everlasting
life (Matth. xxvi, 28; John vi, 51, 54).


The Catholic Reply. As Christ did not say, “This bread is
my Body,” we cannot believe that what He held in His hands
after saying “‘This is my Body” was still bread, but it was
truly His Body under the form of bread. Luther’s interpre-
tation is contrary to the words of Holy Scripture, and to the
belief of all Christendom before his time. St. Paul’s words in
1 Cor. x do not admit of any other interpretation than that
assigned to them by all Christians unanimously during the
first fifteen centuries of the Church’s existence. It is not the
wine but the chalice that St. Paul calls ‘the communion of
the blood of Christ.’”’ When he says that the bread which we
break is the partaking of the Body of the Lord, he means the
food that we receive; he does not mean that the substance of
bread is still really present. In the same way the Catholic
Church calls the consecrated host “bread of heaven,” with-
out meaning that it is really still bread.


With regard to the Sacrifice of the Mass, Protestants think that the
doctrine of the Catholic Church is this: When the priest, by uttering
the words of consecration, has effected the transubstantiation of the
bread and wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, he can offer them
daily to God as an atoning sacrifice, and thus obtain forgiveness of sin
both for the living and for the souls in purgatory.


The Catholic Reply. No, the Church does not teach that
the priest can sacrifice the bread to God after transubstantia-
tion has taken place. The Catholic doctrine is that the priest
at the altar does precisely what Christ did in the Cenaculum, and
what He ordered His Apostles to do, viz., he pronounces the
words of consecration that effect transubstantiation, he offers
a sacrifice and at the same time he prepares food for our souls.


Protestants often make the following assertion: We read in the
New Testament of thank offerings which all Christians, being a priestly


THE SACRAMENTS 133


nation, ought to make to Almighty God; but we read of only one aton-
ing sacrifice, offered by our Lord when He died on the Cross (Hebr. ix,
28). This sacrifice was made once for all, and therefore there is no
need of any other, “for by one oblation He hath perfected for ever
them that are sanctified’? (Hebr. x, 14). Hence we cannot admit that
there is any other sacrifice offered in the Church.


The Catholic Reply. The Catholic Church has not insti-
tuted another new sacrifice over and above the one atoning
sacrifice offered by Jesus Christ, but she carries out His in-
structions and continues His work as she has done ever since
the time of the Apostles. Sacrifice is an essential part of this
work, and we read that the Church of the New Testament also
possesses an altar (Hebr. xiii, 10). Luther and his followers
abolished the offering of Holy Mass, but their action does not
affect the Catholic.Church, and she continues to offer it be-
cause Christ ordered her to do so and according to His in-
stitution (cf. Luke xxii, 109).


Protestants believe that the Catholic rule regarding the administration
of Holy Communion is that the officiating priest may drink the conse-
crated wine but may not give it to the laity.


The Catholic Reply. All that the Catholic Church teaches on
the subject is that the laity, and also priests who are not offer-
ing the holy sacrifice, are not bound by any divine obligation
to communicate under both kinds. As Christ is present,
whole and undivided, under one species, he who receives
under one kind only is not deprived of any grace necessary
to salvation. The rule that Holy Communion should be
administered only under the form of bread was laid down by
the Catholic Church for practical reasons, and might be al-
tered, provided that the faith in the Real Presence of Christ
remained unaffected.


Protestants argue that at the Last Supper our Lord said, “‘Drink ye
all of this,’’ hence they feel bound to adhere to this rule, believing that
thus only they can receive the full benefit of this holy feast. The early
Christians used to receive the chalice, and it was only by an unwarrant-
able exercise of power and after many struggles that the Popes deprived
the laity of this privilege.


134 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


The Catholic Reply. Our Lord’s words were addressed only
to the Apostles. Both our Saviour Himself (John vi) and St.
Paul (1 Cor. xi, 27) ascribed the beneficial effect of the Holy
Sacrament to eating the Lord’s Body alone. The early Chris-
tians were undoubtedly accustomed to receive the conse-
crated chalice, but they did not believe that thus only they
could enjoy the full benefit of the sacrament. Conflicts arose,
not because Catholics protested against being deprived of
the chalice by the Popes, but because some people made the
withholding of the chalice a pretext for their rebellion against
the Church.


COMMENTARY


The teaching of the Catholic Church on the subject of the
Sacrifice of the Mass and the transubstantiation that takes
place during it, is fully in harmony with Holy Scripture and
with oral tradition. Jesus Christ Himself.spoke of His Body
as given or sacrificed and of His Blood as shed for sinners.
Hence even at the Last Supper He offered a true sacrifice in
the Holy Sacrament. The Apostles taught that this was so,
and there is still extant a work dating from the first or second
century in which there is an allusion to the sacrifice on the
Lord’s day; cf. also St. Cyril of Alexandria and others. We
still have sacrificial prayers dating from the earliest ages of
Christianity, and in no Church before Luther’s was the
sacrifice ever denied, nor is there any record of any one
having newly introduced the Sacrifice of the Mass. Weare
in complete conformity with the will of Christ, as it was
understood and carried out by the Apostles.

The holy Sacrifice of the Mass cannot detract from the
merit of the Sacrifice of the Cross because the two sacrifices
are essentially the same. The words of a preacher do not
detract from the words of Christ, the sole Teacher of truth,
for a preacher who is commissioned by Christ and teaches in
His spirit, proclaims the same doctrine as Christ proclaimed
on earth, which can reach us only through the agency of men.
In the same way the sacrifice offered by the priest in the name


THE SACRAMENTS 135


and by the authority of Christ, brings vividly before us, chil-
dren of a later age, the sacrifice offered by Christ, and the
channel of graces once merited by Him is opened to us afresh
every day. No Catholic has ever believed or taught that
even the smallest grace for either the living or the dead is
merited by the priest’s actions at the altar of themselves. It
is through the priest’s agency that the words of Christ reach
each individual in his congregation, and yet Christ remains
the way, the truth, and the life; similarly it is also through
the priest’s agency that the one great atoning sacrifice of the
New Testament, with all its wealth of grace, is brought into
contact with individuals, although Christ is still the one high
priest and the perfect sacrifice. We preach no other doctrine
than Christ crucified, and we offer no other sacrifice than
Christ, to the Jews a stumbling block and to the Gentiles folly.


Sacraments and Blessings


Protestantism teaches that Christ instituted two sacraments, Baptism
and the Lord’s Supper, in which He bestows on us invisible heavenly
gifts together with the visible signs. The Catholic Church, according to
Protestants, looks upon sacraments in another light, and since the year
1439 she has reckoned seven sacraments, as well as various forms of
blessing (benedictiones) to which scarcely less efficacy is ascribed than
to the sacraments themselves. The importance of Baptism and the
Lord’s Supper is not sufficiently emphasized.


A statement of this kind certainly suggests that Protestants
value their two sacraments far more highly than Catholics
value their seven. It does not convey a correct idea of the
Catholic doctrine regarding the sacraments, and what is de-
scribed as the Protestant theory is really the old Catholic
belief, which Luther did his utmost to overthrow. ‘Our defi-
nition of a sacrament is: “A sacrament is an outward sign
of inward grace, ordained by Jesus Christ, by which grace is
given to our souls.’’ Luther on the contrary declared: ‘‘It is
not true that there is in the sacraments any power to justify,
nor that they are signs accompanied by any grace” (de capt.
babyl., Wittenb., Lat. ed., II, 75). When the Pope clearly
stated the Catholic doctrine on the subject of sacraments,


136 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


Luther said: “All the articles condemned by the bull are ac-
cepted by me, and I maintain that every Christian, who is
to avoid everlasting damnation, must accept these articles,
and all that refuse to do so, ought to be looked upon as Anti-
christs, and I now look upon them as pagans” (Wittenb., Ger-
man ed., VII, 88). In the same dissertation against the papal
bull (f. 97 b) Luther says: “There is no difference between
old and new sacraments, and neither the one nor the other
can convey God’s grace; nothing but faith in God’s signs and
words gave grace in the past and still gives it now.”’ It is true
that Luther and Melanchthon, who followed him on this as
on other points, subsequently expressed views approximating
more closely to Catholic doctrine, and later Lutherans as a
rule regarded the sacraments as channels of grace, although
their Protestant prejudice did not allow them to acknowledge
that they had returned to the Catholic doctrine. Conse-
quently they are now continually obliged to discover points
of difference, and first to misrepresent the teaching of the
Catholic Church in order to be able to oppose her with teach-
ing that was originally her own.

It is not true to say that seven sacraments have been rec-
ognized only since the year 1439. As early as 1140, Peter the
Lombard wrote a detailed discussion of the seven sacra-
ments which he regarded as dating from primitive times,
and not a voice was raised in protest against his views. The
Oriental Churches all recognized seven sacraments, and their
unvarying tradition affords very strong evidence in support of
them. Any one who can say that the Catholic Church has
possessed seven sacraments only since the year 1439, shows
his profound ignorance of Christian antiquity, unless indeed
he is deliberately concealing and distorting the truth.

Even if the acts of the Council of Florence, held in 14309,
contained the earliest list of the seven sacraments, it would
not at all follow that they had not existed long before. Has
man possessed five senses only since the year in which, for the
first time, these five senses were enumerated in their usual
order? No one hitherto has been able to show that any one


THE SACRAMENTS 137


of the seven sacraments was instituted by some Pope, bishop,
or council; in the whole history of the Church we hear of no
quarrels or differences of opinion such as would inevitably
have occurred if any one had attempted to introduce a new
sacrament, for it would have had a deep effect upon practical
life. To this subject, as to others, we may apply St. Augus-
tine’s well-known words (de bapt., IV, 24): ‘What the entire
Church has always upheld, and what has not been introduced
by Councils, is rightly regarded as handed down by the au-
thority of the Apostles.”

It is a strange idea that the importance of Baptism and
the Lord’s Supper cannot be sufficiently emphasized if we
have five other sacraments in addition to them. Our Saviour
was certainly not bound to institute any particular number
of channels of grace, but if He chose to institute seven in
order to satisfy the various needs of a soul desirous of salva-
tion, how can any man dare to reject some of these chan-
nels and to attach peculiar importance to others? Is it,
however, true that Protestants value Baptism and the Lord’s
Supper more highly than we do? If such were the case, we
should have less reason to fear that Baptism, as adminis-
tered by many Protestant ministers, is absolutely invalid.
We Catholics well know the worth and sacred character of the
various means of grace. Protestants need but to question
any Catholic child, and they will at once be told which is the
greatest and which the most indispensable sacrament, and
which sacraments are intended for all men, which only for
certain individuals.

To say that we ascribe to the blessings (benedictiones) of the
Church an efficacy equal to that of the sacraments, is to re-
peat one of the old calumnies against things Catholic which
Protestants either do not or will not understand.

Protestants are taught that by benedictiones we do not mean merely
prayers and blessings used on particular occasions, but more especially
blessings pronounced over all sorts of things ecclesiastical and domestic,
such as vestments, altar cloths, candles, water, salt, edibles, oil, etc.,


and they believe all this to be contrary to Holy Scripture. They main-
tain that it is unscriptural to pray, when bread is blessed, that God


138: THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


will render it wholesome for body and soul, and make it a protection ©
against all diseases and all assaults of our foes. It is unscriptural to
conjure the oil, in the name of God, our Almighty Creator, that by its
means all the violence of the enemy, all the hosts of the devil, all the
attacks and apparitions of Satan may be expelled and overcome. It is
unscriptural to ascribe to holy water power to drive out the devil and
his angels, sickness and pestilence and evil passions, and to give this
water to people that they may sprinkle it upon the sick, and their houses,
fields, vineyards, and beds. All this is contrary to St. Paul’s words,
“All that is not of faith is sin”? (Rom. xiv, 23). Experience proves that
such practices, being of human invention, not only give rise to a false
and dangerous kind of religion, but actually deter those who occupy
themselves with them from attending to God’s divine institutions.


‘All that is not of faith is sin,’’ and whatever is not based
on the word of God is not of faith and consequently an abuse!
We are inclined to ask in astonishment, Did not Christ bless
bread and fishes? (Matth. xiv, 19.) Did He not give His
Apostles power to heal sicknesses and to cast out devils?
(Mark iii, 15), and did not they use oil (James v, 14) and the
laying on of hands? (Mark xvi, 18.) Were these not outward
ceremonies? What is there unscriptural in asking God to
bless the things in daily use and those who employ them,
since ‘‘every creature of God . . . is sanctified by the word
of God and prayer” (1 Tim. iv, 4, 5)? We consider it to be
quite in keeping with God’s ordinance, according to which the
spirit of man, whilst it dwells in his visible body, can be hin-
dered and helped by visible things. .

Thus Tobias was cured by the gall of the fish, and Naaman
by washing seven times in the Jordan. In the primitive
Church Christians were in the habit of sanctifying themselves
and things in daily use, especially bread, water, and oil, by
blessings and prayers in the name of God (e.g., Cyprian, Ep.
gO, N23) Basil, de spir.S., c) 27).

The blessings of the Church do not prevent Catholics from
attending to things that are of divine institution, viz., the
holy sacraments. Who would refrain from going to confes-
sion or Holy Communion because he uses holy water? Things
blessed by the Church are intended to lead the faithful to
God, the giver of all good, not to separate them from Him.


THE SACRAMENTS 139


They ought to be used in such a way as really to convey a
blessing to both body and soul.

As to the power exercised by the Church over evil spirits,
we believe that it is quite scriptural (Matth. x, 1, etc.).
Some kind of formula and visible sign is indispensable to the
Church, but she relies chiefly upon prayer in the name of
Jesus Christ, and upon confidence in His promises and His
abiding and living presence in His holy Church.


Confirmation


Protestants tell us that in their opinion Confirmation, though not
instituted by Christ, is nevertheless an edifying Christian rite, so it is
administered in their Church with most beneficial effects. The young
who are being prepared to recéive the Lord’s Supper for the first time,
are reminded by it of their baptismal contract, they publicly profess
their faith, and are solemnly admonished and pledged to be loyal towards
their Creator, Redeemer, and Comforter, and then, according to Apos-
tolic precedent, they are blessed by the laying on of hands, whilst
prayer is offered on their behalf by the clergy, congregation, parents, and
godparents. There is no anointing, because God’s promises apply to the
prayer of the congregation and not to chrism.


It seems strange that the Protestant Churches retain a cere-
mony not instituted by Jesus Christ. They reject as a “farce
and purely human device” (Luther, Wittenb., vi, 169 b) the
Sacrament of Confirmation, known and administered in the
Catholic Church from the beginning, and based on Holy
Scripture and tradition, and yet they retain some kind of
Confirmation, of which they can give no clear account (Léhe,
Agenda, III, 49), but which they believe to be right and
fraught with blessing. In all probability, the blessing that
results from preparation for Confirmation, is the opportunity
for misrepresenting everything Catholic, and for impressing
on the minds of the young a lifelong abhorrence of the Cath-
olic Church. From our point of view Protestant Confirma-
tion is a meaningless ceremony, a caricature of the Catholic
rite, and incapable of conferring any graces. Confirmation is
either a sacrament, an outward sign, instituted by Christ,
and really communicating inward grace, or it was not insti-
tuted by our Lord, and in that case it requires no chrism or


T40 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


laying on of hands, nor any outward sign whatever, and effects
no communication of grace. Lutherans seem to suppose that
it was not regarded as a sacrament until 1439; but we find
it clearly mentioned in Holy Scripture, not as the prayer of
the congregation, but as a means of grace through the laying
on of the Apostles’ hands. Tertullian and Cyprian, writing
about the year 250, as well as other doctors of the early
Church, mention its administration as a true sacrament, and
everywhere prevailed the belief which St. Augustine expressed
in the words: ‘‘The Sacrament of Chrism is a sacrament re-
sembling that of Baptism” (contra lit. Petil., II, c. 104).
Hence in Confirmation, the outward sign, viz., the anointing
with chrism and the imposition of the bishop’s hands, is as
essential for imparting the special grace of the sacrament
as is the pouring of water in Holy Baptism.


Holy Orders


The arguments against regarding Holy Orders as a sacrament are
equally unconvincing. On this subject Protestants maintain: ‘“Ac-
cording to Holy Scripture, we acknowledge the office of preacher to be
of divine institution, and it is the duty of preachers or pastors to make
known the Gospel, to administer the sacraments, and to care for souls,
and also to take part in church management, in providing for the poor,
and in enforcing ecclesiastical discipline. Ministers are ordained for
the discharge of these duties, that is to say, they are blessed by the
laying on of hands and by prayer, and this custom dates from the Apos-
tolic age and has always been used by the Church.”’

The Catholic Church on the other hand is reproached for regarding
the preaching office as of no importance. A Catholic priest need never
preach, but he must exercise his sacrificial and judicial functions; and’
according to Catholic doctrine he is a mediator between Christ and
Christians. Our Lord, however, says to all: “‘He that cometh to me,
I will not cast out; come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy-
laden; Behold, I stand at the door and knock, and if any man hear my
voice and open to me the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with
him and he with me.”

Protestants declare that they cannot allow any one to deprive them
of free access to Jesus Christ, nor to put obstacles in their way to Him.


Here we encounter again the same sort of assertion that
is altogether at variance with Luther’s teaching. Protestants


THE SACRAMENTS I4I


now acknowledge that Christ appointed special officials in
His Church to carry on His own work to the end of the world,
and yet they refuse to recognize the position of the Catholic
priesthood. ‘Tradition; which they persist in rejecting, ac-
cepted a preaching office with which the administration of the
sacraments and the care of souls are connected. Yet they
are unwilling to recognize this office in the form in which it
was instituted by Christ, and existed all over the Church
until the time of Luther. Now Protestants want to have
preachers, but no priests, such as have always existed from
Apostolic times onwards in virtue of the Sacrament of Holy
Orders.

It is of course true that ordination dates from the Apostolic
age and has always been practised in the Church, and that the
clergy are consecrated by prayer and the fying on of hands.
But it is hypocritical to represent matters to the young in such
a way as to lead them to believe that the priésthood, which
includes the office of preacher, still exists in the Protestant
Church. Whence do Protestant ministers derive their com-
mission to teach? What guarantee has any congregation that
their minister preaches the pure and unadulterated doctrine
of Christ, that he has authority to govern and direct them,
and that he has been admitted to the sheepfold by the right
door, and is not a thief or a robber? Would Christians in the
time of the Apostles have recognized a Protestant minister
as their lawful teacher and shepherd? Even in the first cen-
tury St. Clement of Rome spoke of the priesthood as a
special state appointed by God, and distinct from the laity.
St. Ignatius (ob. 107) was careful to emphasize the “cleft”
between priests and laymen. St. Augustine tells us that in
_ his time no one doubted that Holy Orders was indeed a sacra-
ment; and at a much earlier date St. Cyprian describes the
respect paid to priests. Any one who fancies that among the
early Christians the clergy were preachers rather than
priests, ordained to offer sacrifice and exercise judicial func-
tions, should refer to the writings of the Fathers, and espe-
cially to those of St. Jerome and St. Chrysostom on the


142 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


subject of the priesthood. He will then feel impelled to ex-
claim in indignation: ‘‘Ye hypocrites, who pretend to pre-
serve the Apostolic tradition, and have really destroyed it!
You have deceived the people, whom you have robbed of
both altar and priests, although the latter were the guardians
of Christ’s teaching and the administrators of the divine
mysteries. You have sent men out with no authority to
teach and direct the multitude. How can you venture to
assert that the Catholic priests come between Christ and His
followers, and make it difficult for the weary and heavy-
laden to come to our Lord? If this were true, then Christ
Himself closed the door of access, by sending forth Apostles
and disciples to teach in His name. The priesthood does not
interfere with the mediatorial office held by Christ alone;
priests are His agents, appointed to lead all the weary and
sinful souls to Him, and to prepare men’s hearts for the in-
fluence of divine grace so that they may ‘open the door’ when.
our Lord knocks. It is Christ Himself who teaches, baptizes,
absolves, and sacrifices in the person of His priests.”

But, assuming that Christ really intended the faithful to
find faith, grace, and salvation without any human inter-
position, what have Protestant ministers to do? They do not
profess to be mediators between Christ and His followers,
for none may come between them. Do they not actually
hinder people from having the ‘‘free access” to Christ that
they profess to desire?

Again, there is no justification for the old accusation that
preaching is of secondary importance in the eyes of a Cath-
olic priest. At his ordination the bishop orders him to sacri-
fice, bless, and preach; and the Council of Trent declared it
to be the duty of all intrusted with the care of souls, to feed
the flock of which they have charge by preaching to them
the word of God (sess. 23, cap. 1). Moreover the Council
‘commanded parish priests and those in charge of souls, to
make a discourse frequently during Holy Mass, especially on
Sundays and holy days” (sess. 22, cap. 8; sess. 24, cap. 4
and 7). .


THE SACRAMENTS 143


Samuel Laing says: ‘‘Catholicism has certainly a much
stronger hold over the human mind than Protestantism. The
fact is visible and undeniable, and perhaps not unaccount-
able.”? And one reason, he tells us, is because ‘‘in the Catho-
lic Church the clergyman is more of a sacred character than
it is possible to invest him with in our Protestant Church,
and more cut off from all worldly affairs. The clergyman is
entirely separated from individual interests, or worldly ob-
jects of ordinary life, by his celibacy. This separates him
from all other men. Be their knowledge, their education,
their piety, what it will, they belong to the rest of mankind
in feelings, in interests, and motives of action, — he, to a pe-
culiar class. The Catholics, who receive the elements as
transubstantiated by the consecration, require very naturally
and properly that the priest should be of a sanctified class,
removed from human impurity, contamination, or sensual
lust, as well as from all worldly affairs, as far as human nature
can be. . . . Our clergy, especially in Scotland, have a very
erroneous impression of the state of the Catholic clergy. .. .
The education of the regular clergy of the Catholic Church
is, perhaps, positively higher than the education of the
Scotch clergy” (Wotes of a Traveller, p. 394).

In virtue of his having received the Sacrament of Holy
Orders, a Catholic priest is regarded by the faithful as possess-
ing a solemn commission, and as being the minister of an in-
fallible Church, and the messenger sent by Christ, the Son
of God, whose word he makes known pure and unadulterated,
just as our forefathers heard and believed it.

What benefit do Protestants derive from “‘the ministry of
the word’? ‘Their preachers set forth the doctrine that
they have discovered by personal study of the Bible or other
books. The disastrous results of this method made them-
selves felt even in the Reformation period, as Déllinger and
Janssen have shown. Luther himself complained of his
preachers that, with few exceptions, ‘“‘they knew nothing of
the doctrine that a knowledge of Christ and His Father alone
constitutes eternal life . . . although they all succeeded in


144 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


abusing the Pope, monks, and priests” (Ddéllinger, Refor-
mation, I, 298). Does a more satisfactory state of affairs
prevail at the present day? In the year 1890, Eberle, Prot-
estant minister of Onolzheim, wrote regarding the sermons
preached in the Protestant country churches in Wiirttemberg:
“I can safely assert that not a single article of faith or doc-
trine of Protestantism is left unchallenged, and preached
consistently from every pulpit. A horrible confusion of the
most conflicting opinions is preached year after year to
country congregations. It is scarcely possible to imagine a
more outrageous entanglement of words and beliefs. What
one man preaches to-day, will be denied by another to-
morrow.”

What a description of Protestant worship! Sermons are
necessary for the instruction and admonition of the people,
and they are preached in every Catholic Church, but our
worship is something more than a sermon, — it is perfect
adoration of God in the Holy Sacrifice.


The Sacrament of Penance


Protestants object to many points in the Catholic doctrine regard-
ing the Sacrament of Penance. They say that the Protestant Church
also teaches the need of confession of sins to God, and under certain
circumstances also to man, in addition to requiring true contrition.
They distinguish repentance from confession, in which either the con-
gregation publicly, or an individual privately, acknowledges his guilt
in the presence of a minister, and is by him exhorted to have contrition
and faith and to be obedient in the sight of God. This kind of con-
fession is regarded as useful, because it tends to arouse true contrition
and to soothe the consciences of those in distress of mind, but it is not
a sacrament; for our Lord instituted no particular form of confession
in His Church, nor did He appoint any visible sign of the invisible grace
conferred.


How are we to understand the statement that under cer-
tain circumstances confession made to men is a necessary part
of penance? What are these circumstances, and what is the
object and effect of this confession? Either it is obligatory
to confess at least grievous sins—and then it is a matter of
divine commandment and not of counsel — or it is quite un-


THE SACRAMENTS 145


necessary. The confession of sins is made either with the
intention and expectation of obtaining forgiveness — and
then the minister hearing it must have authority really and
truly to absolve the penitent — or with the hope of receiving
merely comfort and admonition from the man to whom the
penitent reveals his state and discloses his shame, — and then
this confession is simply a conversation, having no particular
effect on the spiritual condition of the penitent. Confession
is either an essential part of a holy sacrament, ordained by
Christ and based on faith, or it is a mere mockery and human
device. If it is thelatter, it behooves a good Protestant to
say: ‘‘Away with every form of confession, away with every
hope and expectation of approaching more nearly to Christ
by means of this external work than by means of faith alone.”
If, however, confession was designed by Christ, if it leads men
to Him and confers grace, then it is a true sacrament, and it
itself, united with the priestly absolution, is the outward sign
of the holy Sacrament of Penance with which our Lord has
connected His invisible grace.

How clear and simple is the teaching of the Catholic Church
on this point! She adheres to the words uttered by Christ to
His disciples on the day of His resurrection: “‘Whose sins
you shall forgive, they are forgiven them; and whose sins
you shall retain, they are retained” (John xx, 23). She be-
lieves what Holy Scripture records that our Lord said on this
occasion, ‘“‘Receive ye the Holy Ghost.” She believes that
the Apostles, having received the Holy Ghost, were empow-
ered to judge the sins of mankind in the place of God, and
that their lawful successors exercise this judicial function
beneficially under the guidance of the Holy Spirit. Ever since
the time of the Apostles, the Church has believed not only
that confession is useful in order to arouse true contrition
and to soothe the consciences of those in distress of mind, but
also that it is something infinitely more than this, inasmuch
as it is part of this sacrament instituted by Christ to be, as a
rule, the only way of obtaining forgiveness for sins committed
after baptism.


146 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


Protestant Confession of Sins


The teaching of the Protestant Church seems most con-
fused. It urges a sinner to confess his sins, and do volun-
tarily something that cannot fail to be unpleasant, and the
minister to whom he comes is also to do something, viz., to
hear and comfort him. Yet these actions are not to be
regarded as visible signs of an invisible grace, although some
inward efficacy is ascribed to them. To arouse contrition
and soothe the conscience of one in distress of mind are un-
doubtedly interior acts; otherwise confession would be a mere
mockery. Weare told that under certain circumstances con-
fession is a necessity, therefore it must have some effect upon
the penitent’s moral state, and it would seem that this effect
must be a grace designed by and proceeding from Christ.
Yet Protestants deny that it is anything of the kind. We
have therefore in confession as practised in the Protestant
Church, something external that is yet not an outward sign;
something internal that is yet not an inward grace; some-
thing divine that was yet not instituted by Christ. Protes-
tants declare this kind of confession to be far superior to that
practised in the Catholic Church, because it is rare and vol-
untary. Ought we not to pity the multitude who have been
robbed of priests invested with divine authority to forgive
sins, of confession, and of the supernatural consolation im-
parted by sacramental absolution, and who are now invited
to have recourse to this wretched substitute that is extolled
as a delightful refreshment?

Can we wonder that it is a rare occurrence for any one to
avail himself of this much lauded confession, whilst crowds
throng around the confessionals in every Catholic Church?
A sinner is not satisfied with human consolation and encour-
agement; the one thing that he desires in confession is to
be told: ‘‘Be of good cheer, my son, thy sins are forgiven
thee.’ He asks his confessor, as a Protestant theologian tells
us (Vilmer, Theologie der Tatsachen, p. 90), ‘‘I want to know
whether you have authority and power to forgive my sins.”


THE SACRAMENTS 147


In answer to the all-important questions, ‘‘ Have the clergy
power to forgive sins? When and by whom was this power
bestowed upon each priest?” a Protestant can say nothing,
but it is all perfectly simple to a Catholic.

Hear the Anglican Bishop Sparrow: “To put away all
doubt, let’s search the Scriptures; look into the 2oth of
S. John, v. 23: ‘Whatsoever sins ye remit, they are remitted
unto them, and whosoever sins ye retain they are retained.’
Here is plainly a power of remitting sins granted to the priest
by our Blessed Saviour. Nor can it be understood of remitting
sins by preaching, a8, some expound it, nor by baptizing, as
others guess, for both these, preaching and baptizing, they
could do long before; but this power of remitting they re-
ceive not till now, that is, after His Resurrection” (Spar-
row’s Rationale, p. 313). |

Canon Henry Liddon says in effect the same: ‘‘The
power of remitting and retaining sins was given by our
Risen Lord in the upper room with closed doors on the
evening of the day of the Resurrection. In this way Jesus
provided a remedy for the wounds which sin would leave
on the souls of His redeemed”’ (Secret of Clerical Power, p.
159).

Compulsory Confession

Protestants tell us that they practise confession voluntarily, whereas
in the Roman Catholic Church it is compulsory. Pope Innocent III
ordered every one to confess ail his sins at least once a year to his own
parish priest; but the Council of Trent decided that the confession of
only mortal sins with all their attendant circumstances, as far as a
careful examination reveals them, is all that is necessary for salvation.

We read in the writings of the Fathers that all without ex-
ception, who had fallen into grievous sin after baptism, were
required to confess their sins; it was a command, not a coun-
sel. Pfaff, a Protestant historian, says: ‘‘It cannot be denied
that private confession existed in the earliest ages. It would
be impossible to describe it more clearly than Cyprian does”
(orig. Eccles., p. 134). Now St. Cyprian was so far from: be-
lieving confession to be an optional thing, that he tells us


148 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


how those who ventured to approach Holy Communion with
impure hearts were at once punished by the avenging hand
of God. That impurity of heart was due to neglect of con-
fession appears from the fact that St. Cyprian contrasts
with these sinners Christians, who frankly and with true con-
trition confess to God’s priests even the thought of sins not
actually committed (de laps., c. 28). St. Augustine, Tertul-
lian, and Origen all speak of confession as strictly necessary
for sinners.

If Christ’s Church really possesses authority to retain and
to forgive sins, can she allow her children to avail themselves
of her authority or not, just as they please? A good shepherd
goes after his lost sheep, calling them and bidding them re-
turn to the sheepfold; and this is how the Church acts when
she commands her children to do penance. A hireling may
wait until the lost sheep comes to him of its own accord.
Protestants tell us that their clergy are bound, like our own, to
be silent with regard to what is said under the seal of confes-
sion. Every one intrusted with a secret is of course pledged
to silence; but a Catholic priest is also called upon to admin-
ister a holy sacrament.

Enough has been said to show that it was not Innocent
III who first made confession compulsory. The Fourth Lat-
eran Council, in complete agreement with the Council of
Trent, ordained that all the faithful should conform to the
ancient rule laid down by our Lord Himself, and make their
confession at least once a year. The only difference between
the enactments of the two Councils seems to be that one re-
quires all sins, the other only mortal sins to be confessed.
The discrepancy is only apparent and would puzzle no one
familiar with Catholic doctrines. In the time of the Fathers,
as in that of Innocent III, every Catholic knew what was
required then, as it is now, for a good and complete confes-
sion. If any one told him to confess all his sins, he would be
quite aware that the speaker was alluding to all the sins that
would debar him from salvation and involve the loss of sanc-
tifying grace, in other words, to mortal sins. What he is


THE SACRAMENTS I49


bound to confess is every mortal sin, the number of times it
has been committed, and not all the attendant circumstances
but only such as aggravate or diminish its guilt.


The Clergy and Auricular Confession


Although Protestants speak sometimes of the beneficial results of
confession, they are accustomed to ascribe various ill effects to the com-
pulsory confession practised in the Catholic Church. They tell us: —

(x) That auricular confession is the chief means whereby the clergy
control the hearts of men.--Hence Jesuit missionaries proclaim: “Con-
fession or hell; there is no middle course.”

(2) That the confessional is often misused for the purpose of secur-
ing a Catholic education for the offspring of mixed marriages, contrary
to a promise made previously, or in order to rouse opposition to a gov-
ernment disliked by the hierarchy.

(3) That many unhappy penitents have lost their innocence and been
ruined, in consequence of indiscreet questions asked by a confessor.
The Jesuit Gury is said to complain of this fact.

(4) That penitents are tempted to satisfy the requirements of the
Church outwardly by confessing trivial sins, whilst they refrain from
mentioning the more grievous sins to which they are in bondage; or
they fancy themselves free, after confession and absolution, to sin
again, knowing that they can easily be absolved. It cannot therefore be
denied that compulsory confession as practised in the Roman Catholic
Church is fraught with danger to souls. This is acknowledged by a con-
scientious Catholic priest to be the case.


(rz) It is a truth founded upon divine revelation, that as a
rule confession is the only means of saving a grievous sinner
from hell. The Jesuits did not invent this theory, nor is it
taught exclusively by them. Neither Jesuits nor any other
priests hear confessions with the intention of thus obtaining
influence over their penitents, but in order to preserve souls
from hell. Auricular confession was not instituted to gratify
any desire for power on the part of the clergy, and if any one
really believes that it owes its origin to such a desire, what is,
in his opinion, the object with which a Protestant minister
hears a private confession, and gives advice and encourage-
ment to erring and doubting hearts?

(2) In the confessional a Catholic is frequently reminded
of his duties, but no one can regard this as a misuse of con-


150 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


fession any more than we Catholics have a right to complain if
a Protestant minister tries to prevent a mixed marriage.
It is very strange that any one can suppose it to be the duty
of a Catholic priest to say nothing at all, or even to express
approval, if the children of Catholic parents are brought up
outside the Church.

It is absolutely false to assert that the confessional is used
for stirring up resistance to authority. This is not the place
whence rebels and rioters derive their turbulent ideas.

(3) Father Gury, a Jesuit, was the author of a book for the _
guidance of confessors in the exercise of their difficult office.
We owe him a debt of gratitude for warning priests against
asking indiscreet questions and for pointing out the harm
that such questions may cause. But it is foolish and unrea-
sonable to condemn the confessional, which is a school of
virtue and a source of grace, because individual confessors
have been imprudent. It would be equally absurd to try to
deter the sick from consulting a physician, because instances
have occurred of patients suffering injury at the hands of an
unskilful doctor.

(4) It is a universally recognized fact that the best and
most beneficial institutions are liable to misuse. Thus a
frivolous Catholic may perhaps abuse the privilege of con-
fession, but the sacrament could be answerable for this abuse
only if it sanctioned it. This is, however, by no means the
case; every Catholic child is taught that if forgiveness is
to be obtained, it is not enough to confess one’s sins, but
the confession must be accompanied by true, supernatural
contrition arising out of love of God, and also by an earnest
purpose of amendment, otherwise no sin can be for-
given. It is a fearful sacrilege to refrain from motives of
false shame, or because one does not intend to renounce
them, from all allusion to the grievous sins to which one is
in bondage.

Priests are bound to encourage their people to make a good
use of the Sacrament of Penance, and in this way they will
lead the faulty nearer to that perfection at which we all aim


THE SACRAMENTS 151


in this world but to which we cannot yet attain. Are all
Protestants so perfect that none ever fall back into some sin-
ful habit, even after making a public or private confession
and receiving the Lord’s Supper? Do none of them return
year after year to their pastor to hear once more the tidings
of forgiveness? Does such a Protestant derive greater help
towards final perseverance than a Catholic in the tribunal of
penance? It is unfair and dishonourable to find fault with the
Catholic confessional and not to mention the unspeakable
good that it achieves; although many impartial non-Catho-
lics bear testimony to the great benefits resulting from it. It
is enough to name Voltaire, the father of modern unbelief,
and Rousseau, and men like Goethe, Wilhelm von Humboldt,
Leibnitz, and Pestalozzi. Zezschwitz, a Protestant professor
of theology, says: “We Protestants ought to leave off judg-
ing unfairly, and looking at only one side of a question. .

No one can ever have glanced at the better sort of Catholic
books on morals, who fancies that all the debated points be-
tween ourselves and Catholics can be settled simply by reviv-
ing the old charges regarding the unscrupulous and disastrous
use of the confessional. There are faults on both sides. I
need only allude to confessors such as Carlo Borromeo and
Philip Neri, the latter a penitent of the Jesuits, and himself
one of the most charming, liberal-minded, and sympathetic
confessors who ever lived.”’

“There is another circumstance connected with the in-
stitutions of that Church,” says Francois Guizot, the great
French historian, ‘‘which has not, in general, been so much
noticed as it deserves. I allude to its penitentiary system,
which is the more interesting in the present day, because,
so far as the principles and applications of moral law are
concerned, it is almost completely in unison with the notions
of modern philosophy. . . . It is sufficiently evident that
repentance and example were the objects proposed by the
Church in every part of its system of penance. And is not
the attainment of these very objects the end of every truly


152 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


philosophical legislation? Is it not for the sake of these very
principles that the most enlightened lawyers have clamoured
for Europe?” (History of Civilization.)


Satisfaction for Sins


Finally Protestants declare that all idea of satisfaction is altogether
foreign to them, as Christ by His perfect obedience to God’s will and
especially by His Passion and Death, made abundant satisfaction for
our sins. Catholic priests nevertheless impose penances intended partly
to satisfy God’s justice for sins committed, and partly to act as a safe-
guard against future falls into sin. These penances consist chiefly in
almsgiving, fasting,and repeating certain prayers. How little importance
is attached to the spiritual state of the person who performs these works
is apparent from the fact that one can make satisfaction’ for another, and
this is frequently done in return for payment of money.


It is quite true that all idea of satisfaction is foreign to Prot-
estantism, which looks only at the infinite satisfaction made
by Christ whereby He merited all grace and the remission of
all our sins and penalties. The Catholic Church is by no
means blind to our Lord’s atonement and thankfully ac-
knowledges it, but she goes further, and instead of stopping
short at the thought “Christ suffered for us,’ she asks: ©
“‘Have I personally nothing more to do in order to make the
merits of Christ my own? If I personally have sinned and
offended God, and hope to be forgiven because Christ has
made satisfaction for me, is that all which is required of me,
or ought I to do anything myself in reparation for the wrong
committed against God?” The answer to this question is
perfectly clear: “If we suffer in expiation of our sins, we
become like Jesus Christ who made atonement for us and
from whom all our powers are derived. We rely, moreover,
on the promise that if we suffer with Him we shall be glori-
fied with Him. No satisfaction that we can offer for our sins
is ours in the sense of being independent of Jesus Christ. We
can indeed do nothing of ourselves, but we can do all things
in Him who strengtheneth us. Man has in himself nothing
whereof to glory, but all our glory is in Christ in whom we
live, merit, and make satisfaction, if we bring forth worthy


THE SACRAMENTS 153


fruits of penance, fruits that derive all their efficacy from
Him, that are by Him offered up to the Father and that are
accepted by the Father for His sake” (Trident, sess., 14.
8 cap.).

Holy Scripture contains many instances of punishment in-
flicted by God upon men whose sins were forgiven, and many
also of satisfaction and penance by means of which a sinner
sought to win the grace of God and to avert His punishments.
The Prodigal Son asked to become one of his father’s hired
servants; the thought-would never have occurred to him,
had he not reasoned thus: “I owe some reparation to my
father, although in his love he is willing to forgive me all the
wrong that I have done him.” The following remarkable
passage was written by Luther (assert. 41, ari. contra indulg.
ad art. 5): “‘Our mother, the Christian Church, wishing to
anticipate the punishments inflicted by the hand of God, chas-
tizes her children with some sort of reparation that they may
not fall under His rod. Thus did the Ninivites, by their
self-imposed labours, anticipate the judgment of God. This
voluntary punishment is necessary, for sins are punished
either by us, or by men, or by God, although others [i.e.,
Catholics] get rid of them altogether by means of indul-
gences. If they were good shepherds they would rather im-
pose penalties, and follow the example of the churches in
anticipating God’s judgment.”

Hence at this period, Luther thought that heavier penal-
ties ought to be inflicted; he did not propose to abolish them
and leave everything to Christ. Subsequently, however, he
condemned all idea of satisfaction made by men, although
even then he confessed that his views were contrary to those
of the early Christians and of the majority of mankind. In
his opinion, this erroneous theory of satisfaction had existed
from the beginning of the world; many great men had done
their best to overthrow it, but it would probably remain until
the end of all things (Op. Jen., V, 816).

Protestants believe that Catholics undertake for payment
to make reparation for the sins of others, and this alleged


154 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


practice is regarded as evidence of the slight importance at-
tached to the disposition of the sinner when a penance is im-
posed. The Council of Trent and all the doctors of the
Church make it obligatory upon the confessor to adapt the
penance that he imposes both to the magnitude of the offence
and the disposition of the penitent. It would be quite im-
possible to discover, anywhere in the world, a Catholic who
had received payment for performing another’s penance, or
who had attempted to bribe another to perform the penance
imposed upon him. Yet our antagonists do not hesitate to
explain publicly how it is all arranged. They refer to a chap-
ter in the Roman Catechism (II, 5, 72) which, however, does:
not apply to penances imposed on individuals for definite,
personal sins. Alexander VII actually condemned the propo-
sition (prop. 15) that one sinner might appoint some one to
perform his penance in his stead. Least of all is there any
allusion to payment of money. The Roman Catechism sim-
ply proclaims the profound truth, firmly based on Holy
Scripture and on the life of the early Church, that by means
of voluntary works of penance, or willingly endured suffering,
one Christian can help another. Unless this were true no
one could intercede for sinners, but it follows necessarily from
the Communion of Saints. In proof of it, reference may be
made to Abraham’s prayer for the people of Sodom, to St.
Paul’s exhortation to his converts that they should “bear
one another’s burdens” (Gal. vi, 2),and to a panegyric quoted
by Eusebius (V, 2) and uttered by the clergy of Lyons over
_ the martyrs of that city: “‘They were not filled with arro-
gance towards the fallen, but with motherly compassion they
shared with others that wherein they abounded, and shed
many tears for them before God.” Eusebius records elsewhere
(III, 24) that St. John the Apostle exclaimed to a young
man who had committed a robbery: ‘I will make satisfac-
tion for thee; thou hast still hope of safety; for thy sake I
will gladly welcome death, even as our Lord died for us.”
Moses offered to be a scapegoat for the people of Israel (Exod.
Xxxii, 32), and St. Paul even went so far as to wish to be


THE SACRAMENTS Iss


anathema from Christ for the sake of his brethren (Rom.
ix, 3). Any one who reflects over these passages will find
no difficulty in understanding the sentence in the Roman
Catechism.


Matrimony


Protestants tell us that they regard matrimony as an ordinance
instituted by God, but not as a sacrament, because it can be contracted
outside the Church. Christ did not alter or add to this ordinance,
but reinforced it and promised special blessings to married Christians.
Hence this state is called that of ‘““Holy Matrimony,” and according
to the procedure of-the early Church it ought to be entered upon before
Christian witnesses and with prayer and exhortation from the word of
God.

The Catholic Church calls matrimony a sacrament, but forbids it
to her priests, thus showing that she looks upon it as an inferior state.
In the Bible we read that a bishop should be the husband of one wife,
and that it is a devilish doctrine to forbid men to marry. The Chris-
tian Church adhered to scriptural teaching on this subject for a thousand
years, and it was not until the eleventh century that compulsory celi-
bacy was introduced by Pope Gregory VII.


Statements of this sort require careful consideration.
Let us ask, in the first instance, what the Catholic Church
thinks of marriage, and what Luther’s views were on the
subject. Which doctrine harmonizes best with Holy Scrip-
ture and with the opinions of Christian antiquity? The
Catholic belief with regard to marriage is this: God Him-
self instituted it in Paradise as an indissoluble bond uniting
one man and one woman. Jesus undoubtedly altered and
added to this ordinance and through His Apostles promised
peculiar blessings to married people, for He raised marriage
to the dignity of a real sacrament. That our Lord intended
to make it something more than it had become among both
Jews and pagans is plain from His words in Matth. xix, 3,
etc., Mark x, 2, etc., Luke xvi, 18, and especially from
St. Paul’s instructions in 1 Cor. vii and Ephes. v. The
Apostle regarded even the vocation to the married life as
a special grace of God (1 Cor. vii, 7); he did not consider
the marriage of unbelievers as on a level with Christian


156 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


marriage (v. 13), but taught that an unbelieving husband
could be sanctified by his Christian wife and vice versa
(v. 14). He compares the marriage bond with the union
existing between Christ and the Church (Ephes. v, 29), this
union being her actual source of grace, and he calls this union
a great sacrament (or mystery) adding, ‘‘I speak in Christ
and in the Church” (v. 32). How could St. Paul say that
marriage resembles Christ’s union with the Church unless
grace was communicated by means of it? If Protestants
examined more carefully the view taken of matrimony in the
early Church, they would find that it was always regarded
as asacrament. This can be easily proved from the writings
of Tertullian, St. Ambrose, and St. Augustine (cf. Schanz,
Sakramentenlehre, pp. 726-738).

The Catholic Church undoubtedly considers the married:
state holy. Did Luther value it equally or even more
highly? Let us quote his own words on the subject: ‘“ Mar-
riage does not concern the Church at all, but is outside her
sphere, being a temporal and worldly thing” (Walch, XXII,
1748; XII, 1721; VII, 668). ‘‘Know that marriage is an
external, bodily thing, like any other worldly business”
(JenJedi, (ET) 153).

Of the enduring character of this sacrament in the Catholic
Church, Goethe notes in his Autobiography that “Here a
youthful pair give their hands to one another, not for a
passing salutation, or for the dance; the priest pronounces
his blessing upon the act, and the bond is indissoluble.”

A youthful pair? What does Lecky say in this regard?
“The nearly universal custom of early marriages among the
Trish peasantry has alone rendered possible that high stand-
ard of female chastity, that intense and zealous sensitive-
ness respecting female honour, for which . . . the Irish poor
have long been prominent in Europe” (European Morals,
Ui dea

The Catholic Church has always insisted upon the unity
of the marriage bond, adhering thus to Christ’s teaching that


THE SACRAMENTS 157


God instituted marriage in order to unite one man and one
woman (Matth. xix, 3, etc.), and that in His kingdom this
unity must be restored and maintained. Luther, on the
contrary, allowed Count Philip of Hesse to take a second
wife during the lifetime of his lawful spouse. The preacher
who performed the ceremony had three wives, all living, |
and in his discourse he tried to soothe the bride’s conscien-
tious scruples by telling her that bigamy had hitherto been
forbidden among Christians in consequence of their misun-
derstanding HolyScripture. Luther himself declared several
times in his sermons that a man was not forbidden to have
more than one wife; he did not himself recommend polygamy
but could not prohibit it (Janssen, An meine Kritiker, I, 91).


Indissolubility of Marriage


The Catholic Church insists upon the indissolubility no
less than upon the unity of marriage. She has always re-
spected our Lord’s words: “What God hath joined together,
let no man put asunder” (Matth. xix, 6); ‘Whosoever
shall put away his wife, except it befor fornication, and
shall marry another, committeth adultery; and he that shall
marry her that is put away, committeth adultery” (v. 9).
These words sanction separation from an adulteress, but not
the remarriage of either party. The disciples clearly under-
stood them in this sense, for they exclaimed: “If the case of a
man with his wife be so, it is not expedient to marry”’ (v. 10).
In Mark x, 2-12 and Luke xvi, 18 our Lord absolutely forbids
any severance of the marriage bond. Should any doubt
still linger in the mind of one who has studied these pas-
sages, it cannot fail to be removed by reference to 1 Cor. vii,
10, 11, where St. Paul writes: “‘To them that are married,
not I, but the Lord commandeth that the wife depart not
from her husband. And if she depart, that she remain un- ©
married. . . . And let not the husband put away his wife.”
The Catholic Church has invariably upheld this doctrine.
It is notorious that Henry VIII, King of England, requested
Pope Clement VII to divorce him from his lawful wife. The


158 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


Pope went as far as he possibly could go in order to concili-
ate the king, enduring all sorts of abuse and reproaches,
but he could not surrender the sanctity of marriage, and
defied Henry rather than disobey God. To his intense sor-
row the Holy Father saw the king and his kingdom fall
away from the faith, but he could not, on that account, per-
mit what the Gospel forbade. How different was Luther’s
line of action towards Philip of Hesse! He taught and pub-
licly preached opinions utterly at variance with the Biblical
and early Christian views on marriage. Not only did he
sanction the divorce on his own authority, and in opposition
to Holy Scripture, but from the pulpit he defended princi-
ples regarding married life, such as had never been heard
before in any Christian country, and he even declared adul-
tery to be permissible. Evers, a Protestant pastor who was
subsequently reconciled to the Catholic Church, says of
Luther: ‘‘Is it possible that a man, capable of propounding
such shamelessness to the people, in his public sermons and
writings, can have been the instrument, chosen by God, for
the reformation of the Church?” (Katholisch oder Protes-
tantisch, p. 408).

The Rev. A. K. Blois, of the First Baptist Church, Chicago,
said: “The attitude of the Roman Catholic Church is ad-
mirable. It is better to be too strict than too loose in all
questions of morals, and especially in this [divorce] question,
which so vitally affects both public and private welfare.”

Rev. Dr. Morgan Dix, Episcopalian, rejoices that ‘Roman
Catholics — all honor to them! — allow no divorce a vinculo,
following literally the command of our Lord Jesus Christ”
(Lectures on the Calling of a Christian Woman).

At one moment we are told that the Catholic Church sets
too high a value upon matrimony by regarding it as a sacra-
ment, at another we hear that she degrades it by forbidding
her priests to marry. This is another of those contradic-
tions to which Protestants are prone. The Catholic doctrine
on the subject is very simple: In the Church of Christ mat-
rimony is raised above the purely natural order, and becomes


THE SACRAMENTS | 159


a means of grace. It does not, however, follow that the
married state is the highest in the kingdom of Christ. On
the contrary, it is surpassed by voluntary virginity, preserved
through love of God, according to the teaching and example
of our Lord Himself and His Apostles. What for every
Christian is a matter of counsel (cf. Matth. xix, 12 and 1 Cor.
vii, 7, 8), is imposed by the Church as a binding obligation
upon her priests, since their office requires of them a higher
degree of perfection.

The Catholic Church does not forbid matriage, and fol-
lows St. Paul (x Tim. iv, 1) in calling such prohibition “a
doctrine of devils.”” No one ought to write a treatise on re-
ligion without knowing to what subjects these devilish doc-
trines refer. According to them, all marriage is forbidden,
and the Catholic Church teaches nothing of the kind. But,
on the other hand, she does not command any one to marry,
and in this respect she differs from Luther, who declared
perpetual chastity to be impossible and continence to be a
crime. Schén, a Protestant, in writing of Luther, says:
‘‘He was probably the first, since the foundation of the Chris-
tian Church, to teach that man was a slave to his sexual
impulses, and that the commandment to marry was not only
binding upon every one, but of far stricter obligation than
the commandments in the Decalogue which forbid murder
and adultery.”

Moreover, it behooves every theologian to understand what
St. Paul meant by saying that a bishop should be the husband
of one wife (1 Tim. iii, 2). If he meant that a bishop ought to
be a married man, why did he not himself take a wife in-
stead of wishing that all were as he was? If it is a diabolical
doctrine to require those who wish to serve Christ perfectly
and feel called to this service to remain unmarried, how could
St. Paul extol virginity as the higher way? It is absolute
hypocrisy to try to destroy the old Christian doctrines, to
strip marriage of its supernatural character and make it a
purely natural business, like agriculture or carpentry, and at
the same time to blame the Catholic Church for teaching the


160 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


doctrines of devils, whereas within her fold alone marriage
is still regarded as a holy state on which peculiar blessings
are bestowed, and as a means for attaining to the super-
natural end of man. We have no fear that the Apostles
will ever judge us for possessing diabolical doctrines; they
will rather discover such things elsewhere; for there are
some theories regarding marriage which St. Paul would
certainly not acknowledge to have been taught by Christ
and himself.


Compulsory Celibacy


Protestants are taught that in the eleventh century Greg-
ory VII introduced compulsory celibacy, although for over
a thousand years the Church had followed St. Paul and
condemned it as a doctrine of devils. It ought not to be
necessary at the present day to refute this statement, but
it recurs with obstinate persistency. When the disciples
exclaimed, “‘It is not expedient to marry,” our Lord did not
explain that, on the contrary, they all ought to take to
themselves wives, but remarked that some were volun-
tarily continent for the sake of the kingdom of heaven.
This is recorded in Holy Scripture, as also is St. Paul’s
recommendation of celibacy. It is certain, too, that from
the beginning many Christians have led chaste and virginal
lives in order to serve God better. Was it not quite natural
for the Church to require her priests to lead the life which
all Christians regarded as peculiarly pure and perfect, and
which many adopted of their own free will? Pilatus, a Prot-
estant whose works have done much to overthrow many
Protestant prejudices, says (Quos ego, 17 and 18): “‘Celibacy
was not introduced by the Pope, but was due to the priests’
desire for the union with God resulting from conquest of
the passions.” In the primitive Church, where baptism
was administered generally only to adults, it was impossible
to ordain none but unmarried men to the priesthood. If
such restrictions had existed, where could St. Paul and St.
Timothy have found men fit to be priests and bishops? But


THE SACRAMENTS 161


even in the Apostolic age St. Paul insisted that no one who
had been married more than once should be consecrated
bishop. We never hear of any priest marrying after his ordi-
nation, although many rules were made on the subject such
as those of the Council of Neocaesarea in 314 (can. 1), ac-
cording to which a priest was to be degraded if he took a wife.,
The Second Council of Carthage in 390 declared the celi-
bacy of the clergy to have been ordered by the Apostles
themselves. In the tenth century the old law of the Church
was frequently disregarded, and consequently Gregory VII,
like several of his predecessors, drew attention to it and in-
sisted upon its observance. In this way he prevented any
further decay of ecclesiastical discipline and order, and we
owe him a debt of gratitude for what he did, but celibacy
was not introduced by him. It would be possible to charge
the Catholic Church with violence and compulsion only if
she forced men into the priesthood, and then constrained
them to lead a celibate existence. Priests are not, like re-
cruits for the army in some countries, obtained by means of
conscription. Before a bishop confers the subdiaconate, he
says: “You are still free to adopt a secular calling if you
desire, but when you have received this order, you will no
longer be able to draw back, but you will serve God, and with
His help observe chastity. Therefore reflect, whilst there is
yet time.”” Every Catholic priest can say: ‘‘Was I not at
liberty to use my freedom? To whom was I bound, when I
voluntarily remained unmarried?” He avails himself of
true Apostolic freedom, when of his own accord for Christ’s
sake and in order to save his soul, he renounces rights pos-
sessed hitherto. Luther professed to combat celibacy be-
~ cause of his regard for morality, but we can form some idea
of his real opinions from a passage in a letter, where he says
(Werke, 29, 17, etc.): “ Even if one or two, or a hundred or
a thousand councils decided that the clergy might marry, he,
Luther, would rather put up with one who had been unchaste
all his life, than with one who took a wife after such a de-
cision had been made. He wished to command as God’s


162 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


representative and to give advice, so that no one on the
strength of such a decision should take a wife and endanger
his salvation, but rather let every one live in chastity, and
if that is impossible, let him not despond in his sin and
frailty, but appeal to God’s mercy.” Is this the language
of a serious man, concerned about truth and justice, or is it
not rather that of a child determined to do what his mother
has forbidden?

“The chaste influence of the celibate clergy of Ireland,”
says the anti-Irish Froude, ‘‘kept the peasants wonderfully
moral. Wealthy men may sleep in Ireland with unlocked
doors with a security that no police in New York or London
could secure, so absolutely honest are the people. Offenses
of impurity, also, are almost entirely unknown” (New York
Lines, Oct. (25415572).


Extreme Unction


Protestants dispense altogether with Extreme Unction, and ask
where in the Bible we discover that Satan is to be driven out of the
oil, and that the dying are to be anointed with oil thus exorcised? Where
are we promised that anointing of this kind leads to the forgiveness of
sins committed through the sense of sight, etc. The passage in James
v, 14 refers to the sick and their recovery, not to the dying. Anoint-
ing with oil is a very ancient remedy, but the chief importance is at-
tached to the prayer of faith. In primitive times the dying relied
only on the consolation supplied by Holy Communion, which was called
the “‘Viaticum”’ and the ‘‘medicine of immortality”; and in the Prot-
estant Church it still continues to be their last comfort.


We have here an ingenious attempt to lay stress upon
side issues and disregard the chief point. Allusion is made to
Holy Communion, but the real question is: Did Christ
intend the dying to receive, besides Holy Communion, an-
other means of grace to console and cure them in their hour
of need? The Bible and tradition both answer this question
in the affirmative. Leibnitz, a Protestant, says: “No lengthy
discussion of Extreme Unction is required. The custom of
administering it finds support both in Holy Scripture and in
the Church’s interpretation of the same, on which Catholics
rely with assurance.”’ How and when did Extreme Unction


THE SACRAMENTS 1623


come to be regarded as a sacrament, if it was not always
recognized as such in the Church? No one can offer any
explanation.

Protestants ask contemptuously where, in Holy Scripture,
we discover that Satan is to be driven out of the oil, and
that the dying are to be anointed with oil thus exorcised.
The Catholic Church knows that there are in the Bible sev-
eral references to the curse under which the whole world
was laid on account of the sins of mankind, and St. Paul
says that every creature groaneth for deliverance from it
(Rom. viii, 21, 22). Moreover, we read much about Satan
and his influence, and find that Christ, who triumphed
over Satan, gave His Apostles power over evil spirits (Matth.
x, 1). Therefore, when the Church requires the water used
in Baptism and the oil employed in Extreme Unction to be
previously blessed, and when she includes exorcisms in the
prayers read on these occasions, she is doing nothing con-
trary to the word of God. The Sacrament of Extreme
Unction, however, exists independently of the forms pre-
scribed by the Church for blessing the oil used in its
administration.

Another question asked by Protestants is: ‘Where are
we promised that anointing of this kind leads to the for-
giveness of sins committed through the sense of sight, etc.?”
Surely those who ask this question cannot read, for the an-
swer stands clearly in St. James’ epistle: “If he [the sick
man] be in sins, they shall be forgiven him.” Does not this
satisfy them? The statement that the passage in St. James v
refers not to the dying, but to the sick and their recovery,
is unintelligible, for are not the dying sick? Or do we admin-
ister Extreme Unction only to those of whose restoration to
health no hope remains? Does not every catechism contain
a warning not to delay too long the administration of this
sacrament, since it is intended to benefit the sick in body as
well as in soul? Protestants are taught that anointing with
oil is a very ancient remedy, and that the chief importance
is attached to the prayer of faith. It is, of course, quite true


164 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


that oil is a very ancient and usual remedy, just as water
is the usual means of cleansing, and bread the usual form
of nourishment. Oil, water, and bread serve these purposes
in the realm of nature, but when, in conformity with divinely
given instructions, the prayer of faith is added to them, they
become outward signs of supernatural grace in the holy
sacraments. Neither water, nor bread, nor oil alone, nor
even the prayer of faith alone, effects what our Lord intended
the sacraments todo. The word of God undeniably contains
plain allusions to oil, to the prayer of faith, and to forgive-
ness of sins, as well as to restoration to health.

Finally, Protestants maintain that in the primitive Church
the sick relied solely upon the consolation derived from Holy
Communion. Apart from the fact that the sick in those days
received the real sacrament of Holy Communion and not the
Protestant Last Supper, there is abundant testimony in very
ancient writings proving that Extreme Unction was always
regarded as a sacrament, and that no innovations were made
in its administration. Allusions to it occur in the works of
St. Irenaeus (died 207) and of Origen (died 254).


Baptism


Protestants maintain with regard to Holy Baptism that the only
difference between themselves and Catholics is that the latter believe
original sin to be completely removed by this sacrament, whereas
Protestants think that our natural sinfulness remains.


This difference has already been discussed, and it is un-
necessary to say more here than that we are very thankful
that Luther retained the old Catholic doctrine on the sub-
_ ject of Baptism, and carried with him into Protestantism a
remnant of genuine Catholicism, which seems there rather out
of place. Luther thought, however, that any one who chose
might refuse to be baptized. The fact that true Baptism
remains in the Protestant Churches is the cause of salvation
to countless souls, especially to those of children. Unhappily
the sacrament is not always validly administered, for Protes-
tants do not always baptize in the name of the Blessed


_ THE SACRAMENTS 165


Trinity, nor are they careful that the water should flow.
There are some ministers who openly acknowledge that they
wish to see Baptism abolished.


The Holy Eucharist


On the subject of the Holy Eucharist, Protestants refer to tran-
substantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, and the withdrawal of the
chalice from the laity, as the three points of Catholic doctrine to which
they take exception.

The Protestant doctrine is, we are told, that in the Holy Eucha-
rist they really receive the Body and Blood of Christ together with
the blessed bread and wine, but the sacramental species continue really

/ to be bread and wine and do not merely appear to be such. In this be-
. lief they follow the teaching of St. Paul (1 Cor. x, 16). They think
therefore that in the Bible two elements, one earthly and one heavenly,
are distinguished, although they are united in a most intimate and incom-
prehensible manner.


The average Protestant has no idea how difficult it was
for Luther to discover any foundation for this theory. He
accepts what he is taught and believes that in the Holy
Eucharist he receives bread and wine as well as the Body and
Blood of Christ, whilst Catholics adhere to an unscriptural
doctrine, and believe that Christ alone is present under the
species of bread and wine.

Luther would have liked to give the words used by our
Lord at the Last Supper a figurative interpretation, but they
seemed too clear and forcible for this to be possible. There-
fore he interpreted them literally, but abandoned all idea
of transubstantiation. How he reconciled the absence of
transubstantiation with the Real Presence of Christ is quite
incomprehensible, nor can any one follow Luther’s own argu-
ments. Hence,as a rule, all living faith in the Real Presence
has disappeared, giving place to a theory which would not
have seemed hard even to the Jews in the synagogue at
Capharnaum.

Transubstantiation, as taught by the Catholic Church,
is a deep mystery, but in believing it we do at least know what
we believe and why we believe it. We know that we are not


166 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


accepting the view of a professor who has imagined something
that none of the early Christians ever heard of, but we are
holding fast to the tradition of centuries based on our Lord’s
own words. If the Catholic doctrine regarding the Holy
Eucharist were erroneous, we should surely know with whom
and when it originated, as before that time men must have
believed something else. But this is certainly not the case;
the same doctrine can be traced back to the Cenaculum in
Jerusalem and to the Last Supper, when our Lord uttered the
words, ‘‘This is my Body.”

By his word a king can change a death warrant into a re-
prieve, so that instead of being the harbinger of sorrow and
death it becomes the bearer of joy and life, yet the paper
on which he writes is unchanged. A dog cannot distinguish
any difference in the document, as it was when presented to
the monarch and as it is after passing through his hands;
but a human being perceives an infinite change effected by
the king’s words. In the same way, by the supernatural
light of faith, we recognize the transubstantiation, which is
imperceptible to our natural reason, relying as it does upon
our senses. We believe that through the action of Christ’s
words, the outward form belonging to the substance of ordi-
nary bread now clothes the living Bread, which came down
from heaven in order that all who eat thereof may live for-
ever. In other words the substance of the bread is changed
into the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, but the outward
qualities or species of bread remain unaffected, just as the
paper remains the same, whether it conveys a death warrant
or a pardon.

St. Paul says nothing contrary to the unvarying belief in
transubstantiation. He speaks, it is true, of the Holy Eu-
charist as bread, but his meaning, which is more important
than the actual word, is clear (x Cor. x, 16, 17; xi, 26, 28).
There can be no doubt as to the doctrine of the Catholic
Church, and yet she too calls the consecrated host “bread
of heaven,” ‘‘angels’ bread.” Moreover, the Greek word used
by St. Paul signifies food rather than bread. Before the


THE SACRAMENTS 167


time of Luther, no one understood St. Paul to mean what
Luther supposed. On the contrary, he has always been
quoted in support of the Catholic doctrine, since he as-
serts that the chalice of benediction, which we bless, is the
communion of the Blood of Christ, and the bread, which
we break, is the partaking of the Body of the Lord.

It is here impossible to do more than refer to one or two of
the countless witnesses to this belief. St. Justin (died 166)
says: “We are taught that this consecrated food is the flesh
and blood of the Son of God. Since Christ Himself said of
the bread, This is my Body, who can doubt the fact? and


_ since He said, This is my Blood, who would venture to sup-


pose that it is not His Blood? He changed water into wine;
why should we not believe that He changes wine into blood?”
Such was the doctrine taught in the fourth century by St.
Cyril to his catechumens in Jerusalem. All the regulations
for public worship in the early Church refer to transubstan-
tiation, and the Russian Church retains this doctrine as an
article of faith.


Transubstantiation


We are told by Protestants, moreover, that the Catholic doctrine
regarding transubstantiation contains an unscriptural statement to the
effect that in the mass priests by means of their miraculous power create
God, the Creator of all things (Béhmer, Jus Eccles. protest., V, 192).


Divinely revealed truth contains profound mysteries which,
when stated in human language, are apt to be distorted and
exaggerated or even ridiculed. Hence the early Christians,
in obedience to our Lord’s exhortation not to throw pearls
before swine, were careful to keep their sacred mysteries
secret from the heathen. But any one who undertakes to
teach young Protestants the doctrinal points distinguishing
Catholicism and Protestantism ought first to ascertain what
our doctrines really are. When any one hears that in the
mass priests profess to create the Creator, he naturally sup-
poses that Catholic priests set themselves above God who
created them. But this is a complete misrepresentation.


168 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


The priest does not create the Creator, but the word of Christ
changes the bread and wine into His Body and Blood. The
priest may be the agent of this mysterious transaction, but
he is acting simply as Christ’s servant and in accordance
with His instructions. It is Christ who baptizes, Christ
who preaches, Christ who absolves, and Christ who effects
transubstantiation, — not the priest. It is not the men de-
signing and printing bank notes who change the worthless
paper into money; it is the will of those who employ these
workmen. In the same way God’s word does everything
and a priest nothing unless he be divinely commissioned.
Perhaps we may be permitted to ask who creates the Cre-
ator in the Protestant rite. Protestants are taught that
Christ is really received in Holy Communion, but how does
He become present? Does He come when the minister blesses
the bread and wine, and utters over them the words of insti-
tution? In that case the minister possesses greater powers
than other men enjoy and must be a real priest, which he
does not claim to be. Or does the recipient of the bread and
wine do anything which causes him to receive Christ to-
gether with them? In that case, what would be the good of
any minister, or of any rite, and where in the Bible can we
find such power promised to every individual, for if this
were true each man would be able to bless and consecrate?


Protestants allege further that our doctrines regarding the consecrated
host are unscriptural, for we teach that divine honour should be paid
it, and that Christ with His sacred Body, divinity, and humanity, can
be kept in the monstrance and carried in procession on Corpus Christi
and other festivals. Corpus Christi was instituted by Urban IV in
1264, and the Council of Trent ordered it to be observed in order to
wound, humiliate, or convert heretics and to celebrate the triumph of
Catholicism over them. It is notorious that ever since the memorable
celebration of the feast at Augsburg in 1530, Protestants have on this
day been exposed to much ill treatment and many insults, in consequence
of which they were warned not to take part in the festival from motives
of curiosity.


It seems impossible to believe that Christ is really received
in Holy Communion and at the same time to refuse Him ado-


THE SACRAMENTS 169


ration. Luther says that whoever believes in the Real Pres-
-ence of Christ cannot without sin refuse to reverence the
sacrament, but that those who do not adore it, are not to be
branded as heretics. In fact, he says, it is better not to adore
it (Wittenb., VII, 343 ff.). The oldest Christian liturgy,
that of St. James, requires the deacon to exclaim: ‘‘Let us
adore and extol the living Lamb of God, offered upon the
altar!’? Adoration follows as a matter of course from belief
in the Real Presence of Christ, and, according to Catholic
belief, this adoration is given to Christ, the Son of God,
present under the form of bread.

The Catholic Church has always understood the words
“This is my Body” to mean that what appears to be bread
is not really bread but the Body of Christ (St. Cyril of Jeru-
salem), and if this is the case before the sacred hosts are
consumed, Christ must remain also in those which have not
been consumed as long as the outward form remains un-
changed. Therefore He can be kept in the tabernacle to
be taken as Viaticum to the dying, and exposed in the
monstrance to the veneration of the faithful. The feast of
Corpus Christi is the exultant expression of our joy and
gratitude for the inestimable favour bestowed upon us by
our Saviour in remaining permanently in the midst of His
people. ‘The feast was established long before there were
any Protestants to be offended at it, and Catholics, when
they celebrate it, have no idea of triumphing over others,
nor of wounding, humiliating, and converting them. That
Corpus Christi processions are occasions when Protestants are
ill treated and insulted is one of those fictions to which non-
Catholics adhere with most unreasonable tenacity, and we
have never heard of their being exposed to outrages on this
festival. No harm happened to them at Augsburg in 1530,
but the Protestant princes by their words and actions in-
sulted the emperor, who was himself carrying a lighted taper
behind the Blessed Sacrament.

We have no objection at all to the rule that Protestants are
not to take part in our processions from motives of curiosity,


170 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


but we should like to suggest that, if by any chance they
see or meet such a procession, they should conform to the
ordinary rules of politeness and decency.


The Sacrifice of the Mass


Protestants do their utmost to misrepresent and abuse the Holy
Sacrifice of the Mass, in order to inspire the young, who are incapable
of examining facts for themselves, with hatred and abhorrence of Cathol-
icism. They say that originally the Mass was nothing but the usual
public celebration of Holy Communion, in which the fruits of Christ’s
atoning death were perpetually applied to the Christians present. This
is still the Protestant doctrine, only instead of ‘‘ Mass,” they speak of
the Lord’s Supper. Roman Catholicism, however, has made additions
to this simple celebration of Holy Communion, and has thus changed
it into a sacrifice of atonement, offered by the priests, although this is
contrary to God’s command and promises.


It would be only fair to consider first the reason given by
Luther for abolishing the Mass. He tells us that one night
the devil appeared to him, and in fearful tones, curdling his
very blood, declared that he, the learned Dr. Luther, had
practised idolatry every day for fifteen years by saying Mass.
Although Luther was quite aware that the devil was not
speaking the truth, he abolished the Mass and priestly ordi-
nation (Wittenb., Germ. ed., VII, 443; Jena, VI, 87; Walch,
XIX, 1489). In spite of knowing his doctrines to be opposed
to his own innermost convictions and to the unanimous be-
lief of antiquity, he demanded unconditional acceptance of
them, and expressed himself in language such as no Pope or
Doctor of the Church had ever used. He said: ‘No one,
since the world has existed, ever taught as I, Dr. Martin
Luther, teach. I care nothing for all the texts of Scripture.
I need no foundation for my doctrines, my will takes the
place of all arguments. I, Dr. Martin Luther, will have it
thus. I am wiser than all the rest of the woe put to-
gether” (Wittenb., V, 107).

We see, therefore, who abolished the Holy Sacrifice of the
Mass, ane to whom Luther ascribed his impulse to take this
step. But who instituted the sacrifice? It existed from the


THE SACRAMENTS 171


very beginning, and no one doubted that it was of divine
origin. No bold innovator ever came forward proclaiming,
“The priest at the altar offers a true sacrifice of reconcilia-
tion,” nor was there any one who ventured to foist the idea
of sacrifice upon the Church founded by Christ, in opposi-
tion to the will of her divine Founder. The bishops have al-
ways expressed the feeling of the Church, and would promptly
have resisted so important an innovation as the Mass, if it
had really been superimposed upon the old Communion
service; but there is no trace of any such thing in the whole
history of the Church, and honest Protestants now acknowl-
edge this to be the truth. Kahnis, for instance, writes (Die
Kirche, 1865, p. 113), ‘‘The Eucharist is a sacrifice’; and
Thiersch says, “‘ As our knowledge of ancient Christianity has
increased, it has become clearer to Protestant theologians,
that in the very earliest ritual and in all ancient liturgies the
Eucharist was invariably regarded as a sacrifice.”’ Rodatz
‘remarks: “‘As our Lord shed His blood upon the Cross in
atonement for sins, it would be unreasonable to suppose that
when He gives it in the Eucharist, He deprives it of its power
to atone. The Catholic doctrine of the Eucharist as a sacri-
fice of atonement has frequently been unfairly criticized by
Protestants.”

It is therefore a complete mistake to imagine that in the
primitive Church there was simply a celebration of Holy
Communion, to which at a later date Catholicism added
the idea of sacrifice, contrary to the commandment and
promise of God. The Catholic Church has at all times with
unwavering loyalty adhered to the form of the Eucharist
which our Lord Himself committed to the Apostles to be an
unbloody sacrifice and the greatest proof of His love.


Priesthood


Protestants recognize no priesthood resembling the Levitical, and
say that under the new dispensation Jesus Christ was the one High
Priest; and as He procured us access to the Father, there is no longer
any need of priests. Moreover, as even Bellarmine acknowledges, there
is in the New Testament no mention of priests, but only of ministers, in
the Christian Church.


172 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


We might therefore say that there ought to be no super-
intendents, missionaries, Sunday school teachers, etc., be-
cause they are not mentioned in the New Testament. There
are many allusions to bishops, presbyters, and deacons (1 Tim.
iV, 14; Vv, 223; 2 Lim. 1,.6; Titus, 1,5; Acts xx, 28/etc, ji van we
really have access to the Father through Christ alone in the
sense that all human intermediation must be excluded, why
should there be any ministers or preachers? Surely, their
object is to bring men into contact with God. Whence do
they derive their office, commission, and right to intrude
between the soul desirous of salvation and the word of God?
Lechler, a Protestant, expressed the opinion that if the Lu-
theran doctrine of the universal priesthood were taken
seriously, the absolute collapse of God’s scheme of salvation
would be the inevitable result (Die neutestamentliche Lehre
vom heiligen Amt).

Another question arises here: If priests do not come fronr
Christ, where do they come from? Who was the first to take
upon himself the office, and to proclaim to the amazed Church:
‘‘IT am your priest. I have power to offer Christ’s Body
and Blood in sacrifice”? If such a man ever had come for-
ward, would there have been no outcry, no opposition?
Would not men have died as martyrs rather than take part
In a sacrifice that they recognized as contrary to the will of
God? Does it not follow that the priesthood must always
have been regarded as of divine institution? In the Apos-
tolic age men certainly looked upon it thus, for otherwise why
should Simon have offered money for the powers exercised
by the Apostles, had he seen in them only what Protestants
perceive, and not channels for imparting the Holy Ghost? (cf.
Acts viii.) ‘The Catholic Church now regards the priesthood
in exactly the same light as St. Clement did in the first cen-
tury and St. Justin in the second century.


The Renewal of Christ’s Sacrifice


Protestants say that they refuse to admit that our Lord commanded
the Apostles, and after them the priests of the Church, to sacrifice His


THE SACRAMENTS 173


Body and Blood again. Nowhere is it recorded in Holy Scripture
that He ordered priests to succeed Him and sacrifice Him as an atone-
ment, but we read that He offered Himself once on the Cross for our
sins. The apologists of the Catholic Church are quite aware of this,
and at the Council of Trent a proposal was made to declare that the
current teaching about the Sacrifice of the Mass was based on tradi-
tion alone, since the passages quoted from the Bible really prove
nothing, and expose the Church to ridicule on the part of heretics.

Protestants maintain that it is quite contrary to Holy Scripture
to regard the Mass as a sacrifice, since the Bible teaches that Christ
could not be offered again and again as a victim; nor could He suffer
and die more than once, and yet this would be necessary if He were to
continue to be offered up in sacrifice. Moreover, His atonement re-
quires no subsequent action to be performed by priests, because it lasts
forever (Hebr. x, 12, 14). What can be lacking in Christ’s offering, or
what can be added to it, if ‘‘by one oblation He hath perfected for ever
them that are sanctified’? He gives us in Holy Communion the bene-
fit of this oblation; what more is needed? Is not every attempt to
supplement it derogatory to His one oblation, and a violation of His
sacred rights?


Protestants are careful to avoid making any suggestion
as to the origin of the universal Catholic belief in the true,
unbloody renewal in Holy Mass of Christ’s sacrifice on the
Cross. They are at liberty to say that they recognize no
sacrifice subsequent to that offered by Christ Himself, but
all their protestations and denials are powerless to affect the
Mass. The refusal of a party of blind men to believe in the
sun’s existence could not affect its light. It is a fact that all
Catholics believe in the Sacrifice of the Mass, and this faith
must have originated somewhere. Did the Apostles receive
it from their divine Master and transmit it to the Church?
Did He in His infinite love desire His one oblation on the
Cross to be presented forever in an unbloody manner in every
place where His disciples met together? Was it His design to
apply the graces, merited once for all by His death, to all men
in every age by means of a visible sacrifice similar to that of
the Cross? Did He intend the feast that He instituted on
the eve of His Passion to be a sacrifice as well as food? If
such were His intentions, it does not behoove His followers to
ask, “‘How can this Man give us His flesh to eat?” (even


174 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


Protestants profess to believe that He does this) or, “‘How
can He at the same time cause His flesh and blood to be a
true sacrifice?’’ All that they are required to do is thank-
fully to accept and faithfully to avail themselves of this
priceless benefit:

If, however, the belief in the unbloody Sacrifice of the
Mass did not originate with Christ and was not taught by His
Apostles, it must have arisen at some unknown time and
place, have been invented by some unauthorized person, and
foisted upon the Church. Forthwith, without the small-
est objection, all the clergy and laity must have accepted
this new, unapostolic and unchristian doctrine, so that
thenceforth in every place where hitherto only the Lord’s
Supper had been celebrated, the Sacrifice of the Mass took
its place. Something like this must inevitably have occurred
if the Holy Sacrifice were indeed unchristian and unapos-
tolic. But we know with absolute certainty that ever since
the first Eucharist was celebrated in the Cenaculum at
Jerusalem it has been regarded as a sacrifice, and Luther
was the first to deny it; we have already seen who insti-
gated him to do this.

Harnack, the Protestant theologian (Dogmengesch., I, 386),
admits that in the primitive Church the prophecy of Mala-
chias (i, 11) regarding the clean oblation which should be
offered in every place after the Jewish sacrifices had passed
away, was always referred to the Holy Eucharist. With re-
gard to the prophecy in Ps. cix, Luther himself says (1556
ed., VIII, 579 b): “The offering of bread and wine by Mel-
chisedech represents the priesthood of Christ from that time
to the end of the world, and shows that among Christians
He offers the hidden Sacrament of the altar, viz., His
sacred Body and precious Blood.”

“There are two torrents that amaze me,” says Israel
Zangwill, the noted Hebrew novelist; ‘‘the one is Niagara,
and the other the outpouring of reverent prayer falling per-
petually in the Roman Catholic Church. What, with Masses
and the exposition of the Host, there is no day nor moment


THE SACRAMENTS 175


of the day in which the praises of God are not being sung
somewhere — in noble churches, in dim crypts and under-
ground chapels, in cells and oratories. Niagara is indifferent
to spectators, and so the everlasting stream of prayer. As
steadfastly and unremittingly as God sustains the universe,
so steadfastly and unremittingly is He acknowledged, the
human antiphony answering the divine strophe” (Italian
Fantasies).

The words of institution contain a clear allusion to the
sacrificed body and the blood shed for the forgiveness of
sins. Christ’s Body and Blood possess the property of being
sacrifices of atonement, even in the Holy Eucharist. Ols-
hausen, a Protestant, commenting on 1 Cor. x, 18, says of St.
Paul, that the Apostle regarded Communion also as a sacri-
ficial banquet, and not merely as a commemoration of Christ’s
sacrifice on the Cross. With reference to the faith of the
primitive Church, we may quote Dr. Grabe, a non-Catholic
scholar, who acknowledges that Irenaeus and all the Fathers
whose writings are still extant, both the contemporaries of
the Apostles and their immediate successors, looked upon the
Holy Eucharist as the sacrifice of the new dispensation.
The whole Christian Church, not merely some local congre-
gation, accepted this view as originating with Christ and
the Apostles.

We know, of course, that Christ does not again suffer or
shed blood or die; in fact we call Holy Mass “the unbloody
sacrifice.”” Those who refuse simply to accept Christ’s words
and works as He uttered and performed them, are forced
to make additions and improvements to them; but such is
not the intention of the preacher who makes known the
word of Christ, nor of any one who administers Baptism
in His name, nor is it the intention of the priest celebrating
Mass, for it is through his agency that Christ, our eternal
High Priest, effects transubstantiation, sacrifices, and gives
Holy Communion.

On innumerable occasions has the Catholic Church most
solemnly professed her faith in the Holy Sacrifice of the Cross


176 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


and its infinite value, as well as in Jesus Christ our only
Mediator and Redeemer. She has never wavered in this
faith, but still she is reproached with undervaluing our Lord’s
sacrifice and tampering with His rights. Yet she does noth-
ing but represent anew in a mystical manner, according to
Christ’s will and commission, the sacrifice that’ He once ac-
complished with the shedding of blood and that He is ever
ready to accomplish. She does this in order that His sacri-
fice of atonement for the whole world may be applied to each
individual soul. Protestants say that Christ confers on us
the benefits of His sacrifice, when we receive His Body and
Blood in Holy Communion. This is quite true, but we re-
ceive this Communion only from the altar of sacrifice in the
Catholic Church. We recognize no other Communion than
that which our Lord instituted; we do not venture to
separate it from the living tradition through which it has
come down to us, and we believe that there can be no Eucha-
rist without priests, regularly ordained and commissioned,
or without transubstantiation.


The Office of the Priesthood


As the reason why the papacy upholds this doctrine of the Holy
Sacrifice, Protestants state that all the prestige and power and, to a
great extent, also the revenues of the papacy and priesthood depend
upon it. A priest with authority to celebrate Mass is a mediator and
interpreter between God and man. His power transcends all human
imagination and nothing on earth is comparable with it. ‘‘ Who,”
they ask, “‘would not fear men who alone are able to give us access
to God, and whose authority is supposed to extend beyond the
graver’”’? Young Protestants are warned against yielding to the claims
of the priesthood, and are taught that, as it was not instituted by
God, it is of no avail. Stipends for Masses are supposed to bring
in vast sums of money, and Protestants point with admiration to
their own ministers, living in Apostolic poverty, and contrast them
with the Catholic priests who are represented as possessing boundless
wealth.


There is not much danger at the present day that the young
will yield to extravagant claims of the priesthood; they are
more likely to adopt the views of those who recognize no


THE SACRAMENTS 177


distinctions in the civil and ecclesiastical order. Conse-
quently men who still believe it to be God’s will that such
distinctions should exist, ought to be on their guard against
encouraging anarchy by attacking a class of men respected,
honoured, and loved by all good Catholics.

Jesus Christ set the twelve Apostles over the rest of the
faithful, and conferred upon St. Peter the highest position
among them. He intrusted men, holding a special office in
the Church, with the task of guarding His grace and doctrine
and communicating the same to individuals. Whoever has
been admitted into the ranks of clergy by means of episcopal
ordination, has a right to say with St. Paul, ‘Let a man so
account of us as of the ministers of Christ, and the dis-
pensers of the mysteries of God” (1 Cor. iv, 1), so great are
the treasures confided to his care. St. Paul looked upon him-
self as a mediator and interpreter between God and man, for .
he writes to the Corinthians (7b. 15, 16), ‘‘In Christ Jesus
by the Gospel I have begotten you; wherefore I beseech
you, be ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ.’”’ Appar-
ently he opened to his converts a means of access to God.

Has not every Protestant minister the intention of doing
the same, although he cannot claim to be the officially ap-
pointed steward of the mysteries of God? A Catholic priest
is not, in the eyes of his people, an intruder between them
and God, nor does he lead them to God by his personal quali-
ties, his knowledge, or his goodness, but simply in his official
capacity as the servant of God and His Church. He has
not assumed this office, nor is he appointed to exercise func-
tions of human origin, but, as the servant of Christ, to whom
alone he is answerable, he uses the authority intrusted to
him in the name of God. A Protestant minister expounds
his own views or those taught him by his professors, and fre-
quently, since he is a state official, his teaching is contrary
to God’s revelation. He is under civil control, and in some
places his superior can alter the established religion, or in-
_vent a new one, if he chooses, so that a minister ceases to do
anything more than teach morals, draw up statistics, or


178 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


even act as an agent of the police (cf. Gebhardt, Thiiringische
Kirchengeschichte, 1882, part 2, p. 225).

A Catholic priest holds a dignified and sacred office, but he
and his people know in whose name and authority he exer-
cises it, and for what end. Hence he must not misuse it in
order to obtain ‘‘prestige, power, and revenues.”’ In the
sight of God a priest is an unworthy servant to whose charge
something sacred is intrusted, and by whom a strict account
- will have to be rendered. Fearful indeed will be his sentence,
if he misuses his office and talents for his own advance-
ment or for his temporal advantage. Protestants are fond of
quoting the Roman Catechism, but they overlook a state-
ment that it contains, to the effect that those who become
priests solely to obtain food and clothing commit the griev-
ous sin of sacrilege, although it is right that “they that serve
the altar, partake with the altar” (1 Cor. ix, 13). No man
could commit a meaner or more contemptible sin than to
become a priest through ambition or for the sake of money.
He would deserve to be classed with Judas. It is undeniable
that even among the servants of Christ there have always
been abuses which have done much harm to the Church;
but the Church as a whole cannot be held responsible for
the faults of individual priests any more than the Apostles
can be blamed for the sin of Judas. Are there no Protestant
ministers who exercise their office as a means of acquiring
honour or worldly goods? Did not Luther accept a barrel of
wine and express most profound gratitude for it to Philip of
Hesse, who sent it in return for his advice to marry two wives?
(Lenz, Briefwechsel Landgraf Philipps, p. 361, etc.)


Mass and Sermon


Protestants profess to be very uneasy regarding the danger to souls
resulting from the Mass. It appears to them disastrous that by this
human ordinance men are distracted from the study of God’s word.
They say that if we only hear the words of the Mass (which, being in
Latin, are unintelligible to most people), we fulfil our obligation of hear-
ing Mass on Sunday; we are not ordered but only advised to hear a
sermon.


THE SACRAMENTS 179


The Holy Sacrifice of the Mass is not and cannot be a
human ordinance, for in that case it would never have been
accepted by the Church in every age and place. The sacri-
fice does not distract Catholics from the study of God’s
word, nor is it an obstacle preventing them from coming to
God; it is, on the contrary, the best possible means of lead-
ing them to Him if they unite themselves in spirit with the
actions and prayers of the priest. Catholics are taught what
the sacrifice is and what it signifies, and so they can follow it
with love and devotion, believing that the oblation, once
offered by Christ on the Cross, is renewed in an unbloody
manner on the altar. Each is free to pray as he desires, in
accordance with his personal needs; he is not bound to lis-
ten to the priest, but may use his own words and participate
in the sacrifice as his own feelings may prompt him, for
wherever he is in the world he understands what is going
on at Mass.

It is false to say that by simply listening to the words of
the Mass a Catholic fulfils all his obligations. The Church
requires him to assist at the Holy Sacrifice with reverence
and devotion; she says nothing about listening to words
uttered by the priest. The sacrifice, and not the sermon,
is the chief part of our public worship, but any Protestant
minister must know that the preaching of God’s word is by
no means neglected in Catholic churches. The sermon cannot
indeed take the place of the sacrifice but it has always ac-
companied it; and to hear a sermon is a duty for all who can-
not otherwise obtain the necessary instruction. Parish
priests are bound to preach, in accordance with God’s com-
mandment (Conc. Trid., sess. 23, cap. 1). It is not easy to
see how Protestants are more strictly ordered to hear ser-
mons than we are.


The Fruits of the Mass


Protestants bring very serious charges against Holy Mass itself.
They say that according to Catholic doctrine, on account of this sac-
rifice offered by a priest, God forgives even terrible offences, sins are
blotted out, punishment is remitted, satisfaction is made, and assist-


180 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


ance is given to all the faithful, living and dead (Conc. Trid., XXTI,
c. 2). This is why hundreds of Masses are said for the souls of the
wealthy and aristocratic, and even the poor do their best to pay for
Masses for the dead. Then there is the use of privileged altars, i.e.,
altars on which the Pope has conferred the special privilege, that every
time Mass is said at them a soul is released from purgatory. Protes-
tants congratulate themselves upon avoiding the ‘‘broad way” of papal
indulgences and Masses, and say that they bear in mind our Saviour’s
words: ‘Narrow is the gate, and strait is the way, that leadeth to life,
and few there are that find it” (Matth. vii, 14).


The statement given above is a misrepresentation and
mutilation of the teaching of the Council of Trent which
declared the Mass to be a sacrifice of atonement, because in
it the same Christ is offered in an unbloody manner, who
offered Himself and shed His Blood on the altar of the Cross.
Therefore God forgives even terrible offences for the sake
of Christ’s sacrifice, not on account of anything done by the
priest. The Council declared explicitly that mercy and par-
don are bestowed upon those who draw near to God with sin-
cerity and steadfast faith, with fear and reverence, and with
humble and penitent hearts. Plainly, therefore, it is not
enough simply to hear Mass, and it is unfair on the part of
people professing to give an account of Catholic teaching to
misrepresent it so grossly. To sinners who come to Him with
the required dispositions, God, being reconciled by this sac-
rifice, applies the merits gained once for all by Christ on
Calvary, and in this way they obtain forgiveness of even
grievous sins, since grace and the gift of true contrition are
given them. Such is the teaching of the Catholic Church, and
according to it, she requires far more of a sinner than Luther
did, for he promised the most plenary indulgence imagina-
ble, in life and in death, to all who have faith, and taught
that faith alone without any penance whatever can deliver
from the most infamous sins, both in this life and the next.
Is Luther’s gate narrower and his way more strait than that
of the Catholic Church? Non-Catholics have a deeply
rooted objection to Masses for the dead; yet they are as
ancient as the Mass itself, and St. John Chrysostom traces


THE SACRAMENTS 181


the memento of the faithful departed in the Mass back to
the Apostles themselves (Hom. in Maith.). Tertullian speaks
of the custom of offering Mass on the anniversary of a death
as very ancient. St. Cyril of Jerusalem says: ‘“‘We believe
that it affords great relief to the souls of the departed, if we
pray for them whilst the holy and awful sacrifice offered for
them rests upon the altar. We wreathe no garlands for
them, but we offer Christ, sacrificed for our sins, when we
make atonement on their behalf and our own to God, who
loves mankind” (Catech. myst., 5,9). It is, therefore, a very
ancient Christian custom to remember the dead at the altar;
but God alone can decide how far each individual soul is
capable and susceptible of grace. We are convinced, how-
ever, that souls capable of being helped derive great assist-
ance and consolation from the Holy Sacrifice, in which the
Church offers our heavenly Father the most precious atone-
ment for the sins of the whole world. The Holy Sacrifice is
more efficacious than prayer, almsgiving, and other works
of piety and love; but we cannot tell to what extent the
sufferings of any individual soul are mitigated or shortened by
a Mass said on its behalf. Nothing has been revealed or
promised on the subject, and the Catholic Church has never
taught that a soul is delivered from purgatory whenever
Mass is said at a privileged altar; nor does she make the
way to heaven easier for the rich than for the poor. How
could she possibly do so when she recommends her children
to practise evangelical poverty, and does her utmost to re-
mind the rich and powerful of their duties and responsibili-
ties? She regards rich and poor as bound by the same laws,
and as treading the same path to heaven. The Mass said
for a Pope or an emperor differs in no respect from that said
for a beggar. It is by God’s permission that the wealthy
possess more abundant earthly resources, which they can em-
ploy either in serving the world or in making to themselves
friends who will receive them at the last day. But whoever
has great possessions will be called upon to give an account of
them, and the Church has never taught that money entitles


182 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


a man to sin in this world and gives him an advantage over
his poorer brother even in the world to come. Rich and poor
alike can be saved only through God’s grace and their own
faithful codperation with the same, — there is no other way.
Lazarus, the beggar, who endures his hard lot patiently for
love of God, will in the next life enjoy greater consolation
than Dives, who relies on prayers and Masses to be said
after his death. It is one thing to desire to help the suffering
souls by means of our sacrifices and intercession, and it is
quite another to rely upon such things for our own happiness
after death. Any one who does this, acts in an unchristian
and uncatholic spirit.


Communion under One Kind


The last charge brought by Protestants against the Catholic admin-
istration of the Holy Eucharist is that it withholds the consecrated
chalice from the laity. Leo I and Gelasius, two very eminent bishops,
condemned as heretics those who refused to receive the chalice, and
Paschal II (died 1118) wrote that, with regard to the reception of our
Lord’s Body and Blood, it was not lawful to depart from Christ’s own
rule, for He gave both bread and wine to His disciples. The Roman
party, predominant at the Council of Trent, insisted upon withdrawing
the chalice from the laity, and it has never again been restored in spite
of the requests of clergy and secular monarchs. The alleged reason for
this withdrawal is that if the chalice were given to the laity, they might
fall into the error of supposing themselves to be as worthy as the priests
to receive the sacrament. This reason was suggested by Gerson at
Constance. A Roman Catholic priest remarks however: ‘If a father
were to assemble his household, take a cup and say to his sons, ‘ Drink
ye all of this,’ he would not mean that the servants also were to drink
of it. Hence Christ’s words apply only to the priesthood, whilst serv-
ants and handmaids must be satisfied with the bread.”

Some zealous Catholics, such as Mohler and Hirscher, demanded the
restoration of the chalice. The despised laity of the present day are
hardly aware of the deprivation that they suffer in consequence of the
“‘sreat robbery,’’ — for thus Gelasius describes the separation of the
two parts of the Eucharist.


Even in the primitive Church many people received Com-
munion under one kind alone (Basil, ep. 93; Tertull., ad
uxor., 2, 5), especially the sick, prisoners, children, hermits,


a


THE SACRAMENTS 183


and all who communicated in their own homes. In the
fourth century the Manicheans came from Africa to Rome,
where they mingled with the Catholics and even went with
them to Holy Communion. They never received the con-
secrated wine, because they regarded all wine as evil and
abominated it. If at that time Communion in both kinds
had been universal they could never have escaped detection,
and it was in order to prevent them from approaching the
altar that Leo I and Gelasius I commanded all to communi-
cate under both species. When the latter Pope speaks of an
intolerable sacrilege, he is not referring to Communion under
one kind, but to the superstitious idea that no one ought to
communicate under the species of wine.

The Council of Trent did not abandon the teaching of the
primitive Church, nor did it condemn Communion under
both kinds as sinful or unchristian, but it decided, for very
adequate reasons, that henceforth Communion should be
administered under one kind alone. The Catholic Church
permitted the use of the chalice to nations that asked for
it, provided they professed their belief (1) that reception
under one kind was sufficient for all except the celebrant,
(2) that Christ is present, whole and entire under one, as
under two forms, (3) that the Church does not err in admin-
istering the Holy Eucharist under one form only to all ex-
cept the celebrant. But, as Pope Benedict XIV points out
(de sacrif. miss., 1, n. 367 sq), it seems that the nations which
demanded the chalice for the laity, did so either as a pretext
for rebellion against the Church or because they mistakenly
supposed Communion under one kind alone to be insufficient.
In 1564, at the request of the Emperor Ferdinand I, Pius 1V
actually sanctioned giving the chalice to the laity, but the
inhabitants of Catholic countries refused to avail themselves
of this permission, and in other regions it gave rise to so
many abuses that Pius V and Gregory XIV felt obliged to
withdraw it (Wilmers, Lehrb. d. Relig., III, § 61).

Nothing but the bitterest hostility could suggest that an
overweening arrogance of the priesthood was the cause of the


184 THE CHIEF POINTS OF DIFFERENCE


regulations now in force on the subject of Communion under
one kind. Gerson is said to have remarked that if the chalice
were given to the laity they might fall into the error of sup-
posing themselves to be as worthy as the priests to receive the
sacrament. Gerson gives excellent reasons for Communion
under one kind; the laity are not regarded as less worthy
than the priests to receive the sacrament. Everypriest before
communicating strikes his breast, saying, “Lord, I am not
worthy,’’ and when he communicates without saying Mass,
he receives, like a layman, only a consecrated host. Gerson’s
words are misinterpreted, and his real meaning is that lay-
men do not hold the same office in the Church as priests
(Dignitas is not “worthiness,” but “dignity”). Still less
suitable is the explanation that the laity are regarded as
servants and handmaids, who must be satisfied with bread
alone, whilst wine is given to the sons to drink. This is far
from being the case; kings and princes, bishops and popes,
children and beggars receive from the same holy table the
same heavenly food, not bread and wine, but Christ, with
His flesh and Blood, His Body and Soul, His divinity and
humanity. If a Catholic priest ever made such an explana-
tion, he can only have meant that Communion under both
kinds is not required by the words of institution.

The laity are not despised by the Church, who administers
her sacraments for their sake as well as for that of the priests.
They certainly are not aware of having suffered any great
wrong in being “robbed”’ of the consecrated chalice, because
they have never been prevented from receiving the true Eu-
charistic Communion which is infinitely more than any Prot-
estant receives, for his minister can give him nothing but bread
and wine; although if he be truly contrite for his sins, and
communicate in sincere faith and love, he may to some ex-
tent participate in the graces of a spiritual communion. He
cannot really consume the Body and Blood of Christ, because
there is no one authorized to do for him what Christ com-
manded. If any one is so credulous as to believe that Luther
gave back to the laity the chalice because they had been


THE SACRAMENTS 185


robbed of it by papal intrigue, and in restoring it was motived
solely by zeal for souls, he should read the Formula of Mass
and Communion for the Church in Wittenberg (Works, Jen.
IIT, 338). Luther writes: ‘‘No one is to maintain that they
clamour for a Council, at which both species might be re-
stored to them. We have the right of Christ . . . Yes, we
assert that if a Council should order or permit this, we should
then least of all accept both species; in fact we should show
our contempt for the Council and its decision by receiving
either one species, or none at all, but certainly not both, and
we should utterly curse all who received both species on the
authority of such a Council or its decision.” Surely such a
statement can be the outcome of nothing but the spirit of
contradiction!

Impartial Protestants appreciate the Catholic reasons for
what is called “‘withholding the chalice.’’ It is well known
that a movement has been started in Protestant circles to
prevent the harm resulting from giving the cup to the laity,
and in some places proposals have been made for its com-
plete withdrawal.


Date Due


IDEAL BOOK SHOP Inc.
GOOD BOOKS
BOUGHT and SOLD
1 W. 125th St., N.Y. C.


HARLEM 7-9397


|


wi


—_
== O
—_—— TT
_—____—| @)
——— WA
eae, f
©
7 3


;


uni


: ee a


ca oi Sa Be
“ ane
