ilt.

8, Frederick, Md.

21701
501/475-01G6
J'l'l in 7/9/74
Lear Bill (or a substitute if you are no longer with Facifioa),
Because X have no record I can find JOT of your address I'm asking a friend to
try and get it and forward tlds.

test night I aaught only part of an IIPR news bit on the arrest of your L.A.

manager and Fan’'a comment that his is worse than the usual situation whon the FBI
Sosa after tho press*
I have a layman’s opinion that this is nonsense and only the nature of tho defense
can make it true*
You nay recall that I have 3p*ait most of the past ten years in wliat amounts to an
investigation oi the FBI, have taken it to court, to tho Supreme Court, anH have a
collection of FBI reports so extensive there are about 2,000 pages I liave not yet
had time to read* Some of this con be useful to the defense in your case, if it is
on aggressive dufonso, an atick on t'ns FBI for what it is doing und is trying to do*
Without this your man nay well wind up a martyr and press freedom will be set back
that nuoh more*
Joro I in his position, I'd have filed a oivil suit for damages by now, if 1 had
to bo my own luyyor.

The weak rarely survive in cases mm this and both an attack
rather tlxan a defense and a claim for damages are more t!an justified*
I have case after case of spurious FBI "investigations" and "interviews" for
other than their alleged purposes and impressive statistics -official statistics -
to go with then.

In addition, I huvo something new, totally shocking on just this point, and to now
classified ?T0P 5I2CRET." I an preparing it for another underground book, in the hopo
that a young lawyer with wlion I work can arrange to borrow the money to print it,
about 85,000.

For special reasons I can't go into it am can't permit any use until
it is published in context* Tho port that can be valuable in your case, as I soo it
having value, is incidental to tho use I am making.In addition, I huvo something new, totally shocking on just this point, and to now
classified ?T0P 5I2CRET." I an preparing it for another underground book, in the hopo
that a young lawyer with wlion I work can arrange to borrow the money to print it,
about 85,000. For special reasons I can't go into it am can't permit any use until
it is published in context* Tho port that can be valuable in your case, as I soo it
having value, is incidental to tho use I am making. Worn this completed work to be
offergd in evidence, as I think it could bo and be admitted, it would blow minds. If
you dobt this, send souo Fucifiou reporter from the Washington Bureau, with the under-
standing tliat this one thing be confidential until I can arrange publication. (The
real question hors is money. The remaining work can be completed in two weeks.)
Lawyers generally do not like advice froQ noi>*lnuyor8» If your lawyers aro unwilling
te accept your ro .resentat.iou of my work, they can ask the lawyers in the Fay case,
in wldch i did more than the investigation tliat overturned t»« FBI, the Department of
Justice lawyers and tho FBI. Bud Fonsterwald's pone is 20^/223-1669. Jim Lesar is 202/
484-6023. Bud is oliief counsel. Jim did iiost oi* thu logil work. While I presume that the private phone I pay for is not private, I use it vdth
little inhibition. I say thia becausea others should asoumo they will bo oborhoard
when they spook to me. I have a notion this could bo handled in a way that might got a little Itoarat help,
although I know nothing of his personal attitude in tide case. He has more than a
daughter involved. Best ^eganis,
%rold Woisberg