PARA-MILITARY ORGANIZATIONS


IN CALIFORNIA


Thomas C. Lynch

ATTORNEY GENERAL


OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL


Sppartment of Suatire

LIBRARY AND COURTS BUILDING. SACRAMENTO 93814

April 12, 1965


Honorable "J" Eugene McAteer
State Senator
State Capitol Building
Sacramento, California 95814

Dear Senator McAteer :

Attached is our report on private armies in California.

This report was prepared by agents of our Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation. It encompasses
activities of these groups dating back to 1961 in California.

The report clearly shows the threat to the peace and
security of our state which is posed by the existence of these
groups. They embrace violent racial and political doctrines.

They have lost faith in our system of government . They continually
plot armed activity while skirting outright sedition.

Documented in this report are the types of arms and
maneuvers in which these groups indulge, as wel^L as their
philosophies .

It is our hope that this report reveals the need for
SB 184 which you introduced at our request. I hope it will be
of help to you in achieving passage of this needed legislation
to outlaw these vigilante groups.

Sincerely,


THOMAS C.
Attorney General


cc: Senate Judiciary . Committee

Senator Hugh Burns, Senate President Pro-Tern
Assemblyman Jesse Unruh, Assembly Speaker
Assemblyman James Mills (Co-Author)


INTRODUCTION


There is before the State Legislature a bill which proposes
to outlaw para-military organizations.

This report has been prepared for the purpose of providing
information concerning some of the organizations that might be
affected by such legislation. The report is intended to serve as
an introduction to the several groups, and as such it touches only
upon the salient features of these organizations. An attempt has
been made to keep it as brief as possible, and at the same time to
give sufficient coverage to acquaint the reader with some of the
background, ideology, activities, and goals of the organizations.

It should be emphasized that the organizations under
examination in this report do not constitute the total of the
groups which might come within the framework of the proposed
legislation. These were selected for treatment hej:e only because
they have been mentioned most often in connection with the bill.

There are other organizations and groups which are active in this
state at the present time which also would be affected.


AMERICAN NAZI PARTY


AMERICAN NAZI PARTY


The ANP is wholly the creation of George Lincoln Rockwell.
Directly modeled after its German predecessor, it embraces all the
ideology of the former: extreme racism, anti-semitism, Aryan

supremism, military posturing, and, above all, the Fuehrerprinzip
(the leadership principle whereby Rockwell stands as the sole
authority of the party). Under his tutelage, it has managed to
hold together ^or a number of years, and, by dint of boldly executed
publicity stunts, appears stronger than it actually is. Its head-
quarters is located in Arlington, Virginia, with a few small units
scattered about in various states. The Arlington headquarters has
suffered from a chronic lack of finances and a constant turnover
in Nazi membership. Despite all the problems with which he has
caused himself to be beset, Rockwell has managed to maintain a
semblance of an organization which he could use for his purposes.

Rockwell was born March 9, 1918, in Bloomington, Illinois,
the son of a famous vaudeville comedian, "Doc" Rockwell. A
talented artist and cartoonist, Lincoln attended Hebron Art
Academy in Maine and served as the art editor of the campus magazine
at Brown University. After leaving the university, Lincoln joined
the United States Navy shortly after Pearl Harbor and rose to the
rank of Commander as a naval pilot. (He particularly likes the


ANP-1


r\

title of Commander, and it is obligatory for all Stormtroopers to
address him as such. After 1972, his plans are to replace it with
the more imposing title of Fuehrer of this nation.)

After leaving the Navy he married and had four children
before divorcing his wife and returning to active duty in the
Navy. It was while on a tour of duty in San Diego, he wrote later
in his autobiographical book "This Time The World," that he was
first introduced to and began his study of "the Jewish problem."
Later, when he v)as transferred to Iceland, he read for the first
time Hitler's Mein Kampf, which further study convinced him of
the rightness of Hitler's political ideology, philosophy, purposes,
and goals. In Iceland also he met his second wife, Thora Thors,
the daughter of a prominent Icelandic family and the niece of
the present ambassador from Iceland to the United States. On
their honeymoon they travelled to Hitler's mountain retreat at
Berchtesgaden as to a shrine. Eventually, this marriage too ended
in separation after producing four children.

His first venture after leaving the service was pub-
lishing a slick paper magazine designed for servicemen's wives,
entitled "U.S. Lady." It folded after the first few issues. An
ultra-conservative organization which he began in the Washington
area proved equally abortive. Through John Kasper, who had made
a name for himself as a segregationist agitator in Clinton,


ANP-2


Tennessee, Rockwell was introduced to Rear Admiral (retired) John
Crommelin. Crommelin, a fanatical anti-Semite and anti-Negro
agitator, was then campaigning for the post of Governor of Alabama.
For a short time Rockwell aided his campaign, but after a quarrel
the two fell apart and Rockwell left. In the summer of 1956 he
began working for Robert Snowden, who was organizing a conservative
pressure group called "The Campaign for the 48." This relationship
too, ended with a quarrel. Moving to New York City, he worked
briefly for thk American Mercury.

Sometime in 1957-58 Rockwell met Noel Arrowsmith, a
wealthy and aristocratic Baltimore anthropologist who dabbled in
anti-Semitic research. He generously financed Rockwell in
establishing a paper organization called "The National Committee
To Free America From Jewish Domination." A house was rented in
Williamsburg County, and Rockwell established himself as the
figurehead leader of the Committee. He decorated the house with
Nazi banners and pictures of Hitler, and began to conduct himself
as a junior grade Hitler. This open apeing of Naziism caused a
breach between Rockwell and his financial backer which eventually
resulted in Rockwell being evicted from the Williamsburg premises .
Rockwell then found a second, but not so prosperous financial
angel, one Floyd Flemming. Flemming, a contributor to John Kasper
and secretary of his Seaboard White Citizens Council in


ANP-3


Washington, D.C., purchased a two-storied frame house in the
Arlington suburbs and leased it to Rockwell. Flemming also provided
funds for the emergent party to begin operations .

With that launching, Rockwell busied himself in setting
up a miniscule version of Hitler's Nazi Party. The house in
Arlington was decorated with Nazi banners, symbols, and insignia,
and a nearby house was converted into a barracks for the Storm-
troopers. From the beginning, the operations at headquarters were
carried out on pkeudo -military lines. Rockwell, in his rank of
"Commander" demanded absolute and unquestioning obedience. His
chief aides held the ranks of "Major," and "Captain," "Lieutenant,"
and at the bottom were the Stormtroopers . Nazi uniforms and
regalia were worn, and the Stormtroopers were drilled in military
formations. On occasion the Commander held party ceremonies where
awards, citations, and medals were presented for outstanding
achievements ; these ranged from written citations through the
"Medal of Merit" to the "Order of Adolf Hitler" available in bronze
and silver. On the other hand, breaches of party discipline re-
sulted in "courtsmartial. "

As he attracted new sympathizers and members, his "move-
ment" began to take shape and to be pointed in the direction which
it has followed ever since. By keeping himself in the public eye
he has been able to attract to his party sufficient support and


ANP-4


fluctuating membership to maintain himself on the public scene.

In his voluminous correspondence he had early made contact
with other like-minded individuals in other countries, one of those
being Colin Jordan, a British Nazi who headed the British National
Socialist Movement. Principally between those two, and seconded
by Nazis in other countries , there evolved a proposal for the
establishment of a world-wide organization which would unify the
Nazi groups in the several countries . Plans were made for an
organizational meeting to be held in Britain in August 1962. The
meeting was held, and there was founded an organization to be known
as the "World Union of National Socialists," or "WUNS." The found-
ing document, which described the new organization as a union of
Nazi groups acknowledging the "spiritual leadership" of Adolf
Hitler, set forth the following purposes and objectives:

"...to work toward the unity of all White People in a
National Socialist World order..."

To oppose... "the international Jewish Communist and
Zionist apparatus of treason and subversion" by means
of a "monolithic, combat -efficient , international
political apparatus ..."

To make... "suitable arrangements with non -White leaders
of other races to advance racial dignity and justice for
each race on the basis of total and absolute geographic
separation of the races..."

To... "work for just allocations of suitable and reason-
able portions of the earth's surface for the exclusive
sovereignty of the Black Race, of the Yellow Race, of the
Red Race, and of the Brown Race..."


ANP-5


To... "work toward an eventual world Order based on Race,
with just representation from each racial group..."

"... to find and accomplish on a world-wide scale a just
and final settlement of the Jewish problem..."

Pro-tem officers were elected, Colin Jordan becoming
International Leader, and Rockwell becoming Deputy International
Leader .

Following the conference, Rockwell went into hiding, but
was discovered and deported by the British Government as an un-
desirable alien on August 9, 1962. The British Government also
moved against Jordan and his organization, and on October 2, 1962,
Jordan and three other leaders of "Spearhead" -- the military arm
of the British Nazi organization -- were tried on charges of
organizing, training, and equipping the "Spearhead" group for the
use of physical force for political purposes. They were found
guilty, and drew varying jail terms, Jordan being sentenced to
nine months .

Rockwell has continued to work in behalf of WUNS, and to
identify his party as an affiliate of that international organiza-
tion. The ANP publications customarily stress this affiliation,
and feature news stories and pictures of the activities of Nazi
groups in other countries. Such groups have been named as being
active in West Germany, Britain, France, Ireland, Belgium,


Argentina, Chile, Australia, Denmark, Spain, Norway, Sweden and
Iceland.

An example of the ANP's affiliation with the international
order was afforded in the summer of 1963 when the West German
government, alarmed at the rapid revival of German Nazism, launched
a giant crackdown and made wholesale arrests of many of the leaders
in the new Nazi underground movement. The WUNS protested this
action by staging picketing of German embassy buildings in several
countries. Rockwell's ANP uniformed Stormtroopers did their part
by picketing the West German Embassy in Washington, D.C., and also
the West German Consulate in New York City.

These latter-day Nazis pay homage to the "spiritual
leadership" of Adolf Hitler, and conduct memorial services on his
birthday. As reported in an ANP publication on such a recent
occasion: "On the great day, April 20th, the Leader's Birthday,

Nazi leaders from Chile to Iceland and from Australia to Madrid
held hushed and impressive memorial services for the Hero who
saved White, Christian, Western Civilization from Bolshevik, race-
mixing catastrophe."

The central theme in Nazi publications is that "Nazism,
far from being anything evil, is the White Man's only defense
against the greatest evils in the world, Communism and race-mixing."
And, according to the tenets of the Nazis, behind those two evils


ANP -7


looms the menace of Jewry. The creed of the American Nazi was fairly
well capsulized recently by "Captain Ralph R. Forbes, Commanding,
Western Division" when he wrote:

" We oppose Communism and all those connected

with that dangerous conspiracy. We recognize that the
• Jewish people are primarily to blame for the existence of
Communism. Jews founded Communism, and they have always

been the driving force behind it We believe in

preservation of the white race, and we oppose the mixing
of the races. Integration must eventually lead to inter-
marriage and mongrelization. Our country can rise again
from a foreign military attack, but once our people are
mongrelized, it can never rise again. We advocate the
voluntary return to their native Africa of all Negroes.

Those who wish to remain here will be segregated, second
class citizens. We recognize that in the field of racial
destruction the eternal Jew is again at work "


On the domestic scene, Rockwell has sought to expand and
strengthen his "movement," however despite all his efforts he has
not been able to build his party to any significant size. The
Arlington headquarters is customarily staffed with anywhere from
a dozen to two dozen Stormtroopers . Additionally, there are units
of varying strength located in other parts of the country. Members
have stated that at any given time Rockwell could mobilize less
than 150 uniformed Stormtroopers nationwide. He has other front
groups, however, which bolster his position. One of those groups
is FAN -- "Fighting American Nationalists." An intra-party joke
is that the initials actually stand for "Future American Nazis . "
FAN was established as an operation for those members who do not


ANP-8


wish to be publicly identified as Nazis. Also, behind those front
groups are the assortment of sympathizers who can be relied upon to
forward contributions when the Nazis perpetrate some action result-
ing in widespread publicity.

In the past three or four years the American Nazis have
managed to keep themselves in the public eye by the staging of
demonstrations on a variety of fronts. In their picketing activities
they have with some frequency been involved in violence, and on some
occasions neair -riots have taken place, and some of the Nazis have
been arrested and served jail sentences. Following such occurrences
the ANP publications have lauded the heroic members as martyrs to
the cause. Illustrative of the ANP's activities on the national
scene are the following incidents:

When public interest was focused on the invasion of
the South by the "Freedom Riders" in the summer of 1961,
Rockwell's Stormtroopers followed in their path in a so-
called "Hate Bus" decorated with anti-Negro and anti-
Jewish slogans. The Hate Bus travelled in the same general
route of the Freedom Riders from Washington, D.C., south-
ward to New Orleans, where the police ordered the removal
of the signs. In that city on May 24, 1961, Rockwell and
nine of his followers picketed a theatre showing the film
"Exodus" and a NAACP meeting, and were arrested for
disturbing the peace. While in jail they copied the
Freedom Riders by going on a hunger strike.

In that year and following, the ANP made something
of a project out of picketing theatres showing the
"Exodus" film. The Nazis staged demonstrations in Boston,
Philadelphia, Detroit, Washington, D.C., etc., and at some
of those "actions" there was violence and near-riots.

On September 28, 1962, an American Nazi Party member.


ANP -9


Roy James, made a fistic attack upon the Rev. Martin Luther
King, Jr., as the Negro integrationist was addressing the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference in Birmingham, Ala.

In April 1963, in Washington, D.C., ANP members Karl
Allen and Dave Peterson attempted to disrupt a Negro
demonstration by joining the marching demonstrators dressed
in ape-like costumes and carrying a large anti-Negro banner.

- At other demonstrations Stormtroopers in uniform and carry-
ing anti-Negro banners sought to disrupt the demonstrations.

On September 3, 1964, an ANP member disrupted a session
of the House Committee on Un-American Activities in
Washington, D.C. , when he rushed from the audience toward
a witness, in an attempted assault.

On AugUst 24, 1964, in Atlantic City on the Boardwalk
in front of the Convention Hall during the Democratic Party
convention, eight ANP members in uniform appeared carrying
signs "Lyndon Johnson is a Traitor." Police rescued them
from the crowd after a brief but wild brawl, and placed
them under arrest. (One of the Nazis in that incident was
"Lieutenant" Harry Blair, who is presently heading the
San Francisco unit of the Party.)

On January 4, 1965, the proceedings in the House of
Representatives in Washington were disrupted when a bizarre
figure raced past the guards into the chamber, shouting,

"I'ze the Mississippi delegation." The intruder, who
identified himself as ANP member Robert Lloyd, was dressed
in black tights, a fur-like black loin cloth, top hat, and
with blackened face. As he was dragged away, he shouted
"Long live Rockwell . "

The attitude with which the party members view that type

of "action" is well illustrated in the party biographies which are

published, extolling the heroes of the movement, as follows:

"MAJOR KARL R. ALLEN, Deputy Commander. Joined August 1961.
Veteran of 6 missions. Lone White Man to publicly give
speech against nigger march in D.C., August 28 against
police ban (for which he was jailed); led bloody Philadelphia
IV (Picket -fight at Anti-Defamation League) ; recently jumped


ANP -10


on stage in Danville, Va. , and told off Martin Luther King
before packed hall of coons; is largely credited with getting
Party on organized, business-like basis internally; is
holder of Party Prison Medal and Medal of Merit; received
Letter of Commendation for outstanding organizational and
administrative work; is graduate of Florida University and
the Harvard Graduate School of Business. Former U. S. Army
officer."

"MAJOR J„ V. KENNETH MORGAN, Party Adjutant. Joined Spring
1958. First man to actively join Commander Rockwell. 13
missions, including Party's first street battle in 1959;
veteran of famous 'Riot on the Mall' July 3, 1960; drove
truck to Boston filled with Nazis January 1961 in riot
with 10,000 Jews and reds; holder of Adolph Hitler Bronze
Medal for, defending Commander at first headquarters.

Wound Medial and 3 Prison Medals."

"CAPTAIN ROY JAMES, Commander's Body Guard. Joined Fall
1960. 17 missions. Boston riot; "Hate Bus" tour; leaped

on stage in Birmingham, Ala. , and bashed Martin Luther King
in the face before hundreds of screeching coons September
9, 1962; commanded Chicago headquarters 1963; jailed with
Commander in Emporia, Va. , for 'starting up a war against
the Negroes 1 ; received Adolf Hitler Bronze Medal for
defending Commander in Boston Riot; Adolf Hitler Silver
Medal (highest award in Party) for defending White Race
against raging coons in Birmingham. Holder of 4 Prison
Medals . "

Etc .


During the course of the Party's existence there has
evolved from the membership a small hard core of seasoned veterans
who have proven themselves in their value to the Party and in
their dedication to the cause. Those men, as represented by the
above, are the ranking officers of the Party today. While the
membership in the lower eschelons fluctuates with comings and


ANP-11


goings, the elite of the Party in its positions of rank remain
constant. They constitute the staff through which the Commander's
programs are carried out. All available information indicates
that the majority, if not all, of the officers of rank have no
employment other than that of Party work.

= 0 = 0 =

Turning to the California scene, the "Western Division"
of the Party has never been represented by more than a handful
of members. Thd first unit in the Los Angeles area came into
existence sometime in 1960-61 and was headed by Leonard Holstein,
age 20. Little progress was made under Holstein's leadership,
and the active membership fluctuated, usually numbering about
a dozen members. The group's public actions were limited: they

picketed the Huntington Hartford Theatre in Hollywood when Negro
entertainer Sammy Davis, Jr. was appearing there; and on March
24, 1962, they demonstrated in front of the Progressive
(Communist) Bookstore in Los Angeles. (On the latter "action"
Holstein was accompanied by two other Stormtroopers , one of whom
was Robert Lewton who later emerged as an officer in the
California unit of the National States Rights Party and the
editor of its paper, "Attack.")

During that period of relative calm, the group sometimes
indulged in combat training practice with weapons in the Palos


ANP-12


Verdes Hills. Their spirits were dampened when one of the Nazis,
Robert F. Garber, Jr. , was arrested for illegal possession of a
machine gun which he had purchased as a de-activated piece and
then converted into an operable condition.

April 28, 1963 was a turning-point for the local Nazis.
On that date five uniformed Stormtroopers appeared before the
Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles where the American Zionist
Council was conducting an observance of the 15th anniversary of
the independence of Israel. The Nazis bore anti-Semitic signs
mounted on 4 ft. x 1-1/2 inch staffs. They shoved their way into
the crowd and, "as if by prearrangement," tore the signs from the
staffs and began swinging wildly at everyone within reach. A
melee ensued in which five police officers and four civilians
were injured. The Nazis were tried and convicted on a variety of
charges, and received varying jail and prison sentences.

That happening and its aftermath practically paralyzed

the local movement for a period of time and its reactivation was

slow and difficult. Rockwell assigned the task of rebuilding the

unit to Captain Ralph P. Forbes, whose Party biography reads:

CAPTAIN RALPH P. FORBES: "Commander Western Division,

Joined December 1960. 8 missions. Philadelphia I,

where he did 60 days solitary confinement in Moya-
mensing Prison for EXODUS picket; Boston riot 1961;
bloody fight at White House picket Sept. 1962; Party
legal officer; holder of Party Adolf Hitler Bronze


ANP-13


r if".

Medal; 2 Wound Medals; Prison Medal; Medal of Merit; and
Letter of Commendation for Administrative work. Marine
veteran; nominated for West Point."

Forbes' task was made more difficult by the lack of a
headquarters. For a long time the meeting places were shifted
about from location to location in various cities in Los Angeles
County. Sometimes the attendance was only a half-dozen, however
the average Friday night meeting was attended by ten to fifteen
individuals -- some members, some prospective members, and some
just curious neighbors. At length, in December 1964, a house was
leased at 823 E. Colorado Boulevard, Glendale, Calif., to serve
as a headquarters, meeting place, and residence for Forbes and
his family. When it became known that the Nazis were establishing
their headquarters at that location, there was immediate opposition;
the owner took steps to evict them; and the City charged them with
violation of zoning ordinances. The matter is still in dispute,
and court actions are pending at this time.

With Forbes attempting to build up the strength of the
Party in the Los Angeles area, a step was taken last month to
spark the small unit in San Francisco to increased activity and
growth by placing a new leader in charge of it. The order of
appointment was:

"By order of Commander Rockwell, Lt . Harry Blair of
National Headquarters, is being transferred to command


ANP-14


/■'


duty in San Francisco, California.

"Lt . HARRY BLAIR is a three year Party veteran.

He is a Headquarters trained man, with vast experience
in street demonstrations. He rose through the ranks
to become a Lieutenant and the Commander's personal
body-guard here at National Headquarters. Lieutenant
Blair has been in three full-scale riots while
demonstrating against race-mixing and communist treason
in Philadelphia and Atlantic City, New Jersey. Combat-
ready and unafraid of jail. Lieutenant Harry Blair is
ready to go full blast in San Francisco "

For the present, Lt. Blair is spending a great amount of
time assisting^ Capt. Forbes at the Western Division headquarters.

A recent "action" by the local group was the dispatching
by Forbes of a bus load of Stormtroopers from the Glendale head-
quarters to travel to Sacramento and San Francisco to conduct
demonstrations against Governor Brown. That occurred on the week-
end of January 16-17, 1965. The principal activity took place in
Sacramento where the Nazis briefly picketed the State Capitol and
the Governor's Mansion.

A recent "action" took place February 2, 1965, on the


steps of the Los Angeles City Hall where a demonstration was being
conducted in protest over the jailing of Dr. Martin Luther King,
Jr., in Selma, Ala. The proceedings were disrupted briefly when
a uniformed Nazi named Daniel P. Skelley poured water on his
uniform from a gasoline can and declared he was going to burn
himself as a protest against "Rac e -mixing. " He was escorted away
by police after being offered a match by a television commentator.


ANP-15


COMMENTARY


The very existence of the Nazis in this country provides
interesting material for a clinical study of that minute fraction
of the population which accepts and actively supports an alien
ideology of hatred and racial superiority which has been renounced
and discredited in its homeland and elsewhere. No amount of
propaganda picturing Adolf Hitler as a hero doing battle with
the Communists |n defense of "White Western civilization" can
erase the ugly facts of history. Yet in this country there are
individuals who have embraced fully the Nazi ideology in a latter-
day imitation of the original.

There are those -- whose numbers are unknown -- who
support the movement by sending in contributions. There are
those -- numbered somewhere in the hundreds -- who have drifted
into the movement, been converted and actively participated as
members, then drifted out. Then there are the zealots -- numbered
somewhere in the dozens -- who have for years dedicated their
lives to the movement.

Among the supporters there are those in the classifica-
tion of "angels" who can be relied upon either regularly or in
times of financial crisis. It is said that Rockwell can turn
to about twenty such "angels" in acute necessity. The other


ANP-16


contributions customarily result from "actions" which receive wide-
spread news coverage, or from any other type of publicity.

Publicity serves as the life blood of the American Nazi
Party; without it the movement would wither and fade into obscurity.
Illustrative of this fact was the financial gain derived from the
well -publicized riot at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles on
April 28, 1963. The news media coverage was fairly extensive and
triggered an avalanche of contributions to the California Party,
which up to th'at time had been poverty-stricken. From a source
considered reliable, it is said that these contributions totaled
approximately $7,000.

Further, there are the funds received by the front groups.
Reportedly some of those funds are funneled to the use of the
Party. "Captain" Ralph Forbes and his Western Division have used
such fronts as: "Keep America White Committee," "Keep Glendale

White Committee," "Committee to Gas Martin Nigger Coon," "Fighting
American Nationalists" (F.A.N.), "California Independent Voters
Educational Association," and others. Generally, the propaganda
material sent out by those fronts has been similar to the Party
outpourings .

Since their finances and membership growth are directly
related to their publicity, all "actions" are programmed in
consideration of the amount of publicity they will yield. To


ANP-17


guarantee the fullest amount of coverage, it is standard practice to

/

send out announcements to all news media well in advance of the
planned "action." An ANP tactic giving an impression of greater
numbers than they actually have is to send busloads of members from
Los -Angeles to other cities for demonstrations. While they may pick
up a supporter or two in those cities, the majority of the demon-
strators are from Los Angeles County. Such trips have extended as
far away as Phoenix, Arizona.

A youn)g man being inducted into the strange world of
Nazism first serves as a Probationary Stormtrooper and does not
achieve the status of full Stormtrooper until he has participated
in at least five "actions" that the Nazis consider potentially
dangerous. The recruit's participation is duly recorded and recogni-
tion given for outstanding achievements. (As in military terminology
in which an "action" is a salient happening in a campaign, in Nazi
lexicography an "action" is a salient happening in their campaign
to achieve control of this country by 1972.) In that regard there
comes to mind immediately two incidents of recent occurrence -- the
disruption of the orderly procedure of the House of Representatives
in Washington, D. C. by a Nazi in blackface and outlandish costume,
and the spectacle of a uniformed Nazi pouring water from a gasoline
can over himself and threatening immolation before a crowd on the
steps of the Los Angeles City Hall -- and it is conjectured whether


or not those senseless performances will entitle the perpetrators
to special recognition amounting to a Letter of Commendation, the
Medal of Merit, or possibly even the Order of Adolf Hitler, in
bronze. And that leads to the consideration of the individuals
who would commit such acts, and who could afterwards bask in the
applause of their fellows for their heroic behavior in advancing
the cause.

Those in a position to know are in general agreement
that the Party ^membership falls within three classifications:

1) Those possessing a good educational background and
above average intelligence.

2) Those of a medium level of intelligence and schooling,
but well-versed in German Nazism and National Socialism.

3) Those of little education and limited intelligence who
lack the capacity of comprehension. It is within this
classification that the majority of the membership
assertedly falls.

Further, it is said that the general statement can be made
that the members are the misfits and maladjusted of society; and
that their individual anti-social behavior is, through Party member-
ship, carried over into group anti-social behavior. That statement
appears to be supported in some measure by their criminal records.

Of sixty-five known California members, past and present, thirty-
one have records totaling 131 arrests. Eleven of the thirty-one
have served or are currently serving sentences in State prisons.


ANP-19


The 131 arrests were for offenses ranging from misdemeanors to felonies
such as robbery, burglary, auto theft, narcotics, sex perversion,
carrying concealed weapons, assault, assault with a deadly weapon,
rape, possession of machine guns, indecent exposure, and assault
with intent to commit murder.

The Friday night regular meetings of the Western Division
Nazis vary somewhat in their programs. Some are conducted in a
formal military manner with members wearing uniforms. Others are
conducted informally . Some of the members never wear uniforms .
Generally, the meetings are devoted to discussions of the Party's
objectives and activities, sometimes reading from Hitler's Mein
Kampf , how the Party will gain control of this country by the
target date of 1972, how the nation will be governed under the
Nazis, and naturally the group's activities at the local level;
picketing, demonstrations, etc. The central theme of the member-
ship discussions is that the American Nazi movement is patterned
after its predecessor, and that in all practical aspects it is an
attempted continuation of the parent German movement, even to and
including Hitler's program for the solution of "the Jewish problem."

Such is the American Nazi movement of today. As has been
frequently expressed by knowledgeable observers of the scene, the
antics of George Lincoln Rockwell and his fellows are ludicrous


ANP-20


and politically insignificant; almost as much so as were the antics
of Adolf Schickelgruber and his fellows in the Germany of the


NATIONAL STATES RIGHTS PARTY


(


NATIONAL STATES RIGHTS PARTY

The NSRP is largely a one-man project. Edward R. Fields
is the guiding spirit of the Party and its authoritarian leader.

Today its headquarters is located in Birmingham, Alabama, from
which the party organ is issued and the activities of half a dozen
"state units" directed. NSRP is both anti-Negro and anti-Semitic,
but it has always considered Jews the principal enemy and the Negro
civil rights movement merely an instrument of a Jewish conspiracy.
Fields has never given membership figures but claims that NSRP is
the third largest political party in the United States. That claim
has been challenged by others .

In tracing the genesis of this organization, it is found
that Fields had a considerable background of experience with hate
groups before he founded the Party. In 1946, at the age of 14,
while a student at Marist College, a prep school in Atlanta, Georgia,
he joined the Columbians, a fascist stormtrooper group led by Emory
Burke. (The Columbians, founded in post-war Georgia by Ira Jett
and Emory Burke, was a para-military combat group that actively
plotted a take-over of the State of Georgia. Following a series of
disturbances, Burke and the other officers were seized, along with
considerable stores of arms, ammunition, and explosives -- and a
list of public officials and private citizens to be exterminated


NSRP-1


r \ {

\ 'i V

when the Columbians rose to power. Burke was sentenced to three years
in prison.) Following Burke's conviction, Fields worked on a "Free
Emory Burke Committee," and was associated closely with his fellow
committeeman, General George Van Horn Mosely. In 1952, while at-
tending law school in Atlanta, Fields joined with a fellow student,
Jesse B. Stoner, in a paper organization called the Christian Anti-
Jewish Party. While Stoner continued his studies and was ultimately
admitted to the Georgia Bar, Fields dropped out and attended the
Palmer School of ^Chiropractics in Davenport, Iowa, from 1953 until
1956. While there he was active in several organizations, then
moved to Louisville, Kentucky, where he practiced chiropractics .

In Louisville, he joined with Millard D. Grubbs in the activities
of Grubbs' "Citizens Council," a white supremacy group. In 1957
he was one of the organizers of an anti-Semitic, anti-Negro "Action
Group" called the United White Party. (One of the other founders
was Matt Koehl, former leader of the young 'Elite Guard' of the
Hitler-emulating National Renaissance Party, and who later served
as Security officer of the National States Rights Party until 1962
when he went over to Rockwell's American Nazi Party.) Sometime
thereafter the United White Party merged with a segregationist
group called the States Rights Party, and from that coalition there
emerged the National States Rights Party in 1958. In its develop-
ment, the NSRP has absorbed several smaller groups. In early 1961


NSRP-2


the NSRP joined the "Northern European Ring," an international
fascist group of associations, and was welcomed by the British
National Party into its "circle of friendship and cooperation."

Turning back to Fields' long-time associate, Jesse B.
Stoner, it is interesting to note that he had a similar back-
ground in hate groups. In 1942, at the age of 18, he was a
"Kleagle" (organizer) of the Ku Klux Klan group in Chattanooga.

He later was a member of the Columbians . In 1946 he announced
that he was foAnding a new party which would out-Hitler Hitler,
whom he termed a moderate. The Stoner Anti -Jewish Party, which
proposed to make Judaism a crime punishable by death, received
541 out of 30,000 votes cast in 1948 when Stoner ran for Congress.

In 1952, as law students in Atlanta, Stoner joined with Fields
in changing the name of the Stoner Anti-Jewish Party to the
Christian Anti-Jewish Party. Later, following the organization
of the new NSRP, Stoner became its general Counsel. In 1959, he
became Imperial Wizard of the Christian Knights of the Ku Klux Klan
which opened its official four-state headquarters in Louisville,
Kentucky, during the summer of that year. Stoner continues to
publish a small Klan bulletin in Atlanta, as well as serving
actively in NSRP.

Originally, the headquarters of NSRP was in Jeffersonville,
Indiana, at the home of a member. In 1960 headquarters was moved


NSRP -3


to Birmingham, Alabama, to a stone building at 1865 Bessemer Road,
which it has continued to occupy to the present time. The building
was outfitted to resemble a military headquarters, decorated with
Confederate flags and plaques picturing the thunderbolt symbol,
and including a bunkroom for members . It was at that time that
Fields reconstructed NSRP along more military lines. The thunder-
bolt symbol continued to be used -- the symbol formerly used by
the Columbians -- and a flag was adopted which consisted of the
Confederate Star^ and Bars with a lightening bolt superimposed
over it. A Party uniform was designed consisting of white shirt,
black tie, Sam Browne belt and black trousers, and with armbands
bearing the thunderbolt design. For a time the military discipline
at headquarters was reportedly almost as strict as that maintained
by Rockwell's Nazis, but apparently that was relaxed as time went


on .


The Party creed and objectives may be gleaned from the

following excerpts from the Preamble to the Party's constitution:

"We of the National States Rights Party believe in the
Christian heritage of our people, the White Race and
the Nation which the White man created out of the
wilderness of this continent. ... We believe in the
principles laid down by our forefathers in the United
States Constitution and the Bill of Rights contained
therein. ... We will not allow the blood of our people
to be polluted with that of black, yellow, or mongrel
peoples. . . . All that is patriotic, good, clean, and
decent springs forth from the foundations of our White
folk. ... We dedicate ourselves to the task of saving


NSRP -4


America and the White Race and the preservation of the pure
blood of our forefathers, so that all future generations
which come after us will be born as White children with
a creative intelligence that will strengthen our civilized
influence over the world for the good of all mankind "


As Fields has frequently written in the Party organ, "The
Thunderbolt," the Party's objectives would be accomplished by mass
deportations of members and descendants of "mongrel" races; and
with reference to those who declined to leave: "Later on the

country would l^ave to be purified." Those wholesale deportations
would be accompanied by confiscation of the property of the
deportees .

Fiftieth issue anniversary of The Thunderbolt of April
1963: "Our Party, upon being elected to national power,

will deport the Jews to Madagascar and confiscate their
ill-gotten wealth for the benefit of the American people.

When the Jews are gone, we Americans will own rich
America. We want our money back. The Jews have our
money and we want it back. When we get it back, we will
enjoy a genuine and lasting prosperity, with plenty for
all "


As a political party, NSRP files quarterly financial
reports with the Clerk of the House of Representatives. In 1961
its reported income totalled $15,555 with expenditures of $14,209.
The 1963 report showed an increase — $44,201 income, offset by
expenditures of $42,828. Fields' salary was shown to have risen
from $300 per month in 1961 to $550 per month in 1963. The only
other salaried position listed was that of associate editor.


NSRP -5


In its political activity, the Party has consistently
supported candidates whose ideologies were in consonance with
that of the Party. It has supported the well-known racist
Admiral John G. Crommelin in his many unsuccessful tries for
political office. Prior to the last national election, a series
of articles in The Thunderbolt, advanced as candidate for president,
John Kasper, and for vice-president, NSRP attorney J. B. Stoner.
(Kasper at that time was an automobile dealer in Nashville,
Tennessee. He wls the founder and "director" of the Seaboard
White Citizens Councils. This group, which was not affiliated
with the federated Citizens Councils of America, was described
as a Hitler-inspired movement to deport Negroes and de-citizenize
Jews. Kasper served three jail terms for leading rioting against
school integration in Clinton and Nashville, Tennessee.) The
proposed platform of the candidates encompassed the complete
program of the NSRP; purifying America through deportation of
Negroes and other inferior races and the confiscation of Jewish
wealth.

The NSRP has qualified in several Southern states as
a political party, although much of its program appears to be
devoted to that of a racist "Action Group." Some understanding
of its activities can be gleaned from the following samplings:


NSRP -6


On October 12, 1958, a Jewish synagogue was dynamited
in Atlanta, Georgia. Five men were subsequently arrested
for the crime, and all five were identified as members of
the NSRP. Those charged were tried and acquitted.

In the fall of 1962 £>even NSRP members traveled to
Oxford, Mississippi, to join the protest against James
Meredith's enrollment in the University. Some firearms
were confiscated from the automobile belonging to one
of the men.

In 1963 during the period of Birmingham's integration
of schools and lunch counters , the NSRP was much in the
forefront. NSRP members staged demonstrations, held
rallies, and distributed thousands of leaflets and
"Bulletins." Fields and other NSRP leaders addressed
rallies and participated in demonstrations.

On September 15, 1963, a Baptist Church in Birmingham
was dynamited and four children killed. Among the suspects
arrested in connection with the bombing were a NSRP member,
a Klansman, and another individual. All were charged with
illegal possession of dynamite, fined, and sentenced to
six months prison terms.

In September 1963, seven members of NSRP, including
Fields and Stoner, were indicted by a Federal grand jury
on a charge of conspiring to interfere with the Federal
Court's desegregation order. In February 1964, the
cases were dismissed.

On July 23, 1964, in St. Augustine, Florida, warrants
were issued for the arrest of four men accused of burning
a cross on private property. Those named in the warrant
were two Klan leaders, NSRP member Conrad Lynch, and
NSRP attorney J. B. Stoner.


The NSRP has been intensely active in its opposition to
the desegregation issue, and has been a storm center in the Negro
civil rights movement. In the summer and fall of 1963, it played
a particularly active role in agitational action in northern


NSRP -7


Florida, which added to the build-up- of racial tensions which later
exploded in St.. Augustine. In early summer of that year there
returned to NSRP headquarters from California where he had acted
as State Organizer, a firebrand by the name of Conrad "Connie"
Lynch. Lynch, a self -ordained Fundamentalist -type preacher, had
a particular talent for rousing strong emotions in audiences.

That talent was utilized by the NSRP and Ku Klux Klan attorney,

J. B. Stoner, who teamed with Lynch in touring the northern part
of Florida for tAe purpose of revitalizing the Klan in that area.
They held recruiting meetings throughout September and October
in what was termed a highly successful tour. Then in the follow-
ing June when the racial tensions reached a crisis at the time the
Reverend Martin Luther King went to St. Augustine to spark the
Negro integration program there, Stoner and Lynch appeared on the
scene to set off the explosion. By his nightly haranguings in the
Slave Market, Lynch was credited with agitating the mobs to much
of the bloody violence that took place in that city over a period
of several days. Subsequently, the Florida Senate appointed an
Investigating Committee to conduct inquiry into the situation,
and the Committee report to the Legislature pointed to Lynch's
appearances in St. Augustine's Slave Market, describing him as

"accomplished at whipping a crowd into a riotous condition "

= 0 = 0 =


NSRP -8


The August 1962 issue of the Thunderbolt announced the


appointment of James P. Thornton as the California State Organizer
for the NSRP. Thornton made a slow start by establishing a head-
quarters at his home in Garden Grove, California, and by dis-
tributing the Party literature at meetings of other organizations
and holding small organizational meetings. From his contacts with
the local American Nazi group, Robert Lee Lewton was influenced
to leave the Nazi Party and join with Thornton in NSRP by becoming
editor of the Party's local publication called "The Attack."

In early 1963 Thornton was named as State Director,
Robert Lewton as Deputy Director, and the aforementioned Conrad
Lynch as State Organizer. This shifting was apparently made in
an effort to vitalize the movement in this State. Robert Barber
was made District Director of Kern County; and Newman Britton was
named to two posts, that of District Director of San Bernardino
and of Security Division Chief of Staff. The Britton brothers
operated a plastering contractors business in San Bernardino,
and they reportedly employed Lynch in some capacity.

Thereafter, organizational meetings were held in various
localities in Southern California. Those were spirited meetings
at which Conrad Lynch delivered impassioned diatribes against the
Jews and Negroes, and his vehement outpourings were matched by
those of Neuman Britton. A contrast was afforded by the low-keyed


NSRP -9


pitch of Thornton. The NSRP uniforms, banners, and symbols were
much in evidence at those meetings.

The chain of churches called Church of Jesus Christ
Christian headed by the Reverend Wesley Swift, and also the Open
Bible Foundation Church in Bellflower presided over by the Reverend
George Rigler, were used, among other meeting places, in that
organizational drive. NSRP's The Thunderbolt, in urging its
readers to attend those churches, described Rigler as "one of the
best speakers on^the Israel Identity Message." Conrad Lynch had
for many years previously been associated with the Reverend Wesley
Swift as a preacher in Swift's churches. In fact, it was an
incident following such a meeting in Lynch's own assigned ministry,
the Church of Jesus Christ Christian at 253 Cajon Boulevard,

San Bernardino, that marked a turning point in NSRP's activities
in this State. On February 22, 1963, at the conclusion of the
meeting, several of the uniformed NSRP members repaired to a
nearby coffee shop where they became involved in a quarrel with
some high school students. The quarrel developed into a physical
altercation in which one of the students was wounded by a pellet
fired from a pellet gun assertedly in the hands of one of the
NSRP men. Neuman Britton and his brother, Rufus R. Britton, were
subsequently found guilty in a jury trial on charges of disturbing
the peace and battery, and Conrad Lynch of disturbing the peace.


NSRP -10


That incident marked the end of the organizational drive,
and when Lynch was removed from his post as State Organizer by
‘Fields because of his emotional extremism, and when Thornton moved
to Birmingham to work at Party headquarters, the NSRP movement in
this State came to a halt. Thornton became Associate Editor of
The Thunderbolt until he quarreled with Fields, and thereafter he
joined with other NSRP apostates in forming a new and rival
organization called the American States Rights Party. The Chairman
was named as jlmes R. McDaniel, Sr., and the Information Director,
Jerry Dutton, both ex -members of NSRP. The house organ of ASRP
is entitled "The White American," and is an expensive, two-color
tabloid published in Birmingham, Ala. The ASRP is also semi-
military in its makeup. Its officers are listed according to
military rank, and it too has a party uniform, white shirt with
black embroidered shoulder tabs and black collar tabs, and black
trousers. Thornton visited California in November 1964, seeking
to enlist a State organizer, but from the silence following his
visit it can be concluded that his quest was unproductive.

The NSRP has just recently taken a step aimed at another
organizational attempt in California. The Party organ announced
the appointment of Terrel R. Eddy to the post of State Chairman
of the California Division of NSRP. Following that announcement,
Eddy sent out a mimeographed letter bearing the date of January


NSRP -11


29, 1965, addressed to "NSRP Friends and Supporters" soliciting
funds for financing the start of a California unit. The mailing
address of the new State Chairman was given as Box 17343, San Diego,
California.

About three weeks later, Conrad Lynch and Neuman Britton
made application to the City of San Bernardino for the use of the

Civic Auditorium in that city for a meeting to be held under the

/

joint sponsorship of the NSRP and the Christian Defense League.

(The latter organization is one of the Rev. Wesley Swift's fronts
described in the following chapter.) Other reports recently re-
ceived give clear indication that the NSRP is again conducting
an organizational drive in this State, and that except for the
naming of a new State Chairman, the organizational work will be
conducted by the same individuals as before. Thus, the direct
connection between the NSRP and the Rev. Wesley Swift combine
will continue.


NSRP -12


COMMENTARY


Fields, the man who heads this organization, and his close
associate, Stoner, both served what might be termed apprenticeships
in- their chosen field of activity through their memberships in
the Columbians. The Columbians, it should be remembered, were not
just another hate group of agitators, they were a band of insur-
rectionists engaged in a conspiracy to violently overthrow the
government of thie State of Georgia. It is of no small significance
that the symbol of the NSRP was borrowed directly from the Columbians .
Of more compelling significance is the fact that a close relation-
ship was maintained with Emory Burke, the Columbians' leader, until
it was ended, at least temporarily, by a quarrel in January 1963.

After serving three years in prison, Burke was released
in 1949, and some time thereafter he worked for Gerald L. K. Smith's
Christian Nationalist Crusade. In 1958, he worked for Admiral
Crommelin in the Georgia gubernatorial campaign of that year.

In that year also he was named as "Advisor" to NSRP. In August,

1962, he was appointed to the post of President of the "Patriotic
National Center and School of Racial Studies and Leadership
Training." That was a NSRP school located in Montgomery, Ala.,
which opened the following month to be a headquarters for the
youth sections of all NSRP units, housed in a building containing


NSRP -13


classrooms and a dormitory. In addition to that post, Burke was
named director of the NSRP's speakers’ bureau. He was honored
by being issued NSRP membership Card #1. Following a close and
long-time association, he quarreled with one of the Party's other
officers, and according to The Thunderbolt, "... resigned to
establish a one-man group of his own." It is not known whether
or not the breach has been healed, but it was the continuing
relationship itself which is of significance in this study.

There lis the relationship of the NSRP with the Ku Klux
Klan which is publicly established, and which requires no further
elaboration. The program of activities which the Party conducted
in connection with the Negro civil rights movement in the South,
and which was briefly touched upon in this chapter, also speaks
for itself.

The California Senate Factfinding Subcommittee on Un-
American Activities in its Twelfth Report, 1963, gave some coverage
to NSRP's organizational activities in early 1963, and reported
this conclusion: "This organization is, in our opinion, more

potentially dangerous than any of the American Nazi groups, as
it is interested in activities that are far more vigorous and
direct than the picketing that has become so popular in this
country during the past few years . "


NSRP -14


CALIFORNIA RANGERS


©


CALIFORNIA RANGERS

In many respects this is a continuation of the preceding
chapter -- an exploration of the relationships between the
individuals in the NSRP movement with like-minded individuals in
California engaged in similar programs of activity.

In exploring those relationships, attention first is
directed to the activities of the Reverend Wesley Albert Swift,
a resident of Lancaster, California. In 1945, he was identified
as a Ku Klux Klan organizer. Following a cross -burning incident
in the Big Bear area in that year, he refused to testify at a
State Attorney General's hearing into the matter. From that time,
reports have been received of Klan organizational activity in the
Antelope Valley, and inevitably Swift's name has been mentioned
in connection therewith. In a recent article appearing in a
national magazine, he was described as "a former Kil Klux Klan
rifle-team instructor." Swift is a prolific organizer and has
been instrumental in launching a complex of groups: The California

League Against Communism, The Anglo-Saxon Christian Congregation,
The Christian Defense League, and The California Rangers. He was
early associated with Gerald L. K. Smith, and in 1949 he shared
the platform with Smith on a tour of the West Coast. In 1953, he
became the legal representative of Smith's Christian Nationalist


Crusade .


CR-1


In 1946, Swift founded a fundamentalist-type church called
Church of Jesus Christ - Christian, which in the past two decades
has been developed into a chain of such units from Southern
California through the Central Valley to the San Francisco-Oakland
bay area. According to Swift, the church extends to other states
and overseas. Swift uses his pulpit to disseminate his political
ideology.

Named as president of the church's "Eastern Conference"
is the Reverend Oren Potito who ministers to one of the sect's
churches in St. Petersburg, Florida. He was quoted recently as
stating that the church had organized what he called "guerrilla-
warfare units."

He said, "These 'survival groups' are designed to defend
the country in case of a take-over. We have regular rifle practice,
and our members go on maneuvers in jeeps and boats in different
places in different states." 1

The Reverend Potito also is a member of the NSRP, and in
the fall of 1962, he joined with other NSRP members in journeying
to Oxford, Mississippi to protest against James Meredith's
enrollment there. He was detained and some firearms were
confiscated from his car.

A long-time associate of Swift's is the Reverend Conrad
"Connie" Lynch, who served as minister at various of the Churches


of Jesus Christ -Christian, throughout California for a period of
ten years. After Lynch was appointed State Organizer for the NSRP,
he used Swift's churches for organizational meetings, and Swift
actively joined in the program as a speaker.

When Lynch returned to California from Florida in 1964,
he again associated with Swift in preaching in the Church of Jesus
Christ -Christian, and in actively promoting the program of another
of Swift's organizations, the Christian Defense League.

Another long-time associate of Swift's is Colonel William
P. Gale, U. S. Army (ret), who in World War II served under General
MacArthur in organizing guerrilla forces in the Philippines. His
political sights have been aimed at the Governorship of California.
He was the state chairman of the Constitution Party in 1957, and
its candidate for governor. In 1962 he announced his candidacy
for the governorship on a platform calling for the abolishment of
both federal and state income taxes. Reportedly, tie now aims at
another try in the 1966 election by attempting to effect a
coalition among the so-called extreme right groups in California
and thereby qualifying a new political party.

In the spring 1964, the Colonel took an active part in
rejuvenating one of Swift's organizations., the Christian Defense
League, when a new financial backer -- James Oviatt of Los Angeles
-- provided substantial assistance. While it was enjoying the


CR-3


stimulus provided by the "angel," CDL started a publication called
Christian Defense News, the first issue of which listed the CDL
Eastern Regional Director as being Admiral John G. Crommelin. As
one of its first steps the CDL sent out letters to "rightist"
groups in which an invitation was extended to all such groups to
join with CDL in a "united front," and through cooperative effort
to gain additional strength in the accomplishment of common goals,
stressing that CDL's purpose was to coordinate and render assistance,
and not to absorb or take over any of the other groups. An induce-
ment was added in the form of an offer to provide legal counsel in
the prosecution of libel and slander actions for all groups and
members joining with CDL.

Reportedly, talks were held with leaders of other groups,
but the results of those talks have not been made manifest. Some
time thereafter, Mr. Oviatt discontinued his support, and the CDL
activities were reduced accordingly. All reports (indicate that
Gale is continuing his efforts toward achieving some type of
coordinating influence among the different groups.

The Christian Defense League is described in its own
publications as an organization designed to unite "white Christians"
in opposition to such Negro and Jewish organizations as the NAACP,
CORE, the Urban League, the American Jewish Congress, Anti-
Defamation League, and B'Nai B'Rith. The major project of the


organization has been the compilation and distribution of a
"Christian Buyer's Guide" which would serve as a directory of
white Christian" business firms recommended for patronage by
white Christians." The hate credo propounded by this organiza-
tion has attracted to its ranks some individuals of extreme


viewpoints, as is illustrated by the following incident:


A Christian Defense League member named William H.
Garland was arrested on October 30, 1964, at his home
in Cucamonga where officers found him to be in possession
of eight, machine guns, of which six were operational, and
nearly 100 other weapons, including rifles, shotguns, and
pistols. A barn on the premises was found to be used as
an ammunition dump for 105mm rockets, incendiary bombs,
smoke bombs, flares, blasting caps, and thousands of
rounds of ammunition. Garland's explanation was that he
had amassed the arsenal as a "patriot" for the purpose of
repelling "invaders."


His defense in this matter was handled by Attorney
Bertrand Comparet of San Diego, a Director of the
Christian Defense League. It might be noted that when
Conrad Lynch and other NSRP organizers were arrested
in San Bernardino on February 22, 1963, as a result of
an altercation with high school students, attorney
Comparet joined with the NSRP and KKK attorney, J. B.
Stoner of Birmingham, Alabama, in handling their defense.


In examining the extent of the influence exercised by such
leaders as Col. William Gale, Rev. Wesley Swift, Rev. Conrad Lynch,
and others associated with them in this movement, it is helpful
to concentrate attention on the leadership rather than on the
several organizations which those leaders utilize for their purposes.
The teachings and pronouncements of those leaders are largely


CR-5


unchanged whether delivered from the pulpit or the speaker's platform,
whether in print or on taped messages, and their converts come under
their influence without regard for organizational labels.

Fundamentally, the ideology propounded by those men is
identical in all major aspects with that of the NSRP, i.e., violently
anti-Semitic and anti-Negro, with emphasis placed upon the need for
immediate action. As stated before, Conrad Lynch of the NSRP has
been a minister in Swift's Church of Jesus Christ -Christian, for
over ten years, and both have been named as being active in the
Ku Klux Klan. Col. Gale has also preached in Swift's churches,
and a few months 350 an announcement was made concerning organiza-
tional plans to establish such a church in the San Fernando Valley
with the Colonel named as minister.

The slight differences in objectives, purposes, and
programs of the various organizations which make up the combine
through which those leaders operate is of less sigkificance than
the fact that through those organizations the leaders propound
the one basic ideology. Membership in any of the organizations
brings an individual into a network of considerable size. It has
been reported that the politically-oriented Christian Defense
League and the religious Church of Jesus Christ-Christian, serve
secondary functions of providing a screening process for militant-
minded members of both to be graduated to the Rangers. Assertedly,


CR-6


the whole complex of organizations can be looked upon as consisting
of an outer circle, an inner circle, and a center hard core. The
entire network must be considered in studying the activities and
the influence wielded by those leaders.

The purpose of the Rangers is to build an underground
network for the conduct of guerrilla warfare. No reliable figures
are currently available, but all information indicates a small
membership figure. The training program is said to encompass
all the different activities which a guerrilla force would be
called upon to undertake, ranging from intelligence to actual
combat. The members assertedly are instructed to acquire firearms,
and to practice in their use. In connection with the acquisition
of firearms, it is of interest to take note of the following
incident:

In August 1963, Ranger member, George Joseph King,

Jr., son of a retired admiral, was arrested in the act
of selling a 50 -caliber machine gun and a 9mm British
Sten gun to undercover agents whom he had been led to
believe were interested in joining the Rangers. That
proposed transaction was to be the first of other deals
in which King had claimed he could produce almost
unlimited quantities of illegal arms.

Under Col. Gale's leadership, some of the recruitment
effort has been directed toward former military servicemen to serve
as an organizational nucleus. In furtherance of that program, the
Colonel in 1963 transferred his American Legion membership to the


Signal Hill post where he and his follower, George Joseph King, Jr.,
joined in converting the post into a front for the Rangers. The
Long Beach Press -Telegram featured an expose of the situation. It
revealed that the regular post meetings were adjourned to listen
to speeches by Gale, and that many of the Legionnaires had joined
Gale's Rangers, which the newspaper described as "a secret guerrilla
group composed of persons devoted to extremist racial and religious
beliefs." Acting upon those reports, the California American Legion
governing board conducted a hearing, found the reports to be valid,
and thereafter in June 1964, revoked the charter of the Signal
Hill post.

Returning again to Rev. Swift, it should be noted he has
purchased over a hundred concealable firearms in the past few
years. Moreover, he maintains a firing range on his Kern County
ranch, as well as a reported secret arsenal.


9


9

COMMENTARY

This organization is designed as a secret underground
guerrilla force, yet it is linked with other non-military organiza-
tions by a common ideology and leadership.

The California leaders of the group have intimate
connections with the Ku Klux Klan, the National States Rights
Party, the Christian Defense League, and the Church of Jesus
Christ -Christian. They are associated with these groups both in
California and in the southern United States.

It is in this perspective that the activities of the
Rangers and its leaders must be viewed.

Reportedly as adherents become more involved in the
racist ideology of any of the "front" organizations, they proceed
from the more politically or religiously oriented organizations
to the more military. ^

Col. Gale has aspired to the governorship of California.
Assertedly he is continuing to cherish this dream. Some of his
followers have joined such groups as the White Citizens Council
reportedly to help effect an eventual amalgamation of extremist
organizations which will result in the ballot qualification of
a new political party in this State.


CR-9


Thus, one can conjecture on the establishment of a new
political group here having as its inner nucleus a secret guerrilla
force -- the Rangers.


MINUTEMEN


MINUTEMEN


This organization is headed by Robert DePugh of
Norborne, Missouri,, Its beginnings and objectives are set forth
in a MM publication entited, "A Short History of the Minute-
men," the initial portion of which is quoted below. The docu-
ment is worthy of reflective study for it declares the credo
of the Minutemen, which in substance is their complete dis-
illusionment with the immediately past and present leaders of
this country, their belief that a "pro-American" government
cannot be established by peaceful political means, that an armed
conflict is an imminent inevitability, and that the Minutemen
should train themselves as a guerrilla force to engage the
"enemy. "


"In June 1960, a group of ten sportsmen leased
a small lake in Missouri and organized a duck hunting
club. The next Sunday they started building duck blinds
around the lake. Someone mentioned the current inter-
national crisis and another man said jokingly, 'Well,
if the Russians invade us, we can come up here and fight
on as a guerrilla band. ' l

"It would have probably ended right there but
one of the members who had special forces training re-
marked that it might not hurt Americans to know a little
more about defending themselves . if this war ever degen-
erates to a last ditch stand. The next Sunday he brought
along some of his training manuals that were read with
interest by the other members. Slowly the joke turned
into a serious project.

"Most books on guerrilla warfare have been
written by persons with deep political convictions
and we found that as we studied strategy and tactics
we also became increasingly concerned with the world
political situation.


"To a group of average Americans it came
as a shock to suddenly realize that in the seventeen
previous years the communists had succeeded in taking
over 17 sovereign nations. We were surprised also
to learn that only one had been taken over by military
conquest. The other sixteen were lost to communism by
internal subversion or negotiation. We began to wonder
why and by what right two presidents of the United States
agreed to turn over to the communists several indep-
endent nations in Eastern Europe and considerable
territory belonging to our Chinese allies without
ever asking the people of those countries who they
wanted to be governed by.

"This was a case of ten average Americans
gradually waking up. Gradually beginning to doubt
whether or not our own government had done everything
that should have been done to stem the tide of com-
munist conquest.

"At first we tried to learn the answer from
the printed literature of other conservative organiz-
ations and by inquiries to our Congressmen and Senators.
Still we didn't feel satisfied. Therefore, we decided
to start out on a six months project. Each one of us
took some particular phase of the problem as his object
for special study. We really dug for the facts. Each
one of us spent all of that six months reading, study-
ing, researching the libraries and joining various
other organizations to learn what their proposed
answer to the problem might be.

"We also began infiltrating various left-
wing organizations to see what makes them effective
and how it is that the communists can dupe so 'many
otherwise sensible people into doing their work for
them.


"Later we held a four day meeting to exchange
information and during which we came to the following
conclusions :

"1. Our diplomatic war against commun-
ism has already been lost by bunglers or traitors
within our own government. Our enemies have been
strengthened through unnecessary lend lease and
foreign aid arrangements. Our traditional allies
have been snubbed and alienated from us . By subscrib-
ing to and translating newspapers from several foreign
countries, we learned that other nations of the free


world do not trust the leaders of American govern-
ment to protect even their fellow Americans from
communism.


"2, This diplomatic war has been and con-
tinues to be lost by appointed government officials
beyond the reach of public opinion,

"3, We cannot win a diplomatic war against
communism abroad until we first establish a genuinely
pro-American government here at home,

"4, We also decided that a pro-American
government could no longer be established by normal
political means. In this one respect our conclusions
differ from those of most conservative movements.

There has not been one presidential election since
World War II where the American public has had an
opportunity to vote for a real American. There have
beer, times when the candidates were built up by big
public relations campaigns that sold them to the
American people but when they were once in office
they failed to act in their nation's best interest.

Even the defeated candidates for president have shown
by subsequent events to be little or no better than
those elected. In each case the people have merely
had an opportunity to vote for whoever they thought
might be the lesser of two evils .. .usually a choice
between two 'internationally minded' members of the CFR.

"5. The minority vote blocks, controlled
labor unions and corrupt political machines so completely
monopolize the American political scene that there
is no chance for the average American citizen to regain
control of his own destiny at the ballot box. All the
media of mass communication are effectively controlled
by the enemy so they can make the people think what-
ever they want them to think. Even if we could awaken
enough Americans to the true facts and get out the
vote for a really patriotic candidate then we must ex-
pect from past lessons that those votes would be stolen.

"6. Having come to these conclusions we
decided that any further effort, time or money spent
in trying to save our country by political means
would be wasted and that we would be better off
spending these limited resources on something that
actually had a little chance of victory.


"7. We learned that the leaders of most
other conservative organizations privately agree that
it is politically impossible to elect a conservative
government. Many of them, however, continue to hope
that they can build up 'public opinion' into such a
strong force that it will prevent our elected govern-
ment officials from actually selling us out to the
enemy Here again we concluded that further efforts
to alert public opinion would be largely wasted. A
politician cares nothing about public opinion except
as it may bring him votes or lose him votes. If
he has enough votes guaranteed by labor, political
and minority interest, then he doesn't give a hoot
about public opinion and will not be restrained by
it.


"8. In this short review we cannot start
to even summarize the facts, data and logic which
brought us to these conclusions. In fact, we did not
want to accept these conclusions, but we felt they
were forced on us by the facts. We concluded that
the American people are moving inexorably toward a
time of total control and frustration such as must
have been felt by the people of Budapest and East
Germany when they finally staged their suicidal revolts.

"Therefore, the objectives of the Minutemen
are to abandon wasteful, useless efforts and to begin
immediately to prepare for the day when Americans
will once again fight in the streets for their lives
and their liberty. We feel there is overwhelming
evidence to prove that this day must come.

"Suppose even that we could somehow, win by
peaceful political means. Is it logical to asstime
that a group of people who have come this close to
conquering the world will give up and withdraw
simply because they lose an election? If we do not
fight them, then they will certainly fight us.

Etc

Robert Bolivar DePugh was 38 when he founded the
MM organization. A native of Independence, Missouri, he was
educated at the University of Missouri, Kansas State, and
Washburn. During World War II he saw one year's service with


MM- 4


the Coast Artillery at Fort Monroe, Virginia. Thereafter he
worked for a variety of drug concerns in the Midwest, and in
the late 1950 's he started his own company, Biolab Corporation,
a pharmaceutical supply house in Norbome, Mo., which he
continues to operate at the present time.

Following the launching of the new organization,
DePugh activated himself in setting up MM units wherever pos-
sible and of also absorbing smaller existing groups. He
travelled extensively throughout the nation in furtherance
of the project, and slowly in time there emerged a scattering
of units in a variety of states.

On one such tour, in November 1961, DePugh visited
Los Angeles for the purpose of conferring with the leader of
a Minutemen-type group in San Diego. That group, called the
Loyal Order of Mountain Men, had been formed and was headed
by William Colley, a free-lance photographer. There had re-
portedly been correspondence between the two leaders, however
it was said that DePugh had expressed reservatioks about some
of Colley's actions. At any rate, the meeting which took
place was between DePugh and Troy Haughton, another member
of the group. The meeting received considerable coverage by
the news media, and Haughton, using the pseudonym of Don
Alderman, was named to head the California Minutemen organi-
zation. The publicity resulting from that meeting brought
to light the fact that both Colley and Haughton were convicted


MM- 5


sex offenders who had failed to register with the local police
as required by law. Each was then arrested for the offense
of failing to register. That public disclosure dampened the
Minutemen movement for a while. Haughton received a full vote
of confidence from DePugh, and subsequently set about carrying
out his organizational duties as regional coordinator. His
position was also strengthened some time later when his rival,
Colley, was arrested and jumped bond on a federal charge of
theft of government property.

Haughton has continued to the present time to function
as regional coordinator as a full-time occupation. Under his
leadership , the Minutemen movement has made some gains in
membership, however reliable information indicates that the
total number of ACTIVE members reached a peak about a year ago
and is now on the decline. All sources agree that the Minute-
men organization is plagued by the same problem with which all
other organizations are beset: that of maintaining member

interest and participation. The problem is renderkd much
more acute in the Minutemen organization by reason of the fact
that its structure is that of a series of isolated units del-
iberately walled off from other units, and in that vacuum of
isolation the member loses the concept of participation. Con-
sequently he loses interest and drifts out of the orbit of the
movement. All reports agree that recently the Minutemen
movement in this State has lost membership. These reports have


MM- 6


been supplied by active and inactive Minutemen members and
their reports are admittedly only educated guesses, for in-
formation concerning such matters is a closely-guarded secret.
Only Haughton and national headquarters have the records.

It is doubtful, in fact, if even Haughton could
supply an accurate membership total because even he could not
determine current active members as opposed to those who
have lost interest and drifted out of the organization
without the formality of resignation.

Of interest is the fact that the Minutemen members
supplying those estimates place the total ACTIVE CALIFORNIA
INDIVIDUAL MEMBERSHIP from 100 to 600. It is the conclusion
of these sources of information that the claims which DePugh
has publicly made concerning the national membership are sheer
bombast.

The Minutemen organization is designed to function
as a secret underground network, and its routine operations in
these t im es of peace are conducted along the lilies of a train-
ing program for the hostilities to come. Each member is assigned
a number which becomes his identification in all communications;
he is warned about the use of the telephone in contacting head-
quarters; he is advised in the use of mail drops; he is warned
to use two envelopes in organization correspondence and to
place an opaque material between the inner and outer envelopes
to prevent the letter from being read by means of infra-red


MM- 7


cameras; and he is instructed to employ a wide variety of
stratagems and devices as "security" measures. However, it
is the training of the members as a guerrilla force that re-
presents the gravest potential danger in this organization.

On the national scene there have been a number of instances
of Minutemen members being found in possession of illegal
weapons either used or intended for use in Minutemen training
There have also been such incidents in this State, as follows

On June 18, 1964, two self-admitted Minute-
men, Willard Noble Holstine and Joseph Raymond Carey,
were taken into custody by Burbank Police when found
in possession of illegal weapons.

On June 27, 1964, Minutemen member Adelbert
Harold Schlapia was taken into custody in the Los
Padres National Forest when found to be in possession
of a veritable arsenal consisting of 33,000 rounds
of assorted ammunition, three M-l rifles, two M-l
carbines, two Czechoslovakian military rifles, some
shotguns, a military 12-guage riot gun, 45-caliber
automatic pistol, etc., in addition to a supply of
gun powder and dynamite caps, and miscellaneous
camping equipment.

On October 16, 1964, Minutemen member Robert
Romero was arrested by Los Angeles police when officers
found in his home the following’ seven machine guns,
six rifles, four hand guns, thousands of rounds of
ammunition and clips of ammunition, dynamite and
dynamite caps, fuses, twenty hand grenades including
smoke, gas, and explosive types, and seven booby
traps.


On March 26, 1965, agents of the Bureau of
CII and officers of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's
Department seized 370 machine guns and a number of
silencers from the premises of the Erquiaga Arms
Company in the City of Industry, Los Angeles County.
The head cf the firm, Juan Erquiaga, was known to
have had dealings with the above-mentioned Minutemen,
Harold A. Schlapia and Robert R. Romero, and also
with Minuteman Keith Dwayne Gilbert who as of this


date is wanted for the theft of 1,400 pounds of ex-
plosives which were recovered from his residence,
together with a cache of weapons and a supply of
Minutemen literature. At the time of the seizure
at the Erquiaga plant, the officers found a rifle
left there for modification belonging to Terrel
R. Eddy, mentioned in another chapter as the State
Chairman of the National States Rights Party of
California.


All information indicates that the Minutemen organ-
ization itself does not own illegal weapons, at least in
California. All sources of information are in agreement that
such weapons as are possessed by Minutemen are individually
owned, and that many Minutemen do not own any contraband
arms. The one piece that all Minutemen are required to have
is a rifle. However, there appears to be every inducement
and invitation to collect illegal arms, as is clearly^ il-
lustrated in the following excerpts from the Minutemen
Handbook which has just recently been offered ^to Minutemen
members :


"Carbines and sub-machine guns should be
carried in the groups supply and issued only for
special missions after the hostilities have started.
When a Ml Carbine is encountered, it will be altered
to M2 by the replacement or alteration of those
parts necessary ..... If at all possible Carbines should
be fitted with infra-red snooperscopes whenever
available. ... .Thompson sub-machine guns, Russian
PPSH/41, and German MP/40 sub-machine guns should
be accumulated as rapidly as possible together with
a great supply of magazines (remember that under com-
bat conditions it is impossible or next to impossible
to reload magazines, and this should be kept in mind),


MM- 9


at least 300 rounds should be kept in the magazines
for each gun "

"Machine guns will be the hardest item of
supply. Browning automatic rifles (BAR) are relatively
plentiful and a first class weapon. Both U.S. and
foreign (Belgian) weapons of this type are entirely
suitable but should be immediately changed to 30/06
caliber. Not less than 20 magazines should be accum-
ulated for each gun. The Browning belt fed weapons, are
fine when they can be obtained. Spare parts for the
aircraft type are hard to come by. The only foreign
designed gun that will be recommended is the Jap type
99 light machine gun in 7.7 mm. This can be altered
to use BAR magazines and the chamber lengthened to take
the 30/06 cartridge "

"The mortar is one of the best light weight
heavy fire weapons available to insurgent or guerrilla
forces, and all heavy fire power should be based
around the use of the mortar. 60mm mortars are avail-
able and are a fine compact weapon with one exception,
the availability of ammunition. The old M2 model
is by far the best, and should be complete with sight
and mount. . . . ."

"Rocket Launchers or Bazookas - These are a
very good and desirable item. When the United States
3 . 5" Bazooka cannot be obtained the German M43 88mm
which is available can be altered so that U.S. shells
can be used. The smaller 2.35 bazooka is a good
weapon but ammunition for this is not available, in
fact the only unit now using the 2.35 is Special
Forces . 3.5 bazooka rounds can be purchased for

as little as $4. each, though they are completely
inactive, but can be activated again with little
trouble "


"All personnel should make every effort to
have on hand as many hand and rifle grenades as
possible. Hand grenade bodies (practice type) are
usually to be found without any trouble. Regulation
issue fuses are hard to come by and no attempt should
be made by a novice to manufacture home-made fuses.
Where hand grenades are procured without a filling
charge, use GI blank powder (EC blank fire powder
280 grains) . Dummy grenades should be acquired and
much time given to practicing with them. Whenever
possible, store the fuses separate from the rest of
the grenade. Rifle grenades are readily available


MM- 10


in practice types. These can be loaded and will
perform as good as issued items. Also, a good
supply of flares that could be discharged from a
grenade launcher should be kept on hand....."


The Handbook provides some interesting and highly
instructive lessons on the following subjects: "The Use of

Explosives in Cutting Steel," "Incendiary Weapons Composition,"
"Field Expedient Flame Land Mine Devices Used by the U.S.

Army," "Booby Traps," "New Molotov Cocktail," "Anti- Vehicular
Mines," Railroad Mines, "The Scheele Incendiary Bomb," etc.,
etc. The Handbook is in a continuing process of compilation,
however even in its present stage it provides a fairly
adequate reference text for the guerrilla fighter.

Some understanding of the type of instruction im-
parted to Minutemen members can be gleaned from the following
excerpts taken from "General Notes and Hints F^rom September
Seminar 1963;" a memorandum listing some of the instruction
material presented at a region-wide field training exercise
held on September 28 and 29, 1963, on privately-owned property
located a short distance from Temecula and attended by some
50-odd members:

"#1--A good method of timing an explosion from ignition
point to cap is the use of sawdust mixed with phosphorus.
The burning time can be varied, depending upon the amount
of sawdust used. The more sawdust added, the longer
the burning time.


MM- 11


members. Through personal calls by F.B.I. agents on
those members that are known, they attempt to frighten
them into inactivity. By infiltration into other con-
servative organizations they have attempted to turn these
people against us, and I am sorry to say that in some cases
they've been fairly successful. By repeated smears in the
news media they are attempting to turn the general public
against us. However, in all of these efforts their success
has been less than spectacular.

"Some of our members have asked about Congressman
Joelson's demand that the House Committee on Un-American
Activities investigate the Minutemen. I doubt seriously
if anything will come of this . We have some good friends
on the Committee, and in any case we have nothing to
worry about. In fact, we may just encourage them to
hold just such an investigation to clear the air and for
its publicity value. After about three years of work on
the organization the F.B.I. has succeeded in identifying
approximately one hundred members of our organization.

They think they know more than this . but our list contains
so many planted names that they can’t really tell for sure
who are members and who are not "


While the goal of expanding to a total of 20,000 members
by next fall can be discounted as completely unrealistic, there
is an ominous note in the goal to become "indestructible," through
either "normal police methods" or "conventional military tactics."
That has been the aim throughout the existence of t|ie organi-
zation, and if that goal should ever become a reality, or even a
near-approach to it, the course of action which would ensue can
be accurately prophesied by a re-reading of the founding document
initiating the organization.


MM- 16


COMMENTARY


This organization was founded upon the premise that
the government of this country does not represent the mandate
or will of the people, and that a pro-American government
cannot be established by normal political means. The founders
arrogated to themselves the right to pass judgment upon what was
pro-American and what was anti-American, and then in complete
disregard for the duly constituted governmental agencies, they
set up a private military force to accomplish their will. That
military force is designed as a secret underground apparatus for
guerrilla warfare. The members receive training to develop
themselves into guerrilla fighters; they study the techniques of
terrorists in the use of armaments, booby traps, explosives, etc.
They are led by men who have publicly stated, "When our consti-
tutional government is threatened we are morally justified in
resorting to violence to discourage communists and their fellow
travelers." Notice is thus served that the decision rests with
the MM leadership as to what constitutes a threat to our govern-
ment and what action the MM will take to counter such a threat.
That presents the fantastic situation of a private citizen
raising a private military force to accomplish by violence
whatever objective the citizen decides in his judgment is best
for the country! Such a military force is improperly labelled
guerrillas; the more precise term is insurgents.

= 0 = 0 =


MM- 17


BLACK MUSLIMS


THE BLACK MUSLIMS


There is in the present Negro civil rights movement
in this country an organization which occupies an anamolous
position in that while it must be considered as a part of the
movement, it is in direct opposition to the aims and purposes
of the other leading organizations active in that movement.

In general, it can be said that the stated purpose of the
leading Negro organizations is to achieve a status of equality
for the Negro American. In direct opposition to that campaign
for integration, the Black Muslims campaign for complete sepa-
ration and segregation. Their program is rooted in a religion,
and there is generated in their converts a deep and fanatical
hatred for the white race. In that highly-charged fanaticism
lies a potential present and future danger.

This organization was founded by one Wallace Dodd,
also known as Wallace Ford, also known as W. D. Fard, also
known as Walli Farrad, and other aliases. He was reportedly
born February 26, 1891, in New Zealand to a Polyriesian mother
and a white father. He resided in the Los Angeles area be-
tween 1913 and 1926, and during that period was arrested on
charges of narcotics, bootlegging, and assault with a deadly
weapon. He served a sentence in San Quentin Prison from June
12, 1926 to May 27, 1929.

Following his release from prison, he appeared in
Detroit as a door-to-door solicitor in the Negro district.


MUS-1


selling raincoats and silks. He had an easy flow of language,
and he entertained his customers with tales of their heritage
and of their destiny as Allah's chosen people. His spiels gained
him followers and he conducted meetings in the homes of his
converts, then he expanded to regular meetings in rented halls.

As his following increased, he developed his thesis that the
Negroes are descendants of the tribe of Shabazz, the original
inhabitants of the earth; that the religion of that tribe was
Islam; and that this is the rightful religion of the tribe's
descendants .

Fard claimed that the white race resulted from an
unsuccessful genetic experiment conducted by Yacub (Jacob) .

The creatures were left to perish in the wilderness, but Allah
willed that they should rule the earth for the next 6,000 years.
Their allotted time expired in 1941, and they have been living on
borrowed time ever since. Following the annihilation of the
white race, the black race will regain its world-wide control.

His definition of the black race included all racels except
the white.

Fard's preachings found a response in many of the
former members of the black nationalist organizations headed
by Noble Drew Ali and by Marcus Garvey which had been active
in the 1920 's. These persons were naturally conditioned to this
black supremacy doctrine, with its added lure of a religion
which promised them a divinely ordained destiny. The following


increased > and as it did Fard's identity and role became more
and more mystically interwoven in the theological doctrine which
he expounded- He gave many highly bizarre accounts of his per-
sonal history, one of which was that he was an Arabian,, a mem-
ber of a noble family of the non-existent Kingdom of Hehaz.

Another was the announcement that he was "The Supreme Ruler
of The Universe." Yet another was his claim to have become
incarnate in Mecca several hundred years ago as the son of a
black father and a white mother. However, to his converts he
revealed himself to be Allah, and was apparently so accepted by
them.

Fard assertedly authored two manuals for his organi-
zation: one of which, "The Secret Ritual of the Nation of Islam,"

is designed to be memorized verbatim by the students of the or-
ganization's parochial schools; the other, "The Teaching For
the Lost-Found Nation in a Mathematical Way," was expressed in
symbolic language and requires interpretation. In the period,
1930-33, he sought to expand the cult by training ministers to
carry his teachings into other areas. Also, as auxiliaries to
the temples he established the "University of Islam," the "Mus-
lim Girl's Training Class," and "The Fruit of Islam," the latter
being a semi-military security force within the organization.

However, the movement suffered a setback when in Novem-
ber 1932 a fanatical member of the cult performed a human
sacrifice. He reportedly persuaded the victim to prostrate himself


$


m


upon an improvised altar in a ritual intended to make him the
"Savior of the World," and then plunged a knife into the
victim's heart. As a result of this event Fard served a jail
term, then was ordered to leave Detroit by the police. He
later appeared in Los Angeles for a short visit and then dis-
appeared completely

For some time before his disappearance, Fard had busied
himself establishing a hierarchical structure for the movement.

He selected and trained a staff of ministers, and from that
staff he designated one as the chief minister. His selection
for this post was Elijah Poole.

Elijah Poole was born October 7, 1897, near Sanders-
ville, Georgia, the son and grandson of Baptist ministers.
Elijah's formal schooling ended at the fourth grade. His
family moved to Detroit in 1931, and it was at that time that
Elijah Poole became a convert of Fard's cult. Fard's practice,
which is still continued today, was to require each new member
to drop his slave name and receive his "original" ^ name . Not
all new members receive their original names at the time of
their initiation, but use the letter "X" after their given
names to signify ex-Christian and ex-slave. Fard at first gave
Poole the "original" surname of Karriem, but later when he
named Poole as his "messenger" he changed Poole's name to
Elijah Muhammad, apparently in an attempt to signify his new
exalted status.


MUS-4


So?


Following Fard's disappearance in 1934, the leader-
ship of the cult was assumed by Elijah Muhammad. At that time
the movement was centered in two temples; the founding one
in Detroit^ and one in Chicago which had been established some-
time in 1932*. Th.e Detroit temple was rent with dissension,
and beset with problems which challenged his leadership. The
internal conflicts at that temple reached a climax when Elijah
Muhammad was prosecuted, on a charge of contributing to the de-
linquency of a minor (he refused to transfer his child from the
University of Islam to a public school) , and was placed on six
months' probation. Shortly thereafter he found himself forced
to temporarily relinquish control of the Detroit temple, and
to move his headquarters to the Chicago temple. The Chicago
location has continued to be the headquarters of the movement
to the present.

From the Chicago headquarters, Elijah Muhammad actively
sought to propagate the cult, but his efforts during that period
were not spectacularly successful. There were increases in
membership, but the growth was slow and gradual. Then in 1942,
following the outbreak of World War II, Elijah Muhammad and
82 others were indicted on charges of sedition and "conspiracy
to promote the success of the enemy, making false statements
to those about to be inducted into the armed forces, dis-
rupting .maraJLa^. .and. causing mutiny." Among the statements
attributed to Elijah Muhammad and the others indicted were:


MUS-5


"God bless Hitler," "Our prayers were answered by the bombing of
Pearl Harbor," "Japan will be the savior for American Negroes,"
and "Great Japanese victories leave few victims for us."

Elijah Muhammad was convicted on a charge of coun-
seling draft evasion, and was incarcerated at the Federal Prison
in Milan, Michigan, from 1942 to 1946. In prison, he continued
his preachings and found many converts among the Negro inmates.
Following his release the movement gained momentum and expanded
rapidly Temples were established in various locations through-
out the country, predominately in the eastern and mid-western
states. The 1950's saw the cult grow into a national organiza-
tion.

A spark was added to that growth with the advent of
Malcolm X as an organizational leader. His name before becoming
a Muslim had been Malcolm Little. He was born May 19, 1925,
in Omaha, Nebraska His father had been a follower of Marcus
Garvey in the earlier Black Nationalist movement. Malcolm's
formal schooling ended at the eighth grade, and af!ter drifting
to New York he became a pimp, burglar, and peddler and user of
narcotics .

While serving a ten-year sentence in Massachusetts
state prison he became a convert of the cult. When he was paroled
in 1952 after having served six years, he underwent the required
training, and quickly proved himself to be an outstanding
recruiter for the organization. He developed into a spellbinding


orator, and his writings served to bring in new members. As
he grew in stature within the organization and as his personal
publicity increased, he began to constitute a threat to the
leadership of Elijah. .Muhammad.

From the time of his accession to leadership, Elijah
Muhammad. had always dominated the cult as the sole authoritar-
ian power, and he had successfully coped with all threats to that
absolute authority. The threat presented by Malcolm X was
that of a young sub- leader who had proven himself of inestimable
value to the organization in increasing the membership, but
whose dynamic leadership qualities had at the same time earned
him a personal following within the organization. Also, he
increasingly propounded a more extreme and more violent doc-
trine than that which Elijah Muhammad was then expounding.

The breaking point came when, following the assassin-
ation of President Kennedy in 1963, Malcolm X made a public
statement describing the murder as a case of "the chickens
coming home to roost." Basing his action upon tkat statement,
Elijah Muhammad suspended Malcolm X from the organization.

While he had only been suspended, Malcolm X chose to
make the break final, and he parted with the organization. His
departure constituted a major break in the solid structure of
the Muslims for Malcolm was followed by a number of his personal
adherents at every level. The defectors even included two of
Elijah Muhammad's sons. Those defections generated strong


animosities, and caused Elijah Muhammad to write: "Only those

who wish to be led to Hell, or to their doom, will follow Malcolm.
The die is set, and Malcolm shall not escape " As spoken by
the Messenger of Allah, the fate of Malcolm X was sealed.

Malcolm. X further widened the breach and set the
stage for counter-attack when he publicly accused Elijah
Muhammad of fathering several illegitimate babies by young
secretaries employed at the Muslim's Chicago headquarters.
Undoubtedly because of his intimate knowledge of the workings
of the organization, Malcolm X understood the gravity of his
situation, for he was quoted at that time: "No one can get out

without trouble. This thing with me will be resolved by death
and violence." He was right. On February 21, 1965, as he
began an address before an audience of about 400 in the Audubon
B a ll- room in New York City, he was cut down by a barrage of
bullets fired at point-blank range by three men, one of whom
was apprehended as he attempted to flee the auditorium. Police
later arrested a man described as a Black Muslim Enforcer,

Norman 3X Butler, who at the time was free on bail in the
shooting in January 1965, of a man said to have been another
Black Muslim defector.

Elijah Muhammad disclaimed any connection with the
murder of Malcolm X, stating: "We are innocent of Malcolm's

death. He preached violence and violence took him away."

There were apprehensions that retaliatory acts of revenge would


take place, and they did. Thirty- six hours after the murder,
the Black Muslims.' Mosque No. 7 in Harlem was gutted by fire
traceable to a fire bomb. The mosque in San Francisco suffered
a but firemen controlled it quickly. Elaborate security

measures were taken to protect Elijah Muhammad in his Chicago
home and during his appearance before the annual convention
of the .Muslims held at the Chicago Coliseum, on the weekend
of February 27-28, 1965, but there were no incidents. In his
address at that convention, Elijah Muhammad delivered himself
of this warning: "To seek to snuff out the life of Elijah

Muhammad is to invite doom."

At the time of his death, Malcolm X was said to have
had a following of about one hundred dedicated adherents and
an uncounted number of sympathizers. Since the major number
of his close followers were assertedly defectors from the
Black Muslims, considerable interest has been generated in the
question of what will befall them after losing the dynamic
leadership of Malcolm X. \


Turning back to the beginning of this movement,

attention is directed to Elijah Muhammad's writings in the

Supreme Wisdom," a guide to Muslim conduct:

MASTER W FARD MUHAMMAD: Before we ever suffered

ourselves, Master W. Fard Muhammad, our God and Savior,


MUS-9


the great Mahdi, Almighty God Allah in person, himself
suffered persecution and rejection, all for you and me.

"HISTORY OF THE TRIBE OF SHABAZZ: It is Allah's

will and purpose that we should know ourselves; there-
fore, he came himself to teach us the knowledge of self.
Who is better knowing of who we are than God himself?

He has declared that we are descendants of the Asian
black nation and of the tribe of Shabazz.

"You might ask who is this tribe of Shabazz? Ori-
ginally, they were the tribe that came with the earth
(or that part of it) 66 trillion years ago when a great
explosion on our planet divided it into two parts—
one we call the earth, the other the moon.

"We the tribe of Shabazz, says Allah (God), were the
first to discover the best part of our planet (earth) to
live on, which is the rich Nile valley of Egypt and the
present seat of the Holy City, Mecca, Arabia.

"ISLAM— THE RELIGION OF THE TRIBE OF SHABAZZ:

The religion of Shabazz was none other than Islam. It
was also the religion of Yakub, the father of the white
race before his fall.

"ISLAM— THE PERFECT RELIGION: Allah says of Islam

in the Holy Quran, 'This day I have perfected for you
a religion; completed my favor on you and chose for you
Islam as a religion.' (Chap. 5:3)"


Fard, the founder of this movement, identified himself

to his converts as a divine being, and his succeskor, Elijah

Muhammad, continues with the identification by procla iming Fard

to have been Allah. Elijah, in turn, identifies himself as

the Messenger of Allah, and claims direct contact with Allah.

In "The Supreme Wisdom," Elijah Muhammad declares:

"All of the answers are directly from the mouth of Allah
(God) in the person of Master W. F. Muhammad, to whom
all praise is due, the great Mahdi or Messiah, as the
Christians say, and he is the Son of Man.

"He alone has taught me and continues to reveal his truth
to me "


MUS-10


A close associate was once quoted as saying, "Muhammad
sincerely believes in his self-styled theology" and "he has
tremendous faith in himself and in Allah." That attitude is
clearly illustrated by his reported response to a query as to
his possible successor in the event of his death, to which he
was said to have responded:

"Stop, I know what you're going to say. This is not
like that. You can't take my place any more than some
one could take Moses' or Jesus' place. Only God can name
my successor. 'In the end of the world, God will have
one shepherd' --this is the prediction of the Qur-an and
the Bible. There's nobody after me but God himself!"

The basic doctrine first expounded by the founder
of the cult pertaining to the divinely ordained destiny of the
black race is said to be continued in the present preachings
in the Temples of Islam. As to the means by which that destiny
might be achieved, some indications may be gleaned from the
following:

It is reported that at most, if not all, Muslim meet-
ings there is the following symbolic presentatio^i: On one

side is a representation of the American flag bearing the
caption: "SLAVERY, SUFFERING, DEATH," and opposite it is

a representation of the Islamic star and crescent flag bearing
the caption: "FREEDOM, JUSTICE, EQUALITY," while between the

two is a banner with the words , "Which one will survive a
war of ARMAGEDDON?"

Also, when Malcolm X was conducting recruiting meet-
ings in Los Angeles in the early part of 1958, he frequently


MUS-11


stated to his audiences, "If you are afraid to kill the white
man, don't attend meetings here." That statement was subse-
quently repeated many times by Minister Henry X (Dawson) at
Muslim meetings, in Los Angeles. The Messenger of Allah,
Elijah Muhammad, himself was equally explicit when he made
the following statement at a later date:

"Everybody has failed the Negro. The Govern-
ment has failed; the F.BI. has failed, Christianity
has failed. All we can do is throw these things in
the garbage can and then use the garbage can to fight
back!


"We must take things in our own hands. We must
return to the Mosaic Law of an eye for an eye and a
tooth for a tooth. What does it matter if ten million
of us die. There will be seven million of us left and
they will enjoy justice and freedom."

Elijah Muhammad was quoted as stating that the pend-
ing destruction of the white race would occur before 1970
(more recently extended to the year 2000) .

Elijah Muhammad's attitude toward using the voting
strength of the Muslims as a means of gaining his objectives
is illustrated in his quoted response to such a qiiestion put
to him by writer Bob Lucas :

" We don't want to use this rotten system

of voting that is all in the white man's favor. You
can't fight him with his own stick. . . . . "


Whatever the means of accomplishment, the present
objectives of the cult are set forth in the official organ,
"Muhammad Speaks," wherein the Messenger of Allah presents
a 10-point program of "What the Muslims Want":


MUS-12


We want freedom We want a full and
complete freedom.

We want justice, Equal justice under
the law. We want justice applied
equally to all, regardless of creed
or class or color.

We want equality of opportunity. We ...
want equal membership in society
with the best in civilized society.

We want our people in America whose par-
ents or grandparents were descen-
dants from slaves, to be allowed to
establish a separate state or terri-
tory of their own- -either on this
continent or elsewhere. We believe
that our former slave masters are
obligated to provide such land and
that the area must be fertile and
minerally rich. We believe that our
former slave masters are obligated
to maintain and supply our needs
in this separate territory for the
next 20 to 25 years --until we are
able to produce and supply our own
needs .

"Since we cannot get along with them
in peace and equality after giving
them 400 years of our sweat and blood
and receiving in return some of the
worst treatment human beings have
ever experienced, we believe our
contributions to this land and the
suffering forced upon us by white
America justifies our demand for
complete separation in a state or
territory of- our own.

We want freedom for all Believers of Islam
now held in federal prisons We want
freedom for all black men and women
now under death sentence in innumerable
prisons in the North as well as in the
South , „ ' . .

We want an immediate end to the police
brutality and mob attacks against the


" 7 .


so-called Negro throughout the United
States,

As. long as we are not allowed to establish
a state or territory of our own, we
demand not only equal justice under the
laws of the United States, but equal
employment opportunities -- NOW.

"We do not believe that after 400 years
of free or nearly free labor, sweat
and blood which has helped America
become rich and. powerful, ..that .so. many
thousands of black people should have
to subsist on relief, charity or live
in poor houses.

"8. We want the government of the United States
to exempt our people from ALL taxation
as long as we are deprived of equal
justice under the laws of the land.

"9. We want equal education- -but separate schools
up to 16 for boys and 18 for girls on
the condition that the girls be sent to
women's colleges and universities. We
want all black children educated,
taught and trained by their own
teachers ...»

"10. We believe that intermarriage or race

mixing should be prohibited. We want
the religion of Islam taught without
hinder ance or suppression. ^

"These are some of the things that we,
the Muslims, want for our people in North
America."


The cult sponsors a number of programs aimed at the
advancement and betterment of its members. It conducts train-
ing classes for the women in housekeeping, sewing, cooking,
rearing of children, and proper conduct. There are employment


MUS-14


services, and assistance in the establishment of small busi-
nesses is offered. There is a long-range education program
aimed at the establishment of Muslim "Universities" through-
out the nation, and an ambitious "Educational Center" of
Islam to. be financed through voluntary ^.contributions.

Like all other organizations of its nature, there
are many conflicting, statements made concerning its active
membership strength. The true strength is a closely guarded
secret, and no official figures have been made public. The
estimates extend over an extremely wide range. The most recent
estimate was provided by a disillusioned ex-Muslim named
Aubrey Barnette, who, in an article appearing in the February 27,
1965, issue of the Saturday Evening Post stated:

„ . . . ,1 have been to every big city where
we have a mosque and, giving the Muslims all the best
° I would say that the national membership- -men,

women, and children- -runs less than 7,000, down by
more than half from the high of 15,000 in 1960-61. The
population is not growing. It is collapsing....."

t ^ ie organization there is an inAer organiza-
tion called the Fruit of Islam (FOI) which is recruited from
amongst the able-bodied men in the cult. The Supreme Captain
of the FOI is Raymond Sharrieff, a son-in-law of Elijah
Muhammad, and second in command is Elijah Muhammad, Jr. The .
chain of command is direct from those individuals to the
section in every temple, and each FOI section operates
outside the control of the minister. The functions of the


FOI are varied.;, they screen members for admission to meetings,
they maintain order at the meetings particularly at times when
the audience is whipped to high emotional pitches, they act
as bodyguards for the ministers and other officials, they
investigate in&tances of misbehavior or heterodoxy on the
part of any member, then act as judges in determining the
guilt or innocence of the accused member, finally executing
their own punishment upon the convicted member. A further
function would appear to be that of "enforcer," in its
gangland meaning, as was apparently evidenced in the recent
murder of Malcolm X.

As described in the aforementioned article by
ex-Muslim Aubrey, the FOI maintain a tight control over the
membership through their continuous disciplining of the
members. Beatings assertedly constitute the common punish-
ment. Other observers have described the FOI as being a
goon squad whose autocratic and brutal actions serve to not
only hold the members in line, but also to hold tkem in the
organization.

The FOI members reportedly are trained in karate
and are required to maintain themselves in the peak of
physical condition. Reports have been received of Muslim
rifle clubs, but no authoritative information has been
received concerning such activity.

On the national scene there have been many incidents
of violence .involving Muslims — While most .of them have been


clashes involving a limited number of persons, there have
been some of such proportions as to give indication of the
danger potential in this movement.

In 1935 in Chicago two hundred Muslims
rioted in a courtroom and attempted to storm the
bench while one of their members was on trial.

Before the melee was over, one policeman was dead
and eleven had been injured. Two of the Muslims
were shot in the clash,

i

On April 26, 1957, policemen in Harlem's
28th Precinct responded to a call of two Negroes
fighting. At the scene a Black Muslim entered into
an altercation with a policeman and was knocked to
the ground. Within an hour the word was spread
throughout the area, and some 500 Negroes were
milling around the police station The then Muslim
leader, Malcolm X, was called to the station, and
after negotiating with the police captain for the
release of the Muslim, he stepped into the street,
made a gesture of dismissal, and reportedly the
mob dispersed immediately.

On July .7, 1957, in Detroit a Muslim
speaker harangued a street crowd to a point where
several of the Negroes began attacking white passers-
by, Within a very short time a full-scale riot was
in progress leading to the injury of 19 persons
including eight policemen.

On April 27, 1962 in Los Angeles, police
officers halted a car to question the occupants,
two Negro men. The Negroes attacked the officers,
and immediately a large number of Negro men poured
out of a nearby Muslim temple and joined in the fray.
Police reinforcements arrived on the scene, and a
melee occurred in which one Muslim was killed and
seven others were wounded. One policeman was shot
and several others wounded.

Those samplings serve to illustrate the highly explosive emo-
tional level to which the Muslims are keyed.

During the early period of growth and expansion of
the cult, the temples were numbered in the sequence of their


MUS-17


establishment. Thus, the original temple in Detroit was Number
1, the Chicago temple Number 2, etc. The first temple established
in California was located in San Diego, and it was numbered 8.
Thereafter followed the temple in Oakland numbered 26, and the
one in Los Angeles numbered 27 „ When the numbers reached into
the thirties, the Muslim leaders discontinued that system and
simply designated their temples by address. Temples have been
established in many locations throughout this state; some
have flourished and others have not. Many have experienced
fluctuating careers of growth and decline, openings, and clos-
ings, with intermittent revivals. Reportedly, it is in the
two major population centers that the temples maintain continu-
ing strength. Temples 26 and 27 are said to be the most active
and to have the most membership in this state.

California law enforcement agencies have received
reports of Muslim :.ifle clubs and of shooting matches partici-
pated in by Muslims. There have also been reports of a
military- type training program conducted for the '"Fruit of
Islam" members. Reports of this nature are a continuing source
of concern to the law enforcement agencies of this state.


MUS-18


COMMENTARY


The Muslim cult provides a singular attraction
for the misfits and the maladjusted of the Negro race, for
it offers them a religion promising a fulfillment of their
deep racial hatreds. That religion designates them as the
chosen people of Allah, and promises them the destruction
of the hated white race and the return to supremacy of the
black race. It thus combines religious fervor with race
hatred in generating fanaticism in the most extreme degree.
The potential of danger presented by these fanatics is
clearly manifest.

Newer, smaller, black nationalist movements with
which Malcolm X was associated following his departure from
the Muslims pose similar threats to the peace and security
of the State.


MUS-19
