June 2，1975
R。R.2 Box A68E
Foster，R.I.02825
Mr.Harold Weisberg
Route8
Frederick,Md. 21701
Dear Mr. Weisberg,
Congratulations on the recent U.S.News & World Report
article。
Icouldhardlybelievethat ama.jor newsmagazine
was actually treating the subject seriously-a refreshing
change to besure!
A few months back,I heard over wCBS out of New York，that
you were taking part in a conference at N.Y.U。So the next
of(for the book cover）and headed south.By the time I got
there,several people I met said you had been admitted to a
hospital.I was sorry to have missed you, but much more sorry
tohearofyourillness.
Damn_--ta.ke careofyourself...
selfishly_speaking，we can'tafford tohave you hung up in
a hosnital.
I was reading the testimony of Emmett J.Hudson.the other
day_and Ihave a question:He states"They have moved that
R.L.rhornton Freeway sign and put up a Stemmons sign."
Mr.Liebeler:"They have?They have moved it?"My question
is did Mr Hudson mean to saythat they moved the Stemmons sign
and put up an R.L.Thornton Fwy sign?(In other words，did
he accidently switch the names?) and if so,did Liebeler error
in the saMe manner in the sentences following?(Willis'fifth
shows the stemmons sign，not the R.L.Thornton sign at the
timeoftheassassination.
I ask this question because a Mr.John C.Zuber of the
Meshanticut Park Church in Cranston,R.I.has shown a great
getanappointmentwithSenatorJohnO.Pastore todiscuss
some of the details。Hudson's testimony was one of the things
I was going to possibly cover and. when I was rereading it，I
cameuponthequestion.
Also,Mr.Zuber does television "sign offs" every so often
and.asked. if I would do aquick talk withhimand I would like
toknow if I couldput inaplug for'your books?Without
your really knowing me，I don't know how you would.fel about
myoassing on your informa.tion.Maybe you could let me.know
your feelings on this.
Ihave been exhibiting myJFK paintings at various art
shows at shonping malls，etc.collecting signatures to reopen
thecse.
Enclosedis a photoofonethatwas exhibitedat
westminster Mall in Providence,R.I.A gentleman (maybe not
so gentle）took exception to it andproceeded to put his fist
through it.Just as I was about to return the favortohistoofonethatwas exhibitedat
westminster Mall in Providence,R.I.A gentleman (maybe not
so gentle）took exception to it andproceeded to put his fist
through it.Just as I was about to return the favortohis

--- PAGE BREAK ---

head, I was able to make him understand why I painted it...
He ended up signing the petition.I still show the painting
even with the crack ...as long as it happened，it sort of
adds to its history.
Along with the pa.intings and. petition，I have been
displaying your books and.spend most of the time referring
tothem while explaining the details of the assassination to
those who stop.
(andmanydostop...
.I'm just now recovering
from a horse voice!)
Oh,if you have any 8x1o （or what ever）copies of the blow
up of Oswald in the Depository doorway，please send one and
billme.
Icould blow one up myself，but Icoulddo without
yet another generation.
Sorrythisletter gotsolong.
Ihoneyou've completely
recovered from what ever was ailing you and I hope to hear
fromyou --I realize your averybusyman.
Sincerely,
licmeJ
ziq
Douglas M.Williamson
P,S.Is there anywav of purchasing or somehow
reading atranscriot ofPost Mortem?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Douglas M. Williamson
R.R.2Box A68E
Foster， R.I.
02825
Mr. Harold Weisberg
Route8
Frederick，Md.
21701
RETURN RECEIPT
REQUESTED
CERTIFIED
No.969480
MAIL

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mligum!1m
Fosrer, R.I.
Box A68E
No. 548705.
CERTTFTED
Frederick , /Ad.
RouTe 8
/Ar. HaRold IVeisberg.
ErniePyle
21701
Ernie