OKLAHOMA CITY
FALSE FLAG
OCCULT STATE
TERROR ATTACK
OKLAHOMA CITY
FALSE FLAG
OCCULT STATE
TERROR ATTACK

--- PAGE BREAK ---OKLAHOMA CITY, OK: The north side of the Albert P.

Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City shows the devastation
supposedly caused by a fuel-andfertilizer truck bomb that was detonated early April 19, 1993, in front of the building.

The blast,
the worst terror attack on U.S.

soil until Sept.

11, killed 168 people and injured more than 500.

Timothy McVeigh, convicted on
first-degree murder charges for the bombing, was sentenced to death in 1997 and later executed.

BOB DAEMMRICH/AFP/GETTY IMAGES C H A P T E R F I V E
The Oklahoma City Bombing
BOMBS INSIDE THE ALFRED P.

MURRAH BUILDING
I
n the hours following a quasi-botched bombing of the Alfred P.

Murrah Building in Oklahoma
City on April 19, 1995, KFOR-TV reported that Governor Frank Keating told President Bill
Clinton that “right now they are saying this is the work of a very sophisticated group.

This is a
very sophisticated device.

It has to have been done by an explosives expert.”725
Shortly thereafter, as 168 people lay dead with countless others injured, the official story quickly
changed.

No longer was the explosion sophisticated, nor was it credited to experts.

Instead, two rank amateurs—Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols—supposedly using nothing
more than a crudely constructed ANFO bomb (ammonium nitrate and fuel oil) were blamed for
the incident.

As you’ll see, the notion that a fertilizer bomb partially destroyed the Murrah Building is so
preposterous that even a child would be hard-pressed to believe this fairy tale.

Rather—and this
point is of extreme importance—a series of bombs had been strategically placed inside the
Murrah Building prior to April 19th, and they were what caused the massive damage.

Further,
government forces—including the FBI and ATF—had complete foreknowledge of this act, yet
did nothing to prevent it (if not having a direct hand in initiating it in the first place).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rather—and this
point is of extreme importance—a series of bombs had been strategically placed inside the
Murrah Building prior to April 19th, and they were what caused the massive damage. Further,
government forces—including the FBI and ATF—had complete foreknowledge of this act, yet
did nothing to prevent it (if not having a direct hand in initiating it in the first place). Momentarily, I will provide a brief overview of the government’s foreknowledge and
involvement in the OKC bombing, culminating in an extensive analysis of the actual culprits (not
a scapegoat named Timothy McVeigh who had peripheral contact with the real killers at Elohim
City and was set up to take a Lee Harvey Oswald fall after the event took place). Once you finish
this chapter, it will be undeniably apparent that similar to so many other incidents associated
with the Clintons (Vince Foster’s murder, etc), the American public has been snowed by a
mountain of lies which covers the much darker underbelly of a governmental organized crime
syndicate. To begin, let’s pose a question. How often do you see bomb squad trucks parked along the
streets of your town or city? I’m sure most people would respond: not often, if ever. In addition,
how often do you see these same bomb trucks parked only a block or two away from a building
that subsequently gets bombed only minutes later? If you were told of such an occurrence, I’m
sure most reasonable people would conclude that the bomb trucks had an indication that the
nearby building was going to be hit, and the reason they were located in the vicinity was in
preparation for the coming event. Of course, why the building in question was being bombed is a

--- PAGE BREAK ---different matter entirely.

At any rate, guess what was parked only blocks away from the Alfred P.

Murrah Building only
moments before it was targeted.

Bomb squad trucks!

There was no question that there had been a bomb squad truck in downtown Oklahoma City
before the blast.

“I was coming down for a charity board meeting that I had at 7:30 in the Oklahoma Tower,” said
Daniel J.

Adomitis, an Oklahoma lawyer.

“There was a fairly large truck with a trailer behind it.

It had a shield on the side of the door that said ‘bomb disposal’ or ‘bomb squad’ below it.”726
Another woman, Renee Cooper, said that “she saw a bomb squad in front of the courthouse.

There were six or seven men.

It made her a little uneasy.”727
When asked how she arrived at this conclusion, Ms.

Cooper replied, “They had ‘bomb squad’
written across their jackets in huge letters.”728
These sightings were confirmed by others.

“J.D.

Reed, an employee with the Oklahoma County
Assessor’s office, also saw the bomb squad truck parked on the east side of Hudson Street in
front of the county courthouse on April 19 prior to the bombing.”729
Likewise, “Norma Joslin, a 30-year employee of the Oklahoma County Board of Elections,
stated that she saw the bomb squad truck parked on the east side of Hudson Street in front of the
county courthouse.

She says she commented to a co-worker on the unusual nature of this
sighting.”730
Numerous people witnessed this bomb squad near the courthouse, and commented on how out of
the ordinary it was.

In other words, bomb squads weren’t parked all around Oklahoma City on a
daily, weekly, or yearly basis.

These guys were there for a specific purpose.

Although the FBI
initially tried persuading witnesses that no such units were in the vicinity, “the Sheriff’s
Department finally admitted, after months of adamant denials by Sheriff J.

D.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Although the FBI
initially tried persuading witnesses that no such units were in the vicinity, “the Sheriff’s
Department finally admitted, after months of adamant denials by Sheriff J. D. Sharp, that the
bomb disposal vehicle had indeed been in downtown Oklahoma City that morning.”731
This disclosure is crucial, for now we’re certain that the government was not only lying about the
bomb squad’s presence, but they were prepared for a significant blast that morning in Oklahoma
City. Another specific instance where the government deceived the public about their foreknowledge
was the fact that not a single ATF agent lost their life in the bombing. Edye Smith, whose
children were killed that day, put the matter into perspective during a live CNN interview:
“Where the hell was the ATF? I want to know. All 15 or 17 of their employees survived, and
they were on the ninth floor. They were the target of this explosion, and where were they? Did
they have a warning sign? Did they think it might be a bad day to go into the office? They had an
option not to go to work that day, and my kids didn’t. They didn’t get an option. Nobody else in
the building got that option. And we’re just asking questions. We’re not making accusations. We
just want to know. And they’re telling us: ‘Keep your mouth shut. Don’t talk about it.’”732
Ms. Smith’s point was valid, because if we’re to believe the government myth, militia member
Timothy McVeigh specifically homed in on the Murrah building because of ATF atrocities at
Waco two years earlier. But guess what. Kids in a day care center were killed, as were state
workers and other innocent men and women. But the purported target—ATF—did not have a
single casualty that day because not a single employee was present when bombs inside the
building were detonated. Even though two of them may have reported to work earlier, every
single ATF agent was conveniently out of the office at the time of the blast. Every one!

--- PAGE BREAK ---Realizing they had a public relations nightmare on their hands —one that left them with egg on
their face—the ATF scrambled to arrive at a cover story.

Stated differently, they started lying
again, just as they had at Waco.

“The ATF claimed that Alex McCauley, the resident in charge,
was in an elevator when the bomb went off.

He survived a free fall from the eighth to the third
floor.”733
Let’s get this straight.

An ATF agent took a plunge five floors down an elevator shaft—at
freefall speed—that’s fifty feet, and he survived?

Will miracles never cease?

Hundreds of other
victims were crushed, suffocated, or buried in a mountain of debris; but incredibly, the supposed
sole ATF worker comes out unscathed after dropping from what would be the equivalent of a
five story building.

There’s only one drawback to this story: it’s another lie.

Engineer Duane James from “the
Midwestern Elevator Company, the firm that had actually searched the elevators for
survivors,”734 stated, “We found that five of the six elevators were frozen between floors, and a
sixth had stopped near floor level.

We had to go in through the ceilings of the elevators to check
for people.

All were empty.”735
James continued, “Agent Alex McCauley could not possibly have broken out before the team
arrived, not unless he had a blowtorch with him.

The doors were all frozen shut.

It took several
of our men over twelve hours just to get the one elevator opened.”736 McCauley’s story was an
unadulterated lie.

“None of the elevators had been in free fall.

That’s pure fantasy.

Modern
elevators have counterbalances and can’t free fall unless you cut the cables, and none were.

There are a series of backup safety switches that will lock an elevator in place if it increases in
speed more than ten percent.

The Midwestern Elevator Company took extensive photographs to
document the inspection.

These records were later received by ABC’s 20/20 program.The Midwestern Elevator Company took extensive photographs to
document the inspection.

These records were later received by ABC’s 20/20 program.

The
pictures confirmed that all the safety cables were intact.”737
Try to imagine the evil sickness of this gross deception.

The ATF actually concocted a story
where one of their agents supposedly free fell fifty feet and survived, then used superhuman
strength to escape from an elevator that took professionals twelve hours to open—all to
seemingly prove that the ATF hadn’t been tipped-off beforehand.

But it was all a grotesque lie.

There’s additional proof of ATF and FBI foreknowledge of this heinous act where 168 innocent
people—including children in a day care center—were murdered.

One agent, “his face hidden
behind a shadow for fear of ATF reprisal, asserted that he was told by an ATF agent that, ‘we
were tipped off by our pagers not to come to work that day.’ His employer, who overheard the
conversation, willingly confirmed this controversial claim.”738
ATF agents weren’t the only ones given a heads up that an attack was about to take place.

Investigators from ABC’s 20/20 “provided substantial proof that local fire department officials
were instructed by the FBI five days before the blast that there were some people coming
through town they should be on the lookout for.”739
It seems quite a number of people, from the ATF, FBI, bomb squad, and emergency services
knew that a dramatic event was about to take place.

But no one bothered to tell the innocent
people that went to work that morning and eventually got killed or maimed.

Be assured, the
government knew in advance.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But no one bothered to tell the innocent
people that went to work that morning and eventually got killed or maimed. Be assured, the
government knew in advance. “In perhaps the most startling revelation, the 20/20 investigation
uncovered proof that the Executive Secretariat Office at the Justice Department received a call
24 minutes before the explosion announcing that, ‘the Oklahoma federal building has been
bombed.’ Unfortunately, in an unforgivable sin of omission, authorities failed to notify anyone of
this strange call, much less demand the building in question be evacuated.”740
On the contrary, all those inside were left to be potentially killed or injured.

--- PAGE BREAK ---If you’re beginning to notice a pattern of lies, hold on because you haven’t seen anything yet.

The next myth to be exploded is the infamous ‘Ryder truck’ bomb which reportedly brought
down the Murrah Building.

More specifically, the bomb was supposed to have been made of
“4,800 pounds of ammonium nitrate mixed with fuel oil to create a combustible ‘slurry’ known
as ANFO.”741 Actually, even this description isn’t accurate because the government’s story kept
changing over time.

“The FBI reported that the bombing of the Murrah Federal Building was
caused by a single 1,200 pound bomb made of ammonium nitrate (AN) and fuel oil 1,200 pound
bomb made of ammonium nitrate (AN) and fuel oil foot Ryder rental truck parked in front of the
Murrah Building.”742742 But wait; the government realized that anyone with even the slightest
knowledge of physics would slice their story to smithereens.

Why?

Because, essentially, the
Ryder/ANFO device was what explosives experts call an open-air bomb.

In other words, rather
than being physically affixed to the building itself (such as to a foundation beam which
supported the building and is crucial to it remaining intact), the supposed bomb was sitting in a
truck on the street, away from the structure.

Common sense tells us that the farther away the
bomb is from its target, the less impact it will have.

As you’ll see later, the expert of all
explosives experts stated that the most destruction this ANFO bomb could have caused was to
break a few windows in the Murrah Building.

That’s it.

The government understood the type of problem they had on their hands, so “the story later
changed to a 4,800-pound ANFO bomb.

Then during the trial of Timothy McVeigh, the story
changed again to a 4,800 pound mixture of ammonium nitrate (AN) and nitromethane (NM), a
high performance racing fuel.”743
The government’s conspiracy theory soon reached the point of being laughable.The government understood the type of problem they had on their hands, so “the story later
changed to a 4,800-pound ANFO bomb.

Then during the trial of Timothy McVeigh, the story
changed again to a 4,800 pound mixture of ammonium nitrate (AN) and nitromethane (NM), a
high performance racing fuel.”743
The government’s conspiracy theory soon reached the point of being laughable.

“It would take
weeks to build a 4,800-pound truck bomb this way, and it would not solve the technical
challenge of achieving simultaneous detonation.

Yet the prosecution insists that McVeigh and
Nichols built the bomb in one day, on April 18, 1995, and then executed the flawless detonation
of the biggest ANFO [or ANNM—Ed.] bomb in the history of U.S.

terrorism.”744
The problem of detonation mentioned above is particularly important because we’re led to
believe that McVeigh and Nichols had all these huge vats filled with ANFO [note: 4,800 pounds
of this substance would equal over 100 five-gallon water jugs], and they needed them to be all
wired together to spark (i.e.

explode) at the exact same time to be effective.

It takes a great
amount of technical expertise to pull off such a feat; much more than these two bozos possessed.

“When Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols tried to blow up a milk jug with a small fertilizer
bomb in October 1994, the experiment was a fiasco.

‘The blasting cap just sprayed the
ammonium nitrate everywhere.

It didn’t work,’ said Michael Fortier at McVeigh’s trial.”745
These guys couldn’t blow up a damn milk bottle!

Plus, an openair bomb wouldn’t have
destroyed the Murrah Building.

“The FBI had no scientific basis for concluding that the Murrah
Building was blown up by an ammonium nitrate fertilizer bomb.”746
Again, outright lies were fed to the American public.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Plus, an openair bomb wouldn’t have
destroyed the Murrah Building. “The FBI had no scientific basis for concluding that the Murrah
Building was blown up by an ammonium nitrate fertilizer bomb.”746
Again, outright lies were fed to the American public. “The [FBI] labs guessed that the explosive
charge was placed in 50-gallon white plastic barrels without conducting the requisite tests.”747
Moreover, “they said that the detonator appeared to be a Primadet Delay system, but no trace of
this was found at the crime scene.”748
Isn’t this lack of, or manipulation of, evidence starting to sound eerily like the Vince Foster case? “The Inspector General’s report found that the FBI crime labs had repeatedly reached
conclusions that incriminated the defendants without a scientific basis.”749
Upon further reading we will establish one rock solid fact: an ANFO bomb was physically
incapable of causing the widespread damage that we witnessed in Oklahoma City, while

--- PAGE BREAK ---McVeigh and Nichols didn’t possess the technical expertise (or logistical capabilities—try to
imagine how monumental the task of moving nearly 5,000 pounds of ANFO would be) to even
build a bomb.

The actual destruction to the Alfred P.

Murrah Federal Building was caused by bombs inside the
building.

The following information completely and utterly destroys the government’s single
bomb ANFO/ANNM fable.

“After the rescue efforts had begun, there were reports of other
bombs being found within the Murrah Building.

The building was evacuated at least twice due to
these reports.”750
In the moments following this calamity, the sooner rescue workers were able to locate the
victims the higher the probability was that they could be saved.

Yet that morning in Oklahoma
City, their efforts were halted at least two different times so that bomb squads could enter and
remove unexploded bombs!

The following passage is damning beyond words:
At one point, Toria Tolley with CNN reported: “There is still a danger of another huge
explosion.

Police have confirmed two more bombs have been discovered in the building.

Authorities say one of the bombs has been found and discarded.

A bomb squad is reportedly
dealing with the other one at this time.”
Later KWTW reported: a third explosive device, another bomb—we don’t know if it’s three or
four—but perhaps another bomb has been found inside that federal building.

They are moving
everyone back once again.

This would be the fourth time that this has happened.751
I’ve seen the above raw footage with my own eyes, and the evidence is conclusive.

The initial
newscasts emanating from local OKC TV stations show bomb squads carrying unexploded
bombs out of the Murrah Building.

Such a disclosure completely flies in the face of what the
government told us happened.

According to their fairy tales, one ANFO/ANNM bomb outside
the building caused all the damage; nothing else.

Yet what follow are direct transmissions from
OKC law enforcement officials.--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to their fairy tales, one ANFO/ANNM bomb outside
the building caused all the damage; nothing else. Yet what follow are direct transmissions from
OKC law enforcement officials. The highway patrol dispatcher logs clearly show that there were two bombs found in the Murrah
Building after the blast. The following entries can be found: 10:29 am. There is another bomb on
the south side of the building. Need to get away as far as possible . . . evacuate the area of the
building immediately. 10:37 am. OC Fire Dept. confirms they did find a second device in the
building.752
They weren’t the only sources for the reality of multiple bombs inside the building. “A DOD
[Department of Defense] Atlantic Command memo from Norfolk, Virginia dated April 20, 1995
also shows two additional explosives were found.”753
The evidence of bombs in the building is so overwhelming that it can no longer be denied. “Joe
Harp is a retired CIA operative who now lives in Texas and told the following story. On the day
of the bombing, he was in the Murrah Building at about 11:00 am and observed members of ‘the
fire department EOD’ [Explosive Ordnance Disposal] removing two devices and placing them in
the bomb disposal unit. He described the devices as military olive-drab in color and the size of
round five-gallon drums. He also stated that, upon his arrival, he knew that the explosive device
that caused the damage to the building was not an ANFO bomb because he could smell sulfur in
the air that reminded him of the gas-enhanced ‘Daisy Cutter’ bombs that were used when he was

--- PAGE BREAK ---in Vietnam.”754
Not only did these devices cause the real damage to the Murrah Building, but those that were
unexploded and had to be removed greatly hindered rescue efforts, indirectly causing more
victims to perish.

Following the blast, Dr.

Tom Coniglione directly announced, “At the present
time, the medical teams downtown are unable to get into the wreckage to retrieve more of the
injured because of the presence of other bombs in the area.

I’ve been told by the police
department that just as soon as those bombs are defused, they will permit the medical teams to
enter.”755
During the earliest news telecasts, acclaimed terror authority Dr.

Randall Heather noted, “We got
lucky today, if you consider anything about this tragedy lucky.

It’s actually a great stroke of luck
that we’ve got undefused [sic] bombs.”756
Similarly, “at approximately 11:31 EST, on the day of the bombing, KFOR television broadcast
the following announcement: ‘The FBI has confirmed there is another bomb in the federal
building.

It’s in the east side of the building.

We’re not sure what floor, what level, but there is
definitely danger of a second explosion.’”757
Why didn’t the federal government or the corporate media disclose this information on a wide-
scale basis?

Why the cover-up?

Bottom line: “Although given little coverage by the mainstream
press, eyewitness testimony and other supporting evidence show that undetonated charges were
located and defused once rescue efforts were under way.”758
Experts confirm that the official story regarding OKC was a boldfaced lie.

First, Dr.

Sam Cohen,
who worked on the Manhattan Project and spent four decades in the nuclear weaponry field,
snubbed his nose at the government’s ANFO theory.

“I believe that the demolition charges in the
building were placed inside at certain key concrete columns and did the primary damage to the
Murrah Federal Building.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sam Cohen,
who worked on the Manhattan Project and spent four decades in the nuclear weaponry field,
snubbed his nose at the government’s ANFO theory. “I believe that the demolition charges in the
building were placed inside at certain key concrete columns and did the primary damage to the
Murrah Federal Building. It would have been absolutely impossible and against the laws of
nature for a truck full of fertilizer and fuel oil—no matter how much was used—to bring the
building down.”759
These are mighty powerful words; but oh so true. An open-air bomb can’t create that much
damage. “A series of Armament Directorate tests were conducted by Wright Laboratory at Eglin
Air Force Base in Florida against simulated conventional urban buildings. This study was
conducted to demonstrate the capability of explosive devices against cast-in-place concrete
structures with steel reinforcement bars. The report states that “air blast alone was singularly
ineffective in causing major damage to the Eglin test structure.”760
Put more simply, open-air bombs don’t destroy solidly built structures. To level them, you need
explosives placed directly on the foundational support columns. Others have confirmed this information. “In the spring of 1997, explosives experts at Eglin Air
Force Base’s Wright Laboratory Armament Directorate released a study on the effects of
explosives against a reinforced concrete building similar to the Federal Building. The Air Force’s
test closely matched the conditions under which the government contends the Murrah Building
was destroyed. [David] Hoffman quotes from the report: It must be concluded that the damage at

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Murrah Federal Building is not the result of the truck-bomb itself, but rather due to other
factors such as locally placed charges within the building itself.”761
Another gentleman who invested considerable time studying this event was Brigadier General
Ben Partin, the expert’s expert on military explosives and weaponry.

As this tragic event
unfolded, Partin commented, “When I first saw pictures of the truck-bomb’s asymmetrical
damage to the Federal Building, my immediate reaction was that the pattern of damage would
have been technically impossible without supplementing demolition charges at some of the
reinforcing concrete column bases.”762
According to Partin, “to produce the resulting damage pattern in the building, there would have
to have been an effort with demolition charges at column bases to complement or supplement the
truck bomb damage.”763
The government has lied since day one.

“According to [Partin’s] detailed analysis, it would be
physically impossible for an ANFO bomb to have destroyed the many steel-reinforced concrete
columns which were situated far from the [truck bomb].”764
Partin essentially relied on simple logic.

If an open-air bomb is detonated, those structures
closest to the explosion should suffer the most damage, while those farther away would be
affected to a lesser extent.

But in Oklahoma City, the laws of nature didn’t apply.

“To
substantiate his assertions, the military expert notes that building columns B-4 and B-5, which
were in direct proximity to the blast, remained standing, while column A-7, which stood some 60
feet from the Ryder truck, was mysteriously demolished.

‘The much closer columns are still
standing, while the much larger column A-7 is down.

These facts are sufficient reason to know
that columns B-3 and A-7 had demolition charges on them,’ he states confidently.”765
Others have concurred with this opinion.--- PAGE BREAK ---

‘The much closer columns are still
standing, while the much larger column A-7 is down. These facts are sufficient reason to know
that columns B-3 and A-7 had demolition charges on them,’ he states confidently.”765
Others have concurred with this opinion. • Army veteran Gary McClenny, in a May 16, 1995 letter to FBI Director Louis Freeh:
“Ammonium nitrate is a poor choice for breaching reinforced concrete.”766
• Demolitions expert Sam Groning “recalls setting off 16,000 pounds of ANFO and alleges he
was standing upright a mere 300 yards from the blast site.”767That’s four times the size of
McVeigh’s supposed bomb, and it couldn’t even knock a man off his feet. • An August 1996 FEMA study concluded that “4,800 pounds of ANFO would have been
virtually unable to have caused the so-called thirty-foot crater in OKC.”768
• A leaked Pentagon study reported that “the destruction of the federal building last April was
caused by five separate bombs.”769
• The 1997 Eglin Blast Effects study “could not ascribe the damage that occurred on April 19,
1995 to a single truck bomb containing 4,800 pounds of ANFO and instead suggested that other
factors such as locally placed charges within the building itself may have been responsible.”770
• Neutron bomb inventor Samuel Cohen asserted, “It seems to me that the evidence has gotten
much stronger in favor of internal charges, while the ammonium nitrate bomb theory has fallen
apart.”771
• Author David Hoffman “cites reports of physical evidence such as more damage being done to
the roof [of the Alfred P. Murrah Building] than relatively close to the truck, [and] elevator doors

--- PAGE BREAK ---d Hoffman “cites reports of physical evidence such as more damage being done to
the roof [of the Alfred P. Murrah Building] than relatively close to the truck, [and] elevator doors

--- PAGE BREAK ---

blown away from the shafts and toward the truck].”772
772
1910 contained the following information. “ANFO couldn’t possibly produce a shock wave
capable of mangling the building’s concrete supports.”773
• Dr. Charles Mankin of the University of Oklahoma Geological survey found “there were two
separate explosions based on his analysis of seismographic data from two facilities.
Seismographs show two distinct ‘spikes’ roughly ten seconds apart.”774
The above individuals are authorities and/or experts in their fields, and all have given credence
“to the existence of additional (and deadlier) explosives inside the building.”775
Plus, remember our analysis of the original news reports which were carried by the local
Oklahoma City media. “KFOR television broadcast that as many as two explosive charges had
been located that were far more lethal than the original charge that nearly toppled the Murrah
Building.”776
Nationwide media sources—at least initially—also corroborated the multiple bomb story. “As
reported widely on CNN and TV stations across the nation, up to four primed bombs were found
inside what remained of the Murrah Federal Building on April 19, 1995.”777
Local authorities are also in agreement. “Radio logs and other documentary materials provide
transcripts of OKC police and fire department personnel discussing the removal of additional
explosives. Reports of up to four bombs have surfaced.”778
The preponderance of evidence is 100% undeniable. “Highly powerful non-ANFO explosive
devices were detonated inside the building.”779
In this sense, “If ANFO is physically incapable of causing the level of damage sustained by the
Murrah Building, and if evidence shows that more than one explosion occurred on April 19,
1995, one must at least consider the existence of a more far-reaching conspiracy than the one
sanctified by the mainstream media.”780
Last but not least, there is a huge amount of “evidence which seems to indicate that the federal
government possessed prior knowledge of an imminent terrorist strike on the Murrah
Building.”781
The above information changes the entire scenario in regard to OKC. First of all, why wouldn’t
the federal government tell us about additional bombs, and that ANFO could not have leveled the
Murrah Building?
The answer is simple: they had two scapegoats—Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols—and an
agenda which they were pursuing. More importantly, they had direct knowledge that this event
was going to occur, and they allowed it to take place.
As you will see in the following section, the government’s foreknowledge of the OKC bombing
was so vast that there should have been extensive arrests within the FBI, ATF, Clinton White
House, CIA, and the Oklahoma state legislature.section, the government’s foreknowledge of the OKC bombing
was so vast that there should have been extensive arrests within the FBI, ATF, Clinton White
House, CIA, and the Oklahoma state legislature.

--- PAGE BREAK ---One of the primary sources of direct, firsthand knowledge was ATF informant Carol Howe, who
“had infiltrated Elohim City and stumbled on a conspiracy to bomb federal buildings in the state
of Oklahoma.

The plot was led by Dennis Mahon and Andreas Strassmeir.

Furthermore, the
main gist of this had been passed on to the U.S.

government before the Oklahoma bombing.”782
Although more details will be provided shortly, the main organizational point for this attack was
a compound in rural Oklahoma called Elohim City, which had been highly infiltrated by factions
of the federal government:
By Christmas [1994] the plot was taking shape.

Strassmeir and Mahon, the ringleaders, had
picked three possible targets for attack in the state of Oklahoma: the IRS, plus federal buildings
in Tulsa, and the “federal building” in Oklahoma City.

Carol [Howe] has stated under oath that
she reported these threats to her ATF case officer.783
Howe’s assertions were later verified by government documents.

An April 21 [1995] FBI memo confirms that the Bureau was fully aware of Carol’s clandestine
intelligence within two days of the bombing.

‘Mehaun [Mahon] has talked with Carol about
targeting federal installations for destruction through bombings, such as the IRS Building, the
Tulsa Federal Building, and the Oklahoma City Federal Building.

Strassmeyer (sic) has talked
frequently about direct action against the U.S.

Government.

He is trained in weaponry and has
discussed assassinations, bombings and mass shootings.784
This memo is the smoking gun of the Oklahoma City bombing.

There were individuals within
the government and media who became aware of this information and refused to remain silent
about it.

One was retired Marine Lieutenant Colonel Roger Charles who was fired from ABC
News for speaking out in protest.

The reason?

He was told “this story would bring the country
down.”785 Indeed, there is verifiable proof that the U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The reason? He was told “this story would bring the country
down.”785 Indeed, there is verifiable proof that the U.S. government was
fully aware of a mass bombing—prior to it occurring with their own informants on the inside—
and they didn’t do a damn thing to prevent it. 168 innocent citizens, including children in a day
care center, were slaughtered in cold blood. Their guilt is appallingly evident. “Two days after the Oklahoma bombing Carol Howe reminded the FBI that Strassmeir was a
terrorist instigator who had talked frequently about direct action against the U.S. government. . . . The FBI record of her debriefing, dated April 21, 1995, goes on to say that Strassmeir had taken
three trips to Oklahoma City in November 1994, December 1994, and February 1995. It also
mentions the fact that Strassmeir’s friend Dennis Mahon had threatened to blow up the
Oklahoma Federal Building, yet the FBI saw no reason to interview Strassmeir.”786
If that’s not bad enough, let’s push the envelope all the way. Not only did the U.S. government
have informants within Elohim City, they also had their own agents, including Andreas
Strassmeir! He was the ringleader, and he was the man who organized the OKC bombing. It
wasn’t Timothy McVeigh. He was simply another Lee Harvey Oswald patsy. As you’ll see in the following section, there is even substantial proof that Strassmeir and
McVeigh were hanging out together prior to the OKC attack: “McVeigh was seen with
Strassmeir and Michael Brescia eleven days before the bombing. The three men were at a strip

--- PAGE BREAK ---r and
McVeigh were hanging out together prior to the OKC attack: “McVeigh was seen with
Strassmeir and Michael Brescia eleven days before the bombing. The three men were at a strip

--- PAGE BREAK ---

club called Lady Godiva’s. We know that the date was April 8 [1995] because [of] the security
cameras.”787
There is also evidence that McVeigh met with officials from the government.
According to investigative researcher David Hall: “On the night before the bombing, several
witnesses saw McVeigh meet with ATF agent Alex McCauley and two other individuals of
Middle Eastern descent in an Oklahoma City McDonald’s at approximately 9:30.”788
[Yes, this is the same Alex McCauley who purportedly fell five stories in an elevator, then broke
out through the steel doors and emerged unharmed. Totally absurd.]
Late in 1994, a federal agent revealed that the government had put out the word that Strassmeir
was classified as “hands off.”
In a conversation with the publisher of The John Doe Times, Mike Vanderboegh, the agent said:
“‘We’ve gone as far as we can with this; we’ve been told to back off. Maybe you guys can do
something with it.’ Then he told [Vanderboegh] that Strassmeir had been the government-
sponsored snitch inside the Oklahoma bombing.”789
THE ELOHIM CITY CONNECTION
INTRODUCTION
According to the federal government, they had no idea whatsoever that the Alfred P. Murrah
Building was going to be bombed on April 19, 1995. And, to convince the American public,
Attorney General Janet Reno swore that there would be no stone unturned in their investigation.
So, 2,000+ federal agents were placed on the case; and according to them, 20,000 people would
eventually be interviewed.
In addition, the investigators checked 43,000 tips, journeyed from Arizona to Las Vegas, and
from upstate Michigan to the Philippines in search of answers. In all, they would generate over
one billion documents and spend over one million investigative hours on this case.
And what, ultimately, did the government conclude after this exhaustive investigation? Answer:
that there was no evidence of anyone involved in the OKC bombing other than Timothy
McVeigh and Terry Nichols.
As I will prove, though, the government—including the FBI, ATF, Department of Justice, and
CIA, among others—lied through their teeth about having no foreknowledge of, or involvement
in, the Alfred P. Murrah bombing on April 19, 1995.
Specifically, events at a 400-acre compound called Elohim City hold the key to OKC, and
elements within our federal government were 100 percent certain that the horrific events of that
day would take place.
Regrettably, of the 2,000 federal agents, 20,000 people interviewed, and one million
investigative man-hours spent on this case, not one agent was dispatched to Elohim City. In fact,
Associated Press writer Paul Query quoted an unnamed law enforcement official who had this to
say on the subject: “Elohim City is not a current subject of interest.”
Elohim City is not only ground zero for one of the gravest miscarriages of justice in this
country’s history; it is also one of the federal government’s biggest sources of fear, for it revealserest.”
Elohim City is not only ground zero for one of the gravest miscarriages of justice in this
country’s history; it is also one of the federal government’s biggest sources of fear, for it reveals

--- PAGE BREAK ---is not only ground zero for one of the gravest miscarriages of justice in this
country’s history; it is also one of the federal government’s biggest sources of fear, for it reveals

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in painstaking detail how intimately and directly involved they were in the bombing of the
Alfred P. Murrah Building.
ANDREAS STRASSMEIR
To substantiate my introductory claims, I will systematically and methodically show how all
roads led to Elohim City. To do so, I’m going to follow, in chronological order, the movements
of a man named Andreas Strassmeir, as well as a fascinating cast of characters surrounding him.
To begin, we need to introduce Mr. Strassmeir, who was a German national before immigrating
to the United States for a lengthy stay in 1991, where he eventually became the head of security
at Elohim City.
Strassmeir was the son of Gunter Strassmeir, who was the architect of German reunification and
a top aide to German chancellor and Bilderberg luminary Helmut Kohl. In addition, Strassmeir’s
grandfather was a founding member of the Nazi party (which, immediately after WWII, had
direct ties to American intelligence via Project Paperclip), while the Strassmeir name is one of
the most respected and influential in Germany.
In all, the Strassmeir family was connected to the power elite in every sense.
Strassmeir himself spent seven years in the German army as a Bundeswehr officer, where he
served with the Panzer Grenadiers, which is an elite intelligence unit. And, in case you’re
wondering, Strassmeir’s area of expertise was none other than disinformation. This point is
extremely important, as we’ll see later, because even though Strassmeir is portrayed as an ardent
neo-Nazi, he spoke fluent Hebrew (Israel’s state language), while The London Times reported
that he had a Jewish girlfriend who served in the Israeli
Army.
Is this what we would expect from a notorious “Jew-hater”? Moving along, even though
Strassmeir migrated to the United
States in 1991, his first visit here was on April 7, 1989 when he flew
to Washington, D.C. What makes his arrival peculiar is that in the
Immigration and Naturalization Services (INS) computers, Strassmeir was given a special status
of “AO.” Now even though determining what this status means has been difficult for many
researchers, his “AO” reference was completely scrubbed from
computer files a few years later.
Why?
KIRK LYONS
To “officially” bring Strassmeir to America, an attorney named
Kirk Lyons entered the picture.
Who is he?
Michael Collins Piper, author of Final Judgment and a veteran reporter for American Free Press,
wrote in an unpublished article that,
“For many years Kirk Lyons functioned in some way as a federal
undercover agent and/or informant in a movement in which he
put himself forward as a legal advocate and spokesman for its
cause.”e that,
“For many years Kirk Lyons functioned in some way as a federal
undercover agent and/or informant in a movement in which he
put himself forward as a legal advocate and spokesman for its
cause.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---Piper went on to conclude that Lyons was undeniably, above all
else, Strassmeir’s “handler.”
Lyons even visited Strassmeir’s parents at their plush Berlin
residence in 1991.

In fact, Lyons was the person who orchestrated Strassmeir’s relocation to America.

He also obtained for him a driver’s license by providing Strassmeir with an address in Knoxville,
Tennessee; and he is quoted as
saying, “I’m the reason that Andy was at Elohim City.

I put him
there.

So if there was a plan, I guess I’m part of it.” Not only did
Lyons introduce Strassmeir to everyone at Elohim City, on April 18, 1995—one day before the
OKC bombing—Lyons’ law firm received a 15-minute phone call from a very important person
in this scenario—Timothy McVeigh.

VINCENT PETRUSKIE
Once Strassmeir arrived on our shores in 1991, he quickly gravitated toward, of all things, the
Civil War reenactment crowd.

Why does this seemingly innocuous bit of trivia merit mention?

Because historically, this group has been infiltrated by a variety of CIA splinter groups that used
it as a front for illegal gun-smuggling.

More importantly, though, The London Times reported
that when Strassmeir first arrived in the United States, he was befriended by retired Army
officers, CIA veterans, and Civil War reenactment history buffs.

These men were part of a
network that is very powerful in this country, and one that stretches into the Pentagon and other
federal agencies.

One of these men was Vincent Petruskie, who was a special agent for the Air Force Office of
Special Investigation (OSI) from 1954-1975, and who also knew Strassmeir’s father in Berlin.

Petruskie was also a foreign intelligence officer in Vietnam, a member of the 1131st U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One of these men was Vincent Petruskie, who was a special agent for the Air Force Office of
Special Investigation (OSI) from 1954-1975, and who also knew Strassmeir’s father in Berlin. Petruskie was also a foreign intelligence officer in Vietnam, a member of the 1131st U.S. Air
Force Special Activities Squadron, a Special Projects Officer in the Special Activities Branch of
the counter-intelligence division in Washington, D.C., and was also reactivated during the Gulf
War to fulfill a “sensitive assignment.”
Needless to say, Petruskie was connected to deep intelligence sources for decades, and interacted
with a cabal of ex-military men and former & current CIA employees who were involved in gun
running, mercenary actions, espionage, drug trafficking, blackmail & subversion, and money
laundering. These were off-record, black budget operatives, and Vincent Petruskie made a career
out of soliciting and deal-making with these shadowy figures. So, when Andreas Strassmeir arrived in America and needed a place to stay, who opened their
doors to him? None other than Vincent Petruskie of Petruskie Associates in Manassas, Virginia;
a man who was making at the time $1.6 million/year by working out of his house. How did
Strassmeir know Petruskie? In his own words, Strassmeir described his ally as, “a former CIA
guy my father had known.” But Petruskie’s friendship didn’t end at mere lodging. In addition, he
tried to get Strassmeir a job at the DEA, the Treasury Department, with INS, and also the
Department of Justice. Even more bizarre is the story of when Andreas Strassmeir’s station wagon was impounded by
the Oklahoma Highway Patrol after he was pulled over for driving without tags or a valid

--- PAGE BREAK ---license.

Kenny Peace, a tow-truck driver from Muldrow, Oklahoma who yanked the vehicle, said
that immediately after this event he started getting a flurry of calls from a Houston attorney, a
general or major at Fort Bragg, North Carolina (quite possibly Petruskie), the Highway Patrol’s
district office, the State Department, and the Governor’s office—all telling him to immediately
release the vehicle.

They also said that Andreas Strassmeir had full diplomatic immunity even
though his visa had expired.

Furthermore, the contents of Strassmeir’s briefcase held a copy ofThe Terrorist’s Handbook
(including how to build ANFO bombs & detonators with delayed fuses), job applications for the
INS & DEA, foreign bank statements which showed he was by no means an impoverished
pauper, and suspected government classified documents in both English and German.

But most
bizarre were the classified papers detailing negotiations by Strassmeir on behalf of Petruskie
Associates to buy 747s from Germany’s Lufthansa Airlines to begin a transport business out of
Costa Rica!

Now think about this incredible statement.

Considering that Petruskie was involved
with a shadow-group of black-budget operatives at the height of the crack cocaine craze, what do
you think these airliners flying out of South America were going to be used for?

TEXAS LIGHT INFANTRY BRIGADE
After Strassmeir’s early adventures with Vincent Petruskie, he aligned himself with a citizen’s
militia called the Texas Light Infantry Brigade (TLIB).

The only problem was: the members of
this group quickly became suspicious of Strassmeir’s motives and loyalty, so they followed him
late one night to a federal building.

There, they saw Strassmeir approach an electric lock on the
door, upon which he punched in the code on an electronic keypad.

And just like that, Strassmeir
gained access to the building.

What makes this scenario relevant is that the federal building
conveniently housed an office of the ATF.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And just like that, Strassmeir
gained access to the building. What makes this scenario relevant is that the federal building
conveniently housed an office of the ATF. Anyway, after witnessing this transgression, the TLIB
gave Strassmeir his walking papers for being a suspected undercover agent. GERMAN INTELLIGENCE
Who was Andreas Strassmeir? On July 14, 1996, The McCurtain Gazette reported that,
according to a highly placed source at the FBI’s intelligence division, he was a paid ATF
informant or asset sent to infiltrate Elohim City. This sentiment was echoed by Timothy
McVeigh’s lawyer, Stephen Jones, during a 1998 interview on KTOK radio in Oklahoma City. Jones said Strassmeir was a German national recruited by Louis Freeh to do deep undercover and
intelligence operations for the FBI in the United States. He also said that he discussed
Strassmeir’s FBI alliance to the German government with U.S. prosecutor Beth Wilkinson. There is also FBI form 302 which has been unearthed stating that Strassmeir was a CIA asset on
loan from the German government. Now, as you’ve noticed, three different agencies have been
mentioned—the FBI, ATF, and CIA—in relation to who Strassmeir was working for. And until
our government is more forthcoming with information, we can’t be certain of any details other
than he was a shared asset on loan to the U.S. government. ELOHIM CITY
After being outed by the Texas Light Infantry Brigade, Strass
After being outed by the Texas Light Infantry Brigade, Strass acre compound in rural Oklahoma

--- PAGE BREAK ---(near Muldrow) named Elohim City.

This enclave became, according to Time magazine, “the
who’s who of the radical right” because it housed members of the Aryan Republican Army; the
Covenant, Sword, and Arm of the Lord; the National Alliance; KKK; Aryan Nation; as well as
many other militia and/or neo-Nazi style groups.

The Elohim City crowd was also prone to violence, as was revealed by U.S.

Assistant Attorney
Steven N.

Snyder of Fort Smith, Arkansas, who said that a plot was hatched as far back as 1983
to blow up the Alfred P.

Murrah Building.

The primary movers in this conspiracy were Richard
Wayne Snell, James Ellison, and Kerry Noble, who wanted to use plastic explosives and rocket
launchers to topple the building.

The authorities took this plot seriously enough to raid Elohim
City in 1985, where they arrested Covenant founder James Ellison.

Kerry Noble, former Covenant member, said of Elohim City, “It has the potential, down the
road, of being the most dangerous group in the country.”
Yet, despite its notoriety, it was never again raided from 1985 until the OKC bombing in 1995.

The big question is: why?

Even an FBI report called Project Megiddo addressed the phenomenon
surrounding Elohim City-style compounds when they said right-wing Christian terrorists posed
the gravest danger to our country, and would be the most likely to incite violence in the months
and years ahead.

ROBERT MILLAR
To understand the mind-boggling sense of immunity that was given to Elohim City, we need to
look at Robert Millar, who founded this community in 1973.

Despite his status as a spiritual
leader of the militant right, senior FBI agent Peter Rickel testified on June 31, 1997 that, “Millar
was in regular contact with the agency in the years before the bombing.” Millar actually
confirmed these words on July 1, 1997 when he told the Tulsa World newspaper that he
repeatedly shared information with the FBI, DEA, and other law enforcement officials.--- PAGE BREAK ---

ROBERT MILLAR
To understand the mind-boggling sense of immunity that was given to Elohim City, we need to
look at Robert Millar, who founded this community in 1973. Despite his status as a spiritual
leader of the militant right, senior FBI agent Peter Rickel testified on June 31, 1997 that, “Millar
was in regular contact with the agency in the years before the bombing.” Millar actually
confirmed these words on July 1, 1997 when he told the Tulsa World newspaper that he
repeatedly shared information with the FBI, DEA, and other law enforcement officials. This is why The McCurtain Daily Gazette reported on July 1, 1997 that, “Millar’s position as a
mole for the FBI could explain why the compound has never been raided. Despite its use as a
hideout for gun-runners, drug dealers, bank robbers and suspected members of the conspiracy
that bombed the Alfred P. Murrah federal building in Oklahoma City, Elohim City has enjoyed a
reputation as a place where fugitives can live without fear of arrest.”
ELOHIM INFORMANTS
Robert Millar wasn’t the only individual at Elohim City who was speaking with the authorities. There were plenty of others, including:
• James Ellison , former Covenant, Sword, & Arm of the Lord member who was married to
Millar’s grand-daughter and who testified against the Order. • Peter Langan, the son of a retired U.S. Marine intelligence officer and leader of the Aryan
Republican Army. After being arrested for robbing a Georgia Pizza Hut, the U.S. Secret Service
intervened and had him released. • Gary Hunt, paid informant of the ATF who was videotaped in the company of two other ATF
agents at the Grand Continental Hotel in OKC a full week before the bombing. He was also

--- PAGE BREAK ---videotaped, along with a companion, on April 19, 1995 by a OKC television station right after
the bombing.

Both men were carrying transmitters and walking rapidly from the Alfred P.

Murrah Building.

Hunt was even videotaped as a pall bearer at the funeral of an ATF agent.

• “Christian Identity,” a group financed by the FBI to serve as agents provocateurs to incite
violence and terrorism within the United States.

ELOHIM CRIMINAL ACTIVITY
As mentioned earlier, Elohim City was a sin city of sorts which
harbored fugitives and criminals of all varieties.

Of note were:
• Michael Langon , known as “Commander Pedro,” who commandeered 22 different bank
robberies in seven states which netted over $250,000.

This spree extended over two years, and
explosives were used in many of the heists.

Oddly, even though Langon was wanted in six states,
there wasn’t even one crime scene arrest or fatality at any of the robberies, and never did the
robbers encounter any bank guards or law enforcement officials.

• Michael Brescia, one of the actual bombplanters inside the Alfred P.

Murrah Building, was
arrested on January 30, 1997 in Philadelphia for his participation in a number of bank robberies.

He moved to Elohim City in 1994 and was a roommate of Andreas Strassmeir.

Brescia has also
been identified as John Doe # 2 by Dennis Mahon, ATF informant Carol Howe, and Timothy
McVeigh’s acquaintance/girlfriend, Catina Lawson.

• Richard Guthrie, the son of CIA parents and a Navy veteran, was also arrested for bank
robbery, but not before frequently visiting Tim McVeigh in Arizona.

• Other shady characters included Michael Fortier, who Robert Millar admitted (to KOKH-TV)
had lived at Elohim City shortly before the bombing.

• Then there is Dennis Mahon, who got his start in the Order, which was founded by Robert
Matthews.

He then went on to become third in line at the White Aryan Resistance (WAR).--- PAGE BREAK ---

• Then there is Dennis Mahon, who got his start in the Order, which was founded by Robert
Matthews. He then went on to become third in line at the White Aryan Resistance (WAR). Mahon also served as a former Imperial Dragon of the Oklahoma KKK, and was described by
Andreas Strassmeir as a “good friend.” Equally important, Mahon admitted to meeting Timothy
McVeigh several times, and said that Michael Brescia was “up to his ass” in the Oklahoma City
bombing. Are you starting to see a great deal of interconnectedness taking place here? TIMOTHY MCVEIGH
Lo and behold, if you’ve been wondering how Timothy McVeigh fits into this picture, we’ll start
adding a few of his pieces to the puzzle. For starters, there are some “official” disinformation
sources that say McVeigh had never even visited Elohim City. But we now know that McVeigh
and Terry Nichols drove, on October 12, 1993 from Fayetteville, Arkansas to Elohim City to
meet with Andreas Strassmeir. Also in attendance were bank robbers Richard Guthrie and Peter
“Commander Pedro” Langon. We can also connect McVeigh to the Elohim City coterie via:
• A hotel receipt dated September 13, 1994;
• A speeding ticket he received in 1993 a few miles from the compound;
• Phone records—McVeigh called Strassmeir at Elohim City on April 5, 1995 a few minutes
after reserving a Ryder truck;

--- PAGE BREAK ---• Prisoner interviews;
• His participation in military maneuvers directed by Strassmeir at Elohim City on September 12,
1994;
• Informant reports—Carol Howe, who we will get to a little later, directly linked McVeigh
(using the name “Tim Tuttle”) to Strassmeir, Dennis Mahon, and Pete Ward at Elohim City.

With this information in mind, I can categorically conclude that Timothy McVeigh was at
Elohim City in the months and years before the Oklahoma City bombing.

On the other hand, to further link McVeigh to the Elohim City criminal element, FBI documents
show that they strongly suspected McVeigh of participating in a December, 1994 Ohio bank
robbery with some Aryan Nation members, including Michael Brescia.

This seems to make
sense, because McVeigh’s sister testified later that he wanted her to launder some money for him
in December, 1994.

This would also at least partially explain how McVeigh, with no job and a
sporadic work record, would have the money to travel around the country and buy cases of The
Turner Diaries which he sold at rented gun-show tables.

More proof of McVeigh’s Elohim City links come from a highly documented April 8, 1995
event (merely a week-and-a-half prior to the OKC bombing) where McVeigh, Strassmeir, and
Michael Brescia were videotaped by security cameras at Lady Godiva’s strip joint in Tulsa,
Oklahoma.

Their visit was verified by the Fifth Estate, Canada’s version of 60 Minutes.

Of special note is
McVeigh bragging to one of the dancers, “On April 19, 1995 you’ll remember me for the rest of
your life.”
But to truly understand McVeigh’s role in the OKC bombing, we need to dig a little deeper.

David Paul Hammer, who spent 23 months with McVeigh on death row in Terre Haute, Indiana,
says that McVeigh told him about meeting with three shadowy men with close ties to the U.S.

military shortly after he left the Army.--- PAGE BREAK ---

David Paul Hammer, who spent 23 months with McVeigh on death row in Terre Haute, Indiana,
says that McVeigh told him about meeting with three shadowy men with close ties to the U.S. military shortly after he left the Army. McVeigh also added that these men only went by code
names, and that one of the meetings (with someone known only as “the Major”) took place at
Camp McCall, which was on the grounds of Fort Bragg, North Carolina. Could this once again be Vincent Petruskie? At this meeting with “the Major,” McVeigh was told that he was passed over for a spot in the
elite Army Special Forces so that he could be recruited into a black budget Department of
Defense project where he would gather intelligence for the government on members of the
radical right, including specifically the Aryans, KKK, and militias. Does this sound at all like the
groups that inhabited Elohim City? In effect, then, McVeigh would become a pseudo-agent for
the United States government. I realize that such a scenario sounds fantastic, but in a letter that was read in 1995 before a grand
jury, Timothy McVeigh’s sister said that he thought he was going into a Special Forces covert
tactical unit to fight against evil-doers. Author David Hoffman confirms this sentiment in his book The Oklahoma City Bombing and the
Politics of Terror:
McVeigh wrote his sister Jennifer while he was still in the Army telling her that he had been

--- PAGE BREAK ---picked for a highly specialized Special Forces Covert Tactical Unit (CTU) that was involved in
illegal activities.

The letter was introduced to the federal grand jury.

According to former grand
juror Hoppy Heidelberg, these illegal activities included “protecting drug shipments, eliminating
the competition, and population control.

The AP also reported that the government had been closely monitoring those who came to show
their support for the Branch Davidians prior to the Waco siege.

McVeigh, of course, was in
attendance, handing out anti-New World Order literature.

Could it be that McVeigh had been sheep-dipped in the exact same manner as Lee Harvey
Oswald prior to the JFK assassination?

To those who’ve studied this subject, we know that Guy
Banister and E.

Howard Hunt made sure that Oswald was photographed handing out pro-Castro
leaflets in New Orleans, and they even got him on a local radio show to secure the connection.

Could McVeigh also have been reinvented as a “racist revolutionary” who would play a
Manchurian Candidate role in some later black-op project?

Before ruling out the possibility, let’s return to another quote from David Hoffman’s book:
In an illuminating series of phone calls to Representative Charles Key, an anonymous source
stated that McVeigh was present at several meetings with ATF and DEA agents in the days
immediately preceding the bombing.

The meetings took place in Oklahoma City at different
locations.

The ostensible purpose of these meetings was to provide McVeigh with further
instructions, and to facilitate a payoff.

David Hall of KPOC-TV uncovered information that
McVeigh had met with local ATF agent Alex McCauley in a McDonalds the night before the
bombing.

The ATF agent was seen handing McVeigh an envelope.

Adding another element to the espionage angle is James Nichols, who in his book Freedom’s
End claims that McVeigh was met in prison by the notorious MK-ULTRA mind-bender Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The ATF agent was seen handing McVeigh an envelope. Adding another element to the espionage angle is James Nichols, who in his book Freedom’s
End claims that McVeigh was met in prison by the notorious MK-ULTRA mind-bender Dr. Jolyon West, who not only pronounced Jack Ruby “insane” after killing Lee Harvey Oswald, but
also handled Sirhan Sirhan following the Robert F. Kennedy assassination. Moreover, McVeigh
also stated that he thought he’d been implanted with a computer microchip while serving in the
Army, and many have declared that he was under the influence of mind-control drugs during his
incarceration after the bombing. A further insight into McVeigh’s personality was provided by a woman named Lynda Haner-
Mele, who worked with McVeigh at Burns Security in early 1992. Tim wasn’t the type of person who could initiate action. He was very good if you said, “Tim,
watch this door—don’t let anyone through.” The Tim I knew couldn’t have masterminded
something like the OKC bombing. It would have had to have been someone who said, “Tim, this
is what you do. You drive the truck.”
All of this leads us once again back to Andreas Strassmeir, who admitted that he met Timothy
McVeigh in the late spring of 1993 at a Tulsa gun show, and that he was in possession of
McVeigh’s Desert Storm military uniforms. Furthermore, ATF infiltrator-agent Carol Howe has unequivocally stated that Andreas Strassmeir
was the OKC mastermind and prime instigator of the bombing; and McVeigh was merely his

--- PAGE BREAK ---urthermore, ATF infiltrator-agent Carol Howe has unequivocally stated that Andreas Strassmeir
was the OKC mastermind and prime instigator of the bombing; and McVeigh was merely his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

protégé. She also said that Strassmeir exerted “extraordinary influence over McVeigh.”
CAROL HOWE
Anyone familiar with the deep dirty secrets of the OKC bombing intuits that Carol Howe’s role
as an informant, along with her subsequent testimony, are the incriminating smoking guns that
completely shred the government’s credibility. For starters, official sources denied that Howe
was even employed by them. But now, many years later, we know for a fact that Ms. Howe’s
Confidential Informant number was: 53270-183 (or, for short, CI-183).
After being caught in this lie, the government said that Howe was dropped from their employ in
June, 1995, after the OKC bombing. But an ATF report dated January 31, 1996 stated, “It is
required that CI 53270-183 be retained as an active informant.” Plus, under cross-examination,
Howe’s superior, Karen Finley, admitted that she was an active informant until December 18,
1996.
We have further proof of Howe’s status as an informant via internal ATF documents, specifically
Karen Finley’s preliminary report, which had an ATF Investigation Number of 53270-94-0124-
B, and was recorded on form # 3270.2. This form was signed by not only Finley, but also David
E. Roberts (Resident in charge of the Tulsa field office) and Tommy Wittman; and was
forwarded to Lester D. Martz, Special Agent in charge of the Dallas Field Division of the ATF.
In this report, Howe’s work was described as “sensitive” and “significant” according to ATF
official Robert Sanders.
Furthermore, on Feb. 22, 1995, Ken Stafford, an Oklahoma State Patrol pilot, told Karen Finley
that the FBI had an informant inside Elohim City in addition to Howe. In true spy-versus-spy
fashion, though, the ATF and FBI agents did not know of the other’s existence or identity.
Now that we have proof that Carol Howe was an ATF informant, what type of information did
she feed to this agency? To answer this question, we’ll start with ATF Special Agent Karen
Finley’s testimony on April 24, 1997:
Question : Ms. Howe told you about Mr. Strassmeir’s threats to blow up federal buildings,
didn’t she?
Finley : In general, yes.
Question: That was before the OKC bombing? Finley: Yes.
Question: Now, Ms. Howe actually took some
of these people from Elohim City at your direction to Oklahoma City, didn’t she?
Finley : She went with them. She probably didn’t drive.
Question: This trip to OKC by Elohim City residents occurred before the bombings, actually by
a few weeks, didn’t it?
Finley: No, it would be months . . . fall of ‘94.
Question: Are you sure? So, it wasn’t the third week of February?
Finley: Oh, I’m sorry; we did send her back.
Question: The very next day, you asked Ms. Howe to take you to Oklahoma City and show you
the places they visited, didn’t you?the third week of February?
Finley: Oh, I’m sorry; we did send her back.
Question: The very next day, you asked Ms. Howe to take you to Oklahoma City and show you
the places they visited, didn’t you?

--- PAGE BREAK ---Finley: I don’t know if it was the next day, but yes, I took her to OKC and asked her the places.

With this incriminating testimony in mind, let’s cut to the chase.

To begin, in the months prior to
the OKC bombing, Carol Howe submitted over 70 reports to Karen Finley, her ATF control
officer.

She was also polygraphed at least a dozen times to check her reliability, and each time
she passed with flying colors.

Also, ATF reports described Howe as a “key” witness, along with
being “stable and capable.”
Why, then, wouldn’t the ATF want Ms.

Howe’s testimony to be heard?

As we have already seen,
it all boils down to foreknowledge and direct complicity.

Howe told her superiors in no uncertain
terms that Andreas Strassmeir and Dennis Mahon were the primary instigators of the OKC
bombing.

She also told the ATF that Strassmeir teamed up with a KKK leader from Tulsa—
Dennis Mahon—to bomb the Alfred P.

Murrah Building in Oklahoma.

She also reported that Strassmeir and Mahon made three trips to OKC to case various locales—
one in November, 1994; the next in December, 1994; and finally in February, 1995.

Howe even
accompanied them on one of these trips.

Plus, these assertions were corroborated by Karen
Finley—under oath—on April 24, 1997.

Finley even accompanied Howe to OKC to see the
exact areas that Strassmeir and Mahon cased.

Is it clear what is being presented here?

The ATF knew that Strassmeir and other Aryan
Republican Army members had discussed blowing up federal buildings in OKC.

They knew that
the Alfred P.

Murrah Building was a target, just like it was in 1983 when other Elohim City
residents plotted to destroy it.

They knew that Timothy McVeigh and others had spoken of
bombing the APM Building because Carol Howe notified her superiors of this fact.

Even Robert
Millar, Elohim City founder, called for a preemptive strike against the government several
months before April 19th.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They knew that Timothy McVeigh and others had spoken of
bombing the APM Building because Carol Howe notified her superiors of this fact. Even Robert
Millar, Elohim City founder, called for a preemptive strike against the government several
months before April 19th. If you’re still not convinced, during Carol Howe’s trial, ATF Agent Karen Finley testified that
the FBI, as well as her agency, “had the information in advance of the bombing of the Murrah
Building.” She also admitted that Howe warned them of bomb threats against federal buildings
before April 19, 1995. In addition, during her own trial, Carol Howe was asked by her lawyer,
Clark Brewster, if she thought she had provided sufficient information for the ATF to conduct an
investigation that would have confirmed the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Building would
take place. Howe answered yes. She is also quoted as saying, “It is the indisputable truth that the
government had ‘detailed prior knowledge’ of the plot to bomb the building, but somehow failed
to stop it.”
Ms. Howe’s words are confirmed by an event which took place on February 7, 1995 when Karen
Finley and other ATF agents flew with Oklahoma State Patrol pilot Ken Stafford over Elohim
City to photograph and videotape the complex to gather intelligence for a possible raid to arrest
Strassmeir and others. They were specifically targeting Strassmeir because Howe told ATF
officials that he kept declaring, “It’s time to go to war,” and “It’s time to start bombing federal
buildings.”
This type of inflammatory rhetoric alarmed the authorities to such an extent that an arrest/raid
was scheduled for February, 1995. But, in that same month, this invasion of Elohim City was

--- PAGE BREAK ---scrubbed after senior members of the ATF, FBI, and U.S.

Attorney’s Office met.

The ramifications of this decision cannot be overemphasized, as former Oklahoma State
Representative Charles Key stated toWorld Net Daily on May 22, 2001: “It’s fair to speculate
that the FBI got the ATF to call the raid off, or told them to, or someone with higher authority
did.” He added, “If they had not called that raid off, it alone may have stopped the bombing of
the Murrah Building.”
It should also be noted that the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) cancelled the FBI’s
notice to detain Andreas Strassmeir, and that the State Department wouldn’t assist in getting
Germany’s cooperation to question Strassmeir after the bombing.

Lastly, even though Carol
Howe—who provided mountains of information to the ATF, urged them to raid the Elohim City
bunker, and who was taken to the basement of the old Pepco Building in downtown Oklahoma
City for debriefing only hours after the bombing—was prohibited from testifying at Timothy
McVeigh’s trial.

The reason?

Judge Richard Matsch said that her testimony might “confuse” the
jurors.

FOREKNOWLEDGE AT ELOHIM CITY
The most pressing question at this point is: why would those at the highest levels of government
—all the way up to the Department of Justice—call off this raid?

According to Robert Sanders, a
top ATF official, Elohim City was under intense scrutiny by federal agencies at the top levels of
management.

The reports given to these individuals about the activities at Elohim City include:
illegal explosives and firearms, illegal immigration, planned terrorism, a history of violence, and
incendiary rhetoric.

Worse, this information went to the FBI, ATF, Treasury, Department of
Justice, National Security Council, and even Bill Clinton’s White House.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The reports given to these individuals about the activities at Elohim City include:
illegal explosives and firearms, illegal immigration, planned terrorism, a history of violence, and
incendiary rhetoric. Worse, this information went to the FBI, ATF, Treasury, Department of
Justice, National Security Council, and even Bill Clinton’s White House. Plus, most everyone included in this sordid Elohim City saga was either: an operative, spook, or
informant, including: Andreas Strassmeir, Kirk Lyons, Vincent Petruskie, Robert Millar, James
Ellison, Peter Langan, Gary Hunt, Timothy McVeigh, and Carol Howe. The foreknowledge of an April 19 bombing was so widespread that Richard Wayne Snell, a
member of James Ellison’s Covenant, Sword, & Arm of the Lord, bragged about this catastrophe
on the day of his execution—coincidentally on April 19, 1995. Arkansas prison official Alan
Ables said of Snell: “He repeately predicted that there would be a bombing or explosion on the
day of his death.” When his prophetic words about the OKC bombing came true, he knowingly
chuckled and laughed before being put to death. Similarly, Chevie Kehoe, another bank robber associated with the Elohim City crowd, showed-
up at a Spokane motel about 45 minutes before the bombing to watch the event on CNN. The
hotel manager toldThe Spokane Review that Kehoe had been talking about it for days. “It’s about
time,” he eventually proclaimed with manic excitement. Also, as a side-note, Elohim City founder Robert Millar admitted that Kehoe and his brother had
lived at the compound. Could it be that the entire OKC bombing was a covert government cover-up? Considering all
those on the ‘inside’ who were funneling data to the authorities, plus the totally hands-off,
immune status that these men enjoyed, what else can we conclude? Was a cabal within our

--- PAGE BREAK ---federal government actually scapegoating those at Elohim City by enticing them into committing
illegal acts, or a conspiracy to do so; all the while as they were being egged-on by paid
provocateurs?

The McCurtain Gazette reported (July, 1996) the ominous words of a former government
undercover agent who said, “It is typical for agencies such as the CIA, FBI & ATF to place
multiple moles inside a place like Elohim City and play one resource off the other, without either
one knowing the other’s identity.”
Mike Vanderboegh, editor of The John Doe Times, echoed this sentiment on July 4, 1997:
Not even in czarist Russia did the secret police send paid provocateurs to provoke the other paid
provocateurs.

Elohim City can thus be seen in its true light—not as an operation infiltrated and
suborned by infiltrators—but rather as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the FBI/ATF.

STRASSMEIR’S IMMUNITY
Not surprisingly, all of the above information brings us back to Andreas Strassmeir.

Karen
Finley, Carol Howe’s superior, said in an ATF report on November 29, 1994: “His [Strassmeir’s]
plans were to forcibly act to destroy the U.S.

government with direct actions and operations such
as assassinations, bombings, and mass shootings.” She also informed her superiors that
Strassmeir was a huge weapons dealer, and his status as of December, 1994 was that of an illegal
alien.

Dennis Mahon, a co-conspirator in the bombing, had this to say of the situation: “If a person
wanted to know about the bombing, then they should talk with Andy Strassmeir because he
knows everything.”
Similarly, Media Bypass reported in September, 1996 that highlevel FBI sources said, “ATF
computer indices reflect substantial intelligence-gathering activities in which Strassmeir
participated.” They continued, “Either Andy is their snitch or he is under investigation and has
been for a long time.

And considering the fact that it was Strassmeir that McVeigh made the call
to .

.

.--- PAGE BREAK ---

. . well, why do you suppose he wasn’t interviewed right after that became known? Could it
be that Andy’s being protected?”
Ultimately, we have to ask ourselves, who did Strassmeir work for? Quite telling is the fact that
when Timothy McVeigh’s attorneys wanted Strassmeir’s files, they had to ask the CIA for them! Also, it is now known that FBI Director Louis Freeh was aware of Strassmeir and had been
monitoring his activities, and that he was a subject of interest to the State Department’s Counter-
terrorism Division of Diplomatic Protective Services. More incredibly, a BOLO (Be On Look Out) alert was issued on Strassmeir in the weeks
preceding the bombing by Tulsa ATF agents who were seeking his arrest. Yet, even though
Strassmeir and Mahon were subjects of investigations in the days after the OKC bombing, they
were subsequently dropped from any followups. Why? Is this a case of one hand not knowing
what the other was doing, or something more sinister? After all, if Strassmeir was arrested and
started to sing, guess where everything would lead: directly to our federal government, and
possibly beyond. British journalist Ambrose Evans-Pritchard described the scenario as such: “The plot was

--- PAGE BREAK ---guess where everything would lead: directly to our federal government, and
possibly beyond. British journalist Ambrose Evans-Pritchard described the scenario as such: “The plot was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

hatched at Elohim City in the fall of 1994 under the guidance of Dennis Mahon and Andreas
Strassmeir, two men who were clearly enjoying the protection of the FBI. McVeigh was
undoubtedly part of the movement, and the bombing was probably part of a sting operation that
went disastrously wrong.”
Still, despite the incriminating evidence pointing to his involvement in the OKC bombing, in
May of 1995, an Oklahoma news service took film footage of Andreas Strassmeir still residing at
Elohim City!
Another clip shows him together with Michael Brescia. They were still living there, even after
Carol Howe, during her debriefing by the FBI on April 20, 1995, identified Strassmeir as one of
the primary perpetrators.
Even a member of the mainstream media—Roger Charles—a former 20/20 producer, told
Soldier of Fortune magazine in July, 2001 that there was “compelling evidence that Strassmeir
had access to prior knowledge regarding the bombing.” He also noted that in subsequent
interviews, Strassmeir said that:
1) Two yellow trucks were connected to the bombing, not just one;
2) Federal authorities put tracking devices on the trucks as they approached OKC that day.
The biggest question now is: where did Strassmeir get his information, and why wasn’t he
immediately arrested as a suspect? Instead, Strassmeir remained in the U.S. until January, 1996,
whereupon he was whisked out of the country. And guess who facilitated this departure. First in
line was the infamous attorney Kirk Lyons, while the actual dirty work was performed by
Germany’s elite counter-terrorism group, the GSG-9.
ANDREAS STRASSMEIR IN HIS OWN WORDS
After Andreas Strassmeir fled the country in early 1996, he began speaking out in various
interviews. Here are a few of his more revealing quotes. While reading them, ask yourself: was
Strassmeir a simple neo-Nazi klutz, or was he elaborating as someone with deep knowledge from
inside the intelligence world?
Quote 1: “It’s obvious that it [OKC] was a government op that went wrong, isn’t it? The ATF
had something going with McVeigh. They were watching him. Of course they were.”
Quote 2: “McVeigh knew he was delivering a bomb, but he had no idea what was in the truck.
He just wanted to shake things up a little; ya know, make a gesture.”
Again, we need to ask: Where was Strassmeir getting his information?
Quote 3: When asked by British journalist Ambrose Evans-Pritchard if an informant could ever
speak out about Oklahoma City, Strassmeir replied, “How can he? What happens if it [the
bombing] was a sting operation from the very beginning?” He continued, “What happens if it
comes out that the plant was a provocateur? What then? Of course the informant can’t come
forward. He’s scared stiff right now.”
When Pritchard was asked if he thought Strassmeir was referring to himself as the plant, helant was a provocateur? What then? Of course the informant can’t come
forward. He’s scared stiff right now.”
When Pritchard was asked if he thought Strassmeir was referring to himself as the plant, he

--- PAGE BREAK ---responded, “Of course.

There’s no doubt that is exactly what he meant to convey.

He was stating
it as plainly as he could without admitting criminal culpability.

.

.

.”
THE ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE
At this stage, we need to ask once again: were Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols nutty
bombers who acted alone to plan, coordinate, orchestrate, execute, and cover up the OKC
bombing?

As we’ve seen, an overwhelming amount of evidence proves that not only were others
involved in this cataclysmic event, but various federal agencies had infiltrated and monitored
many of the groups which gravitated to Elohim City.

In fact, CNN reported in June, 1995 that
two years before the bombing, McVeigh was already being surveilled by undercover agents at an
Arizona gun show.

Then, on June 3, 1995, The Washington Post stated that it was actually a
McVeigh associate who tipped off the FBI that he was involved in the bombing.

This point is
crucial, because it irrefutably contradicts the official story that McVeigh only became known to
them after he was arrested by a vigilant police officer during a traffic stop following the
bombing.

Now, considering that McVeigh associated with known “hate groups,” and their involvement in
the OKC bombing is undeniable, why would organizations such as the Anti-Defamation League
(ADL) and Morris Dees’ Southern Poverty Law Center do everything imaginable to deflect
blame AWAY from known Aryans, KKKers, and racists?

In other words, why were they so
vociferously supporting the lone-nut theory when there was an unabashedly militant Nazi
enclave at Elohim City?

Wouldn’t you think groups such as the ADL and SPLC would want to
nail them to the wall at once?

The ADL’s behavior can only be explained when we realize that this agent of the B’nai B’rith—
which has secret files on over 10,000 American citizens and over 600 different organizations,
while regularly sharing data with the Mossad and CIA—is hiding something.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Wouldn’t you think groups such as the ADL and SPLC would want to
nail them to the wall at once? The ADL’s behavior can only be explained when we realize that this agent of the B’nai B’rith—
which has secret files on over 10,000 American citizens and over 600 different organizations,
while regularly sharing data with the Mossad and CIA—is hiding something. And what, pray
tell, could they want to keep from public scrutiny? Quite simply, the ADL was directly involved
in tailing Timothy McVeigh in the weeks and years preceding the bombing. One of the most noted authorities on this subject is Michael Collins Piper, author of Final
Judgment and The New Jerusalem. In an interview with Tom Valentine ofRadio Free America,
Piper stated very directly, “Although a lot of people like to talk about government
foreknowledge of the OKC bombing plot, the fact is that much of that government knowledge
actually came to the FBI and BATF, and probably even the CIA, from ADL informants active in
the ‘right wing.’”
A perfect example of how intricately the ADL had become entwined with McVeigh came about
through the most unlikely of scenarios. On April 21, 1995, two days after the OKC bombing, The
Washington Post ran a story about McVeigh in which they claimed he had placed a series of ads
inThe Spotlight, a populist newspaper that Piper wrote for. The source for this tip was none other
than the ADL, and the article said that the ad was placed by McVeigh using the alias “T.Tuttle.”
In addition, it also named the dates upon which these ads ran, what he was selling (they
mistakenly said rocket launchers when in fact they were flare guns), and that he’d also placed
calls on a Spotlight phone card under the name “Darryl Bridges.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---Now please remember, this article ran only two days after the bombing.

Anyway, after Piper read
this reference to the publication by which he was employed, he and others began a painstaking
process to see if these assertions were true.

It should be noted that The Spotlight wasn’t
computerized, so the employees had to engage in a laborious, time-consuming search to even
find the ads in question, let alone verify them.

They couldn’t simply punch a few keys and have
it instantly pop up on their computer screens.

Thus, they had to dig through file cabinet after file
cabinet to locate these “T.

Tuttle” ads.

Mysteriously, though, the ADL had no difficulty in forwarding this information to The
Washington Post.

How could this be, especially when McVeigh didn’t even use his real name?

The odds of stumbling upon such a find are astronomical.

Or, could it be attributed to the ADL’s
highly sophisticated data bases with all its intelligence apparatus?

Or, could it be that this
information was already at their fingertips because they had been trailing McVeigh for quite
some time?

But wait, the peculiarities get even more bizarre.

.

.

.

For starters, the dates upon which the ADL
toldThe Washington Post that “T.Tuttle’s” ads ran in The Spotlight were wrong!

McVeigh had
originally contracted for the first of four ads to run the week beginning August 9, 1993.

But due to some type of production problem at the newspaper, the first ad didn’t actually run
until the following week—August 16, 1993.

Something seems to be awry, so let’s be very clear about this.

How could the ADL have known
so much about these specific ads when McVeigh was using an alias, and The Spotlight records
weren’t even computerized?

Plus, this was only two days after the bombing.

So, if we figure in
contact time, writing time, pre-production set-up time, printing time, and distribution time, the
data had to have come to the ADL immediately.

This seems impossible unless they had someone
very close to McVeigh.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So, if we figure in
contact time, writing time, pre-production set-up time, printing time, and distribution time, the
data had to have come to the ADL immediately. This seems impossible unless they had someone
very close to McVeigh. Michael Collins Piper even went so far as to say of this highlevel connection: “Do you know
how the ADL knew that McVeigh had advertised in The Spotlight? The ADL had a guy in
McVeigh’s inner circle, close to McVeigh.”
The real clincher, though, resulted from a very peculiar reaction by The Washington Post and the
ADL. Upon realizing that the information they had run in their morning edition about the dates of
McVeigh’s ads was off by a week, and
that such a disclosure would undeniably blow their cover, the Post
completely scrubbed all references to the Spotlight ad and “T.Tuttle”
in their afternoon edition. Worse, they even erased all references to this advertisement in
their microfiche records. Strange behavior? You better believe it. COVER-UP
Despite the preponderance of evidence presented in this section, Joseph Hartzler, the chief
prosecutor at Timothy McVeigh’s trial, said, “At no time did the FBI consider Andreas
Strassmeir a subject of the OKC bombing investigation.”
Regrettably for Mr. Hartzler, we now know this statement is untrue, because on April 27, 1995,

--- PAGE BREAK ---FBI Special Agent Hudspeth made a background check on Andreas Strassmeir to German police
intelligence.

This report was eventually returned to the State Department’s Counter-terrorism Division, Office
of Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott.

[As we learned in Volume One of this trilogy, Talbott has been directly linked to Bill Clinton
since the late 1960s.—Ed]
Incredibly, in light of all the direct evidence linking Strassmeir to the OKC bombing, the FBI
didn’t interview him until April 30, 1996, and this wasn’t done in person, but via telephone.

Such
a blatant miscarriage of justice is even more damning when we consider that Strassmeir
remained in the United States for eight months after the bombing, and didn’t depart for Germany
until January, 1996.

During these crucial eight months when Strassmeir remained in the U.S., our government had
time to review over 70 reports filed by informant Carol Howe, along with 38 audio cassette tapes
and two videotapes.

The source of these figures was none other than ATF official Robert
Sanders.

And what, you may inquire, was contained in Ms.

Howe’s recordings and reports?

Well, the
information pertained to the identity of the Elohim City residents, those who visited the
compound, their organizational structure, family trees, telephone numbers, license plate
numbers, explosives, guns, and even their tattoos.

Yet Elohim City was never raided .

.

.

not once, even though the ATF and FBI knew that Dennis
Mahon had been setting off 500-pound ANFO bombs in the months before April 19, 1995.

Why
didn’t our government even question Mahon about his role in the OKC bombing?

It’s incredible.

In addition, a newly released FBI document which was obtained by Timothy McVeigh’s attorney
states, “There was evidence withheld by the government that another person could well have
been the mastermind behind the bombing.” Do you think they could have been referring to
Andreas Strassmeir, or somebody even higher than him?--- PAGE BREAK ---

It’s incredible. In addition, a newly released FBI document which was obtained by Timothy McVeigh’s attorney
states, “There was evidence withheld by the government that another person could well have
been the mastermind behind the bombing.” Do you think they could have been referring to
Andreas Strassmeir, or somebody even higher than him? We also know that other relevant information was covered up after the bombing, because on
May 10, 2001, the Department of Justice turned over 4,000 previously undisclosed FBI
investigative papers. Furthermore, Chairman Dan Burton’s House Government Reform
Committee uncovered the whereabouts of numerous confiscated videotapes and photographs that
most certainly would have refuted the official version of events. These very same videos have also been cited by the Oklahoma Bombing Investigation
Committee (OKBIC), yet the Department of Justice absolutely refuses to release them, even
under the Freedom of Information Act. At this point I could go on and on with a litany of examples which prove that a cabal within our
federal government was directly involved in the OKC bombing, and that they subsequently
covered up their actions; but instead I’ll simply ask one question that harks back to the opening
section of this speech: Do you feel that no stone went unturned in Attorney General Janet Reno’s
investigation? If your answer is no, then even though the FBI, ATF, and CIA were undeniably complicit in the
OKC cover-up, the ultimate responsibility leads directly to the doorstep of Janet Reno, former
President Bill Clinton, and Ms. Jamie Gorelick, who was also instrumental in covering up the
TWA Flight 800 disaster and 9-11. Militia members at Elohim City were not the ultimate driving
force behind the Oklahoma City bombing disaster on April 19, 1995; they were simply a pretext
used to cover for much more sinister forces directly inside our own federal government.

--- PAGE BREAK ---orce behind the Oklahoma City bombing disaster on April 19, 1995; they were simply a pretext
used to cover for much more sinister forces directly inside our own federal government.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BRIGADIER GENERAL BENTON K. PARTIN SPEAKS OUT On December 12, 2004 Lisa
Guliani and I interviewed Ben
Partin, who served thirty-one years of active duty in the United
States Air Force, where he became known as the premier expert on
weapons systems. He was also “responsible for the design and testing of almost every non-
nuclear weapon device used in the Air
Force.”790
During the course of this discussion, Partin spoke out on many
subjects, including the infamous bomb which was purportedly
used to partially topple the Alfred P. Murrah Building. Partin stated that the amount of
ammonium nitrate and fuel
oil, commonly known as ANFO, that McVeigh and Nichols supposedly used could not have
brought down the building the way the
government said it did. Damage to the building was very asymmetrical, it was not adjacent to the
Ryder truck (where one would
expect it to be), and the columns collapsed in a way that were technical impossibilities in regard
to an ANFO bomb. What we should
have seen with this sort of device would be a fairly symmetrical
pattern because the building itself was symmetrical, yet the damage was not symmetrically
consistent with the structure or the resulting crater.
When asked to compare the explosive strength of an open-air
bomb to a direct impact bomb, Partin replied, “With an open-air
bomb, your blast wave is moving through the air, and the only
damage you can have is the damage propagated through air. The damage falls off inversely
proportional to the cube of the distance. Now when you have the explosive right up against a
concrete column, it doesn’t take that much explosive to destroy the column.” In laymen’s terms,
the farther away from a target an open-air bomb is, the less damage will occur. Therefore, the
ANFO/Ryder truck bomb wouldn’t be nearly as effective as an explosive placed
directly against a building’s column.
Partin continued his analysis of why an ANFO bomb could not
have toppled the Alfred P. Murrah Building. “If it would have been
in the ballpark to get an explosion out of it, it would not have been
able to do the job that they claim it did. It’s technically impossible.
Even if it had been perfectly mixed and put there in pristine condition, within the exact
proportion, it still would not have done
what happened to the Murrah Building.”
At this point, Lisa Guliani broached a subject which boggles the
mind in terms of improbability. She explained how in the 25 years
prior to the OKC bombing, the public hadn’t heard anything about
ANFO bombs. But in early 1994, the BATF and Army Corps of Engineers began conducting
ANFO tests at White Plains Missile
Range in New Mexico under the code name Dipole Might. Curiously, one of the people involved
in that testing was agent Harry
Everhart, who also happened to show up on the scene at the OKC
bombing.
Here is where circumstances become more than coincidental.Curiously, one of the people involved
in that testing was agent Harry
Everhart, who also happened to show up on the scene at the OKC
bombing.
Here is where circumstances become more than coincidental.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Harry Everhart, who performed the ANFO tests in New Mexico, “is
an employee of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms [and
is] an accomplished ATF expert in ANFO truck bombs.”791791 Now remember, until OKC,
ANFO hadn’t been used as a
weapon in any public acts of destruction for twenty-five years.

Then, the year prior to OKC, Everhart started doing tests using this
exact substance at a government military base.

So, who “was actually one of the first federal law officers to report the details of the bombing to
his superiors from the scene in
front of the Murrah Building, within minutes of the blast”?792 It was Harry Everhart!

In fact, “the
ANFO story was born only ten minutes after the blast when a high-ranking ATF official by the
name of Harry Everhart witnessed the blast from nearby and called the ATF office in Dallas to
excitedly announce, ‘Someone had just blown up the federal building in OKC with a truckload of
ANFO.’”793
First, try to calculate the odds that of all the places on the planet
earth where ATF agent Harry Everhart could have been—he being
the only man in the country to do official testing on ANFO
bombs—that he was precisely in the exact same spot where an
ANFO bomb went off—the first time in twenty-five years!

The possibility of this happening by
chance is so far beyond any stretch of
the imagination that it’s incalculable.

Secondly, how could Everhart have “known” so quickly the
source of this explosion?

“Some reports and investigators who have
looked objectively at the bombing now argue that neither Everhart
nor anyone else could have correctly deduced in such a short time
exactly what caused the explosion.”794
Anyway, General Partin said the story that the OKC bombing
was performed by one guy—Timothy McVeigh—was phony.

Rather, he said McVeigh was a patsy because the Randy Weaver
case in Ruby Ridge was blamed on a religious-style militia.

Then
Waco was blamed on militias.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rather, he said McVeigh was a patsy because the Randy Weaver
case in Ruby Ridge was blamed on a religious-style militia. Then
Waco was blamed on militias. Subsequently, Ruby Ridge and Waco
really generated the militia movement in this country. Why? Because people saw the government
doing things that were unconstitutional. Finally, Partin was asked: “If we could rebuild the Alfred P. Murrah Building and put a Ryder
truck exactly where it was on the
morning of April 19, 1995, fill it with 4,800 pounds of ANFO, then
set it off, how much damage would it actually cause?” Partin didn’t miss a beat. “You would
have taken out some of the
flooring on the first floor, and probably a little bit up to the third
floor, and that’s about it.” He then went on to explain how the 1993
WTC truck bombing took out the flooring two floors up and three
floors down around only one column. That’s it. Plus, the Murrah
Building was more flimsily constructed than the World Trade Center towers (which were two of
the strongest buildings ever erected), while the bomb used there went off right next to a column
—not an open-air bomb some distance away like at OKC. Partin concluded by citing seismographic data which showed that there were additional

--- PAGE BREAK ---explosions at the Murrah Building, corroborating what survivors inside the structure testified to
later— that it felt like an earthquake when charges inside the building were being detonated.

Then, moments later, there was another explosion from outside the building which sent glass
flying inside the building.

Thus, seismographic data coincides with the timing of bombs going
off inside the building first, then from the Ryder truck outside second.

Because he had the courage to be truthful about OKC, General Partin was not called to testify at
Timothy McVeigh’s trial in Denver.

In his own words, he said the reason why was “because
there was too much of a government cover-up.”
ADDENDUM TO DIPOLE MIGHT
Was the ATF in fact responsible, knowingly or unknowingly, for the explosion that destroyed the
Murrah Building?

Consider the following article which appeared in the June 5, 1995 issue of
Newsweek:
For the past year, the ATF and the Army Corps of Engineers have been blowing up car bombs at
the White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico.

The project, codenamed Dipole Might, is
designed to create a computer model to unravel terrorist car and truck bomb attacks.

By
coincidence, an ATF agent assigned to Dipole Might happened to be in Oklahoma City on April
19th, working at the Federal Courthouse, which stands across the street from the Murrah
Building.

He saw the devastation and called the ATF office in Dallas.

The Murrah Building had
just been hit by an ‘ANFO’ (ammonium material) bomb of at least several thousand pounds, he
reported.

Within minutes, explosives agents trained under Dipole Might were dispatched to the
scene.

They identified the type and size of the bomb almost immediately.

Just how this agent (Harry Everhart) was able to immediately ascertain the building had been
blown up by an ANFO bomb, when no forensic analysis had yet been conducted, is unclear.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They identified the type and size of the bomb almost immediately. Just how this agent (Harry Everhart) was able to immediately ascertain the building had been
blown up by an ANFO bomb, when no forensic analysis had yet been conducted, is unclear. When Phil O’Halloran, a freelance journalist, attempted to ask the ATF Public Relations Bureau
why a Dipole Might expert just happened to be in the courthouse at that moment, and how he
could immediately have known the exact nature of the bomb, O’Halloran, rather than be given a
rational explanation, was accused of attacking the agency and was promised a fax of agency
views on right-wing conspiracists (which never arrived).795
(Coincidentally, Project Dipole Might was created via authorization of Bill Clinton’s National
Security Council.)
COLLATERAL DAMAGE
The most obvious question is: why would the government plant operatives inside Elohim City to
plot an attack against the government . . . against itself? Such a notion seems convoluted beyond
words. What would their motive be? Also, why would they have informants inside Elohim City
who reported back to them (the government), then allow the plan to bomb a federal building
move forward unimpeded? The idea makes less sense than the crazed characters did from Alice
in Wonderland. If one studies the history of state-sponsored terrorism, rather than accepting the spoon-fed lies
delivered by official sources and their compliant lapdog press, an entirely different world will
open before your eyes. In this sinister realm, we have a combination of Machiavellian amorality,

--- PAGE BREAK ---Hegel’s Dialectic, the end justifying the means, and a term which reportedly came out of
Timothy McVeigh’s mouth while he sat in prison: collateral damage.

From the state’s
perspective, a few lives—even those of their own citizens—are worth sacrificing as collateral
damage in light of a larger agenda.

It’s hard to imagine a sicker, more evil concept; but it exists,
it is real, and it continues to this very day.

We the people are pawns; innocent lambs to be
slaughtered in a context which we’re not even aware of.

So, why OKC; what were their motives?

ONE: “The dormant Anti-terrorism Bill was revived, inflated, and put on the fast track to
passage.”796
What essentially developed after the OKC bombing was pre-Patriot Act legislation which greatly
enhanced the government’s ability to surveil its citizens.

“Before the April 19th bombing, two
anti-terrorism bills were moldering in Congress.

Since the bombing, they have been scrapped
and new shiny versions, with the same repressive slants, have been pushed up before a Congress
now rabid about taking out terrorists regardless of the facts, regardless of the cost to the
Constitution.”797
What we’re talking about is Big Brother-style Big Government which laid the groundwork for
post 9-11 legislation.

“The overpowering trend involves more control of the citizenry, more Bill
of Rights scrapping, more octopus-maneuvering, more taking over of local functions, more
computerizing, more linking, [and] more corporate-government identity of interest and
agenda.”798
Even the terminology used in the mid-1990s was eerily similar to that which would be enacted
only a few years later.

Here’s how it worked.

George Bush Sr.’s people created the initial Big
Brother legislature; Bill Clinton pushed through the prototype; and then George W.

Bush
finalized it after 9-11.

The entire scenario is partand-parcel of the Bush-Clinton-Bush cabal that
we’ve witnessed since 1980.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bush
finalized it after 9-11. The entire scenario is partand-parcel of the Bush-Clinton-Bush cabal that
we’ve witnessed since 1980. Following OKC, we saw “repressive anti-terrorism laws, Internet
surveillance, crackdowns on politically suspect dissident groups, and the Clinton
Administration’s proposal to create a ‘Homeland Defense Force’ that will allow the U.S. military
to police the citizenry.”799
The most appalling aspect of this 1984 nightmare is that the entire bombing scenario was a
fabrication. Timothy McVeigh didn’t
even remotely mastermind it. He was a fall guy. The U.S. government knew 100% that not only
would OKC happen; they had operatives such as Andreas Strassmeir pushing the event to
culmination. Plus, informants like Carol Howe filed continuing reports from the inside, letting
the FBI and ATF know precisely what
was taking place. OKC was step one in the modern era of Big
Brother government which would eventually seize almost total
control of this nation. TWO: Motive number one was obviously the primary reason
for the OKC bombing; but don’t for a moment think that the Clintons didn’t also have a personal
stake in this matter. Stated differently, they saw a way to manipulate events for their own
self-interest. As we pointed out earlier, a slew of Clinton scandals
was boiling during their first term; many of which were about to
be investigated at a federal level. But after OKC, the “focus of attention shifted from
investigations into Whitewater, Waco, Ruby Ridge,

--- PAGE BREAK ---Mena, ATF conduct, and the death of Vince Foster—all originally
scheduled to begin congressional investigations four weeks after
the bombing—to ‘more pressing issues.’”800
The resulting media blitz superseded these trials, which were
conveniently pushed to a back-burner.

OKC, sadly enough, was
but the first of many Clintonesque Wag the Dog uses of violence,
war, and trauma to deflect attention away from their scandals.

THREE: The precise target in
OKC also became an integral part
of the equation to prevent an inquiry into the many Bush-Clinton
crimes.

“If the records from the Mena drug smuggling operation
were moved to the Murrah Building from Little Rock (or duplicates
kept there after originals were previously destroyed or disappeared), then it would prove very
beneficial to those about to come
under congressional investigation in the following months (MayJune ‘95) to have those records
destroyed, or seized and moved for
later destruction.”801
One has to ask: was the Alfred P.

Murrah Building targeted because it housed documents which
incriminated the Clintons and Bushes?

It’s a distinct possibility.

FOUR: At the time of the OKC bombing, anti-government and militia movements had reached
unprecedented levels in this country.

Spearheaded by populist and anti-New World Order
newspapers and a network of booksellers, these patriot groups began posing enough of a threat to
those in Washington D.C.

that they had to be taken seriously.

But once Timothy McVeigh’s face
was plastered on television and magazines across the nation—garbed in a prison orange jumpsuit
and scowling at the cameras—the militia movement was immediately and effectively destroyed.

Timothy McVeigh— agent provocateur for the government—was their black eye.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But once Timothy McVeigh’s face
was plastered on television and magazines across the nation—garbed in a prison orange jumpsuit
and scowling at the cameras—the militia movement was immediately and effectively destroyed. Timothy McVeigh— agent provocateur for the government—was their black eye. “A new
‘Barbarian at the Gate’ in the form of ‘militias’ was created by the media; giving citizens a
‘domestic threat’ to worry about.”802
With crew-cut McVeigh sneering and referring to dead babies as collateral damage, the attack
“provided the impetus for a statesanctioned war against ‘anti-government’ dissent that has
produced a chilling effect on certain forms of political activism in this country ever since.”803
In effect, the “anti-American radical wild-eyed conspiracy theorist militia member” was born;
and with the mainstream media, ADL, and Southern Poverty Law Center fueling the fire, those
who sought honest government were branded enemies of the state. Considering the above four motivating factors, it’s safe to conclude that the Bush-Clinton cabal
was successful in their endeavor to protect themselves and push forward an agenda by bombing
the Alfred P. Murrah Building in Oklahoma City. THE MURDER OF OFFICER TERRENCE YEAKEY
Throughout the course of this book, a host of corrupt law enforcement officials, intel operatives,
and politicians has been exposed for their multitude of illegal activities, including drug
trafficking, money laundering, murder, and state-sponsored terrorism. But there are among their
ranks honest public servants who aren’t bought off, compromised, blackmailed, or motivated by
greed or career advancement. In other words, there are still plenty of good guys left. But guess what happens to these virtuous individuals when they get in the way of those who
belong to the Bush-Clinton cabal, the CIA, or the Dixie Mafia. They get brutally murdered in

--- PAGE BREAK ---cold blood.

One of the most tragic examples ever was the case of Oklahoma police officer Terrence Yeakey.

This man was one of the first on the scene after the Alfred P.

Murrah Building was bombed by
ordnance inside the structure.

His efforts to save men, women, and children went beyond the
heroic as he worked gruelingly for two days straight digging through the rubble to find survivors.

“On May 11ththe following year he was scheduled to receive the Medal of Valor from the
Oklahoma City Police Department.

He never got it.

He was murdered on May 8, 1996, in the
country, 2 ½ miles from El Reno.”804
Officially, his death was ruled .

.

.

hold your breath .

.

.

a suicide.

Yes, another suicide!

How did
Yeakey supposedly kill himself?

This morbid portrait is even worse than the Vince Foster
murder.

According to public reports, “Terry slashed himself eleven times on both forearms
before cutting his own throat twice near the jugular vein.

Then, apparently seeking an even more
private place to die, he crawled through another mile of rough terrain away from his car and
climbed a fence before shooting himself in the head with a small caliber revolver.

What appeared
to be rope burns on his neck, handcuff bruises to his wrists, and muddy grass embedded in his
slash wounds strongly indicated that he had some help in traversing the final distance.”805
On the website Officer.com, a report stated, “All the autopsy evidence shows that Yeakey’s
wounds were consistent with a tortureexecution.

The fatal shot was fired from a pistol with a
silencer, held in contact with Yeakey’s skull, leaving a barrel imprint and very little powder
residue.

No pistol was found at the scene until the FBI arrived, over an hour after his body was
found.

Handcuff marks were on both wrists according to the funeral home director.--- PAGE BREAK ---

No pistol was found at the scene until the FBI arrived, over an hour after his body was
found. Handcuff marks were on both wrists according to the funeral home director. By the time
the body arrived at the funeral home, the wrist lacerations had been sewn up and mud and grass
was inside—showing that Yeakey was dragged through the mud as he attempted to fight off his
attackers.”806
Yeakey’s death was not a suicide; it was a political assassination. Why? Because Terrence
Yeakey witnessed the aftermath of the explosions inside the Murrah Building, and it most
certainly did not match up with the official story. On the morning of April 19thhe called his wife,
crying, “It’s not true. It’s not what they’re saying. It didn’t happen that way.”807
What did Terrence Yeakey see inside that federal building? Obviously there were still
unexploded bombs, plus the wreckage of those bombs that did not go off, including the twisted
beams which could not have resulted from an open-air bomb out on the street. He and others saw
what really happened. He “may have been the first to discover the sham.”808
Yes, his wife “Tonia Yeakey revealed that her husband had been very upset by something that he
had seen under the day care center on April 19th. He had wanted to go back and photograph it,
but the officials would not let him onto the site again.”809
Instead of covering up the truth, Yeakey continued to investigate this matter; his actions soon
drawing notice from the authorities. On the day of his murder, Terry “was on his way to El Reno
to check out something; but first he had to shake the FBI agents who were following him.”810
He never made it home. Following his murder, “witnesses said that the inside [of his car] looked

--- PAGE BREAK ---out something; but first he had to shake the FBI agents who were following him.”810
He never made it home. Following his murder, “witnesses said that the inside [of his car] looked

--- PAGE BREAK ---

like someone had butchered a hog on the front seat.”811
Could Yeakey have been fitting the final pieces to the puzzle, and then preparing to disclose his
findings at the OKC Police Department award ceremony while receiving his Medal of Valor? Is
that why three days prior to this ceremony, Yeakey was murdered in cold blood? The brutal,
gangland-style hit is indicative of the Dixie Mafia’s handiwork; and we need to consider that if
they’ll kill an officer of the law in such a hideous fashion, nobody is safe from their barbaric
actions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MASTERMIND OR PATSY? The Time magazine Oklahoma City “special issue” depicting the purported mastermind of the
bombing of the Murrah building, Tim McVeigh, is shown above. McVeigh, it turns out, was more surprised than anyone when

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the small “send a message” bomb he thought he was carrying appeared to rip the entire face off of the OKC federal building. We
now know McVeigh had contact with a wide array of ADL and FBI agents as well as an intriguing cast of characters including
German intelligence operative Andreas Strassmeir.

--- PAGE BREAK ---OKLAHOMA CITY BOMBINGS---SPLIT IN FBI?

by Sherman H.

Skolnick 05/11/01
A possible split in the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and other federal agencies, may
open up various possiblities as to what really happened as to the bombings in Oklahoma
City, April 19, 1995.

And we use the term BOMBINGS in the plural advisedly, because
some explosives experts contend fertilizer bombs in a front-of-the-building truck could
not have wrecked the building pillars as occurred.

Background President Clinton felt his power slipping away.

The 1994 Congressional
elections, considered by fellow Democrats as a Clinton-caused disaster, brought in a
noisy GOP majority.

In the spring of 1995, a small group of highly patriotic flag officers
were plotting to arrest their Commander-in-Chief Clinton for giving military secrets to the
Red Chinese, a sworn enemy of the U.S.; an arrest provided for and authorized under
the military code.

As titular head of both the U.S.

civilian and military Establishment,
Clinton, on the other hand, could have arrested the 24 Admirals and Generals for
mutiny.

If they were not assassinated, they intended to defend themselves with proof,
such as Clinton giving, to the head of the Red Chinese Secret Police, in the White
Houuse and elsewhere, U.S.

financial, industrial, and MILITARY secrets.

Giving aid and
comfort to a sworn enemy of the U.S., the classical definition of treason.

Clinton felt he could nevertheless control the situation, notwithstanding the plot against
him.

Just prior to the 1994 elections was appointed to investigate Bill and Hillary, a
supposed "Independent Counsel", Kenneth W.

Starr.

But Starr had built-in conflicts of
interest, as Clinton was aware.

Starr had as a private law client, Wang Jun, head of the
Red Chinese Secret Police.

Wang Jun also headed a Red Chinese military-owned
company that made and marketed AK-47 submachine guns, intended for shipment to
U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Starr had as a private law client, Wang Jun, head of the
Red Chinese Secret Police. Wang Jun also headed a Red Chinese military-owned
company that made and marketed AK-47 submachine guns, intended for shipment to
U.S. inner-city narco-terrorist street gangs, for shoot-em-ups with big city police, to
destabilize the U.S. government. Moreover, Starr was reportedly the UNREGISTERED foreign lobbyist for the Red
Chinese government. Starr was thus subject at any time, to Clinton Justice Department
punishment. [Visit our extensive website series, "Red Chinese Secret Police IN THE UNITED
STATES".]
On Monday, April 17, 1995, a military jet planeload of top military was enroute to Dallas. They had onboard what is not supposed to exist, an American prisoner-of-war, prepared
to finger the Pentagon as perpetuated by Clinton, as continuing the POW/Missing in
Action cover-up from the Viet Nam war. From sabotage, the plane blew up in the air,
killing all onboard, near Alexander City, Alabama. The Pentagon made every effort to
cover up what happened. Families of the victims were reportedly not permitted to have
any possessions or details. There are strong reasons to believe the plane had a portion
of a group of "Seven Days in May" style military officers plotting a coup against the
White House. Thereafter, the small group of other flag officers, out of uniform, took up
residence in a Paris suburb. A year later, the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Jeremy
Boorda, apparently aware of the coup, was assassinated and covered up as a "suicide",

--- PAGE BREAK ---a favorite whitewash by the monopoly press.

And about the time of Boorda's murder,
was assassinated William Colby, former Director of Central Intelligence.

He reportedly
was assisting the plotters with detailed data.

Colby's death was explained by the
pressfakers as a "boat accident", although his friends contend it was murder.

Clinton, as President, was fully aware that Oklahoma City had as residents, a large
number of Iraqi military officers and their families, some officers of Iraqi Intelligence
units, supposed defectors after the Persian Gulf War, 1991, brought into the U.S.

by
President George Herbert Walker Bush.

Iraq, as Clinton knew, was planning a revenge
terrorist attack against a federal office building in Oklahoma City, using U.S.

dissidents
as surrogates, but insulated from the actual Iraqi handlers.

The FBI, the CIA, and other
in the intelligence community, have pictures and records showing the Iraqi military
officers supervising the Murrah Building bombings.

[Local Oklahoma TV reporters
confirming this in part were fired or otherwise punished.]
Little if at all publicized was that prior to the Timothy McVeigh trial, the head of his
defense team, Stephen Jones, filed an extra-ordinary petition in the Federal Appeals
court, called Petition for Mandamus.

It sought to force the Denver trial judge who was
set to hear the McVeigh murder case removed from Oklahoma City, to release certain
secret documents possessed by various federal intelligence agencies.

Referring to the
secret as well as public court records, Jones' Petition pointed out that U.S.

intelligence
agencies were aware of Iraqi complicity in the Murrah Building bombing.

For apparent
reasons of "national security", a catch-all whitewash excuse, the federal appeals court
rejected the Petition and the McVeigh murder trial, minus the revealing records,
proceeded.

A U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For apparent
reasons of "national security", a catch-all whitewash excuse, the federal appeals court
rejected the Petition and the McVeigh murder trial, minus the revealing records,
proceeded. A U.S. Secret Service Agent, Witcher, in a position to finger Clinton on other matters,
was steered into occupying an office in the Murrah Building. He died in the disaster. [We
have one of the few pictures of him.] Clinton, apparently faking remorse, later attended a
memorial for the agent. At the time of the bombings, the U.S. Treasury's Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco & Fire-Arms, headquartered in the Murrah Building, was planning an
exercise as to how to "sting" or flush out would-be domestic terrorists. Something went
wrong with their "sting" operation. The BATF knew not to have their personnel in the
Alfred Murrah Building on that Wednesday, April 19, 1995. A local fire official was
likewise warned. So was a local judge in a nearby building, warned of an expected
bombing that day. Making a rare appearance on CBS' "Sixty Minutes" Program, Clinton described the
tragedy as a "plot to overthrow the government". WIth his power and prestige waning
prior to the bombings, Clinton with the complicity of the spy-riddled monopoly press, now
urged the public to support and rally around their President. Clinton and the
presswhores used the bombings as an excuse to want to punish and round-up U.S. domestic dissidents that were heckling the central government in Washington. [Similarly,
when Adolph Hitler came to power, he had the German Parliament burned down and
falsely blamed on dissidents, to consolidate his power and have an excuse to round-up
opponents to the Nazi Party.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Right before the scheduled execution of McVeigh, an apparent split has developed in
the FBI.

There is reason to believe the split is also in other intelligence agencies.

The
target of the divergence is both current alleged "President" or White House "resident"
George W.

Bush and former President Clinton.

Through his father, George W.

Bush is in
a position to know, and want to cover up, the complicity of the Iraqi officers on U.S.

soil
in the Oklahoma City bombings.

Also, former President Clinton, somewhere in the
future, may well be subject to federal criminal prosecution for treason and the murder of
the 168 who died in the Murrah Building bombings.

Are other records about to be
revealed?

Some believe so.

Based on a little-known Federal case in Chicago, 1991, where I was the only spectator
and journalist present, I did exclusive stories on how the Elder Bush in the decade of the
1980s, was a PRIVATE business partner of Iraqi strongman Saddam Hussein.

Together,
they shook down the weak sheikdoms in the Persian Gulf for billions and billions of
dollars of oil kick-backs.

The Persian Gulf War, in its simplest form, was merely two
private business partners having a falling out and wanting to punish one another.

Through foreign units of his firm, Halliburton, Vice President Richard Cheney has
extensive business with Iraq on oil-country machinery and such.

Prior to being Vice
President, Cheney was CEO of Halliburton.

Through Harken Energy, and a massive
swindle, George W.

Bush has extensive interests in the Persian Gulf and conflicts of
interest as to Iraq as a so-called subdued "enemy" of the U.S.

Tell me if you can WHAT IS THE REASON NONE DARE CALL THIS TREASON?

More coming.

Stay tuned.

OKLAHOMA CITY BOMBINGS---SPLIT IN FBI?

FURTHER DETAILS
by Sherman H.

Skolnick 05/11/01
The following further details in this report might be helpful in understanding the situation
1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

FURTHER DETAILS
by Sherman H. Skolnick 05/11/01
The following further details in this report might be helpful in understanding the situation
1. As stated, the head of the McVeigh defense team, attorney Stephen Jones, prior to
the 1997 McVeigh murder trial, filed a Petition for Mandamus, an extra-ordinary
attempted remedy in the U.S. Court of Appeals, 10th Circuit, Denver. Because of
perceived prejudice against a fair trial in Oklahoma, the case had been transferred to
Denver U.S. District Judge Richard Matsch. Prior to the beginning of the trial, Jones was
attempting to force Judge Matsch to order the release of secret records in the
possession of U.S. intelligence agencies, corroborating that U.S. dissidents were
secretly surrogates for an Iraqi revenge plot to carry out a major terrorist attack on an
Oklahoma City federal office building. That these records, also referred to in secret court
records, would show Iraqi complicity, as known in advance by U.S. intelligence
agencies, as referred to in Jones' unpublicized Petition of some 185 pages. The spy-riddled monopoly press did not bring out an important detail. Namely, that
Judge Matsch was intimidated into keeping these records secret to protect the Clinton
White House cover-up of the multiple bombings of the Murrah Building as well as
protecting the FBI, the CIA, the NSA, and others of the spy agency Establishment. How? Judge Matsch's daughter was apparently murdered. She somehow fell into a volcano in

--- PAGE BREAK ---Hawaii.

This apparent murder made the Judge naturally distraught.

The apparent
murder example also was known to and intimidated the Federal Appeals Judges in
Denver who after the McVeigh murder trial, conducted without these highly revealing
records, upheld the District Court's guilty verdict of McVeigh.

So both the trial judge and
the federal appeals Judges in Denver had been coerced into going along with a cover
up by murder close to home.

Will trial Judge Matsch and/or the federal appeals judges, all apparently intimidated by
the apparent murder, do something at this late date to bring out the true nature of the
bombings of a federal office building in Oklahoma City?

2.

The apparent split in the FBI by which some three thousand records suddenly showed
up also involves the super-secret Federal Emergency Management Agency, FEMA.

Seldom accurately referred to by the pressfakers, FEMA is not authorized OR FUNDED
by Congress.

According to very well placed sources, FEMA secretly funds their covert
operations, planning to run the U.S.

FROM ABOVE THE U.S.

CONSTITUTION, with
huge funds garnered from the CIA's dope trafficking into the U.S.

Vice President Richard
Cheney has promoted the idea that FEMA should take over all anti-terrorist planning of
the U.S., thus excluding the FBI, and causing a rift between the FBI and FEMA.

Yes,
FEMA seeks to run the U.S.

from ABOVE the U.S.

Constitution and yes, I recognize
such a doing is itself unconstitutional.

[The martial law edict, quietly signed several years ago by President Clinton and carried
over by alleged "President" or White House "resident" George W.

Bush, provides---now
get this---that no judge in the U.S.

has jurisdiction to consider any challenge to the
martial law edict.

We are about the only ones publicly stating that several federal judges
in the U.S.

wear two hats---one as federal judge, and two, generally unknown, as FEMA
official.

One such judge sits in the Federal Court in Chicago.--- PAGE BREAK ---

wear two hats---one as federal judge, and two, generally unknown, as FEMA
official. One such judge sits in the Federal Court in Chicago. We pointed all these details
out in a several hundred page documented lawsuit, in January, 1991, against FEMA, in
Chicago's Federal District Court. Yes, a federal judge on behalf of FEMA dismissed our
suit in secret, without any legal formality.]
3. Despite the military coup planned against Clinton as President, referred to in our
story, Clinton was never concerned. Why? Because he had reason to know that his rise
to and stay in power was orchestrated with the aid of blackmail and murder. We
mentioned how supposed "Independent Counsel" Kenneth W. Starr was blackmailed. Clinton benefitted from an epidemic of suspicious if not sabotaged military aircraft
crashes and from the strange death of those who knew too much about Clinton and
about the military coup plot against him. One of those who knew too much and was reportedly sympathetic if not supportive of
the coup, was General David McCloud, head of he Alaska Military District. He died in a
sabotaged plane crash. His military colleagues are aware of the terrible details but
refuse to allow a reporter to publicly identify them or take their position public. His
relatives tend to agree with our details. 4. Some in the monopoly press, who talk to us off the record and we agree never to
identify them as sources, contend such details as in our stories, which they believe to be

--- PAGE BREAK ---true but cannot go in print or on the air with them, could well topple the U.S.

government.

Why?

Because the ruling elite, whose faces are seldom seen, are governing us from
behind the scenes in contradiction of the U.S.

Constitution and laws.

5.

Is there a rationale by the ruling elite for the cover up of the true nature of the
bombings of the Murrah Building?

They fear, supposedly, a full scale war with Iraq which
now has chemical and biological weapons as well as some types of nuclear bomb
devices.

Furthermore, any ruckus with Iraq over the Murrah Building inevitably would
involve the current German government Establishment.

Why?

A German counter-
intelligence agent, on behalf of Iraq, supervised the U.S.

domestic dissidents in the
limited role outside the Murrah Building while others had already planted explosive
devices INSIDE the building to go off about the same moment as the ineffective truck
fertilizer bomb outside.

That agent,known to the American CIA, reportedly was Andreas
Strasmeier, whose elders reportedly were pro-Hitler.

Little understood German industry
has supplied much of the weaponry for Iraq.

And, they built a 60-foot-under-the-ground
bomb shelter for Saddam Hussein as well as other super-secret buildings, machines,
and weaponry for Iraq.

All while Germany professes to be pro-West and pro-U.S.

Also, in our stories about the murder of Clinton White House Deputy Counsel Vincent W.

Foster, Jr., we mentioned that German Counter-Intelligence [also tied to Strasmeir] in
Frankfurt, had advance knowledge of a foreign team set to murder Foster.Also, in our stories about the murder of Clinton White House Deputy Counsel Vincent W.

Foster, Jr., we mentioned that German Counter-Intelligence [also tied to Strasmeir] in
Frankfurt, had advance knowledge of a foreign team set to murder Foster.

[See our
website stories, "Greenspan Aids and Bribes Bush", Part Four.] And study our website
story about how Foster was part of a team, trying to assist the FBI, in arresting
international swindler Marc Rich, at the Swiss/French border [Affidavit of former CIA
operative Leo Wanta.]
In an honest world, if McVeigh is to be severely punished for his limited role in the
bombings, also deserving of major punishment would be William Rockefeller Clinton and
his crony, George W.

Bush, as well as the Elder Bush, George Herbert Walker Bush, for
their cover up complicity in the 168 murders on behalf of Iraq.

6.

Timothy McVeigh, a purported expert in secret code usage, cryptography, has been
communicating in code with author Gore Vidal who was on an extremely short list of
those McVeigh wanted to witness his supposed execution.

{Study Gore Vidal's book
"1876" and how it predicted the strange 2000 election.

See our website series on the
year 2000 alleged election.] Gore Vidal, a third level cousin of Albert Gore, Jr.,[they are
on the outs with each other] reportedly has a witnessed Affidavit from Timothy McVeigh
supposedly setting forth "smoking gun" details that could scandalize the American
government and Presidents George Herbert Walker Bush, Bill Clinton, and Bush's son,
George W.

How is it that high-level types are so dedicated to destroying and discrediting the
American central government?

Isn't this something the British monarchy and aristocracy
have been trying to do since at least the War of 1812?--- PAGE BREAK ---

How is it that high-level types are so dedicated to destroying and discrediting the
American central government? Isn't this something the British monarchy and aristocracy
have been trying to do since at least the War of 1812? And British complicity in the
murders of President Abraham Lincoln, President James Garfield, and President William
McKinley, all who opposed the British plans to take back this continent and its peoples
as subjects of a British colonial rule.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[Visit our website series, "Greenspan Aids and Bribes Bush", to which are attached
secret Federal Reserve wire transfer records showing billions and billions of dollars,
from worldwide illicit dope trafficking and such, to the joint account of the Bush family
with the Queen of England at her private bank, owned by the Queen, Coutts Bank
London, as authorized under the secret codes of Greenspan.]
More coming. Stay tuned.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Bush family
with the Queen of England at her private bank, owned by the Queen, Coutts Bank
London, as authorized under the secret codes of Greenspan.]
More coming. Stay tuned.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Red Mercury Tritium Lithium Micro Nuke Sherman Skolnick Oklahoma City Bombing.txt
[6] As confirmed as to contents, by the FBI/CIA/intelligence agencies surveillance
of
Timothy McVeigh in the company of his Iraqi military officer handlers, McVeigh and
his
handlers carried around several suitcases. Some of them contained highly effective
C- 4
explosives. One suitcase contained a lower level sub- atomic device, known as "Red
Mercury". The suitcase nuke had been developed by the Soviets and made available to
their client- state, Iraq. The shearing off of the steel pillars of the Murrah
Building was
NOT done by a fertilizer truck- bomb from in front of the building. Rather, by
devices in
the parking section of the basement.
As reported by a researcher, "Jane Graham,a sixty year old Federal Housing Services
employee, was on the ninth floor of the Murrah Building when she saw, heard and felt
the rolling tremor of the building accompanied by a slow rumbling explosion. About 6
to
8 seconds later, she was struck by a much more powerful and sudden explosion that
lifted the floors of the building straight up. About 3 hours after the explosions
took place
she saw and later obtained video recordings of the federals pouring wet concrete
into
the 25 foot crater in the basement of the Murrah Building. Even though she demanded
to testify before the Grand Jury she was not allowed to do so. Nor was she allowed
to
testify at all concerning any of the proceedings surrounding the Oklahoma City
Massacre. Many other witnesses report similar experiences. Most witnesses are too
fearful to speak out." As sent to us by e- mail from Reinhold Sommerstedt
wealthassure@earthlink.net, 6/8/01.
Independent persons, with radiation gauges, called Geiger Counters, tried to measure
the radiation after the explosions, but were not permitted to get that close. In the
past, I
have been heckled for my exclusive stories that nuclear- type radiation residue,
from
tritium, was found and secretly measured by government operatives in the bombsite.
Luckily or otherwise, what was discovered were left- overs of tritium. Unlike
plutonium,
tritium does not have a hundred- year or more "half- life", the period during which
it can
still greatly harm. Some contend the half- life of tritium is as little as thirty
days.
Critical of the fertilizer truck- bomb theory, author David Hoffman in his book did
state: An
article in The Nashville Tennessean insists Saddam Hussein has been developing 220
pounds of Lithium 6 a year. Lithium 6 can be converted to TRITIUM, an essential
ingredient in thermonuclear reactions." (Emphasis added.) And in a footnote " 'Iraq
Also
Worked on Hydrogen Bomb', Associated Press, quoted in The Nashville Tennessean,
10/9/91, as quoted in Charles T. Harrison, 'Hell in a Hand Basket The Threat of
Portable
Nuclear Weapons', Military Review, May, 1993." The Oklahoma City Bombing and the
Politics of Terror, Feral House, original 1998 Edition, page 14.
Page 1, 'Hell in a Hand Basket The Threat of
Portable
Nuclear Weapons', Military Review, May, 1993." The Oklahoma City Bombing and the
Politics of Terror, Feral House, original 1998 Edition, page 14.
Page 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Oklahoma City
What the Investigation Missed—and Why It Still Matters
Andrew Gumbel and Roger G. Charles

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dedication
To those whose lives were shattered or lost on April 19, 1995,
and to the admirable men and women who wanted it
told as it was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Contents
Title Page
Dedication
Prologue
1. The Road to Oklahoma
2. 9:02 A.M.
3. We Got Him
4. Tim and Terry and James and … That’s It
5. War Fever
6. The Great John Doe Two Disappearing Act
7. The Many Mysteries of “Bob from Arkansas”
8. Oklahoma’s Own Private Afghanistan
9. Aryan Paradise Lost
10. Trial and Punishment
Afterword: Vengeance and Truth
Sources
Select Bibliography
Photographs
Acknowledgments
Index
About the Authors
Also by Andrew Gumbel
Credits

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Copyright
About the Publisher

--- PAGE BREAK ---Vengeance and Truth
Sources
Select Bibliography
Photographs
Acknowledgments
Index
About the Authors
Also by Andrew Gumbel
Credits

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Copyright
About the Publisher

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROLOGUE
There are, as a result of the investigation and the presentation of the
evidence in this case, a number of questions unanswered…. It would be
disappointing to me if the law enforcement agencies of the United States
government have quit looking for answers in this Oklahoma bombing
tragedy.
—RICHARD P. MATSCH, PRESIDING JUDGE IN THE MCVEIGH AND NICHOLS TRIALS
I’m thoroughly convinced we’re going to have another domestic terrorist
act in this country that is going to be beyond our imagination, beyond
Oklahoma City.
—KERRY NOBLE, REFORMED MILITANT FROM THE RADICAL FAR RIGHT
Why read about the Oklahoma City bombing, after so long? Many Americans
think of the events of April 19, 1995, as a jarring interruption to an otherwise
peaceful decade, a disturbing story whose shockwaves, mercifully, did not
resonate for long. They remember it as the work of two disaffected army
veterans from the heartland, who pulled together their deadly payload from
ordinary farm fertilizer and delivered it in a Ryder truck to a city unprepared for
such destruction.
But that is only part of what happened. While the guilt of the two principal
defendants, Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols, was established beyond doubt
at trial, many other things were sidestepped: the dysfunction within the country’s
law enforcement agencies, which missed opportunities to penetrate the radical
right and prevent the bombing; the question of who inspired the bombing and
who else might have been involved; and evidence contradicting the
government’s repeated insistence that investigators had everything under control
and that, ultimately, the system worked.
This litany may sound familiar from the controversies following the
September 11 attacks, and it should. Many of the same institutional problems
and misplaced political priorities that blinded the country to the threat from al-
Qaeda in 2001 were responsible, six years earlier, for a refusal to take the threat
of paramilitary violence from the radical right with the requisite seriousness.
Attorney General John Ashcroft was more interested in public decency and
outlawing medical marijuana than in reports of suspicious foreigners enrolling in
flight schools; likewise, his predecessor, Janet Reno, pushed her Justiceft was more interested in public decency and
outlawing medical marijuana than in reports of suspicious foreigners enrolling in
flight schools; likewise, his predecessor, Janet Reno, pushed her Justice

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed in public decency and
outlawing medical marijuana than in reports of suspicious foreigners enrolling in
flight schools; likewise, his predecessor, Janet Reno, pushed her Justice

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Department to crack down on deadbeat dads while playing down reports of
radicals advocating bombings, assassinations, and shootings.
One problem, as in 2001, was a failure by law enforcement agencies to see
past their own rivalries. Another was an assumption that the threats were just
empty rhetoric from the mouths of social outcasts incapable of holding down a
regular job, much less doing real damage.
The lessons of Oklahoma City have never been properly articulated. Yet they
are important, because the conditions that led to the deaths of 168 people at the
Murrah Building in downtown Oklahoma City, and the shattering of thousands
of other lives through grief or injury, could easily be replicated. McVeigh was a
traumatized veteran of the first Gulf War, who felt validated by his experience of
warfare but returned home to disillusion, recession, and a bleak future of dead-
end jobs. He found solace in his fascination with fire-arms and survivalism,
bounced around the country on the gun-show circuit, and shared the company of
angry young men like himself. Sometimes they blamed blacks and Jews; other
times they directed their anger at the federal authorities. When a government
siege at the Branch Davidian religious compound in Waco, Texas, went horribly
awry in early 1993, McVeigh and his cohorts decided it was time to stop
complaining and take action, because a government capable of deploying tanks
against civilians and watching children burn to death could not be counted on to
leave anyone in peace.
No two moments in history are exactly alike, of course, but it is not difficult
to see how new McVeighs could emerge from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan,
the lingering devastation of the 2008 economic meltdown, and the anti-
establishment rage embodied by everyone from the Tea Party and Occupy Wall
Street to the violent racists threatening to put a bullet in the brain of America’s
first black president. The government is no better at tracking political extremism
or mental instability in the armed forces than it was in the early 1990s. Too many
dangerous people have a measure of military training, as a much-discussed
Department of Homeland Security report found in 2009; too many have access
to a fearsome array of firearms and explosives.
The choices made by McVeigh and his fellow conspirators were abhorrent,
but their story is still quintessentially American, a story of hopes raised and
dashed against a backdrop of violence, political agitation, and individual
restlessness. “The personality susceptible to the dream of limitless freedom,”
Jonathan Franzen wrote in his novel Freedom, “is a personality also prone,
should the dream ever sour, to misanthropy and rage.” McVeigh and his friends
were just such personalities, with an added layer of idealistic fervor to spur them
beyond their resentments to deadly action. They saw themselves in the samethropy and rage.” McVeigh and his friends
were just such personalities, with an added layer of idealistic fervor to spur them
beyond their resentments to deadly action. They saw themselves in the same

--- PAGE BREAK ---Veigh and his friends
were just such personalities, with an added layer of idealistic fervor to spur them
beyond their resentments to deadly action. They saw themselves in the same

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mold as the eighteenth-century revolutionaries who fought off British rule. They
called themselves patriots, seeing little or no contradiction between the violence
they advocated and the many wars waged by their government in the name of
honor, freedom, and country.
“America has always had a war culture,” the social historian Billy Gibson
wrote in Warrior Dreams, a remarkable study of America’s paramilitary frenzy
in the wake of Vietnam. “This culture has two fundamental stories, one
celebrating the individual gunman who acts on his own (or in loose concert with
other men); the other portraying the good soldier who belongs to an official
military or police unit and serves as a representative defender of national honor.”
Intriguingly, McVeigh fit both categories—first as the exemplary infantryman
who won medals in the Gulf, then as the underground warrior convincing
himself that a bold statement in Oklahoma City could trigger a general uprising.
In both incarnations, he was indeed the good soldier, confident of his mission
and clear about his cause.
Many people were shocked when McVeigh dismissed the children who died
in the Murrah Building’s day-care center as “collateral damage,” the necessary
price of warfare. But these words were military terminology he had learned in
the army. McVeigh was extraordinarily callous in his choice of target, and he
made a crucial strategic error in killing so many innocent people, because his act
provoked only revulsion and snuffed out the revolution he hoped it would start.
Still, he defended the military integrity of his actions to the end.
In many ways, this is a story of failure. The radical far right wanted to wage
a war of “leaderless resistance,” in which hardened fighters would form
paramilitary cells and make command decisions that would be shared on a need-
to-know basis. But these were not people temperamentally disposed to waging a
subtle war of attrition, and they lapsed easily into indiscipline and poor
judgment. Everything about the Oklahoma plot screamed overkill, where a more
carefully targeted attack might have been more effective. Several people in the
far-right believed McVeigh would hit the federal courthouse next to the Murrah
Building as part of a nationwide assault on the judiciary. Others thought he
would detonate the bomb at night. But McVeigh had his own ideas.
The government’s law enforcement agencies also failed—by taking their eye
off the radical right at a time when advocacy groups were sounding the alarm,
and by shying away when presented with evidence of actual criminal behavior.
The FBI and the ATF spent a lot of energy after the bombing blaming each other
for the warning signs they missed, and for information they failed to share about
known radicals congregating to plot a revolutionary war. But both agencies were
at fault.e bombing blaming each other
for the warning signs they missed, and for information they failed to share about
known radicals congregating to plot a revolutionary war. But both agencies were
at fault.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The overwhelming pressure to hunt down the bombers gave rise to a
sledgehammer approach to questioning and apprehending McVeigh’s closest
associates, offering them and others a chance to destroy evidence and rehearse
stories. The government stopped investigating certain suspects—Michael and
Lori Fortier, Steve Colbern, and Roger Moore—because it was more interested
in securing their testimony against McVeigh and Nichols than in exploring their
deeper involvement. That, too, constituted a profound failure.
Once the shape of the case was set, the search for other suspects, or a larger
conspiracy, came to be viewed as a risky fishing expedition. Evidence that might
have established links between McVeigh and other criminal cells was ignored. In
some cases, it was destroyed.a larger
conspiracy, came to be viewed as a risky fishing expedition. Evidence that might
have established links between McVeigh and other criminal cells was ignored. In
some cases, it was destroyed.

CHALLENGING THE OFFICIAL ACCOUNT OF A MAJOR HISTORICAL event can seem presumptuous,
even foolhardy. Journalists and authors, after all, do not have subpoena power,
forensics laboratories, or polygraph kits. We cannot interview 18,000 witnesses
or run down 43,000 leads, as the Oklahoma City investigators did.
What we do have, in this case, is the opportunity to review the government’s
work from start to finish. This book is based on records that have been unearthed
for the first time, including the complete archive of documents shared with the
defense teams in the two federal trials and in Terry Nichols’s state trial in
Oklahoma. We also have a voluminous body of writings from Nichols, who did
not utter a word for ten years after his arrest but agreed to discuss the case with
us in great detail.
Much of the freshness of our perspective comes from the people at the heart
of the effort to bring the bombing perpetrators to justice: law enforcement
managers and street agents, federal prosecutors, even—as the quote at the
beginning of this preface demonstrates—the trial judge. Many continue to harbor
strong feelings about what they experienced, the pressures they faced, the screw-
ups, manipulations, and lost opportunities, and the shocking number of talented
senior investigators—the ones best placed to penetrate the bombing’s enduring
mysteries—who were prevented from contributing to a case that should have
been the crowning pinnacle of their careers.
Institutionally, the narrative was kept simple and straightforward. A sign on
the prosecutors’ office door read: DON’T BURY THE STORY IN THE EVIDENCE. But many of
those quoted in these pages remain skeptical that all the perpetrators were
caught, that the FBI and the other investigative agencies tracked down every
lead, that the case really was, as Oklahoma’s then-governor Frank Keating put it,
“the FBI’s finest hour.”erpetrators were
caught, that the FBI and the other investigative agencies tracked down every
lead, that the case really was, as Oklahoma’s then-governor Frank Keating put it,
“the FBI’s finest hour.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---ght, that the FBI and the other investigative agencies tracked down every
lead, that the case really was, as Oklahoma’s then-governor Frank Keating put it,
“the FBI’s finest hour.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Oklahoma City was by far the largest criminal investigation in the United
States before 9/11. In hindsight, it looks less like a detective story than an anti–
detective story, in which government investigators chose not to follow the
evidence wherever it led. Instead, they closed down critical lines of inquiry, for
fear of what they might find and what it might reveal about their own failings.
The official narrative of two sad misfits acting alone underwent some
corrections at trial. Nichols was cleared of first-degree murder and spared the
death penalty, following a series of prosecutorial setbacks and “gotcha” moments
on the witness stand. Still, the trials were principally about the government’s
evidence, as trials almost always are; attempts by the defense teams to extend the
case to possible coconspirators, or to the involvement of other countries, fell
largely flat.
Michael Tigar, who was brilliantly effective as Nichols’s lead defense
attorney, has written how the full story never quite seems to be told at trial but is
reduced to “shadows on the courthouse wall”—shards of witness narrative here
and forensic evidence there, all of which needs to be ascribed meaning and
fashioned into shape for the jury. Some of that epistemological uncertainty
applies to this book, too. The FBI did not record its interviews, so its witness
reports are fraught with problems of interpretation. Did the agents ask the right
questions? Did they write down the answers accurately? Were they, too,
interested in telling their bosses what they wanted to hear? Were there deliberate
attempts, motivated by internal politics, to keep things out of the written record?
Some of the FBI’s missteps were exposed at trial, particularly under cross-
examination of witnesses who did not like the way their statements were
misinterpreted. But the witness testimony itself was problematic. Federal law
does not preclude FBI agents and prosecuting attorneys from taking witnesses
through their statements before trial—an exercise which, if done honestly, can
conceivably enhance precision but, in practice, can look a lot like coaching or
coercion.
Without the full story, it can be tempting to look at those shadows on the
wall and construct phantoms—shapes and patterns that are seductive for one
reason or another but do not have the solidity of documentable truth.
Government agencies responding to criticism of the Oklahoma City case have
frequently sought to tar their detractors as conspiracy theorists, dishonest
information-brokers pulling together random pieces of information to serve a
self-interested agenda. Some of that tarring has been richly deserved. Just as
there was nothing simple about the people who perpetrated the bombing, there
was nothing inherently crude or sinister or conniving about the investigators and
prosecutors who brought them to justice. If they were incompetent or dishonest,ple who perpetrated the bombing, there
was nothing inherently crude or sinister or conniving about the investigators and
prosecutors who brought them to justice. If they were incompetent or dishonest,

--- PAGE BREAK ---the bombing, there
was nothing inherently crude or sinister or conniving about the investigators and
prosecutors who brought them to justice. If they were incompetent or dishonest,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

it was not by default.
That said, the “conspiracy theory” label has also been misused and
manipulated by government officials who have preferred not to engage with their
critics or address their mistakes. Daring to criticize the ATF for inconsistencies
in its agents’ accounts of April 19 is not the same as accusing the agency of
collusion in the bombing. To draw that inference, as the ATF has sometimes
done, is lazy, dishonest, and a deliberate attempt to confuse the real issues.
This book makes no apologies for humanizing its characters, whether they
are lawyers, prosecutors, law enforcement officers, rescue workers, bereaved
victims, white supremacist agitators, or hardened criminals. They are all human
beings, which makes them complex, flawed, idiosyncratic, inconsistent, and
prone to disagreements with their friends and associates. Humanizing them is not
the same as indulging or excusing them; nobody reading this book will come
away feeling that its subjects have been given a free pass for their transgressions.
But it is important not to caricature or demonize even the worst of them, because
understanding can come only with an appreciation of the messiness, complexity,
and ambiguity of their motives and interactions.
The Oklahoma City bombing was a conspiracy, and McVeigh and Nichols
were charged accordingly. The real question is: how far did the conspiracy go?
In preparing for trial, the FBI and prosecution wanted to keep things simple, so
the jury would see a clear path to conviction. In the process, they mangled
evidence, withheld documents, distorted testimony, gave deals to potential
suspects, and lost sight of crucial chunks of the real story. The government was
fortunate that its desire to pin the crime on McVeigh coincided with McVeigh’s
own desire to take full credit and become a martyr-hero to his cause. Both sides,
in the end, colluded to cover up the truth.
An author has an important advantage over law enforcement or even the
most adept trial lawyer: he can weigh the available information without
worrying where it might lead, or who it might compromise, or whether it will
meet some high burden of proof. The following pages are an attempt to
reconstitute events as they happened, to understand what went right and wrong,
to separate what we know from what we don’t know, and to identify the
appropriate lessons. Those who are still living can speak for themselves and are
entitled to be heard. The dead deserve as much truth as we can offer.know from what we don’t know, and to identify the
appropriate lessons. Those who are still living can speak for themselves and are
entitled to be heard. The dead deserve as much truth as we can offer.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n’t know, and to identify the
appropriate lessons. Those who are still living can speak for themselves and are
entitled to be heard. The dead deserve as much truth as we can offer.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

{ 1 }
THE ROAD TO OKLAHOMA
Sometime in mid-April 1995, Cliff Mogg and Dan Humphries, two bomb
disposal experts from Kirtland Air Force Base in New Mexico, were ordered at
short notice to drive more than five hundred miles across the Great Plains to
Oklahoma City. The men do not appear to have been told much about their
mission. When they arrived, they were put up in a nondescript chain hotel on the
north side of town and ordered to stay put until told otherwise.
One day passed, then two, then three. Still they were told to keep to
themselves.
Military explosives and ordinance disposal teams are often deployed to help
protect high-level dignitaries, but Oklahoma City was expecting no such official
visits in the latter half of April 1995. Mogg’s written orders from the 377th Air
Base Wing designated him an explosive technical escort, and his brief included
“emergency response to incidents involving DoD [Department of Defense]
munitions/explosives/weapons systems.” Had the men been summoned to defuse
a bomb?
If so, they were not given the chance. Just after 9:00 A.M. on April 19, a huge
explosion ripped the heart out of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in
downtown Oklahoma City, killing 168 people and injuring hundreds of others.
Mogg and Humphries never came close to the truck carrying the bomb. They
were not asked to help determine the cause of the explosion or to join the
incipient criminal investigation.
Instead, with the city in chaos, they left Oklahoma City as mysteriously as
they had arrived.
Years later, when he was no longer with the military, Cliff Mogg
acknowledged the strange episode. “Yes,” he told the investigative reporter Don
Devereux, demonstrating considerable surprise to have been tracked down, “I
was there.”
Had there been a tip-off about the bombing, prompting the mission? Did the
government try, and fail, to stop the explosion at the last minute? Mogg
answered that it was not for him to say, and rushed to get off the phone.off about the bombing, prompting the mission? Did the
government try, and fail, to stop the explosion at the last minute? Mogg
answered that it was not for him to say, and rushed to get off the phone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---g, prompting the mission? Did the
government try, and fail, to stop the explosion at the last minute? Mogg
answered that it was not for him to say, and rushed to get off the phone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EARLY ON APRIL 18, A LITTLE MORE THAN TWENTY-FOUR HOURS before the bombing, the Ryder
truck that would later wreak such devastation was backed up against a storage
locker on the edge of Herington, Kansas, more than 250 miles from Oklahoma
City. A tall, wiry army veteran named Timothy McVeigh was loading fifty-
pound bags of ammonium nitrate into the rear and quietly fuming. Terry Nichols,
McVeigh’s best friend from the army, lived just a few minutes away. Nichols was
almost never late, but he had not shown up at 6:00 A.M. as agreed.
The two men had once enjoyed a deep friendship, but lately it had
degenerated into sour recrimination and mutual suspicion. Two days earlier,
McVeigh had used explicit threats to strong-arm Nichols into driving to
Oklahoma City to help him drop off a getaway car a few blocks from the Murrah
Building. Should McVeigh drive over to Nichols’s house, brandish his Glock,
and threaten his wife and infant daughter? They had acquired all the bomb
components together and had committed at least two major robberies. They had
more than enough guilty knowledge of each other’s activities to pose a real
threat if one of them bailed.
McVeigh was determined not to back down. Months earlier, during the first
of many bitter arguments, McVeigh had warned Nichols that he knew where his
brother, ex-wife, and twelve-year-old son lived and would not hesitate to
eliminate them. “No one,” he said, “is going to stop me from carrying out my
plans.”
Nichols awoke at 5:30 A.M., with plenty of time to make the appointment, but
he wanted to mull it over one more time. Later, he would remember wanting
nothing to do with a bombing, certainly not one that would take dozens of
innocent lives. He would say he didn’t know McVeigh’s target, or when he
intended to strike. Nichols wanted to assume that McVeigh would bring down a
federal government building only at night, when it was largely empty.
Nichols’s misgivings did not prompt him to do anything to stop the bomb
plot. But he certainly had doubts about McVeigh. His friend, who came across to
many people as jovial and easy to like, had been behaving erratically for months,
partly under the influence of the crystal meth he used to fuel himself on his
frequent cross-country car journeys. His temper had grown more volatile, the
threats of violence more sinister. For a few weeks the previous summer, he even
had a furtive sexual affair with Nichols’s Filipina wife, Marife—a dirty secret
that spilled out only later. McVeigh was also showing signs of undisciplined
thinking and impulsive decision-making. If he had a properly elaborated plan for
building and delivering the bomb, Nichols did not know it. And did not want to
know.
Still, Nichols calculated he was better off confronting McVeigh than riskinghe had a properly elaborated plan for
building and delivering the bomb, Nichols did not know it. And did not want to
know.
Still, Nichols calculated he was better off confronting McVeigh than risking

--- PAGE BREAK ---laborated plan for
building and delivering the bomb, Nichols did not know it. And did not want to
know.
Still, Nichols calculated he was better off confronting McVeigh than risking

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the safety of his family at home. So he drove over to a Pizza Hut about a quarter
of a mile from the storage locker, parked his GMC truck, and cut through two or
three vacant lots. It was now 6:30 A.M., and, as he approached, he could see the
rage in McVeigh’s face.
“You’re late,” McVeigh said coldly. “I’ve already got the truck half-loaded.”
“Hey,” Nichols responded, “why don’t we take a few minutes and discuss
things?”
“There’s nothing to discuss,” McVeigh snapped. “It’s time for action.”
Nichols chose not to engage him further and helped load the rest of the
fertilizer sacks.
Over the next hour, they moved most of the contents of the storage locker:
three fifty-five-gallon barrels of nitromethane, about three hundred blasting caps,
Tovex high explosive arranged in long skinny “sausages,” packets of a binary
explosive called Kinestik, spools of shock tube and black-powder cannon fuse,
some five-gallon measuring buckets, and a dozen empty fifty-five-gallon drums,
half-metal and half-plastic, that would hold the components once they had all
been assembled.
Nichols believed this was all he would have to do. But McVeigh asked him
to follow behind the heavily laden Ryder truck for a few miles to make sure it
was handling the road correctly. They rode north on Highway 77, back toward
Junction City, where McVeigh had been staying. After about eight miles,
McVeigh turned off unexpectedly at the entrance to Geary Lake State Park.
Nichols followed McVeigh up a hill, and both men got out of their vehicles.
“What’s wrong?” Nichols asked. “Why are you up here?”
“We’re going to make the bomb here,” McVeigh announced, “and you’re
going to help me.”
Nichols blanched. “You’re crazy! You’ve got a big bright yellow Ryder truck
parked on top of a hill sticking out like a sore thumb for everyone to see. You
may as well stick up a sign advertising what you are doing. Anyone on the
highway can easily see you here as well.”
McVeigh responded: “Then we’ll move down near the lake and do it where
we’re more concealed.”
Nichols made no further protest. He had a history of submitting to
domineering figures in his life, of whom McVeigh was the latest and most
dangerous. He had nothing to offer but quiet acquiescence. And so, the two men
drove back down the hill and began the laborious business of building a five-
thousand-pound weapon of mass destruction.dangerous. He had nothing to offer but quiet acquiescence. And so, the two men
drove back down the hill and began the laborious business of building a five-
thousand-pound weapon of mass destruction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---othing to offer but quiet acquiescence. And so, the two men
drove back down the hill and began the laborious business of building a five-
thousand-pound weapon of mass destruction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ON ARKANSAS’S DEATH ROW UNIT AN HOUR OUTSIDE LITTLE ROCK, A white supremacist double
murderer named Richard Wayne Snell was counting down his final hours and
scaring the daylights out of his guards. “Within the next ten days there will be
hell to pay,” he predicted. Repeatedly, Snell talked about a bombing and told his
guards that his execution date, April 19, would be a bad day for everyone.
Snell was a seasoned criminal, condemned for gunning down the only black
state trooper in southwestern Arkansas during a routine traffic stop. He had
joined the radical far-right in the early 1980s and thrown himself into a ragtag
campaign to bring down the government with a wave of bombings, acts of
sabotage, and assassinations. Most of these plots came to nothing, because of
bad planning, poor weaponry, or wavering on the part of the plotters. He was
regarded as the most dangerous of them; a week before, at a clemency hearing,
he made approving reference to Hitler’s deputy, Rudolf Hess, and said he’d
probably shoot the trooper all over again.
April 19 was an iconic day for the right. Not only was it Patriots’ Day, the
anniversary of the “shot heard ’round the world” at the battle of Lexington and
Concord in 1775; It also marked the two-year anniversary of the calamitous end
to the Waco siege. The incident had triggered congressional hearings, official
investigations, and political fallout for the Clinton administration. For the radical
right, Waco was the moment when the much-detested federal government
showed its true satanic colors. Putting Snell to death on the anniversary was a
blatant provocation, if not also a call to arms.
Twelve years earlier, Snell and his associates had themselves planned to
destroy the federal building in Oklahoma City. Their plan was to use missiles
rather than a bomb; they gave up only after one of their homemade rockets blew
up in the hands of their munitions expert. This was spelled out at the time by
Snell’s closest associate, an egomaniac racist preacher and cult leader named Jim
Ellison. “We need something with a large body count to make the government sit
up and take notice,” Ellison told his followers. “I want the government to know
that the right wing has spoken, that the Second American Revolution has
begun.”
His words were later echoed almost exactly by a disenchanted army veteran
seen by many in the movement as a younger Wayne Snell, someone with the
same revolutionary fervor and fearless commitment. His name was Timothy
James McVeigh.st exactly by a disenchanted army veteran
seen by many in the movement as a younger Wayne Snell, someone with the
same revolutionary fervor and fearless commitment. His name was Timothy
James McVeigh.

ON APRIL 17 OR 18, CAPTAIN KARYN ARMSTRONG, A VETERINARIAN conducting research into
respiratory illnesses at the Walter Reed army Institute of Research outside

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Washington, D.C., received an unusual phone call. The man said he was from
the Pentagon but never properly identified himself. He wanted information on
treating lung injuries caused by pressure waves from large explosions. Captain
Armstrong said she was not qualified to reply, because she treated animals, not
humans. When the man insisted, she suggested that he get in touch with her
boss, Dr. Adolph Januszkiewicz.
Dr. Januszkiewicz, also a respiratory specialist, later spoke to someone
claiming to be from either the Aberdeen Proving Ground in Maryland or from
his own command at Fort Detrick—the doctor could not recall which. This
person was also asking about blast injuries.
“They identified themselves as being the liaison at the Pentagon to the
governor’s office of Oklahoma,” Captain Armstrong recalled. “They never left a
name, they never left a phone number. They always called us, and neither of us
were medical doctors. I’m a veterinarian and he’s a Ph.D.”
Armstrong and Januszkiewicz thought little of the incident until after the
Oklahoma City bombing. Then, whenever the subject came up, someone would
invariably start humming the Twilight Zone theme..”
Armstrong and Januszkiewicz thought little of the incident until after the
Oklahoma City bombing. Then, whenever the subject came up, someone would
invariably start humming the Twilight Zone theme.

A NIGHT OR TWO BEFORE THOSE CALLS, A GOVERNMENT-CONTRACTED steam-generating plant in
downtown Oklahoma City experienced a loud, but minor, blowout. Within
minutes, the city police were pounding on the control room window and
pummeling the duty manager with questions about a “major explosion and
possible terrorist takeover of the building.” The manager had to talk them out of
calling the bomb squad.
“I explained [that the] situation was under control and back to normal,” the
manager later wrote in his duty log. “They said in the future to please pick a
slower night for them for this to happen. He [unnamed police officer] said, y’all
scared the SHIT out of the people in the hotel…. We blamed it on the full moon,
laughed, and on their way they went.”
The hotel was, presumably, the one in the Convention Center right next to
the Trigen plant. But the record does not explain why this night was so busy for
the Oklahoma City Police Department. Explosions and terrorist attacks were not
exactly commonplace in the heartland. At least one noteworthy alert, though,
reached Oklahoma City over that Easter weekend. On Good Friday, someone
from the FBI called the fire department and told them to watch out for suspicious
people coming into town over the next few days.
After the bombing, the OCFD’s chief of operations, Charles Gaines, publicly
denied he had received any alert, but he was contradicted by his head dispatcher.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ver the next few days.
After the bombing, the OCFD’s chief of operations, Charles Gaines, publicly
denied he had received any alert, but he was contradicted by his head dispatcher.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“That’s right,” the dispatcher, Harvey Weathers, said. “On Friday the 14th, Chief
Gaines received a call from the FBI, and we were told to be on the alert for
terrorist activity in the near future. I passed that information down the line.”
There were no more specifics.
When Weathers’s account appeared in the media, the fire department brass
changed their story and said an FBI agent had called with a generalized warning
about a possible attack on an American city by Aum Shinrikyo, the Japanese
group that had staged a sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway three weeks earlier.
But Weathers told the FBI that this version was not correct, either. “That call did
come,” Weathers insisted. “A lot of people don’t want to get involved in this
deal.”kyo subway three weeks earlier.
But Weathers told the FBI that this version was not correct, either. “That call did
come,” Weathers insisted. “A lot of people don’t want to get involved in this
deal.”

TERRY NICHOLS WAS HAVING AN OUT-OF-BODY EXPERIENCE. HE AND McVeigh had spent several
hours assembling the bomb when he felt himself floating in midair inside the
cargo area of the Ryder truck, tilting forward and looking down at himself
drawing nitromethane out of a barrel into a bucket. “How can I be a part of
this?” he remembered thinking. Still, he kept working. When McVeigh and
Nichols first pulled up to the edge of Geary Lake, McVeigh drew him into the
back of the truck and rolled down the door completely. Nichols thought they
needed more light and fresh air, and persuaded McVeigh to prop the back door
open about a foot and open the passenger-side door.
Still, the quarters were maddeningly cramped. In Nichols’s account,
McVeigh began to fill the fifty-five-gallon drums with ammonium nitrate. This
should have been pretty straightforward, but the AN prills had absorbed moisture
and stuck to each other in large, unwieldy clumps. They had to be pulled apart
until they were small enough to shove into the barrels.
Nichols’s main job was to measure out twenty-pound quantities of
nitromethane using a siphon pump, and add them to the ammonium nitrate in
each barrel. He had to take care to spill as little as possible and minimize the
liquid’s exposure to the air, because nitromethane evaporates very quickly.
“Absolutely no mixing was done,” Nichols said. “The fertilizer went in a barrel
first, then the fuel—that was it. No stirring, nothing.”
Occasionally, one of the men peered out of the truck to see if anybody was
watching. At about 9:00 A.M., a car with a boat and trailer pulled into the park and
stopped at the boat ramp about three hundred yards ahead of them. An off-duty
soldier and his son got out and launched their boat to go fishing.
McVeigh closed the side door facing the lake, but kept opening it a crack to
see what was happening. Once or twice he asked Nichols to look for him. Aon got out and launched their boat to go fishing.
McVeigh closed the side door facing the lake, but kept opening it a crack to
see what was happening. Once or twice he asked Nichols to look for him. A

--- PAGE BREAK ---hed their boat to go fishing.
McVeigh closed the side door facing the lake, but kept opening it a crack to
see what was happening. Once or twice he asked Nichols to look for him. A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sharp wind was churning the lake, and after an hour the man and his son steered
the boat back in and left. The fisherman, an army sergeant named Rick Wahl,
was almost as alarmed by the seemingly abandoned Ryder truck as McVeigh and
Nichols were by him. Wahl noted both the Ryder and Nichols’s GMC pickup and
decided to keep a good distance. He even looked for a place to turn around
quickly in case of trouble.
As McVeigh and Nichols were filling the eleventh barrel—the last one they
would have space for, in Nichols’s version of events—their nitromethane supply
ran out. Each one’s first impulse was to blame the other.
“Either your calculations are wrong, or this cheap scale is off,” Nichols said.
McVeigh asked if Nichols had any diesel fuel in his pickup.
“Only what I have in my tank,” Nichols said. The GMC held about twenty
gallons, and it was nearly full.
“Go siphon out about ten gallons.”
“With what?” Nichols protested. The siphon he had been using for the
nitromethane was too fat to fit in his fuel tank.
McVeigh produced a length of quarter-inch plastic tubing from Walmart,
which Nichols eyed skeptically. “It’s going to take a long time with that small
hose, and I don’t think it’s even long enough to work,” he said.
McVeigh had no time for grumbling. “Just do it.”
The tubing was crucially too short to reach the bottom of the bucket, and
with the wind whipping erratically, some of the diesel spilled onto the ground,
leaving a fuel mark later discovered by the FBI.
Once Nichols finished siphoning and filling the last barrel, McVeigh cut a
slit into the side of the remaining ten or twelve bags of fertilizer, poured some of
the diesel in, closed up the slits with duct tape, and then shook the bags around.
He lined them along the driver’s side of the cargo hold to add to the bomb’s
explosive punch.
There was little risk that the first eleven barrels of ammonium nitrate and
nitromethane would not do the job by themselves. They added up to almost five
thousand pounds of high explosive; as long as one of the barrels ignited
successfully, it would set off a chain reaction and detonate the rest. But McVeigh
preferred to err on the side of overkill. He, like Nichols, had received only
rudimentary explosives training in the army and did not necessarily know better.
Indeed, their lack of expertise raises the question of whether anybody, at Geary
Lake or elsewhere, helped them put the device together. Both men later insisted
they worked unaided. But the accounts that each of them gave are also riddled
with puzzling inconsistencies.
On the technical details, McVeigh’s version is far skimpier than Nichols’s.later insisted
they worked unaided. But the accounts that each of them gave are also riddled
with puzzling inconsistencies.
On the technical details, McVeigh’s version is far skimpier than Nichols’s.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

One explosives expert suggested that by the time McVeigh agreed to discuss
how he built the bomb, close to five years after the fact, he might simply have
forgotten what he did, or perhaps never entirely knew. Nichols, though,
remembered everything. That raises a broader issue of veracity, because it was
supposedly McVeigh, according to both men, who did the brain work of wiring
the bomb and constructing its boosters and detonators. What are the chances the
master bomb-maker would turn out to be so clueless, or oddly forgetful?
There are two other possibilities. Either Nichols was the real bomb-maker
but never wanted to embrace that dubious historical distinction—especially after
McVeigh willingly claimed sole responsibility—or both men took their direction
from someone else.s the real bomb-maker
but never wanted to embrace that dubious historical distinction—especially after
McVeigh willingly claimed sole responsibility—or both men took their direction
from someone else.

THE RADICAL FAR RIGHT NEVER FORGOT WAYNE SNELL’S 1983 PLOT to destroy the Murrah
Building. “Blowing up a federal building…was not a novel idea,” said Jack
Knox, an FBI agent who helped run down Snell and Ellison in the 1980s and
was once on their assassination list. “It was floating around out there.”
One of Snell’s closest friends, Louis Beam, discussed bombing the Murrah
Building as early as the mid-1980s. Beam was a veteran of the Texas Ku Klux
Klan and a fearsomely talented public speaker, who repeatedly pressed his
friends in the Aryan supremacy movement to wage an all-out war against the
federal government. Two of Beam’s friends confirmed that, in the 1980s, he had
talked with a Klan leader from Oklahoma about attacking the Murrah Building,
although they were unsure who first proposed the idea. They were also certain
that Beam and Snell both knew about the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing before
it happened.
“Snell knew about the bombing,” Bruce Campbell, Beam’s confidant and
fellow propagandist for the antigovernment cause, said in a 2009 interview.
“Louis was very close to Snell.”
Cheri Seymour, an author and researcher into the radical far right who
hosted Beam several times at her home, said Beam went to see Mary Snell three
weeks before April 19 and gave her a message to pass on to her husband that
“Armageddon was coming on the day of his death.” This meeting was later
corroborated by an unconnected government informant.
Mary Snell gave plentiful indication that she knew—or hoped—something
was up. “April 19,” she wrote in a letter to the Militia of Montana intended to
whip up outrage in the run-up to her husband’s execution, “is the first day of a
weeklong sacrificial preparation for the GRAND CLIMAX ceremony celebrated
by those who follow the Luciferian religion.”whip up outrage in the run-up to her husband’s execution, “is the first day of a
weeklong sacrificial preparation for the GRAND CLIMAX ceremony celebrated
by those who follow the Luciferian religion.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Was it possible that she or her husband were in on the bomb plot, or at least
knew it was in the works? “I have no solid information,” said Bill Buford, the
ATF’s top agent in Arkansas at the time of the bombing, “but the pieces fit
together too neatly for him not to have known.”
The FBI never talked to Beam after the bombing, and conducted only one
relatively perfunctory interview with Mary Snell. But they had plenty of
information indicating that Beam knew about the bombing before it happened. A
career criminal named Roy Byrd told the bureau from an Arizona prison about a
phone conversation he had with Beam in the summer of 1994, in which Beam
said that “something big” would happen in Oklahoma City, Denver, or Dallas on
the anniversary of Waco. When Byrd asked what it was, Beam replied that it
would be similar to the plot of a notorious underground novel, in which a band
of white supremacists drives a truck loaded with ammonium nitrate and fuel oil
into the basement of FBI headquarters in Washington, D.C., and blows up the
building. Byrd did not mention the novel by name, but he was clearly referring
to The Turner Diaries, a cult book on the fringe of the gun-show circuit, written
by one of America’s leading neo-Nazis, William Pierce. The Turner Diaries was
Tim McVeigh’s favorite book.
According to Byrd, Beam did not mention anybody by name. He said only:
“They’ve got some kid who’s going to do something.”eo-Nazis, William Pierce. The Turner Diaries was
Tim McVeigh’s favorite book.
According to Byrd, Beam did not mention anybody by name. He said only:
“They’ve got some kid who’s going to do something.”

MCVEIGH WAS PROUD OF HIS BOMB DESIGN WHEN HE DESCRIBED IT to Lou Michel and Dan
Herbeck of the Buffalo News, who interviewed him extensively on death row for
their book American Terrorist. The main trigger for the blast, McVeigh said, was
a bucketful of Tovex sausages he placed at the center of the barrels of fertilizer
soaked in nitromethane. He ran two lengths of fuse cord from the truck’s cab
into the cargo hold, via separate holes that Nichols drilled for him. He inserted
the fuse ends into nonelectric blasting caps. He used duct tape to attach the
blasting caps to lengths of shock tube, which snaked their way to the Tovex.
McVeigh only needed to light the ends of the fuse cord inside the truck’s cabin
and the bomb would ignite. The black-powder fuse burned at a rate of about
thirty seconds per foot—he measured off a two-minute length and a second, five-
minute length. The burning fuse would trigger the blasting caps, which would
then ignite the shock tube, set off the Tovex, and—boom—the ammonium
nitrate barrels would detonate in a split-second chain reaction.
This scheme was basically workable, according to experts who reviewed it,
which helps explain why it has gone largely unchallenged since American
Terrorist was first published in 2001. But it does raise some basic questions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---g to experts who reviewed it,
which helps explain why it has gone largely unchallenged since American
Terrorist was first published in 2001. But it does raise some basic questions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh took particular pride in the two independent fuse lines, describing them
as the “perfect redundancy.” He even described a third redundancy—a pile of
explosives, which, he said, he kept at his feet. If all else failed, he intended to
ignite them by firing his pistol.
This all sounds very meticulous, but to a seasoned bomb expert it comes
across as faintly ridiculous. Pharis Williams, a veteran explosives expert and
government consultant, said a professional bomb-maker would never rely on one
central ignition point. “It would seem,” he said, “that someone who is proud of
his redundancy would also boost every barrel.”
Indeed, Nichols’s version suggests this is exactly what they did. In his
scheme, the two lines of fuse cord were connected to a single, central point
where they were attached to a booster (the binary explosive Kinestik) as well as
twelve separate lengths of Primadet shock tube. These Primadet tubes were then
connected to each barrel, where they were attached to another Kinestik and a
Tovex sausage via a prefitted nonelectric blasting cap. Nichols thus describes the
bomb as having not one but a dozen ignition points, creating a dozen
redundancies.
Nichols’s account is more convincing throughout. McVeigh made no
mention of securing the barrels in the back of the truck, while Nichols describes
how, at McVeigh’s direction, he cut and hammered down lengths of four-by-four
wood beams so there would be no danger of the barrels shifting during transport.
McVeigh neither describes nor names the Primadet, which he and Nichols had
stolen in a quarry robbery months earlier. Instead McVeigh focuses on self-
aggrandizing details that seem dubious at best—for example, how he considered
closing the ends of the blasting caps with his bare teeth. McVeigh was a fanatical
reader of The Turner Diaries and another novel by William Pierce, Hunter, and
was no doubt familiar with a scene in the second book in which the warrior hero
blows up a Mossad office in Virginia. The book describes him arranging barrels
of ammonium nitrate and fuel oil around a single fifty-pound box of Tovex. Was
this what McVeigh was thinking of when he gave his description of events at
Geary Lake that April morning?
By midday, McVeigh and Nichols had finished. McVeigh suggested
throwing the empty fertilizer bags into the back of the truck, but Nichols was
concerned that some could survive the bombing and leave fingerprint traces. So
he took the time to roll them into bundles, attach them with duct tape, and toss
them in the back of his pickup truck. He also took his Makita drill, which he had
used to bore holes for the cannon fuse, the siphon pump, and the bathroom
scales. Everything else—the dolly they used to load the nitromethane; the empty
nitromethane barrels; the last, unused white plastic barrel; their two five-gallonse, the siphon pump, and the bathroom
scales. Everything else—the dolly they used to load the nitromethane; the empty
nitromethane barrels; the last, unused white plastic barrel; their two five-gallon

--- PAGE BREAK ---

buckets; and a bunch of tools, including a hacksaw, hammer, left-over tubing,
and pliers—was left in the back of the Ryder.
McVeigh closed the side and back doors and padlocked them. Then he
sauntered to the lakeside to splash water on his face and hands, and slipped into
a change of clothes.
The two men stared at each other one last time. McVeigh climbed into the
truck, Nichols into his pickup. When they reached Highway 77, Nichols headed
north toward the U.S. Army base at Fort Riley, where he would drop in on a
military surplus auction. In his rearview mirror, he saw the Ryder truck retreat
and vanish on its trip south.Nichols headed
north toward the U.S. Army base at Fort Riley, where he would drop in on a
military surplus auction. In his rearview mirror, he saw the Ryder truck retreat
and vanish on its trip south.

IN THE REMOTE HILLS OF EASTERN OKLAHOMA, MANY OF THE MOST prominent members of a
fringe religious community known as Elohim City spent April 18 on the move.
The community’s figure-head, Robert “Grandpa” Millar, was getting ready to
lead a group to Little Rock to protest Wayne Snell’s execution and to take his
body back for burial. Millar was Snell’s spiritual adviser, a role he later insisted
was not an endorsement of his criminal career but rather an expression of
compassion. Millar liked to say that everybody came to him through Jesus, and
he accepted them all.
In April 1995, Jesus had sent Millar quite the collection of odd-balls,
dropouts, silver-tongued charlatans, and out-and-out criminals. They attended
services in the igloo-like Elohim City church (Millar had an aversion to straight
lines and right angles in buildings), camped out in an assortment of caravans,
squat houses, and makeshift structures made of ammunition crates and bright
orange polyurethane, showed off their collections of assault weapons, pistols,
and black-powder explosives, and shared in the fear that the federal government
would one day descend to kill them all.
Among the visitors was Mark Thomas, a neo-Nazi preacher who lived most
of the year in abject squalor in rural Pennsylvania, where he sired a stream of
children and plotted attacks on gas and electricity plants, railroads, and
communications facilities. Thomas came to visit his sixteen-year-old son
Nathan, who had been living at Elohim City on and off for two years and
participated in perimeter security patrols. According to a government informant,
Nathan bragged about converting his AK-47 assault rifle to full automatic and
making homemade napalm. Two of Mark Thomas’s skinhead protégés from
Pennsylvania, Scott Stedeford and Kevin McCarthy, visited for about a week;
they were both members of a neo-Nazi punk band named Cyanide, along with a
more permanent Elohim City resident, Michael Brescia, who had fallen into thed and Kevin McCarthy, visited for about a week;
they were both members of a neo-Nazi punk band named Cyanide, along with a
more permanent Elohim City resident, Michael Brescia, who had fallen into the

--- PAGE BREAK ---, visited for about a week;
they were both members of a neo-Nazi punk band named Cyanide, along with a
more permanent Elohim City resident, Michael Brescia, who had fallen into the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

same White Power scene in Philadelphia in the early 1990s.
Since the previous fall, Stedeford, McCarthy, and Thomas had been
members of a white supremacist bank robbery gang that variously called itself
the Company or the Aryan Republican Army. Stedeford had taken part in five
robberies in Ohio, Iowa, and Missouri, netting more than $80,000; McCarthy
had been in on four. Mark Thomas was not a direct participant, but he was
heavily involved in planning and expanding the gang’s activities. The idea was
to steal enough to finance a full-frontal assault on the federal government. Less
than a month earlier, on March 29, the gang had hauled in $29,000 from a bank
in Des Moines. Two days later, they elected to disband for four months—an
unprecedented period of inactivity suggesting some side project involving one or
more of them, or a compelling need to lay low for an extended time.
One might expect these men to stay around to pay homage to Wayne Snell,
whom they regarded as a hero, but instead they rushed far away. Mark and
Nathan Thomas left on Monday, April 17, for Allentown. That same day,
Stedeford and McCarthy drove to Fort Smith, Arkansas, to buy a twelve-year-old
Chevy Suburban, and did not return.
Most Elohim City residents lived simply and were mostly unaware of the
criminal connections these people had in the wider world. The women
concentrated on child-rearing and housework and were kept away from the
business of the elders. The children, some the product of polygamous or even
incestuous relationships, were home-schooled according to the community’s
bizarre interpretation of Christianity, which held that white Americans were the
true children of Israel, while Jews were the spawn of Satan and blacks even
worse. Millar and his immediate family knew much more about their visitors’
revolutionary ambitions. And so did one of the more peculiar residents in the
community, a gangly German named Andreas Strassmeir.
Strassmeir shared a small stone house with Mike Brescia, and hosted
Stedeford and McCarthy over Easter. He had been in the army back in Germany,
drifting into radical right-wing circles in the United States through his friendship
with a white supremacist lawyer named Kirk Lyons. Lyons, in turn, was friendly
with Millar, and entrusted Strassmeir to his care after the young German
exhausted all other offers of hospitality. Strassmeir’s grandfather was said to
have been one of the Nazi Party’s earliest members, with a membership card
number lower than Hitler’s, while his father had been a prominent aide to
Helmut Kohl, the German chancellor who oversaw reunification after the fall of
the Berlin Wall. At Elohim City, Strassmeir ran the security detail, a platoon of
teenagers and young men who marched around the four-hundred-acre compound
with old SKS assault rifles loaded with cheap Chinese ammunition and low-ty, Strassmeir ran the security detail, a platoon of
teenagers and young men who marched around the four-hundred-acre compound
with old SKS assault rifles loaded with cheap Chinese ammunition and low-

--- PAGE BREAK ---he security detail, a platoon of
teenagers and young men who marched around the four-hundred-acre compound
with old SKS assault rifles loaded with cheap Chinese ammunition and low-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

budget Remington sniper rifles. Occasionally they sported bayonets, especially
to scare outsiders.
Grandpa Millar liked Strassmeir and allowed him to live, as one of his
friends put it, “in his fantasy world being field marshal of Elohim City.”
Strassmeir’s relations with the other residents were significantly more strained.
With his gawky manner, rigid Prussian upbringing, and foreign accent, he was
never fully accepted. His abrasive intelligence rubbed people the wrong way, and
he was a shambles of a human being—forever forgetting or breaking things,
swearing and cursing.
One of Strassmeir’s best friends was Pete Ward, one of three brothers living
at Elohim City, who had been brought up by Christian missionaries in Africa.
Pete was not blessed with much initiative, and was known for following
Strassmeir around like a puppy. His brothers, Tony and Sonny, got into trouble
for stealing firewood and hitting up young women for money.
Just before the bombing, they and their parents and kid sister all disappeared
from Elohim City without warning. Sonny was later reported to have spent
several more days somewhere in Oklahoma before heading to Georgia. Most of
the others took off for New Mexico. A Sunday-school teacher who taught the
Wards’ little sister, Priscilla, later told the FBI that the girl had come to her, very
upset, and indicated that something had happened but would not say what.
“Everyone was shocked that they would leave so suddenly,” Kennilee Mooney,
the teacher, told the FBI.
Years later, Strassmeir would deny there was anything strange about these
multiple departures on the eve of the bombing. He felt protective toward his
former friends and concocted a strange argument that their comings and goings
meant nothing, because they were not living in the community at the time. “How
can they leave if they were not there?” he asked.
This was, of course, a linguistic absurdity. The bank robbers, and the rest of
them, were there, and they did leave.
Again, he insisted: “They did not leave, because they were not there.”?” he asked.
This was, of course, a linguistic absurdity. The bank robbers, and the rest of
them, were there, and they did leave.
Again, he insisted: “They did not leave, because they were not there.”

DAYS BEFORE MCVEIGH AND NICHOLS BUILT THEIR BOMB, Ken Stern of the American
Jewish Committee issued a remarkably prescient report on the dangers of the
country’s burgeoning militia movement. “Do not be surprised if there is militia
activity next week in your area,” he wrote to AJC supporters on April 10. Stern
had no special inside knowledge, but he and a group of other academics and
professional hate-group watchers had been monitoring extremist newsletters and
Internet chat rooms for months.

--- PAGE BREAK ---o special inside knowledge, but he and a group of other academics and
professional hate-group watchers had been monitoring extremist newsletters and
Internet chat rooms for months.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Stern’s warning was imprecise in that McVeigh and Nichols did not belong
to a militia; they were too extreme for that. But he was absolutely correct when it
came to gauging the degree of public anger and alienation from the federal
government, and the risk that someone on the extremist fringe could resort to
radical measures. The militia movement had been growing with a vengeance, a
symptom of the rapidly changing times. On the heels of the dramatic collapse of
family farming across the heartland in the 1980s had come recession and the
rapid loss of defense-sector jobs at the end of the Cold War. Cheap immigrant
labor was eroding the stability of many semiskilled and unskilled jobs. And
under Bill Clinton, the first U.S. president in half a century not to have served in
uniform, there was an unprecedented push toward gun control, first with the
passage of the Brady Bill, which instituted the country’s first system of
background checks on firearms purchases, and then with the 1994 assault
weapons ban.
The majority of the disaffected people were not criminals; they wanted only
to stand up for themselves and their gun rights. Two specific instances of
catastrophic overreaching by federal law enforcement pushed the political
temperature toward the boiling point, however. The first was the 1992 Ruby
Ridge incident, in which a seemingly routine attempt to pressure a survivalist in
Idaho into becoming a government informant degenerated into a ghastly
mountainside shootout. And the second was the disastrously mishandled siege at
Waco.
The militias started talking about federal law enforcement agents as the
“shock troops” of a New World Order intent on stripping Americans of their
rights. Wayne LaPierre, the head of the National Rifle Association, wrote a
notorious fund-raising letter in which he denounced the feds as “jack-booted
government thugs…wearing Nazi bucket helmets and black storm trooper
uniforms to attack law-abiding citizens.” G. Gordon Liddy, the Watergate-era
presidential “plumber” turned radio host, encouraged listeners to open fire on
agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, whose actions had
initiated both the Ruby Ridge and the Waco disasters. “Don’t shoot at [their
chests], because they got a vest on underneath that,” Liddy said. “Head shots.
Head shots…Kill the sons of bitches!”
The militias, Stern wrote in his report, “constitute a new manifestation of
violent hate-group activity” whose targets now included government employees.
Some people, he said, were advocating killing, and he feared the threat was
serious. He was right.a new manifestation of
violent hate-group activity” whose targets now included government employees.
Some people, he said, were advocating killing, and he feared the threat was
serious. He was right.

--- PAGE BREAK ---of
violent hate-group activity” whose targets now included government employees.
Some people, he said, were advocating killing, and he feared the threat was
serious. He was right.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EARLY IN THE AFTERNOON OF APRIL 18, THE WHITE SUPREMACIST CAUSE Foundation received a
baffling phone call at its North Carolina headquarters. CAUSE was a legal
advocacy organization, and its name was an acronym for the five places in the
world most heavily populated by white people—Canada, Australasia, the United
States, South Africa, and Europe. Kirk Lyons, the man behind it, was a former
personal litigation lawyer from Houston, who saw himself as the right wing’s
answer to the ACLU; he defended the Ku Klux Klan’s free speech rights and
made sure skinheads and neo-Nazis were prosecuted only for their criminal
behavior, not their political beliefs.
Lyons, an amateur historian of the old Confederacy, was on his way to a
Civil War reenactment when the call came in, so his friend and partner Dave
Hollaway took it instead. The young man on the line didn’t give his name, and
launched into a diatribe about a Waco lawsuit that CAUSE was pursuing at the
time. The suit had not gone far enough, he said, and it was time to send the
government a clear message.
“Usually people are ranting when they call,” Hollaway recalled, “but this
guy was young and very clear in his message and tone. That set off a master
warning light in my head. I said, ‘Let me give you some unsolicited legal advice.
If I was your lawyer, I’d say you need to be careful about calling people up and
making statements like that. You’re perilously close to the edge of your First
Amendment rights.’”
Hollaway was a talker; CAUSE’s phone records show the call lasted
eighteen minutes. He said there were three kinds of freedom in America—the
ones guaranteed by the jury box, the ballot box, and the cartridge box. “Really,”
Hollaway said, “you want to exhaust the first two before resorting to the last.”
Hollaway later told the FBI he was sure the caller was Tim McVeigh, taking
time out from his final bomb preparations to sound off to someone he thought
might be sympathetic.re resorting to the last.”
Hollaway later told the FBI he was sure the caller was Tim McVeigh, taking
time out from his final bomb preparations to sound off to someone he thought
might be sympathetic.

BETWEEN HIS PARTING WITH TERRY NICHOLS AND THE EARLY MORNING of April 19, Timothy
McVeigh was like a ghost, flitting from place to place across southern Kansas
and northern Oklahoma. The phone call to the CAUSE Foundation was just one
of many puzzles. After the bombing, people reported sightings of him at gas
stations, in diners and restaurants; in company and alone; in the Ryder truck and
in other vehicles entirely. He couldn’t possibly have been in all these places, nor
could he have stomached the impressive diet of burritos, steaks, and hamburgers
he was witnessed downing.
McVeigh gave a rudimentary account of his movements in one of his first

--- PAGE BREAK ---or
could he have stomached the impressive diet of burritos, steaks, and hamburgers
he was witnessed downing.
McVeigh gave a rudimentary account of his movements in one of his first

--- PAGE BREAK ---

interviews with his defense team. He avoided the main highway, I-35, he said,
driving instead a few miles farther east, down Highway 77. Sometime in the
afternoon of April 18, he stopped for gas. Later, he pulled over at a rest stop to
check that the bomb barrels had not moved. He tossed his truck rental agreement
and a fake ID into the back of the truck before closing it up again.
Once across the Oklahoma state line, he found a McDonald’s for dinner,
then walked into a cheap chain hotel to rent a room but decided to spend the
night in the truck instead. He said he was alone at all times.
Later, the FBI found witnesses who not only contradicted that, but said he
might have been traveling in a convoy. It was often the same vehicles the
witnesses cited: the Ryder truck, of course; McVeigh’s beat-up old yellow
Mercury Marquis, which, in his account, he had stashed days earlier in
downtown Oklahoma City; a white sedan; and a brown Chevy pickup.
An Oklahoma gas station attendant who said she served McVeigh
remembered a companion with slicked-back black wavy hair. At a steakhouse in
the small town of Perry that night, several customers spotted someone
resembling McVeigh, and one of the owners also described a friend of his,
standing six feet tall and weighing 260 pounds, with curly brown hair. On the
morning of the bombing, the postmaster of the tiny town of Mulhall, not far from
Perry, reported standing next to McVeigh and another man as they ordered coffee
at Jackie’s Farmers Store.
Taken one by one, these stories are of dubious investigative value, and likely
to be tainted by imperfect recall and the power of suggestion. Taken together,
though, they make at least the beginnings of a case that Timothy McVeigh was
not alone as he commandeered his weapon of mass destruction toward its target.and the power of suggestion. Taken together,
though, they make at least the beginnings of a case that Timothy McVeigh was
not alone as he commandeered his weapon of mass destruction toward its target.

THE MORNING ROUTINE IN THE WILBURN HOUSEHOLD IN Oklahoma City was always chaotic.
The three adults—Glenn, his wife Kathy, and Kathy’s daughter Edye—had jobs
to run to, and it was a scramble to dress and feed Edye’s two boys, Chase, age
three, and Colton, age two.
On April 19, Glenn was getting ready to leave with Kathy, when he noticed
that Chase didn’t have his shoes on. He picked up the boy, plonked him on the
wet bar, and fit first one shoe and then the other.
“You’re a good boy,” Glenn said as he kissed him on the forehead. “Paw-
paw loves you.”
Chase was a big presence and a natural-born joker. Glenn stopped to notice
how much he had grown over the previous couple of months. Kathy suggested
playfully that they should trade Chase in for a girl named Shirley.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“I’m not Shirley!” Chase replied indignantly. The adults laughed.
Glenn and Kathy headed to the garage—it was up to Edye that morning to
drive the boys to their day care on the second floor of the Alfred P. Murrah
Federal Building.
“Bye, Shirley,” Kathy said.
“Don’t call me Shirley,” Chase said. He was half enjoying the joke and half
bristling at it.
“Bye, Shirley. I won’t call you that,” Glenn said.
Those were the last words he ever said to his grandson.
“He was so funny,” Kathy later remembered. “He was such a funny little
boy.”bristling at it.
“Bye, Shirley. I won’t call you that,” Glenn said.
Those were the last words he ever said to his grandson.
“He was so funny,” Kathy later remembered. “He was such a funny little
boy.”

APRIL 19 WAS A DESIGNATED TRAINING DAY FOR THE OKLAHOMA County Sheriff’s bomb squad,
but they had no plans to come downtown. It was up to a deputy named Bill
Grimsley to collect their truck at the county jail and drive it to their training area
in the northeastern part of the city. He was not supposed to stop along the way;
the truck had large lettering on the side that read BOMB SQUAD, and was apt to scare
people.
But Grimsley made several stops, first at the county courthouse, where his
day job was to supervise the security staff, and then at a McDonald’s, where he
bought himself an Egg McMuffin. Naturally, he was seen. After the bombing
many people became convinced that they had stumbled on some dark secret
involving an attempt to stop the bombing at the eleventh hour. Some, like Norma
Joslin, a clerk with the county court, worried they might be targeted for
assassination if they revealed what they had witnessed; when Joslin was called
before a grand jury in 1998, she insisted on being driven directly into an
underground garage and escorted into the courtroom. The FBI was also curious,
and grilled every bomb squad member over a period of months.
It didn’t help that the sheriff’s department put out a series of confusing, even
contradictory, statements. First, officials denied the bomb truck had been
downtown at all. Then they told at least one media outlet that the entire bomb
squad had been training near the Murrah Building, wearing blue jeans instead of
their uniforms. By the time they got around to the truth, few were inclined to
believe it.
It was Grimsley himself who created much of the confusion. Worried he
might get into trouble for disobeying the rules, he told his superiors he had
driven the truck straight to the training facility. At first they chose to believe
him. Then they tried to cover for him. “Bill was notorious for getting into littleules, he told his superiors he had
driven the truck straight to the training facility. At first they chose to believe
him. Then they tried to cover for him. “Bill was notorious for getting into little

--- PAGE BREAK ---

kinks like that,” said Kyle Kilgore, the bomb squad’s dog handler. “The only
thing that saved us was that our bomb squad schedules are put in yearly, one year
in advance.” Those schedules showed that April 19 was indeed a training day—
just a bizarre coincidence.er. “The only
thing that saved us was that our bomb squad schedules are put in yearly, one year
in advance.” Those schedules showed that April 19 was indeed a training day—
just a bizarre coincidence.

THERE WERE OTHER, LESS FARCICAL STORIES OF UNUSUAL LAW ENFORCEMENT activity. Renee
Cooper, a deputy clerk at the county courthouse, said she saw several men in
dark jackets with bomb squad markings outside the federal courthouse at 8:00
A.M. Claude Criss, a private investigator, said he saw them, too, and they were
rooting through the bushes. Debbie Nakanashi, a window clerk at the Center
City Post Office across the street from the Murrah Building, indicated to a
congressional investigator that she had seen sniffer dogs but was ordered by her
superiors not to talk about them. According to Randy Yount, a state park ranger
who helped with the rescue effort, explosives experts spent all night looking for
a bomb in response to a warning that one had been planted inside the federal
courthouse.
It is tempting to give credence to these reports, because they all center on the
same location and suggest, however vaguely, that there was a tip-off. Throw in
the mysterious air force EOD team and the FBI warning to the fire department,
and we have multiple indications that some part of the government—perhaps
more than one part—heard about a coming attack. Still, the accounts add up to a
fractured picture at best. Nobody in authority has ever acknowledged having
advance warning of a major explosion, and many agencies, particularly the FBI
and ATF, have vehemently denied it.
If a bomb squad was out looking for a device, who could they have been?
On the morning of April 19, the head of the Oklahoma Highway Patrol’s tactical
team, John Haynie, was in Oklahoma City with a bomb truck, even though he
was stationed in Ardmore, near the Texas border. Ostensibly, he was in town to
run another training session—quite a coincidence. In 1998, Haynie told a grand
jury that his session was called to hone his team’s surveillance skills. OHP time
records, however, show that at least three of the team members who might have
been expected to attend were off work or on vacation.
Could Haynie have been involved in a different operation, with the training
session acting as a cover story? Haynie, exactly the sort of sure-footed senior
officer people would turn to in a crisis, who had spent almost a decade tracking
intelligence on Elohim City, refused to comment. “There’s no benefit that I can
see to talking about anything to do with anything I’ve ever done,” he said.
A question also hangs over the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation,y, refused to comment. “There’s no benefit that I can
see to talking about anything to do with anything I’ve ever done,” he said.
A question also hangs over the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

which brought three out-of-town agents into Oklahoma City on the evening
before the bombing, for reasons it has never adequately explained. Rick
Stephens, who came in from the Tulsa area, would not say if he or other OSBI
agents had been forewarned of a bomb attack. “That’s been rumored for years,”
he said. Invited to issue a categorical denial that the OSBI was responding to a
threat, he said: “I won’t confirm or deny anything.”been forewarned of a bomb attack. “That’s been rumored for years,”
he said. Invited to issue a categorical denial that the OSBI was responding to a
threat, he said: “I won’t confirm or deny anything.”

THE RYDER TRUCK WAS FIRST SPOTTED IN DOWNTOWN OKLAHOMA City at around 8:00 A.M. At
least two dozen eyewitnesses saw the truck over the next hour, many of them
reporting that it was accompanied by a brown Chevy pickup, a white sedan, and
an aging Mercury. These vehicles made themselves conspicuous in and around
the Murrah Building, sometimes parked, sometimes driving, other times roaring
into the building’s underground garage. McVeigh was seen in more than one of
them, and always with at least one other person.
Years later, McVeigh told Michel and Herbeck, his prison interviewers, that
he did not drive into Oklahoma City until 8:50 A.M. But an African-American
commuter named Leonard Long spotted someone fitting his description—a “tall,
slim, white man” with a dark ball cap worn backward—about fifty minutes
earlier. McVeigh, Long said, was inside a brown pickup switching lanes at high
speed near the Murrah Building. Long remembered the encounter because he
narrowly avoided a collision and because the man next to McVeigh, a stocky,
dark-complexioned man in a camouflage jacket, spewed racial insults at him.
Shortly after 8:00 A.M., an employee of the Kerr-McGee Oil Company saw
two men walking away from the YMCA building, also on Fifth Street, toward a
yellow Mercury parked in the oil company’s lot two blocks farther south. The
men matched the description of McVeigh and his companion given by Leonard
Long.
About half an hour later, Kyle Hunt, a banker, spotted a Ryder truck another
block or so south of the Kerr-McGee building. Close behind was a four-door
sedan with three men inside. “One of the men was looking up, straining his neck.
The group looked lost,” Hunt later said. “As I pulled closer, the driver of the
sedan warned me off. I got an icy-cold, go-to-hell look from the young man that
I now know to be Timothy McVeigh. It was unnerving.”
Two more sightings seemed to confirm the bombing crew as lost, or at least
at a loss. The first was at Johnny’s Tire Company, on a hill a few blocks
northwest of the Murrah Building. Mike Moroz, a mechanic, told the FBI that
two men in a Ryder truck pulled into the store and almost hit the flag banners
hanging from a covered part of the forecourt. The driver, whom Moroz latering. Mike Moroz, a mechanic, told the FBI that
two men in a Ryder truck pulled into the store and almost hit the flag banners
hanging from a covered part of the forecourt. The driver, whom Moroz later

--- PAGE BREAK ---echanic, told the FBI that
two men in a Ryder truck pulled into the store and almost hit the flag banners
hanging from a covered part of the forecourt. The driver, whom Moroz later

--- PAGE BREAK ---

identified as McVeigh, asked for directions to Northwest Fifth Street, the address
of the Murrah Building. The man seemed confused, so Moroz invited him to step
out of the truck and take a look down the hill at the one-way system. He was
wearing a dark ball cap back to front with no hair showing.
Oddly, after the McVeigh figure told Moroz he knew where to go, he and his
companion sat on the forecourt for several more minutes. Moroz and his
manager wondered aloud what they were up to and joked that they should put up
a sign outside, saying DIRECTIONS: $5. Finally, the truck moved on, taking a hard
right and moving back downhill.
The second sighting was at a warehouse loading dock southeast of the
Murrah Building in an industrial zone named Bricktown. David Snider, the
warehouse foreman, was expecting a delivery and waved expectantly when he
saw a Ryder truck rolling slowly toward him. The driver, he noticed, had a dark
complexion, dark hair and mustache, and was wearing sunglasses. His passenger,
who could have been McVeigh, had short, blond, military-style hair. “They were
both looking in the side-view mirrors, and they looked like they were looking for
an address,” Snider said. He quickly determined that they were not friendly, and
he started yelling obscenities at them. The truck driver sped on.
Minutes later, James Linehan, a lawyer, encountered the yellow Mercury on
the corner of Fourth and Robinson. He described the back of the car as “caked in
Oklahoma dirt” and the license plate either obscured or missing. The time was
exactly 8:38 A.M.; he was on his way to court and kept time on the clock of his
black Jeep Cherokee. The Mercury was slowing to a crawl, so Linehan pulled
out to overtake. But the yellow car abruptly edged over and almost pushed him
into the oncoming lane. “I am thinking, basically, hey idiot, what are you
doing?” Linehan recalled. “I don’t want your crappy yellow paint on my car.”
He got a good look at the driver, who was scrunched up over the steering
wheel and looking up at the Murrah Building. He thought at the time it was a
woman in a hooded top but wondered later if it was McVeigh in disguise. Then
the Mercury made a sharp turn into the Murrah Building’s underground parking
lot. Linehan saw it disappear and remembered thinking: “That car doesn’t belong
in there.”
Danny Wilkerson, who ran the convenience store at the Regency Towers
apartment building on Fifth Street, said a man strongly resembling Tim McVeigh
walked in at around 8:40 A.M. and bought two Cokes and a pack of Marlboro
cigarettes. (McVeigh was not a smoker.) Wilkerson noticed a Ryder truck parked
outside and asked McVeigh if he was moving in. McVeigh said he was not. As
he walked out, Wilkerson watched him and noticed a second man in the cab.
Moments later, Wilkerson saw the Ryder truck again, this time on the far side ofhe was moving in. McVeigh said he was not. As
he walked out, Wilkerson watched him and noticed a second man in the cab.
Moments later, Wilkerson saw the Ryder truck again, this time on the far side of

--- PAGE BREAK ---Veigh said he was not. As
he walked out, Wilkerson watched him and noticed a second man in the cab.
Moments later, Wilkerson saw the Ryder truck again, this time on the far side of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the street, pointing in the direction of the Murrah Building, a moment captured
on one of the few pieces of video surveillance tape shown at McVeigh’s trial.
What did all these sightings mean? Officially, the FBI concluded they were
the result of witness confusion, compounded by wall-to-wall news coverage. Not
one of the eyewitnesses who saw McVeigh that morning was called to testify at
trial, because the government determined that every one of them was wrong to
say he was not alone. But as Danny Coulson, one of the FBI’s most experienced
investigators, put it: “If only one person had seen it, or two or three…but twenty-
four? Twenty-four people say, yes I saw him with someone else? That’s pretty
powerful.”
Newly available information from law enforcement and from sources inside
the radical right suggests Coulson was right to be skeptical of his bureau
colleagues. Not only do these sources say that McVeigh had company on April
19. They also say that McVeigh and his coconspirators intended to drive the
Ryder truck into the basement of the Murrah Building or the federal courthouse
next door, but had to change plans in a hurry because the truck exceeded the
height limit for the garage.
Dave Hollaway, of the CAUSE Foundation, was flabbergasted by what he
saw as a lack of foresight. “They couldn’t get the truck into the parking garage,
and that’s why there was all that turning and stopping,” he said. “The guys
weren’t exactly the brightest bulbs on the tree…. If they had had any kind of
guidance—if I’d been doing it—there would have been nothing left of the
building.”
Several pieces of evidence fit the scenario. Five days before the bombing,
Jane Graham, a union official with the Housing and Urban Development agency,
spotted three men acting suspiciously in the underground garage and later came
to believe they were sizing it up as part of the plot. James Linehan’s account of
the morning of April 19 points to suspicious activity involving one or more
vehicles tearing in or out of the garage. And there is no doubt: the height
clearance on the garage was too low for McVeigh’s twenty-foot truck.
After the Ryder made a first pass at the Murrah Building, a number of people
saw it trying to squeeze into an alley between the federal courthouse and the Old
Post Office Building, which houses the bankruptcy court. The alley, however,
was blocked by a large U.S. Marshals Service truck, and the Ryder truck backed
out again. This was first reported in the late 1990s by a member of the Oklahoma
Highway Patrol. But it has since been confirmed by two very well placed
officials. The first of these was Tom Hunt, who in 1995 was the local head of the
Federal Protective Service, with responsibility for the security of the courthouse
complex and the Murrah Building. He personally knew the marshal’s deputyHunt, who in 1995 was the local head of the
Federal Protective Service, with responsibility for the security of the courthouse
complex and the Murrah Building. He personally knew the marshal’s deputy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

blocking the alley. “The Ryder could have gotten only partway through,” Hunt
said. “I’m glad. I would have hated to see those judges get it that day.”
The second official was John Magaw, the director of the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms, who was privy to just about everything in the bomb
investigation. Magaw acknowledged that McVeigh’s initial plans turned out to
be “too difficult, or…would have drawn too much attention.” Magaw could not
confirm the specifics, either on the garage or the alley, but he thought both
scenarios were plausible. “[McVeigh] drove around and couldn’t find a place,”
Magaw added. “Wherever he meant to put it was too tight—the truck wouldn’t
fit. There was a piece of information about that…. If you have heard he intended
to drive it into the garage, I wouldn’t argue with that.”
Thereafter, the truck and its occupants would have had to find a place to
mark time while a new plan was formulated. Running into David Snider put the
kibosh on dawdling in Bricktown. One reason for driving toward Johnny’s Tire
Company could have been to take advantage of the higher ground to send or
receive radio messages.
One can imagine the frenzy among the members of the bombing crew, as the
clock ticked toward 9:00 A.M. The truck and its deadly load had been driving
around Oklahoma City for close to half an hour, glaringly visible to dozens of
witnesses, and they still had no firm idea what to do with it.d 9:00 A.M. The truck and its deadly load had been driving
around Oklahoma City for close to half an hour, glaringly visible to dozens of
witnesses, and they still had no firm idea what to do with it.

AT 9:32 A.M. EASTERN TIME, JAMES HOWARD MILLER PICKED UP the phone at the Department
of Justice’s Executive Secretariat, where he worked as a secretary, and heard a
man say a federal building had just blown up. “He’s saying he’s standing across
the street, watching it,” he told two coworkers.
None of them believed it; Miller’s main job was to screen calls, and his
phone extension was commonly referred to as the “nut line.”
Only later, once the news broke, did it dawn on him that 9:32 A.M. in
Washington was 8:32 A.M. in Oklahoma. Nothing at that point had blown up yet;
it seemed someone with a lot of inside knowledge had prank-called the federal
government.

JUST ACROSS THE NATIONAL MALL, ANOTHER TEASER ARRIVED AT the offices of Republican
congressman Steve Stockman of Texas. It was an unsigned, handwritten note,
sent by fax, and written so obscurely that the staffer who first read it tossed it
away. Later it was retrieved, and Stockman gave it to the FBI.
The one-page message came from the offices of Mark Koernke, a prominent
Michigan Militia leader acquainted with McVeigh and Nichols. It read: “First

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd Stockman gave it to the FBI.
The one-page message came from the offices of Mark Koernke, a prominent
Michigan Militia leader acquainted with McVeigh and Nichols. It read: “First

--- PAGE BREAK ---

update. Bldg 7 to 10 floors only military people on scene—BATF/FBI. Bomb
threat received last week. Perpetrator unknown at this time. Oklahoma.” The
word “Oklahoma” was underlined.
The most interesting thing about the message was the 8:59 A.M. time stamp.
In both Michigan and Washington, that was more than an hour before the bomb
went off. A staffer later said the fax machine had not been reset since daylight
savings time began, so it really arrived at 9:59, or 8:59 in Oklahoma. That was
still three minutes before the bomb went off. And even if that was inaccurate,
and the fax came in just after the explosion, as the FBI later determined, it is still
a mystery how Koernke’s people received the news so fast.ore the bomb went off. And even if that was inaccurate,
and the fax came in just after the explosion, as the FBI later determined, it is still
a mystery how Koernke’s people received the news so fast.

A FEW MINUTES BEFORE 9:00 A.M., MCVEIGH’S BACKUP PLAN WAS IN place. The bomb would be
detonated in the handicapped parking spot on the Murrah Building’s north side.
The configuration of the barrels—most likely designed with the intention of
driving the force of the explosion into the underground garage’s key support
pillars—would now concentrate the blast toward the building itself, rather than
the street.
A few minutes before the explosion, according to several witnesses,
somebody moved the yellow Mercury to within eighty feet of the detonation site,
probably along the same side of Fifth Street as the Ryder truck. The brown
Chevy pickup was on the other side of Fifth Street, in front of the Journal Record
Building. Shortly after, someone with long blond hair—perhaps the same person
seen by James Linehan at the wheel of the Mercury twenty minutes earlier—
waved the Ryder truck into position. This time, it seems more certain that
McVeigh was inside, with the swarthy John Doe seen repeatedly over the
previous hour. They had already lit both fuses. They exited, each walking calmly
toward one of the getaway vehicles.
Glenn Grossman, an employee of the Oklahoma Department of Securities,
watched this scene unfold from his fourth-floor office inside the Journal Record
Building. In the few minutes before 9:00 A.M., he looked out twice. The first time,
he saw the Mercury parked in front of the Ryder truck. It caught his attention,
because he used to own a 1978 Mercury Marquis and was familiar with the
vehicle. The second time, the Ryder had pulled in front. Someone was standing
by the driver’s side of the Mercury. On the sidewalk, a skinny woman with long
blond hair was yelling and gesturing wildly at him. “They were together,”
Grossman told the FBI, “and she was frantic about something.”
A different perspective on the same events was provided by Daina Bradley, a
young African-American woman who was inside the Murrah Building visitingold the FBI, “and she was frantic about something.”
A different perspective on the same events was provided by Daina Bradley, a
young African-American woman who was inside the Murrah Building visiting

--- PAGE BREAK ---e was frantic about something.”
A different perspective on the same events was provided by Daina Bradley, a
young African-American woman who was inside the Murrah Building visiting

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the first-floor Social Security office with her mother, sister, and two children.
She and her sister saw the Ryder truck through the building’s plate-glass
windows as it pulled up. She did not see who was driving, but she got a good
view of the passenger as he climbed out, walked to the back of the truck, and
then started walking forward again at high speed. “It was a olive-complexion
man with short hair, curly, clean-cut,” she said at McVeigh’s trial. She said he
was wearing a blue jacket, jeans, tennis shoes, and a white baseball cap with
purple flames on the sides.
A third view was offered by a catering truck driver named Rodney Johnson,
who had to swerve out of the way of two people stepping in front of him on Fifth
Street. To his right, Johnson noticed the Ryder truck parked against the building.
To his left, he saw the brown Chevy pickup. He later identified one of the people
in front of him as McVeigh. The other man, he said, was stocky, with black hair,
and wearing a jacket. “I expected them to make some kind of move once they
saw the truck barreling down at them,” Johnson said. “They didn’t flinch one
bit.”
At least two other witnesses claimed to be present as the cannon fuse cord
burned down to detonation point. Leah Moore, a pedestrian who was walking on
the north side of Fifth Street saw the Ryder truck in the handicapped zone and
decided she would complain about it. Not far away from Moore, outside the
YMCA building, seventy-year-old Levoid Jack Gage was waiting for a bus and
noticed the Ryder truck and the brown pickup as he lit a cigarette. Both
witnesses were lucky to survive.
This narrative of the final minutes could not be more different from the
version presented in court. The government asserted, simply, that McVeigh lit
one or both fuses while he was still driving the Ryder truck, and hopped out as
soon as he parked in front of the Murrah Building. He was on his way to the
Mercury, parked in an alley a few blocks away, when the bomb exploded.
Nobody was with him. McVeigh offered a similar version in his prison
interviews with Michel and Herbeck, describing how he popped in a pair of
earplugs as he pulled the Ryder truck into position and walked purposefully
behind the YMCA building at Fifth and Robinson to shield himself from the
explosion.
The witnesses aren’t alone, though, in insisting that they saw what they saw.
They are backed up by the government’s own contemporaneous documentation
and by an account of the investigators’ assessment of events, which appeared in
the Los Angeles Times six months after the bombing.
A minute-by-minute timeline of the first few weeks of the investigation
compiled by the Secret Service makes clear that extensive efforts were made toe Los Angeles Times six months after the bombing.
A minute-by-minute timeline of the first few weeks of the investigation
compiled by the Secret Service makes clear that extensive efforts were made to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

match the testimony from Glenn Grossman and Daina Bradley with time-lapse
calculations based on video surveillance footage recovered from the Regency
Towers, half a block away. At this stage, the witness accounts were treated with
the utmost seriousness. Both the Secret Service timeline and the Los Angeles
Times report, published in October 1995, allude to the lapse between the last
time the Ryder truck was captured on tape and the explosion, a period of just
over three minutes. In the scenario described to Times reporters Rick Serrano
and Ronald Ostrow, the fuses were lit before the Ryder truck came to a halt—
just as McVeigh later told it—leaving about a minute between the time the truck
was parked and the explosion.
McVeigh was soon at the wheel of the Mercury, driving north out of
Oklahoma City and back toward Kansas. The brown Chevy pickup was seen
leaving in the same direction, along with a white sedan similar to the one spotted
close to the Ryder truck the day before. The bombers probably did not see the
explosion, but they must have heard it and perhaps surveyed the damage it
caused. A deafening rumble shook the entire city, a spasm of destructive
violence like no other across the Great Plains.

--- PAGE BREAK ---they must have heard it and perhaps surveyed the damage it
caused. A deafening rumble shook the entire city, a spasm of destructive
violence like no other across the Great Plains.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

{ 2 }
9:02 A.M.
Just after 9:00 A.M. on April 19, Stanley Brown was standing at his office
window at the Oklahoma Military Academy, admiring his view of the city. The
air was cool, the sky a pristine blue, and it promised to be a beautiful spring day.
That was when the detonation hit him. “You could feel the blast,” he said. “It
nearly blew my hat off.” Some of the ceiling tiles in his office smashed to the
floor, and he looked out and saw a large plume of smoke rising from the high-
rise buildings three miles to the south. Major Brown was a Vietnam War veteran,
a major in the Oklahoma National Guard, and a senior member of the Oklahoma
County Sheriff’s Office bomb squad. “You see that plume of smoke,” he said,
“and you know damn well, everybody needs to get their balls wrapped up and
go.”
He and another National Guard major ran for his pickup to head downtown.
As he later wrote in a meticulous chronology, he felt a pair of explosions, which
made him think there had been not one but two bombs.another National Guard major ran for his pickup to head downtown.
As he later wrote in a meticulous chronology, he felt a pair of explosions, which
made him think there had been not one but two bombs.

AT THE FEDERAL COURTHOUSE, GARY KNIGHT OF THE OKLAHOMA CITY police thought he was
experiencing an earthquake. He was in a soundproof, windowless courtroom on
the first floor, watching his pregnant wife at work as she called a defense witness
in a civil suit against four of Knight’s OCPD colleagues. He couldn’t hear a lot
at first, but he certainly felt the initial jolt, which was like being rear-ended in a
car.
The shaking grew ever stronger, the fluorescent lights swung dangerously,
and ceiling tiles tumbled down. Gary Purcell, the trial judge, brought down his
gavel. “Gentlemen,” he said, “I believe that was a bomb.”
The corridors outside were thick with smoke. People yelped and stumbled
from the jury rooms on the outer side of the courthouse, where the plate glass
had imploded. On his way out, Knight saw a U.S. marshal shepherding people
out even though he was covered in blood and glass fragments. “At first I thought
it was our building,” Knight said. “The federal courthouse handled big interstate
drug cases, and I thought someone had put a bomb in the courthouse.” Only
when he stepped outside and saw that the back of the Murrah Building was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

shattered did he understand which building had been hit.t someone had put a bomb in the courthouse.” Only
when he stepped outside and saw that the back of the Murrah Building was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

shattered did he understand which building had been hit.

BERTHA NICHOLS BARELY MADE IT THROUGH THE DOOR OF THE REGENCY Towers apartments
when the force of the detonation spun her around and knocked her more or less
into the arms of her husband, Richard. He was a maintenance man, and his first
reaction was to think the Regency’s boilers had blown. Then he remembered that
their eight-year-old nephew Chad was still strapped into the backseat of their
bright red Ford Festiva. They both dashed outside to retrieve him.
The Nicholses walked into a gust of flying glass and debris. Bertha ducked
into the backseat and started tugging on the seat belt to pry Chad free. Richard
might have joined her in the effort, but he heard an extraordinary whirring sound
coming from the direction of the Murrah Building and turned to look. “I seen
this humongous object coming to us out the air. And it was spinning like a
boomerang. And you could hear this ‘woo-woo-woo-woo’ noise,” he later
testified.
Nichols was looking at the 250-pound rear axle from the Ryder truck, and it
was hurtling directly toward him. “Get down!” he screamed.
He reached into the car and pushed his wife down onto the floorboard. The
axle hit the windshield on the passenger side, throwing the vehicle back several
feet. Nichols lost his grip on his wife, and on the car itself, which jerked
violently past his outstretched hands. He ran back to where it came to a halt on
the sidewalk. “I grabbed my wife,” he said, “and I grabbed Chad, and I kind of
hovered over them like an old mother hen.” Somehow, they all escaped serious
injury.n back to where it came to a halt on
the sidewalk. “I grabbed my wife,” he said, “and I grabbed Chad, and I kind of
hovered over them like an old mother hen.” Somehow, they all escaped serious
injury.

MAJOR BROWN ARRIVED AT THE MURRAH BUILDING ELEVEN MINUTES after the explosion and
found a scene he described as “pure hell.” Bodies and body parts were visible
everywhere, along with office furniture and reams of paper spilling out over the
wreckage. Screams punctured the dust-choked air, and many of the cars along
Fifth Street and in the Journal Record parking lot were on fire. The sidewalks
were buckled and the parking meters either twisted or plucked out of the ground.
Brown smelled the distinctive odor of ammonium nitrate, mingled with the dust
and smoke.
Brown immediately worried that another bomb might be ready to explode
once the rescue workers, news reporters, and political leaders arrived on the
scene. It was what his training had taught him to expect. Some of the firefighters
and doctors and nurses gathered around and asked him what he thought, and he
told them he didn’t have a good feeling at all. For the next several hours, Brown

--- PAGE BREAK ---

half-expected to be blown to smithereens.s gathered around and asked him what he thought, and he
told them he didn’t have a good feeling at all. For the next several hours, Brown

--- PAGE BREAK ---

half-expected to be blown to smithereens.

GLENN WILBURN, WHO HAD BEEN PLAYING WITH HIS GRANDCHILDREN less than two hours earlier,
raced to the Murrah Building as soon as he realized it had been hit. He felt the
low rumble of the blast from his office building, eighteen blocks away, and was
on his way up to the roof for a better view when he learned that the explosion
was right next to Chase and Colton’s day-care center.
“It was kinda eerie going downtown,” he later recalled. “It’s a heavy
business district, and there was no traffic. It was like everything had frozen in
the city.” There was no way of getting close to the Murrah Building, so he
parked four blocks away and started running. He came to the crest of a hill, and
the full horror of the explosion came into view.
“I knew then that our boys were dead,” he said. “There was no way they
could have survived, just from looking at the scene. Where our boys were was
nothing but a big pancake of rubble.”ame into view.
“I knew then that our boys were dead,” he said. “There was no way they
could have survived, just from looking at the scene. Where our boys were was
nothing but a big pancake of rubble.”

TWENTY-ONE INFANTS, TODDLERS, AND PRESCHOOLERS HAD BEEN dropped off at the America’s
Kids day care that morning. Three teachers were also on duty; a fourth had
called in sick. The numbers might have been much higher, but three weeks
earlier there had been a controversial change of management. Danielle Hunt, the
popular, outgoing day-care operator and director, had been pushed out before the
end of her contract to make way for a rival who was friends with an assistant
building manager. Many parents were uncomfortable; they didn’t know anything
about the new operator, and they weren’t happy that the young woman she
appointed to run the center, Dana Cooper, was still a year from finishing her
early childhood education degree.
Many parents had pulled their children out in protest and sent them
elsewhere—an extraordinary stroke of good fortune. When the bomb exploded,
one teacher was putting the infants down for a nap right next to the windows
overlooking Fifth Street. Another was leading the older children in a round of “I
Love You, You Love Me,” from Barney, which was everyone’s favorite
television program.
Nobody near the windows stood a chance. The infants were killed instantly,
and most of the others, including Dana Cooper and the two other teachers,
perished as soon as the building collapsed. The six children who survived were
all on the south side of the facility. Two of them, a sparky pair of red-headed
toddler siblings named Rebecca and Brandon Denny, had gone to the front door
to wait for a muffin delivery man, who arrived every day at 9:00 A.M. The muffin

--- PAGE BREAK ---rky pair of red-headed
toddler siblings named Rebecca and Brandon Denny, had gone to the front door
to wait for a muffin delivery man, who arrived every day at 9:00 A.M. The muffin

--- PAGE BREAK ---

man saved their lives—although Brandon, then three years old, suffered severe
head injuries and went on to have four brain surgeries.
Three more children under the age of five died in the building, all of them
accompanying parents or grandparents to the ground-floor Social Security
Administration office, where the worst of the death and destruction was
concentrated. The visitors and government workers who crowded into the SSA’s
marble-floored office space on the building’s north side had nowhere to escape.
Those who were not skewered by flying glass, or flung against the workstations
or the walls, were buried under nine floors of rubble when the side of the
building came down. Forty people died in this place alone, almost a quarter of
the total, and many others suffered horrific injuries. Daina Bradley, the young
African-American mother who saw Timothy McVeigh’s companion through the
plate-glass windows moments before the detonation, heard her two small
children screaming as the floor gave way and large slabs of concrete pounded
down around her. She ended up trapped in the basement for hours in a pool of
frigid water, her left arm pinned behind her head and her right leg wedged
beneath a giant concrete boulder. Another large lump of concrete was perched
directly above her face and might have killed her if it had fallen just a few more
inches. Her sister, Falesha, lay nearby, her head badly injured. For a while, they
could hear each other moaning. Bradley’s mother and both her children perished.
The injuries and trauma suffered throughout the building were almost
beyond description. In some cases, bodies were literally shredded, or crushed
under falling concrete, or impaled on filing cabinets or pieces of flying structural
steel rebar. According to the Oklahoma City Fire Department rescue operations
chief, who witnessed the horrors firsthand, some people were blown fifty feet
through six masonry block walls. Limbs were severed and blown off. One of the
dead toddlers was decapitated; another was found with the top of his skull
sheared off. A Hyundai car emblem was embedded in someone’s brain.
In the fifth-floor customs office, a forty-four-year-old secretary named
Priscilla Salyers tumbled more than five floors until her body was pressed
between slabs of broken concrete. Her head and face were clamped so tight she
could not separate her teeth wide enough to spit out her gum. In the gloom she
scrabbled around with the one part of her body she could move, her left hand,
until she felt something. It was a hand. She squeezed and tugged it closer, only to
realize that it was stone-cold and attached only to a forearm severed at the elbow.
Still, she did not let go. She was too shocked to feel the horror of the moment.
As the hours passed and she waited in growing desperation for the rescue she
fervently hoped would come, that disembodied hand made her feel oddly
comforted and less alone.l the horror of the moment.
As the hours passed and she waited in growing desperation for the rescue she
fervently hoped would come, that disembodied hand made her feel oddly
comforted and less alone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Salyers and the others most directly impacted by the bombing bore no
responsibility for the government operations at Waco or Ruby Ridge, or any
other paramilitary offensive that might have spurred McVeigh and his
coconspirators into action. The employees in the Social Security office, and the
Federal Employees Credit Union, and the Housing and Urban Development
offices, were poorly paid bureaucrats trying to make ends meet, as were many of
the people they were servicing. They posed no threat to the Patriot Movement’s
gun rights, or to their civil liberties, or to their freedom to establish churches
preaching the supremacy of the white race. More than 80 percent of the deaths—
138 out of 168—were entirely unrelated to law enforcement, the military, or
even tax collecting. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, which was
most likely at the top of the bombers’ target list, did not suffer a single fatality.
Neither the IRS nor the FBI had any presence in the building. Even on
McVeigh’s terms, the bombing was notable only for its gratuitous carnage or, to
use the chilling military term he preferred, “collateral damage.”nor the FBI had any presence in the building. Even on
McVeigh’s terms, the bombing was notable only for its gratuitous carnage or, to
use the chilling military term he preferred, “collateral damage.”

THE ALFRED P. MURRAH BUILDING WAS NOT A PARTICULARLY strong structure, nor was it as
well-protected as it should have been. At the time of its opening, in 1977, the
otherwise unimaginative nine-story block of steel-reinforced concrete and glass
gained attention and praise for its energy efficiency, particularly during air-
conditioning season. Nothing was especially wrong with its construction—all
follow-up studies agreed it had been built to specification—but neither was
anything especially right.
The columns were reinforced by relatively fragile single-lengths of steel
rebar. After the bombing, a study sponsored by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency concluded that reinforcing the columns with hoop steel
instead would have probably prevented the catastrophic pancaking effect on the
building’s north side. Had the Murrah been built to the specifications standard in
earthquake zones, it probably would not have collapsed at all, mitigating about
80 percent of the damage and saving 80–90 percent of the lives lost. The cost of
such additional reinforcement would have been negligible, about one-eighth of 1
percent of the overall construction budget.
One-eighth of 1 percent of $14 million, the price tag for the whole building,
comes to about $18,000. That was less than the planners spent on drawing up
their budget, an amount so small it would have caused barely a hiccough in the
approval process. For $18,000, the federal government could have spared the
country its worst single trauma since Pearl Harbor. The bombing would have
still been a tremendous shock, and some of the injuries just as horrific. The

--- PAGE BREAK ---nment could have spared the
country its worst single trauma since Pearl Harbor. The bombing would have
still been a tremendous shock, and some of the injuries just as horrific. The

--- PAGE BREAK ---

property damage would have been almost as extensive. But the death toll would
have been limited to just fifteen or twenty people.
The Ryder truck, of course, should never have been able to get so close to
the building. In the years since, especially after 9/11, it has become standard for
federal buildings and law enforcement agencies to be scrupulously well-guarded,
with concrete barriers and other obstacles keeping vehicles at a safe distance.
But even in the 1990s, federal building management agencies were well aware
of the dangers, and how to address them.
In 1988, the National Research Council, part of the National Academy of
Sciences, outlined the basics in a widely distributed but little-read report on
improving structural integrity, establishing secure site perimeters, and deploying
appropriately trained security staff to ward off risks and identify suspect
characters. The NRC’s report highlighted the risk of an explosive-laden vehicle,
and even suggested that one of the first things to do after receiving a threat was
to close any on-site day-care centers.
The Murrah Building was targeted, in part, because it complied with none of
these recommendations, unlike federal buildings in Dallas or Omaha, which
McVeigh and his friends also cased. It never had more than one guard on duty, a
subcontractor who worked for a private security outfit rather than the
government. And the Murrah Building, along with the federal courthouse and
the Old Post Office court building immediately to the south, went unguarded
altogether for five hours out of every twenty-four.
In hindsight, one can appreciate how nonsensical it was to assume, as some
people clearly did, that because the Murrah Building received no specific threats
it was not in danger. For two years before the bombing, the ATF had received
agency-wide threats over Ruby Ridge and Waco, suggesting—as one of the lead
authors of the National Research Council study argued—that the day care should
have been moved to a different building. “I was disappointed they couldn’t adopt
some of the things we recommended,” John Pignato, author of the NRC study,
told the Kansas City Star a week after the bombing. “I’m not saying we could
have saved everybody, but I certainly think we could have contributed to some
(lives) saved.”
Some people, however, were keenly aware of the potential threat. Early in
1995, Magistrate Judge Ronald Howland of the Oklahoma City federal bench
met with Tom Hunt, the head of Federal Protective Service, to discuss
vulnerabilities at all three downtown federal buildings. “I’ve always been a
security guy,” Howland explained. “I just felt we needed better security.” His
two specific concerns were the five-hour gap in security coverage on weekdays,
and the alley between the federal courthouse and Old Post Office Building,. “I just felt we needed better security.” His
two specific concerns were the five-hour gap in security coverage on weekdays,
and the alley between the federal courthouse and Old Post Office Building,

--- PAGE BREAK ---eded better security.” His
two specific concerns were the five-hour gap in security coverage on weekdays,
and the alley between the federal courthouse and Old Post Office Building,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

where judges drove in on their way to a dedicated underground parking area.
What would happen, Judge Howland asked, if some unauthorized person drove
into that alley? What would happen if someone tried to blow up the place?
“Judge,” Hunt replied, “I have asked everybody. I’ve asked my agency, I’ve
asked the Marshals and the GSA [General Services Administration]. I’ve asked
agencies with offices in the Murrah Building to pay for additional security.” No
one, he said, was willing to put up the funds. “Even my own bosses said, don’t
ask again.”
In February 1995, Hunt was asked for a risk assessment on the Oklahoma
City buildings under his jurisdiction. This resulted in a document cataloguing the
security holes, along with a list of suggested remedies. But his bosses didn’t
want to hear this. “They told me, you have to realize the United States has not
had that many terrorist attacks,” Hunt said. “Everybody wanted a federal
building that was really open to the public, because of the Social Security office
and army recruiting and HUD in there. They wanted an atmosphere that said,
come on in and do business with us.”
Hunt was told to rewrite his assessment to say everything was fine as it was.
To his enduring chagrin, he did as he was told—not explicitly endorsing
anything other than the alarm system, but not openly criticizing anything, either.
“I changed it and signed it,” he said. “I should have put a page in there saying I
was signing it under duress, or something to that effect…When that bomb went
off I thought, oh man, they’re going to put me in a cell.” He might not have
achieved anything by protesting more than he did, but he has never stopped
asking what he might have done differently.
Hunt was never called to account for the bombing, no doubt because his
bosses knew the efforts he’d made to beef up security. But those same bosses
seemed worried about what he might reveal to the media. For weeks, they sent
him on out-of-town work trips, to Brownsville to help investigate a murder, to
Houston to do a risk assessment on the Johnson Space Center, to the Virgin
Islands and New Mexico. “I said, why are you sending me to all these places?
I’ve got a bombing,” Hunt recalled. “My agency wanted me out of the way.”
The mistrust did not end after Hunt retired in 1999. The day after he left, he
said, GSA employees came to his office with bolt cutters to cut the locks off his
filing cabinets. He was sure they were looking for his Murrah Building files. He
had taken everything home for safekeeping. He knew private lawsuits would try
to pin blame on one branch of government or another. “I was not going to leave
it to others to say I had nothing to do with this,” he said.ing home for safekeeping. He knew private lawsuits would try
to pin blame on one branch of government or another. “I was not going to leave
it to others to say I had nothing to do with this,” he said.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ping. He knew private lawsuits would try
to pin blame on one branch of government or another. “I was not going to leave
it to others to say I had nothing to do with this,” he said.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FEW ISSUES ABOUT THE BOMBING GENERATED AS MUCH INTEREST, OR misunderstanding, as the
question of whether there was more than one explosion. Major Brown of the
National Guard felt a double thump from three miles away, as did some
survivors inside the Murrah Building. Most persuasive were seismographic
readings done by the earthquake monitoring systems administered by the
Oklahoma Geological Survey at the University of Oklahoma in Norman, fifteen
miles south of the bomb site, which showed an initial jolt, or cluster of jolts,
right around 9:02 A.M.; then a second set between seven and eleven seconds later.
For several weeks after the bombing, Raymon L. Brown of the OGS
maintained that based strictly on geological data, there were probably “two
events”—in other words, two bombs. Other experts, including Thomas Holzer of
the U.S. Geological Survey, disagreed. Dr. Brown eventually changed his mind,
stating that there were other plausible explanations for the data he had collected.
By that time, though, all sorts of wild theories were running loose.
By the end of July, retired air force general Benton K. Partin sent a report to
Congress, asserting that the Ryder truck bomb alone could not have caused all
the damage, and that additional explosive charges must have been strapped to the
pillars inside the building. General Partin made some elementary mistakes,
including an overestimation of the strength of the concrete pillars and a failure to
appreciate the power of gravity to pull down part of the building once key
support columns had been weakened. But these flaws in Partin’s findings did not
stop a number of paranoid antigovernment activists from accepting this and
further alleging that the government itself had brought down the building—for
political reasons too far removed from reality to be worth dissecting here.
What really happened was this: when the ammonium nitrate barrels ignited,
a vast initial shock wave expanded outward in all directions, shattering windows,
smashing into cars parked on the street, and ripping into the guts of the Murrah
Building. Brute force is the signature of this kind of explosive; ammonium
nitrate won’t set fire to a building necessarily, but it will generate a destructive
blast that can rip off facades and roofs, shatter walls and internal supports, and
create conditions for a partial or total structural collapse.
The first wave was followed by a second one, known as the negative blast-
pressure wave, so called because it is caused by air rushing to fill the vacuum
created by the initial explosion. Rick Sherrow, who spent three decades as an
explosives expert with the ATF, gave an authoritative explanation of the
phenomenon when he wrote up his independent inquiries for Soldier of Fortune
magazine. “During an explosive detonation,” he wrote, “large quantities of
expanding gases are forced outward in the form of a positive-pressure wave.
This creates a vacuum behind them. As the pressure of this wave dissipates, ave detonation,” he wrote, “large quantities of
expanding gases are forced outward in the form of a positive-pressure wave.
This creates a vacuum behind them. As the pressure of this wave dissipates, a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

negative-pressure wave is formed by gases (and debris) being sucked into this
vacuum. This negative wave often is powerful enough to cause additional
damage, in some cases finishing off what had just been weakened by the positive
wave.”
In other words, if the initial blast had not already sheared or shattered the
three main support columns of the building on its own, the negative blast-
pressure wave might have done so. Add to that a likely reverberation or tamping
effect from the surrounding buildings, and it’s easy to understand why those
columns on the north side gave way. The second series of jolts recorded by Dr.
Brown could have been the negative blast wave, or the collapse of the building,
or some combination of the two.
McVeigh and his coconspirators probably knew nothing about negative
blast-pressure waves, or the other likely effects of detonating a truck bomb. And
it is unlikely that they studied the structural defects of the Murrah Building, or
knew about the relative fragility of the reinforced concrete. Dave Hollaway, the
curiously well-informed deputy director of the CAUSE Foundation, did not
hesitate to acknowledge that the bombers blundered their way to notoriety.
“They got lucky because the bomb knocked the face of the building off,” said
Hollaway, who had some explosives knowledge from his army days. “Often, it’s
the collapsing of the air back in that does most of the damage. When it blew
off…it set up a fanning wave, which shattered the pillars on one side of the
building…. That’s what resulted in the multiple damage. That was just lucky.”in that does most of the damage. When it blew
off…it set up a fanning wave, which shattered the pillars on one side of the
building…. That’s what resulted in the multiple damage. That was just lucky.”

THE BOMBERS’ LUCK WAS A NIGHTMARE FOR RESCUE WORKERS DIGGING their way into the bowels
of the building. Lumps of concrete were still tumbling from the wreckage, and
large slabs hung precariously by what looked like thin threads of rebar, causing
minute-by-minute concern about the safety of the firemen, police, nurses, and
doctors. The largest slab, a 32,000-pound monster, became known as the
“Mother Slab,” or the “Slab from Hell.” The basement area where most of the
victims were trapped was dank and slowly filled with frigid water from the
ruptured pipes. The rescuers named it “the Pit.”
A kind of frenzy gripped everyone involved. The rescuers became as
uncertain as the survivors that they would get out alive, and their nerves worked
on them in strange and unpredictable ways. At one point, a group of workers
digging through the rubble of mangled cabinets and desks began to find large
quantities of money which they gave to FBI special agent Franklin Alexander for
safekeeping. At first, Alexander shoved these bills into the cargo pockets of his
fatigue pants, for lack of a better place, before he woke up to reality and told his

--- PAGE BREAK ---Alexander for
safekeeping. At first, Alexander shoved these bills into the cargo pockets of his
fatigue pants, for lack of a better place, before he woke up to reality and told his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fellow rescuers: “Forget about the money, it doesn’t matter right now. Look for
people!”
John Avera, an Oklahoma City police sergeant, broke down several times
when the FBI interviewed him about his experiences in the building. He was
asked about the friends and colleagues he had encountered, and about the people
he had helped, but he was unable to visualize any of them clearly. “There were a
lot of bodies. I remember seeing lots of torsos,” he said, in a daze. “But I just
can’t remember their faces.”
One victim he saw had literally been scalped—the rolls of skin and blood
hanging down from his bare skull. As Avera pushed deeper into the Pit, he was
hit on the shoulder by a piece of falling debris and had trouble moving his neck.
His T-shirt and jeans were covered in blood; the dust penetrated his lungs and
made his breathing labored. Every few minutes, he had to wipe his glasses clean
from the dust and spray from broken water pipes. He tried removing his glasses,
but that didn’t work, either.
Then he came across Baylee Almon, a baby from the day-care center, who
had celebrated her first birthday just the day before. He did not know if she was
alive or dead. Her clothes and shoes had been shredded; she was wearing only
her white ankle socks. He picked her up and thought her neck was broken. He
cradled her so he would not inflict any further head or neck damage, and listened
for any sign of breathing. There was none.
Soon, a photograph of a lifeless Baylee being carried out of the Murrah
Building by a gentle giant of a firefighter would become the iconic image of the
bombing, a moment captured by two amateur photographers whose work would
be published on the front pages of newspapers and magazines around the world.
But finding that firefighter was no easy task.
Avera ran outside with the baby and tried to hand her off to a nurse or doctor.
Everyone he approached told him to find someone else. Nobody, it seems, could
bear to hold the dead child, much less face the prospect of handing her over to
her devastated parents. Avera couldn’t understand it. Finally, Chris Fields of the
Oklahoma City Fire Department came up to him, rather than waiting to be asked,
and scooped up Baylee’s remains as though it was the most natural thing in the
world.nd it. Finally, Chris Fields of the
Oklahoma City Fire Department came up to him, rather than waiting to be asked,
and scooped up Baylee’s remains as though it was the most natural thing in the
world.

THE FIRST ASSUMPTION ABOUT THE BOMBING WAS THAT IT WAS THE work of Middle Eastern
extremists. In some cases, the assumption prompted hysterical reactions directed
at Muslims generally. “Shoot them now, before they get us,” wrote Jeff Kamen
of New York Newsday. But spring 1995 was also a period of heightened “chatter”

--- PAGE BREAK ---rical reactions directed
at Muslims generally. “Shoot them now, before they get us,” wrote Jeff Kamen
of New York Newsday. But spring 1995 was also a period of heightened “chatter”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

from Middle Eastern groups threatening the United States, not least because
Ramzi Yousef, the mastermind behind the 1993 attack on the World Trade
Center in New York, had recently been arrested in Pakistan and extradited to the
United States.
A few weeks earlier, the federal judiciary had received a stark security
warning, not about the radical far right, or the anniversary of Waco, but a fatwa
issued by Iranian extremists against the U.S. Marshals Service and the buildings
it was charged with protecting. (This was perhaps one reason Judge Purcell so
quickly believed the rumbling in his soundproof courtroom was a bomb.) The
grievance resulted from an episode during the World Trade Center bombing trial,
when a deputy marshal accidentally stepped on a copy of the Koran in a
courtroom scuffle. There was no indication that Oklahoma City was likely to be
singled out for attack, and one of Purcell’s colleagues said the briefing was
mostly about preventing intruders from bursting into the building to create a
hostage-type situation.
The Middle Eastern theme dominated cable news coverage for the first
several hours. One of the earliest eyewitness reports spoke of three Arabs
driving away from the bomb site. A local Jordanian-American, Abraham
Ahmad, shot to the top of the suspect list because he fit an eyewitness
description and was booked on a flight to Italy directly after the explosion.
Ahmad was grilled by customs officials in Chicago, then intercepted when he
reached London and sent back to Washington for questioning by the FBI. His
luggage traveled on to Rome, where local police pulled it apart on arrival.
The government took no chances with anyone else, checking and double-
checking passports at Will Rogers International Airport in Oklahoma City and
assigning a dozen Arabic-language translators to decipher surveillance traffic.
The translators were kept on even after it became clear this was a domestic
attack, to the irritation of the Pentagon, which had loaned them to the FBI.
The real experts, those federal and local law enforcement agents with direct
experience of the radical right, were never in doubt about the true nature of what
had happened. About an hour after the bombing, Oklahoma’s police and fire
chiefs were standing on the north side of Fifth Street with the assistant city
manager and Bob Ricks, the special agent in charge of the FBI’s Oklahoma City
office. They were contemplating the ghastly scene when Ricks, unprompted,
looked at the others and said, “This is the anniversary of Waco.”
As the FBI’s public face throughout the fifty-one-day Branch Davidian siege
two years earlier, Ricks well knew the fury it unleashed. Militia groups had
attacked him in their newsletters, and he was already wondering if the bomb had
been meant for him.y Branch Davidian siege
two years earlier, Ricks well knew the fury it unleashed. Militia groups had
attacked him in their newsletters, and he was already wondering if the bomb had
been meant for him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A similar gut feeling gripped one of Ricks’s longest-standing FBI
colleagues, Danny Coulson, just recently appointed as special agent in charge of
the Dallas office. Coulson knew the legacy of Jim Ellison and Wayne Snell from
his time in charge of the bureau’s Hostage Rescue Team. Exactly ten years
earlier, on April 19, 1985, Coulson ordered the HRT to move in on a heavily
armed religious compound in rural Arkansas run by Ellison under the name of
the Covenant, the Sword, and the Arm of the Lord. The four-day siege ended
without a shot being fired, largely thanks to Coulson’s patience and the
intervention of Robert Millar, the patriarch of Elohim City, who acted as a go-
between and induced Ellison to surrender peacefully.
Coulson later wrote that when he heard about the bombing, he grabbed his
weapons and drove as fast as he could through a driving rainstorm up I-35 to
Oklahoma City. On his way, he received a phone call from Rita Braver, a
correspondent with CBS.
“Everybody in Washington is saying it’s Middle Eastern,” she said. “Do you
think that’s right?”
“No it’s not. It’s a Bubba job.”
“It looks like all the other truck bombings coming out of the Middle East,”
Braver persisted.
“It’s Bubbas,” Coulson said. “It’s April 19.”Do you
think that’s right?”
“No it’s not. It’s a Bubba job.”
“It looks like all the other truck bombings coming out of the Middle East,”
Braver persisted.
“It’s Bubbas,” Coulson said. “It’s April 19.”

TIM MCVEIGH MADE A REMARKABLY CLEAN GETAWAY, THOUGH ANY number of things could
have gone wrong for him. The Mercury was leaking oil. It had a lousy
transmission, a questionable battery, and a broken fuel gauge. On its rear was a
large primer stain, making it easy to spot if anyone decided it was suspicious.
McVeigh’s task was to navigate his way out of the city without being spotted by
the police officers, firefighters, and volunteer rescue workers rushing in the
opposite direction. He could have broken down or been stopped at any moment.
McVeigh’s only mistake was not having a license plate for the back of the
Mercury Marquis. After months of planning, it was extraordinary that McVeigh
could have slipped up over something so elementary. It is a wrinkle in the story
that has generated endless theories but almost no cogent explanations. The FBI
scoured the streets looking for the license plate; and at least two witnesses
reported seeing it hanging by a single bolt in the days leading up to the bombing.
But the feds found nothing. Later, McVeigh said he removed the plate when he
stashed the car in an alley on April 16, presumably because he did not want an
overcurious cop or traffic warden to trace the car back to him. But he never
explained why he didn’t reattach it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---car in an alley on April 16, presumably because he did not want an
overcurious cop or traffic warden to trace the car back to him. But he never
explained why he didn’t reattach it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The government ascribed the oversight to recklessness or simple
incompetence. But when McVeigh bought the Mercury five days earlier in
Junction City—to replace a Pontiac station wagon with a blown head gasket—he
had taken care to switch his Arizona plates to the new car, even though they
were the wrong plates. “Nice and solid, two screws right on top,” he told one of
his defense lawyers shortly after his arrest. At least on April 14, it was very
important to him not to drive around without plates.
The best way to understand the scenario is if McVeigh was not alone.
Everything he did up to the moment he drove away from the Murrah Building
suggests the Mercury was intended not as a getaway vehicle but rather as a “drop
car”—a vehicle to carry him a short distance away before being ditched. That, in
turn, implies that he was expecting a ride the rest of the way.
On the front passenger seat he left a sealed envelope stuffed with documents
describing the motivation for the bombing, a collection that acted both as a
manifesto and as a signature taking responsibility for the carnage. They included
a historical article on the battle of Lexington and Concord, provocative quotes
from Samuel Adams, Patrick Henry, Thomas Jefferson, and Winston Churchill; a
copy of the Declaration of Independence, on the back of which McVeigh had
scrawled: “Obey the Constitution of the United States, and we won’t shoot you”;
a chunky paragraph from John Locke arguing for the legitimacy of war against
those who would take away our liberty; and a long passage from The Turner
Diaries, in which the narrator justifies the car bomb attack on FBI headquarters
as a message to the “politicians and the bureaucrats” that they can run but not
hide.
Had these documents been discovered in an empty car, they would have
generated endless speculation and analysis in the media, as McVeigh later said
he hoped they would. If he was planning to drive the Mercury just a short
distance, it becomes more understandable that he would not want to spend more
than a few hundred dollars on it. He needed to transfer the Pontiac’s license
plates for the trip down from Junction City so nobody would stop him en route.
Equally, it made sense to remove the license plates when he stashed the car, so
nobody could easily link him to the Mercury while it sat unattended for three
days. McVeigh left a note under the windshield: “Not abandoned. Please do not
tow. Will move by April 23. (Needs battery & cable.)” And he put a piece of
tissue paper over the gas cap to alert him if someone had tried to siphon off any
fuel. According to Terry Nichols, who accompanied McVeigh to Oklahoma City
on Easter Sunday, he had the Arizona license plate in his hand when they rode
back to Kansas. When Nichols asked why he had unscrewed it from the
Mercury, McVeigh said he didn’t want it stolen.a City
on Easter Sunday, he had the Arizona license plate in his hand when they rode
back to Kansas. When Nichols asked why he had unscrewed it from the
Mercury, McVeigh said he didn’t want it stolen.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

After the bombing, the car’s ownership was bound to be traced through the
VIN number, which was clearly visible through the windshield. Since McVeigh
could easily have bought a drop car under an assumed name, at a dealership
where he would not be recognized (unlike the one in Junction City, where he
knew the owner), we must assume he wanted this to happen. One suspects his
real desire was to enjoy the public notoriety associated with the bombing while
living the life of a full-time outlaw and, perhaps, planning and carrying out other
attacks. That’s what Earl Turner did in The Turner Diaries. And it was
something he more or less announced in a letter to his sister Jennifer, eighteen
months or so before the bombing. “If someone does start looking for me,” he
wrote, “(I have ‘ears’ all over the country), that’s when I disappear…. Believe
me, if that necessity ever comes to pass, it will be very difficult for anyone to
find me.”
Another reason to believe the Mercury was meant as a drop car was that
McVeigh had another vehicle. This was not discussed at trial, or disclosed to the
news media at the time. But on January 4, 1995, McVeigh bought a ten-year-old
Ford Ranger pickup truck in Michigan. The FBI’s records say nothing more
about it—where it was kept, what kind of condition it was in, whether it was
ever recovered—but this could have been the vehicle McVeigh intended to use
after he made his getaway from Oklahoma City.e
about it—where it was kept, what kind of condition it was in, whether it was
ever recovered—but this could have been the vehicle McVeigh intended to use
after he made his getaway from Oklahoma City.

SOMETHING CLEARLY WENT WRONG WITH THE “DROP CAR” PLAN, BECAUSE McVeigh ended up
driving the Mercury out of Oklahoma City and another sixty miles to the north.
Perhaps he panicked and felt there was no time to stop and switch cars. Or a
fight broke out between McVeigh and his companions. The FBI came to believe
McVeigh wanted to kill the kids in the day-care center as revenge for the
children who perished at Waco. Did the others, believing they were targeting the
federal courthouse, try to stop him? Or did they abandon him once they saw the
scale of the slaughter they had perpetrated?
In McVeigh’s account, he walked alone from the Ryder truck through a maze
of back alleys as the fuse wire burned toward detonation point. He was just past
the YMCA, kitty-corner from the north entrance to the Murrah Building, when
the explosion rocked everything around him. He dodged a severed power line
whipping dangerously in his direction, hopped out of the way of a tumbling pile
of bricks, shrugged at a woman coming out of a shop, swapped glances with a
couple standing forlornly in front of a shattered storefront, and exchanged a line
of conversation with a private mail deliveryman on his rounds.
“Man,” McVeigh reported the man saying, “for a second I thought that was

--- PAGE BREAK ---a shattered storefront, and exchanged a line
of conversation with a private mail deliveryman on his rounds.
“Man,” McVeigh reported the man saying, “for a second I thought that was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

us that blew up.”
“Yeah, so did I,” McVeigh said he replied.
McVeigh walked to his car in an alley off Eighth Street, checked his gas
tank, and tried several times to start the Mercury. It coughed and sputtered but
would not engage. Just as he was about to give up, it kicked into gear. He
navigated the one-way system on to Broadway, which runs parallel to I-235,
paused as a fleet of police cars and fire engines hared toward downtown, and
turned north onto the freeway back to Kansas.
None of the bystanders McVeigh described has ever been traced—one of
many problems with his account. The Mercury was probably parked much closer
to the Ryder truck, as discussed in the last chapter. In the minutes after the
explosion, two more eyewitnesses saw McVeigh and the muscular, olive-skinned
character in an alley a block and a half southeast of the Murrah Building—a
different direction from the one in McVeigh’s version. Germaine Johnston, a
Housing and Urban Development worker who was hit in the head by flying glass
and debris, staggered out on her own and thought immediately of walking to her
husband’s office to tell him she was all right. On her way, she saw a man she
later identified as McVeigh, as well as a second, shorter, darker man. She said
they were standing next to a yellow Mercury just like one she and her husband
had once owned.
“What happened?” the McVeigh figure asked.
Johnston told him.
“A lot of people killed?”
“I don’t know,” she responded weakly. Johnston was thrown by the question,
because he seemed entirely indifferent to the fact that she was bleeding from the
head, caked in concrete dust, and wet from the ruptured pipes that had sprayed
her on her way out of the office. “I thought he was going to ask me if he could
help me, or if I was okay, or something,” Johnston recounted. “Several people
had already done that.”
Later, Johnston realized something else noteworthy. At the spot where she
talked to the McVeigh figure, the alley had a clear view of the Murrah Building.
A few yards farther back or forward, the building would have been obscured.hing else noteworthy. At the spot where she
talked to the McVeigh figure, the alley had a clear view of the Murrah Building.
A few yards farther back or forward, the building would have been obscured.

AT A DINGY MOTEL OUTSIDE SPOKANE, WASHINGTON, A TWENTY-TWO-YEAR-OLD skinhead named
Chevie Kehoe banged on the door of the manager’s living quarters and insisted
he turn on the television.
Kehoe was then at the dawn of a criminal career that would send him on a
vicious cross-country robbing, bombing, and killing spree. Lately he had been

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed
he turn on the television.
Kehoe was then at the dawn of a criminal career that would send him on a
vicious cross-country robbing, bombing, and killing spree. Lately he had been

--- PAGE BREAK ---

living on and off at the Shadows Motel and RV Park, which he used as a
gathering point for fellow neo-Nazis and skinheads who wanted to build an
Aryan paradise in the Pacific Northwest. The manager, Jeff Brown, was more or
less a friend who chose to turn a blind eye to gunshots or loud pops coming from
Kehoe’s quarters. “Bud,” as Brown called Kehoe, would experiment with small
explosives and blasting caps in his room, setting them off inside the pages of
motel phone books. In addition to a library of do-it-yourself guerrilla warfare
manuals, Kehoe kept an arsenal of shoulder weapons and explosives, including a
supply of fertilizer, mothballs, and black powder, which he would cook up into
homemade bombs.
Brown was asleep when he heard the banging at his door. Kehoe was yelling
for him to turn the TV on to CNN. “Ten minutes later,” Brown told a newspaper
reporter, “the news is breaking there was a bomb going off in Oklahoma City.”
Kehoe looked thrilled. “It’s about time,” he said.
Several days earlier, Kehoe told Brown that something would happen on
April 19 to “wake people up.” “I look back on it,” Brown said, “and he
obviously knew about it beforehand.”
Kehoe moved in the same circles as Tim McVeigh. Both traveled the gun-
show circuit and dropped in on radical communities around the country. In the
months before the bombing, Chevie and his younger brother Cheyne spent
extended periods at Elohim City, taking shooting lessons from Andreas
Strassmeir and participating in discussions on how to bring down the
government. A former associate of Chevie’s, who accompanied him twice to
Elohim City, later told the feds he remembered a conversation in late 1994 about
a “delivery” that needed to be made very soon. Despite repeated inquiries,
Kehoe refused to explain what this delivery was.im City, later told the feds he remembered a conversation in late 1994 about
a “delivery” that needed to be made very soon. Despite repeated inquiries,
Kehoe refused to explain what this delivery was.

WAYNE SNELL HAD A RESTLESS NIGHT. HE ROSE AT 1:45 A.M., PUTTING on his day clothes and
monitoring the television outside his death row cell, which was kept on at his
request. Between news bulletins, he sat at his desk and wrote. At 4:00 A.M., he
ordered a hearty breakfast of eggs, chicken sausage, grits, biscuits, and gravy,
which put him to sleep for an hour or so. He woke in time to watch the 6:00 A.M.
news, before dozing off again. Much of the local coverage was about Snell’s
execution scheduled for 9:00 P.M. that night. He seemed pleased that the tone was
not unduly negative. At this stage, he still had his final appeals pending and was
hoping for a last-minute reprieve.
Once news from Oklahoma City broke, Snell’s guards noticed an immediate
change in demeanor. He chuckled, nodded in approval, and seemed to find a

--- PAGE BREAK ---hoping for a last-minute reprieve.
Once news from Oklahoma City broke, Snell’s guards noticed an immediate
change in demeanor. He chuckled, nodded in approval, and seemed to find a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

renewed inner calm. He spent much of his last day writing and munching on
sunflower seeds. In the afternoon, for his final meal, he downed six pieces of
fried crappie, hushpuppies with buttermilk, a salad with blue-cheese dressing,
and three-quarters of a large white onion.
According to his lawyer, Jeffrey Rosenzweig, Snell had misgivings about the
way the bombing was carried out. He reportedly told his attorney that a
professional bombing crew, the sort he associated with during his criminal
heyday, would never have targeted children. It is impossible to know if this was
a genuine reservation, or a way of distancing himself a little. The bombing
certainly did not dampen Snell’s revolutionary spirit—quite the contrary. As he
was strapped down and wheeled into the death chamber, he issued a final
statement that spooked everyone who heard it.
“Governor Tucker,” he said, “look over your shoulder. Justice is on the way.
I wouldn’t trade places with you or any of your political cronies. Hell has
victory. I am at peace.”everyone who heard it.
“Governor Tucker,” he said, “look over your shoulder. Justice is on the way.
I wouldn’t trade places with you or any of your political cronies. Hell has
victory. I am at peace.”

OTHER MEMBERS OF THE RADICAL FAR RIGHT WERE UNHAPPY WITH the bombing, understanding
that it would not be a catalyst to additional antigovernment action so much as a
huge screeching brake. Some of McVeigh’s fellow revolutionaries were
disgusted by the deaths of blameless civilians. Even those who did not fault the
bombing’s morality still attacked its operational stupidity. Kale Kelly, an Aryan
Nations adherent and antigovernment revolutionary, said bluntly that McVeigh
should have killed more federal agents and fewer innocents. Andreas Strassmeir,
who acknowledged knowing and liking McVeigh, thought a bomb was the
wrong weapon and a public office building the wrong target. “The whole militia
movement basically died that night,” Strassmeir said many years later.
“Whatever he did achieve worked against anything he believed in.”
Some of the statements coming out of the Patriot Movement were, of course,
self-serving. Nobody wanted to catch heat from the vast government
investigation—least of all Strassmeir, who later came under close scrutiny as a
possible suspect. But the reactions were also unmistakably tinged with contempt,
if not anger, toward McVeigh. “Didn’t he case the place?” Strassmeir asked
incredulously. “You’re talking about a public building. Even Tim knew not
everyone in there was a murderous BATF agent. You can’t be that dumb.”
Some people dropped hints that McVeigh had unilaterally changed the
intended plan, or that the attack was much more vicious than they had been led
to believe ahead of time. One was Jack Oliphant, a one-armed World War II
veteran who led the Arizona Patriot Movement and almost certainly knew

--- PAGE BREAK ---more vicious than they had been led
to believe ahead of time. One was Jack Oliphant, a one-armed World War II
veteran who led the Arizona Patriot Movement and almost certainly knew

--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh from his time in the dusty desert town of Kingman. A couple of weeks
before the bombing, one of Oliphant’s neighbors overheard him saying that
“something big” would happen before the end of the month. In one of many
newspaper interviews after the bombing, Oliphant said: “The bastard has put the
Patriot movement back 30 years…. If he’d blown up a federal building at night,
he’d be a hero.” Another hint came from a white supremacist prison gang leader
named Bobby Joe Farrington, who told the FBI that McVeigh’s job had been to
blow up the federal courthouse as part of a national campaign against judges
who displeased the movement. Farrington said he had met McVeigh, whom he
knew as “Sergeant Mac,” and could only conclude he was an idiot who had
“fucked it up.”t of a national campaign against judges
who displeased the movement. Farrington said he had met McVeigh, whom he
knew as “Sergeant Mac,” and could only conclude he was an idiot who had
“fucked it up.”

ABOUT AN HOUR AFTER THE EXPLOSION, A TALL, ATHLETIC MAN WITH a goatee, wearing blue
jeans, a ball cap, and a blue windbreaker, made a dramatic appearance at a
shattered window on the Murrah Building’s ninth floor. To his left was a
makeshift sign on which he had scrawled ATF - TRAPPED - NINTH FLOOR. In his right
hand was a small lockbox.
Special Agent Luke Franey said he had been on the phone with an ATF
colleague when he felt the walls and ceiling falling in. He could hear screams
from the Drug Enforcement Administration next door. A gust of air pressure
flung him out of his chair and into a hallway, where he landed, covered in
rubble. He may or may not have lost consciousness, but after checking himself
for injuries—and finding nothing but “minor scrapes and cuts”—he kicked and
chopped his way through a wall, only to realize with horror that the DEA’s part
of the building was gone. Then he went to his fellow agents’ desks, scooped up
as many documents and keepsakes as he could find and put them in the lockbox
he held up in the window. He also picked up his own children’s savings bonds
and some family photographs.
Franey told this story for years afterward, but something about it did not add
up. On his way out of the building, he said, he broke through three Sheetrock
walls with his bare hands and climbed down an outside ledge at a perilous forty-
five-degree angle before descending a blood-smeared staircase. His hands were
banged up, and he said he had them bandaged as soon as he could. He also had a
cut on his head.
Yet in a video shot later that morning, Franey’s hands are not bandaged, and
he can be seen vigorously shaking hands with Bob Heady, the commander of the
sheriff’s office bomb squad, with no obvious discomfort. There are no cuts on
his head, or any other indication of bodily injury. While other survivors werehands with Bob Heady, the commander of the
sheriff’s office bomb squad, with no obvious discomfort. There are no cuts on
his head, or any other indication of bodily injury. While other survivors were

--- PAGE BREAK ---y, the commander of the
sheriff’s office bomb squad, with no obvious discomfort. There are no cuts on
his head, or any other indication of bodily injury. While other survivors were

--- PAGE BREAK ---

caked in dust and grime, his face and clothes remained clean.
Danny Coulson of the FBI, who helped gather the physical evidence during
the first week of the investigation, said he had no problem climbing up the
southeastern staircase and walking into the remains of the ATF office without
jumping onto ledges or clambering across broken Sheetrock. Franey’s ATF
colleague Harry Eberhardt concurred, saying the route “was used many times by
searchers and other agents.” Even John Magaw, the ATF director, made little
attempt to defend Franey when asked about him in 2009. “He sometimes
overstates things,” Magaw said. “I think people who have worked with him have
learned to take these things with a grain of salt.”
What really happened? Did Franey enter the building after the bombing on a
sensitive mission to retrieve documents, or weapons? Magaw said he did not
know but did not rule it out. If Franey was in radio contact with his colleagues,
as he said, why make such a spectacle of his presence?
Franey was not the only ATF agent with a questionable story that morning.
His boss, Alex McCauley, the ATF’s resident agent in charge in Oklahoma City,
claimed he was in an elevator when the explosion occurred. He said that he and
DEA agent Dave Schickedanz went into free fall, plunging from the eighth floor
to the third. Three times, with smoke wafting in, they tried and failed to open the
elevator doors. On the fourth try, they squeezed themselves out to the third floor
and made their way to a stairwell, bringing ten or fifteen other survivors with
them. When they realized the stairwell had crumbled, they used a bedsheet as a
rope to shimmy down toward a “chain of rescuers,” who brought them all to
safety.
This story was circulated in an ATF news release and repeated in court by
Joe Hartzler, McVeigh’s chief government prosecutor. But two technicians
working for the Midwest Elevator Company—Duane James and Oscar Johnson
—challenged it. They were on the scene within minutes to see if anyone had
been trapped. Nobody was, and the technicians said there was no way any of the
elevators could have free-fallen. Each elevator had a mechanical brake at the top
that would freeze the hoist ropes, and there was another brake beneath each
elevator car in case the ropes got cut. None of these backup systems was even
activated; the ropes were all intact.
The technicians said McCauley and Schickedanz probably slid no more than
four or five feet as the emergency brake came on. “If you fell six floors and it
was a free fall,” James said, “it would be like jumping out of a six-story
building. I’d ask ’em how long they were in the hospital and how lucky they
were to survive.”
The elevator story became a public relations nightmare for the ATF, andbe like jumping out of a six-story
building. I’d ask ’em how long they were in the hospital and how lucky they
were to survive.”
The elevator story became a public relations nightmare for the ATF, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

almost certainly factored in the decision to transfer McCauley quietly out of
Oklahoma City in the summer of 1995. He left the ATF shortly after.
At the time of the bombing, the ATF was fighting for its survival because of
the Waco disaster, and one of John Magaw’s main goals was to restore its public
image. He saw the bombing as an opportunity to paint the agency in heroic
colors, and his staff was irresistibly drawn to Franey and McCauley’s gritty
survival stories. But the holes in those stories did the ATF real damage, because
they eroded the agency’s credibility within the bombing task force and spawned
all sorts of wild theories on the media fringes and on the Internet. To the extent
that the ATF jumped on the stories as publicity material, they backfired. When
Magaw was asked in a 2010 interview about the photograph of Franey in the
ninth-floor window, he responded: “I wonder if that was one of the pictures that
was staged.” The picture was, in fact, taken by a local news photographer
unstaged. But Magaw’s response might have given away more than he meant to.ed: “I wonder if that was one of the pictures that
was staged.” The picture was, in fact, taken by a local news photographer
unstaged. But Magaw’s response might have given away more than he meant to.

TIM MCVEIGH WAS CRUISING SMOOTHLY TOWARD THE KANSAS border. A few miles past the
tiny town of Perry, he saw a highway patrol trooper’s vehicle roaring up behind
him at more than ninety miles per hour. The trooper, Charlie Hanger, was on his
way to help a distressed motorist. He had been called to Oklahoma City earlier
that morning, only to be turned around and told to return to regular patrolling
duties. The Mercury was sticking to the speed limit, and Hanger might not have
noticed it at all, if the large patch of primer on the left rear panel had not guided
his eye to the missing license plate. He was a gruff, no-nonsense trooper who
had cruised up and down Oklahoma’s highways for nineteen years, and he rarely
missed a driver committing an obvious infraction. He slowed as he fell in behind
the Mercury, took a second look at the back bumper, and turned on his siren.
McVeigh had to think fast. He had a loaded Glock pistol in his pocket, as
well as a backup ammunition clip on his belt, so he could easily take care of
Hanger if he wanted. But what was worse for him: a dead cop and a race to stay
ahead of a multistate manhunt, or the inconvenience of a traffic ticket or two?
In McVeigh’s own account, he decided to spare Hanger because he was a
state trooper, not a federal officer. But the decision cannot have been made
calmly. A calm man would have stayed put, using the time Hanger took to lean
into his window to decide whether to hand over his license or put a bullet in the
trooper’s brain. McVeigh, oddly, decided to step out of the car right away.
Hanger wasn’t taking any chances. Two weeks earlier, on this same stretch
of road, a driver had fired at one of Hanger’s highway patrol colleagues. So he
crouched behind his open door for cover, waiting until he could see McVeigh’ss. Two weeks earlier, on this same stretch
of road, a driver had fired at one of Hanger’s highway patrol colleagues. So he
crouched behind his open door for cover, waiting until he could see McVeigh’s

--- PAGE BREAK ---, on this same stretch
of road, a driver had fired at one of Hanger’s highway patrol colleagues. So he
crouched behind his open door for cover, waiting until he could see McVeigh’s

--- PAGE BREAK ---

hands, before moving forward.
Hanger told McVeigh why he’d been stopped and asked for a bill of sale to
prove the Mercury was his; McVeigh said the dealer was still filling out the
paperwork. Hanger expressed some skepticism. When McVeigh was asked for
his driver’s license, he reached into his back pocket, revealing a suspicious bulge
under the armpit of his windbreaker. Hanger took the license, ordered McVeigh
to lift up both hands, and told him to unzip his jacket very slowly.
“I have a gun,” McVeigh conceded.
Hanger pressed his left hand against the bulge in McVeigh’s jacket and used
his right hand to push the barrel of his own pistol directly against McVeigh’s
head.
“Get your hands up and turn around,” he said. He frog-marched McVeigh to
the back of the Mercury and spread-eagled him across the trunk.
McVeigh complied, and told him: “My weapon is loaded.”
Hanger responded: “So is mine.”
Hanger lifted the Glock out of McVeigh’s pocket and threw it onto the
shoulder. McVeigh told the trooper about the ammunition clip and a knife in his
jacket. Hanger took both and threw them on the shoulder also. Then he
handcuffed McVeigh, pushed his gun against McVeigh’s back, and walked him
back to his vehicle.
“You know that one wrong move on your part could have gotten you shot,”
Hanger told him.
McVeigh shrugged. “It’s possible.”
Hanger wanted to establish just how tough a customer he was dealing with.
McVeigh sought to minimize the concealed weapon, saying he had a permit for
one in New York. But Hanger was hardly reassured by a Black Talon “cop
killer” bullet he found inside the Glock. Was the gun or car stolen? McVeigh had
no registration papers or proof of insurance.
The trooper radioed in the Mercury’s VIN number and the Glock’s
registration number; both were clean. He also asked the dispatcher to run a check
on McVeigh, to see if he had prior arrests or outstanding warrants. He did not.
McVeigh seemed resigned to spending a day or two in jail. If he was lucky,
he could arrange bail and still vanish underground before anyone associated him
with the bombing. It certainly helped that Hanger had not touched the sealed
white envelope on the passenger seat. When they left for the Noble County
lockup, it stayed where it was.
They talked briefly on the twenty-minute ride into Perry. McVeigh was
anxious to get his Glock back; Hanger said he’d have to sort that out with the
court. McVeigh asked Hanger what kind of service pistol he was carrying—itthe twenty-minute ride into Perry. McVeigh was
anxious to get his Glock back; Hanger said he’d have to sort that out with the
court. McVeigh asked Hanger what kind of service pistol he was carrying—it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was a SIG 228—and even dared him to drive his car faster. Hanger didn’t take
the bait, but took comfort in the jocular tone. McVeigh felt calmer, too: although
his wrists were cuffed and he was heading into custody, nobody was yet
associating him with the bloodshed in Oklahoma City.it, but took comfort in the jocular tone. McVeigh felt calmer, too: although
his wrists were cuffed and he was heading into custody, nobody was yet
associating him with the bloodshed in Oklahoma City.

SHORTLY AFTER 10:30 A.M., AS MCVEIGH WAS BEING BOOKED, THE Oklahoma City Fire
Department announced the discovery of another bomb at the Murrah Building.
Word spread that it might be bigger than the first—exactly what Stanley Brown
had dreaded all morning. On Fifth Street, where Brown was stationed, the
reaction was pure panic. People sprinted as fast as they could across the
Robinson intersection and over a small hill. Firefighters stopped some of them
and asked where the secondary device might be, but nobody could say.
Brown was amazed to see Bob Heady, the commander of his own bomb
squad unit, running away with the crowd. Before Brown had time to think, he
was running after him. “I had to tackle his ass,” Brown said. Heady came
crashing to the ground.
“Bob,” Brown cried, “you’re the goddamn bomb squad!”
Heady was not pleased, but Brown talked him out of jumping back up and
making another run for it. “I couldn’t understand it,” Brown recounted. “I mean,
he’s a Vietnam veteran. Maybe I was dumb as dirt but my attitude was, we
needed to be there.”
Inside the building, and especially in the Pit, where collapsed floors had
ensnared the largest number of victims, the rescue workers did not know how to
break the news that they were being ordered out. A suburban fire crew had been
sitting with Daina Bradley while she was pinned down in six inches of freezing
water. She begged them not to go. They did not know what to say, and neither
did Mike Shannon, head of the fire department’s rescue operations. “If she were
my wife, I would not have wanted her to be left alone,” Shannon later wrote. He
crawled into the hole where Bradley lay, removed his helmet, and offered up a
prayer. When a deputy came to retrieve him, he told Bradley the team would be
back with better tools and equipment, a white lie designed to make her feel a
little better.
It has never been proven that there was a valid reason for the bomb scare.
Shannon was told a device was found on a staircase, but none was ever
identified. Danny Defenbaugh, a senior FBI agent who was not in Oklahoma
City on April 19 but later headed up the investigation, heard that the scare was
triggered by a gas leak. To complicate matters, the FBI received calls that two
possible bombers were running away from the scene. The “bombers,”headed up the investigation, heard that the scare was
triggered by a gas leak. To complicate matters, the FBI received calls that two
possible bombers were running away from the scene. The “bombers,”

--- PAGE BREAK ---tigation, heard that the scare was
triggered by a gas leak. To complicate matters, the FBI received calls that two
possible bombers were running away from the scene. The “bombers,”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Defenbaugh said, turned out to be technicians from the Oklahoma Gas &
Electric Company, who were there to cut off the building’s gas supply.
A more sinister explanation, which federal and local authorities have tried to
deny over the years, was that the evacuation was ordered to recover ordinance
and weaponry that government agencies were storing illegally in the building.
When Don Browning, a dog handler with the Oklahoma City police, was
ordered out, he met a woman wearing a red jacket from either the ATF or the
FBI, who told him the building had been secured so the feds could recover some
crucial “files.” Browning immediately suspected the “files” were ordinance and
weaponry. When he entered the building the first time, he recognized boxes of
small arms ammunition and blocks of C-4 plastic explosive. “I’m real familiar
with C-4,” Browning explained. He would not be the last person to tell a similar
story.
Randy Yount, the state park ranger, was part of a group of rescue workers
led down to the basement by an ATF agent. They pried open a door and had to
remove large chunks of concrete before going further. He thought they were on a
straightforward rescue mission until he and the others were led into a concrete-
walled room packed with rifles, pistols, hand grenades, plastic explosives, and
“thousands and thousands” of ammunition rounds. The ATF supervisor, whom
Yount did not know, referred to this material as “evidence.” Yount remembered
him saying: “There are some things here that we need to get out of the
building…. If anybody has a problem with not talking about what you are fixing
to do, you are welcome to leave. Nobody will hold it against you or reprimand
you.” They all stayed, carrying the crates to the plaza area on the south side of
the building and loading them into white vans so they could be taken to a secure
storage facility.
Nobody in authority has ever fully confirmed this account. Oklahoma
Highway Patrol officer Shane Slovacek later told the FBI he knew of an ATF
vault full of confiscated weapons and small-arms ammunition, some of which
turned up in the debris. The sheriff’s department video—the one capturing Luke
Franey’s unbandaged hands—included footage of rescue workers lifting
semiautomatic weapons out of the rubble. Yet another witness, an elevator
company inspector named Virgil Steele, said in a sworn statement that he had
helped the ATF carry out a vast assortment of weapons and materiel, including
AR-15 and M-16 assault rifles, handguns, thousands of rounds of ammunition,
hand grenades, C-4, and at least three “antitank missiles or shoulder/hip–type
rocket launchers.”
John Magaw, the ATF director, confirmed that the 10:30 A.M. alert was really
about weapons and explosive materials that belonged to government agencies.issiles or shoulder/hip–type
rocket launchers.”
John Magaw, the ATF director, confirmed that the 10:30 A.M. alert was really
about weapons and explosive materials that belonged to government agencies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

He remembered that agents recovered two black cases containing high-powered
weapons that morning; they had been stored either in the ATF office or the
Secret Service office, both on the ninth floor.
The interruption lasted forty-five minutes. In his handwritten journal,
Stanley Brown noted that the fire department made great efforts to figure out
what triggered the bomb scare, without success. John Haynie, the head of the
Oklahoma Highway Patrol’s tactical team, reported much the same. He had
made repeated efforts to find out who raised the alarm, but he never found
anybody—“or, at least, no one who would admit it.”he
Oklahoma Highway Patrol’s tactical team, reported much the same. He had
made repeated efforts to find out who raised the alarm, but he never found
anybody—“or, at least, no one who would admit it.”

AT AROUND 11:00 A.M., CHARLIE HANGER ESCORTED TIM MCVEIGH up to the fourth-floor
booking area inside the Noble County courthouse. A television set was on, with
uninterrupted coverage of the bombing. Hanger exchanged expressions of
dismay with Marsha Moritz, the employee processing the jail admissions.
McVeigh said nothing, and did not react. He glanced at the television a few
times, but mostly he looked away.
Hanger cited McVeigh on four charges: transporting a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle, unlawfully carrying a weapon, failure to display a current number
plate, and failure to maintain proof of liability insurance. Moritz asked McVeigh
to take off his jacket and empty his pockets. He was carrying two
commemorative Revolutionary War coins, a spare pair of earplugs, some aspirin,
four .45-caliber bullets, and $255 in cash. Most striking to her was his T-shirt.
The front had a picture of Abraham Lincoln and the words SIC SEMPER TYRANNIS,
which John Wilkes Booth shouted after delivering the fatal gunshot. “Thus ever
to tyrants.” The back showed a tree and the Thomas Jefferson quote: THE TREE OF
LIBERTY MUST BE REFRESHED FROM TIME TO TIME WITH THE BLOOD OF PATRIOTS AND TYRANTS.
Moritz took mug shots and asked McVeigh some routine questions, which he
answered willingly until she requested the name of his closest family member.
McVeigh acted as if he hadn’t heard. So she asked again. Hanger walked over to
the booking counter as a precaution. Moritz explained that she wanted a name
only for emergencies; she was not going to contact McVeigh’s family to tell
them he had been arrested.
Hanger remembered McVeigh’s Michigan driver’s license and asked about
the address listed on it: 3616 N. Van Dyke Road, in the tiny farming town of
Decker. “Who lives there?” he asked.
McVeigh said it was a place where he had stayed a number of times, and that
it belonged to the brother of a friend he met in the military.
“Well,” Moritz suggested, “do you want to use that?”e asked.
McVeigh said it was a place where he had stayed a number of times, and that
it belonged to the brother of a friend he met in the military.
“Well,” Moritz suggested, “do you want to use that?”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh agreed, and offered up the name James Nichols. He had been using
the address for several days, ensuring that any law enforcement interest would
lead to one, if not both Nichols brothers. The Nicholses themselves later saw this
as one of a number of signs that he had set them up as fall guys. Many in the
Patriot Movement later credited McVeigh with a certain nobility for keeping his
mouth shut and denying the existence of a broader conspiracy, but on the day of
his arrest he didn’t hesitate to lead law enforcement straight to two of his best
friends.
Moritz and Hanger had no way of grasping this and saw no reason to suspect
that this calm, well-spoken young man had anything to do with the ghastly
images on TV. At most, they were aware of something a little off. After McVeigh
was escorted to his jail cell, Moritz said to Hanger: “Wasn’t that a strange T-shirt
that he had on?”
“What do you mean?” Hanger asked.
“Well, it had a strange saying on it,” she said.
“Well,” he responded, “I didn’t read it.”

BACK IN OKLAHOMA CITY, CHARLIE HANGER’S BOSSES IN THE HIGHWAY PATROL picked up on
McVeigh’s arrest within a couple of hours, because they were interested in
anyone who had been stopped in the immediate aftermath of the bombing. OHP
passed on the information to the governor’s office, and Dennis Dutsch, the
governor’s security chief, tried to alert the FBI.
The FBI agent Dutsch spoke to, though, told him flatly he was not interested.
“We don’t have anybody in custody,” he insisted. Dutsch never got the agent’s
name, but he understood his message. “What he was saying was, we’re doing
our job. Stay out of it,” Dutsch said.
And so McVeigh went undiscovered by the feds for another forty-eight
hours.the agent’s
name, but he understood his message. “What he was saying was, we’re doing
our job. Stay out of it,” Dutsch said.
And so McVeigh went undiscovered by the feds for another forty-eight
hours.

SHORTLY AFTER THE EVACUATION ORDER WAS RESCINDED, DR. ANDY Sullivan received a call at
the Oklahoma City Children’s Hospital. The rescuers needed an orthopedic
surgeon to help extricate a woman trapped under a pile of rubble and Sullivan,
the orthopedics chair at the University of Oklahoma medical school, was the
man for the job. Sullivan knew he was risking his life, so he took off his
wedding ring and removed the wallet from his trouser pocket. If he died, he
wanted his wife and sons to have these as keepsakes.
Sullivan arrived with a rudimentary amputation kit including scalpels, a saw,
various tourniquets, anesthetics, and tranquilizers. A fire crew led him and his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fellow surgeon David Tuggle to the Pit, where Daina Bradley was lying. She was
breathing only with great difficulty and her skin was dust-gray. Just getting close
was a challenge. Tuggle was too large to climb into the space where she was
trapped; Sullivan, who was shorter, could do so only after a firefighter hacked
off a jutting piece of metal. Even then he had to crawl in, military combat–style,
and lie on top of her with his feet pointing up toward her face.
Sullivan began experimenting with a nylon rope he planned to use as a
tourniquet only to be interrupted by another evacuation order. The firefighters
told the doctors they had to leave immediately.
“Don’t leave me, don’t leave me!” Bradley screamed. “I’m going to die!”
“It was gut-wrenching,” Sullivan said. “You don’t leave somebody that’s
going to die.” But they had to anyway.eave immediately.
“Don’t leave me, don’t leave me!” Bradley screamed. “I’m going to die!”
“It was gut-wrenching,” Sullivan said. “You don’t leave somebody that’s
going to die.” But they had to anyway.

THE NEW EVACUATION WAS PROMPTED BY THE DISCOVERY OF A BOX, eighteen inches square and
three feet deep, which was marked “Class A Explosives.” Rescue workers
discovered it in the rubble of the day-care center. The sheriff’s department bomb
technicians thought it was a rocket-propelled grenade launcher, but actually it
was an antitank TOW missile, which had tumbled out of a fifth-floor vault
belonging to U.S. Customs.
The missile’s warhead was empty, but it still qualified as a destructive device
under the National Firearms Act, because it contained rocket fuel. “It’s an
extremely dangerous weapon [even] without the warhead,” said Bob Sanders, a
former assistant director of the ATF. “Possession of a TOW missile is perfectly
lawful for a law enforcement agency…but storage in a public building is against
public safety and against the law.”
As the FBI later established, customs had no paperwork on it. The agency
had obtained three inert TOW missiles from the Anniston Army Depot in
Alabama in the late 1980s for use in a sting operation, but the official
documentation showed that all three had been returned. So there was no ready
explanation of what this missile was doing in the Murrah Building at all.
The sheriff’s department and highway patrol transported it safely down a fire
truck ladder and into the secure trailer tank of the sheriff’s office bomb squad
truck. Oddly, when Bob Heady, the bomb squad chief, filed his report, he wrote
that the missile arrived at the sheriff’s department safe storage facility at 11:00
A.M., more than three hours earlier than the actual time.
This could have been a mistake, but it also suggested, erroneously, that the
TOW missile was the cause of the first evacuation order—the one for which
nobody would take responsibility. By the time the federal trials were over in thebut it also suggested, erroneously, that the
TOW missile was the cause of the first evacuation order—the one for which
nobody would take responsibility. By the time the federal trials were over in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

late 1990s, this revised order of events had become received wisdom, stated as
fact by the FBI and the media.
But we know from Stanley Brown’s contemporaneous notes, from an
exhaustive account written by Mike Shannon of the Oklahoma City Fire
Department, from John Haynie’s statements to the FBI, and from other
witnesses, that the TOW missile was discovered between 1:30 P.M. and 1:45 P.M.
and removed about twenty minutes later.
Heady did another odd thing: As soon as he learned that Stanley Brown was
taking notes for a journal, he ordered him to put them in a safe and never take
them out again. When Brown was asked why he thought Heady would issue
such an order, he said: “I don’t know. Bob’s a squirrelly man.”
But Brown did as he was told and did not show the notes to anyone for
fifteen years.en Brown was asked why he thought Heady would issue
such an order, he said: “I don’t know. Bob’s a squirrelly man.”
But Brown did as he was told and did not show the notes to anyone for
fifteen years.

WHILE DR. SULLIVAN AND DR. TUGGLE WERE WAITING FOR THE ALL-CLEAR, they created a plan
to extricate Daina Bradley. They knew they had to be quick, and they also knew
they could not risk administering an anesthetic given her weakened state. The
most they could offer was a tranquilizer to help her forget the ordeal once it was
over. It was a grim prospect. They needed her to remain fully conscious while
they hacked off her leg under the worst of circumstances.
When they first shared their plan with her, she cried and shook her head in
disbelief, saying she couldn’t tolerate the pain. They told her that if they couldn’t
cut off her leg, they would have to leave, because the building was in danger of
collapsing at any moment. Slowly, she changed her mind. Sullivan had almost
no room to maneuver in the confined space and realized he could not cut through
her calf bones, as he would have preferred. He would have to cut through the
ligaments in her knee, greatly increasing the risk that she would bleed to death.
He had to do this with his left hand, even though he was right-handed. The only
light would be from the lamp on his fire-rescue helmet.
“I don’t know if I can do this,” he told his colleague.
“You’ve got to,” Tuggle replied.
Tuggle crawled next to Bradley and administered the tranquilizer to her
neck. Sullivan thought about his wife and children, as well as Bradley, and
offered up a prayer for all of them. Then he set to work. A fireman was perched
above him, his hands checking for tremors in the concrete crushing Bradley’s
leg. If he felt anything, he was to get Sullivan and Tuggle out immediately,
regardless of the condition of the patient. The fireman also had a harness
attached to Bradley so he could pull her out as soon as the operation was over.s to get Sullivan and Tuggle out immediately,
regardless of the condition of the patient. The fireman also had a harness
attached to Bradley so he could pull her out as soon as the operation was over.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sullivan plunged the first of his scalpels into Bradley’s flesh, the single
hardest act of his medical career. “She started kicking and screaming, so I had to
more or less pin her free left leg against the wall while using my left hand,”
Sullivan said. He desperately wanted the operation to go quickly, but he broke
his first blade, then a second, then a third, and a fourth. He could not properly
see what he was doing, and Bradley did not stop yowling.
At one point, he cut into a large vein and thought he had severed an artery.
Eventually, the flow of blood ceased, and he continued. Twice, he thought he had
finished when he hadn’t. “We’d pull her out, and she was still attached, and she
would scream,” Sullivan said.
By then he was out of surgical blades, and had to use his pocket knife to
sever the last pieces of flesh from Bradley’s thigh stump. As soon as Sullivan
was done, he rolled out of the hole and let the others take over. A dozen men
pulled Bradley onto a spine board to transport her to the hospital. An ambulance
arrived, later than expected, and the two doctors made frantic efforts to keep the
patient alive as they drove to the University Hospital. “She kept lapsing into
unconsciousness,” Sullivan said. “And so we’d scream at her and shout at her
and slap her and try to do anything we could to keep her breathing.”
They succeeded. Bradley survived.

--- PAGE BREAK ---unconsciousness,” Sullivan said. “And so we’d scream at her and shout at her
and slap her and try to do anything we could to keep her breathing.”
They succeeded. Bradley survived.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

{ 3 }
WE GOT HIM
Within an hour of the explosion, FBI director Louis Freeh made a mercurial
decision: asking Weldon Kennedy, the special agent in charge in Arizona, to lead
the investigation, instead of following customary practice and selecting the
richly experienced head of the local field office, Bob Ricks.
The most common explanation was that Ricks had been the bureau’s press
spokesman at Waco and was too closely associated with the disastrous end to the
siege, even though he was involved in few, if any, key command decisions. At
the time of the bombing, Freeh was facing congressional hearings on Waco and
was no doubt concerned not to hand extra ammunition to his House and Senate
interrogators.
But Freeh was also in the process of replacing every field division supervisor
with people his detractors referred to as FOLs, or Friends of Louie. He wasn’t
just building a hierarchy of grateful loyalists; he was also attacking the FBI’s
ingrained culture. Many times, Freeh expressed contempt for the bureau’s top-
down management culture, preferring to sit down with field agents, who, he said,
“do the real work for the FBI.”
Freeh clearly saw Ricks as part of that culture, and two years earlier, the two
men had been rivals for the director’s job. Freeh, who had only a six-year career
as an FBI agent in New York before climbing the ladder to a federal judgeship,
was very much the outsider candidate. He had connections in the Clinton White
House, which is why he was chosen, but he also had good reason to fear the
criticism and resentment of the bureau veterans. The man he picked to supplant
Ricks was inescapably a veteran, too, but one just months from retirement.
Kennedy had won his spurs negotiating a peaceful end to a prison riot in Atlanta
in the 1980s and was a popular and reliably safe pair of hands. He could also
compensate for Freeh’s lack of exposure to the American heartland. As Freeh,
the inveterate New Yorker, once put it: “I never learned to do good ol’ boy.”
Kennedy could not have been more surprised when he was pulled out of a
drug trafficking conference in El Paso and ordered onto the first plane to
Oklahoma City. “I was not a Friend of Louie,” he said. “He didn’t know me, and
he didn’t trust me.”
Kennedy faced troubles from the start. Even though Ricks was not theordered onto the first plane to
Oklahoma City. “I was not a Friend of Louie,” he said. “He didn’t know me, and
he didn’t trust me.”
Kennedy faced troubles from the start. Even though Ricks was not the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

official on-scene commander, his staff still treated him that way. And that led to
an atmosphere of mistrust, political scheming, and reluctance to share
information. “The one [team] is not necessarily helping the others,” Ricks
explained. “It just creates an additional layer of bureaucracy.”ere of mistrust, political scheming, and reluctance to share
information. “The one [team] is not necessarily helping the others,” Ricks
explained. “It just creates an additional layer of bureaucracy.”

RECOVERY OF THE RYDER TRUCK’S REAR AXLE FROM RICHARD NICHOLS’S Ford Festiva at the
Regency Towers, the first significant piece of evidence, should have been a
breakthrough moment for law enforcement, but instead it turned into a feud over
bragging rights.
Mike McPherson, an Oklahoma police sergeant who passed the Towers
every day on his way to work, was the first to claim that he’d found the axle
piece, wiped it clean of grease and grime, and located the vehicle identification
number. Almost immediately, two city traffic cops insisted they were the ones
who brought both the rear and the front axle to the feds’ attention.
The FBI dismissed both stories, saying it was Melvin Sumter, the
videographer for the sheriff’s office, who found the rear axle and called in Jim
Norman, one of the bureau’s most experienced agents, to take it to the FBI’s
temporary command post three blocks away. Another agent then called the
partial VIN number into the National Insurance Crime Bureau and learned it
belonged to a 1993 Ford truck registered to the Ryder Rental Truck company of
Miami.
From an investigative standpoint, it didn’t much matter which version was
correct, because the upshot was the same. Several people found parts of the truck
within a three-block radius of the bomb site, and every bit helped. McPherson’s
story about finding the partial VIN number does not square with FBI interview
records or with two separate published accounts, but it is also possible he made
the discovery before the FBI, and the work was simply replicated.
The problem with this episode was the tone it set. A number of rival
investigators wanted to be written into the historical record, even if doing so
meant contradicting each other for bragging rights. It would not be long before
law enforcement agencies supposedly united in a common purpose would be
accusing each other of withholding information, obstructing the investigation,
and lying.ng rights. It would not be long before
law enforcement agencies supposedly united in a common purpose would be
accusing each other of withholding information, obstructing the investigation,
and lying.

INVESTIGATORS MADE ANOTHER EARLY BLUNDER BY FAILING TO secure the Murrah Building as a
crime scene. This was understandable in the first few hours, when firefighters,
doctors, and citizen volunteers tended to the injured and dying and did not think
twice about trampling over the wreckage to reach them. But the problem

--- PAGE BREAK ---w hours, when firefighters,
doctors, and citizen volunteers tended to the injured and dying and did not think
twice about trampling over the wreckage to reach them. But the problem

--- PAGE BREAK ---

persisted, even after the FBI and the city fire department began to impose some
order. They established a perimeter shortly after 10:30 A.M., but it was barely
more than a block in each direction. Later in the day, once the FBI had taken full
control, the perimeter was expanded to about a quarter of a mile—three or four
blocks each way. That was almost certainly not large enough to safeguard
important evidence, either. James Powell, a bomb squad officer for the ATF, later
told Justice Department investigators that the usual protocol was to block off the
entire debris field plus an extra 25 percent. Even the smaller perimeter was
ineffective; Powell observed soldiers and Red Cross volunteers roaming at will
to offer refreshments to the rescue workers.
Many basic tasks that could have yielded valuable results were overlooked.
Nobody, for example, thought to cover and protect the bomb crater before a light
cloudburst hit at about 3:00 P.M., or before a much bigger storm rolled in that
evening. Evidence collectors were directed to sift through the debris with rakes.
“If you can’t see it at rake’s length, it’s not worth picking up,” Dave Williams,
the FBI’s on-site forensic supervisor, was heard saying. Ed Kelso, the head of the
FBI crime lab’s evidence response team, later told a Justice Department inquiry
this was wrong, because smaller pieces—for example, any fragment with a hole
drilled through to run detonating cord or shock tube—could indeed prove
valuable. Two on-site technicians walked away in disgust. LaTonya Gadson, an
evidence processor at FBI headquarters, said the materials sent back to her were
a “mess,” showing no signs of sorting or sequencing.
Williams took much of the blame for the fiasco. But ATF director John
Magaw thought the Federal Emergency Management Agency also bore
responsibility. “It was [FEMA’s] first time on a major crime scene,” he said,
“and their gut instinct was to save lives. But you can save lives and protect the
scene a little bit if you at least think about it.” The ATF was not without blemish,
either. Someone in the organization made a wildly inaccurate guess that the
Murrah Building was destroyed by a 1,000–1,200-pound car bomb, roughly the
same size as the device planted at the World Trade Center in 1993. Magaw
provided this estimate to CNN audiences four hours after the bombing, and it
made its way into a number of the army’s early internal reports. Episodes like
this did not endear Magaw to leaders of the investigation’s task force.NN audiences four hours after the bombing, and it
made its way into a number of the army’s early internal reports. Episodes like
this did not endear Magaw to leaders of the investigation’s task force.

THE SHOCKWAVES FROM THE BOMBING DID NOT JUST STIR LAW ENFORCEMENT to action; they were
keenly felt at a nondescript two-bedroom home in Pittsburg, Kansas, 250 miles
northeast of Oklahoma City. This was a safe house used by the Aryan
Republican Army, the bank robbery gang motivated not just by money but by a

--- PAGE BREAK ---home in Pittsburg, Kansas, 250 miles
northeast of Oklahoma City. This was a safe house used by the Aryan
Republican Army, the bank robbery gang motivated not just by money but by a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

determination to start a white supremacist revolution. The house was crammed
with much the same paraphernalia McVeigh and his associates had been
gathering: wigs, disguises, fake IDs, phone cards, and police scanners; pistols
and semiautomatic weapons; timers, switches, live grenades, pipe bombs,
blasting caps, shock tube, and gallon jugs of nitromethane.
The ARA had grown increasingly explicit about its desire to wage war on
the government, and real questions would soon arise about the possibility that
members of the group were in on the bomb plot. The previous fall, its members
discussed setting up revolutionary cells, each one specializing in derailing trains,
or attacking power plants, or infiltrating and ransacking military installations. In
January 1995, the ARA’s core members got drunk, donned masks, and shot an
eccentric recruitment video—a bewildering, almost campy mix of race hate, gun
fetishization, and old-fashioned revolutionary fist-thumping. The main speaker
calls himself Commander Pedro and plays a hammy version of a Latin-American
guerrillero in olive drab fatigues. He refers to “federal courthouses that need to
be demolished”—possibly McVeigh’s original brief—and justifies killing in the
name of the revolution. “We have endeavored to keep collateral damage and
civilian casualties to a minimum in all our operations,” he intones. “So far we
have been successful, but as in all war some innocents shall suffer. So be it.”
When he wasn’t dressing up as the warrior-buffoon, Commander Pedro was
a wayward Irish-American child of the sixties named Pete Langan, a high-school
dropout whose father had worked for the CIA in Saigon during the Vietnam War.
When the family relocated to the Washington suburbs, Langan turned to drugs
and petty crime, drifted down to Florida, and ended up in prison for holding up a
department store. He was short and slight, even a little effeminate, which made
him easy prey for his larger cell mates. He was determined to survive, arming
himself with knives and small petrol bombs, dreaming up escape plans—one
briefly successful—and turning to white supremacism. “I was,” he later said, “a
small person you didn’t wanna fuck with.”
After years of odd jobs, a failed marriage, intermittent problems with
alcoholism, and increasing involvement in Aryan Nations and the Christian
Identity movement, Langan went to prison again for robbing a Pizza Hut in
Georgia. This time, he got lucky and was recruited as an informant by the Secret
Service, which had become alarmed after overhearing one of his oldest friends
from Maryland, Richard Guthrie, talk about blowing up the White House and
killing President George H. W. Bush. Langan was an odd and—quickly—
disastrous choice of informant, but he gratefully accepted the early release from
prison and the free ride back to his home in Cincinnati. Within weeks he ditched
his Secret Service handlers, hooked up with Guthrie, and disappeared. The pairatefully accepted the early release from
prison and the free ride back to his home in Cincinnati. Within weeks he ditched
his Secret Service handlers, hooked up with Guthrie, and disappeared. The pair

--- PAGE BREAK ---e early release from
prison and the free ride back to his home in Cincinnati. Within weeks he ditched
his Secret Service handlers, hooked up with Guthrie, and disappeared. The pair

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of them decided, with gleeful abandon, to become full-time warriors against the
system.
Guthrie was a volcanic sidekick, a scam artist and arsonist who once
dreamed of becoming a Navy SEAL but did not have the temperament for
military life. During his time in the navy—including a stint in explosives and
ordnance-disposal training—he regularly went AWOL or made up bogus
illnesses. He was court-martialed after painting a swastika on his ship and left
the service with a less-than-honorable discharge. Out of uniform, Guthrie
traveled the country, building up contacts in the white supremacist movement.
He bragged about torching abortion clinics and shooting interracial couples, and
came to see war against the government as his life’s sole purpose. To earn a
living, he scammed department stores and staged car accidents to collect on the
insurance.
By April 1995, Langan and Guthrie had carried out a dozen bank heists, first
as a twosome and then adding recruits, including Kevin McCarthy and Scott
Stedeford, Mark Thomas’s punk musician protégés from Philadelphia. They
scoped out targets, parking spots, and getaway routes, and adopted a military-
inspired checklist Guthrie called Basic Armed Resistance Tactics. Once the job
was under way, they donned cheap Halloween masks of ex-presidents (an idea
from the surfer-heist movie Point Break). After they had cleaned out the
cashiers’ drawers, they left a fake explosive device, often decorated to match the
season. At their most recent job in Des Moines, it had been an Easter basket
containing a fake pipe bomb and a smoke grenade. They always used drop cars,
cheap junkers they would acquire under a false name—often, the name of a
prominent FBI agent—and dump close to the crime scene.
Later, there would be plentiful reasons to suppose that McVeigh was
acquainted with the ARA or even involved in some of the robberies. He and they
traveled the same gun-show circuit, and their movements often overlapped,
including a long stretch in early 1995 when they were all in Arizona. McVeigh
told his sister Jennifer he had been involved in a bank robbery, as the FBI would
learn a little later. Both Terry Nichols and Nichols’s ex-wife, Lana, came to
suspect the same thing. None of the ARA principals, meanwhile, had a viable
alibi for April 19.
According to Langan and Guthrie, they were at the safe house for most of
the day. In the morning, Langan drove a van into Joplin, Missouri, for repairs—a
trip he later described as an “ironclad alibi,” though nobody claimed to have
seen him there. Guthrie said he sat down on the living room couch with a cup of
coffee at about 9:45 A.M. and saw news of the bombing on television. If the event
shocked him, or filled him with human sympathy, he never mentioned it. Langann on the living room couch with a cup of
coffee at about 9:45 A.M. and saw news of the bombing on television. If the event
shocked him, or filled him with human sympathy, he never mentioned it. Langan

--- PAGE BREAK ---couch with a cup of
coffee at about 9:45 A.M. and saw news of the bombing on television. If the event
shocked him, or filled him with human sympathy, he never mentioned it. Langan

--- PAGE BREAK ---

later described Guthrie as “a raving psychopath, a cross between Ted Kaczynski
and Ted Bundy”—an exaggeration, perhaps, but also a hint at his propensity for
unbridled violence. Guthrie saw the bombing as the start of a long and violent
struggle against the federal government. “Simply put,” he later wrote in a prison
memoir, “within ten years, it’s my opinion that this country will resemble
Sarajevo.”
Guthrie’s memoir records almost no events for the month of April; this was
the period when the ARA had supposedly elected to disband for several months.
Guthrie does say that Langan traveled to Kansas City early in the month to visit
his lover. Guthrie wittily refers to the woman—he has no reason to think it is not
a woman—as Langan’s “mysterious.” But Langan was a secret cross-dresser,
and when he wasn’t fomenting revolution with neo-Nazis, he was seriously
considering a sex-change operation. Recently he had been wearing dresses, high
heels, lipstick, and nail polish, and attended gender-bending parties under the
name Donna McClure. His “mysterious” was a fellow transsexual, known as
Cheryl, whom he met at a New Year’s Eve church mixer.
Was Langan wedded to the revolutionary cause or committed to a path of
self-discovery that his white supremacist cohorts would not only find repugnant
but might see as grounds to kill him? (McCarthy, following an unbending
interpretation of Leviticus and Deuteronomy, believed that homosexuals and
cross-dressers should be put to death.) Langan’s secret life as Donna does raise
the possibility that he was the woman spotted on April 19 in Oklahoma City—
first at the wheel of McVeigh’s Mercury and later waving the Ryder truck in
toward the Murrah Building. An artist’s sketch of one of the eyewitness
sightings in Oklahoma City bore some resemblance.y—
first at the wheel of McVeigh’s Mercury and later waving the Ryder truck in
toward the Murrah Building. An artist’s sketch of one of the eyewitness
sightings in Oklahoma City bore some resemblance.

KEVIN MCCARTHY AND SCOTT STEDEFORD ALSO HAD NO ALIBI FOR April 19. McCarthy was a
deeply disturbed kid, just shy of his eighteenth birthday, a stringy, hard-core
skinhead with a history of drugs, alcohol, and mental illness. Stedeford was, in
theory, more stable, twenty-seven years old, and dedicated to his music. He fell
into the right-wing revolutionary movement via the underground neo-Nazi punk
scene in Philadelphia. When he discovered a talent for bank robbery, he imbibed
deeply from the radical philosophy that went with it and came to feel it was his
right and his religious duty to kill enemies of the white race. “Unfortunately,” a
chastened Stedeford later reflected, “I was exposed to some poor role models
and incorrect information at the wrong time in my life.”
The first time the FBI asked McCarthy where he and Stedeford were on
April 19, he said they were at the safe house in Pittsburg with Langan and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ation at the wrong time in my life.”
The first time the FBI asked McCarthy where he and Stedeford were on
April 19, he said they were at the safe house in Pittsburg with Langan and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Guthrie; they had arrived back from Elohim City three days earlier and saw
news coverage of the bombing on television. But Langan said McCarthy and
Stedeford did not return until early April 20. Guthrie concurred. So the FBI
talked again to McCarthy, who now said he heard about the bombing on the car
radio as he and Stedeford were returning from a trip to Iowa to register a newly
purchased Chevy Suburban. The FBI accepted this alibi even though it, too, was
contradicted by other evidence. Paperwork tracked down by the bureau shows
that the Chevy was registered in Iowa on April 21, not on April 18 or 19. No
motel records or other documents have ever surfaced to show that McCarthy and
Stedeford were in Iowa on April 19.
When McCarthy showed up at the house, more than twelve hours after the
bombing, Langan asked if he had been involved and was not inclined to believe
his denial. A few months later, according to Langan, McCarthy confided that he
had legal “liabilities” concerning the bombing and he might need to go
underground. Langan was not interested in helping, in case he was later accused
of collusion in the bombing plot himself.
Guthrie had his own suspicions—or perhaps more concrete knowledge—
about McCarthy. In July 1995 he visited Mark Thomas, McCarthy’s neo-Nazi
mentor in Pennsylvania, and told him: “Your young Mr. Wizard took out the
Murrah Building.” A month later, Guthrie, McCarthy, and Stedeford robbed a
bank in the St. Louis suburbs and left a newspaper article about McVeigh and the
Oklahoma City bombing on the drop car’s front seat. Guthrie told the FBI this
had been his idea, although he was also drunk on tequila and nearly sabotaged
the robbery by showing up late. The newspaper article could have been a
signature, or an expression of support for the bombing, or a dangerous way—
typical of Guthrie’s reckless irreverence—of taunting the government with the
revelation that one or more of the bombers was now in the bank robbery
business.
The FBI learned all this well before McVeigh’s trial. They also had a
revealing conversation with Mark Thomas’s ex-girlfriend Donna Marazoff, the
embittered mother of two of his children. Marazoff said Thomas vowed revenge
against the government after Ruby Ridge and Waco. “We are going to get them,”
she quoted him saying. “We are going to hit one of their buildings during the
middle of the day. It’s going to be a federal building. We will get sympathy if we
bomb the building.”
Thomas never said anything so explicit in public, but he did offer a robust
defense of the bombing when a Washington Post reporter interviewed him in
January 1997. “Government rules people by fear, which is terrorism,” he said.
“Therefore, if you’re gonna have people who are going to construct ang when a Washington Post reporter interviewed him in
January 1997. “Government rules people by fear, which is terrorism,” he said.
“Therefore, if you’re gonna have people who are going to construct a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

government of, by, and for the people, they’re gonna have to use force to exert
their will over their public servants…. For example, the bombing of Oklahoma
City. There have been no Ruby Ridges or Wacos since that time.”
Thomas was the only active ARA member who could properly account for
his whereabouts on April 19. He was at his rambling, filthy farmhouse outside
Allentown, Pennsylvania, with his latest girlfriend and brood of children.ctive ARA member who could properly account for
his whereabouts on April 19. He was at his rambling, filthy farmhouse outside
Allentown, Pennsylvania, with his latest girlfriend and brood of children.

IN OKLAHOMA CITY, FBI AGENTS IMMEDIATELY BEGAN HUNTING for video surveillance
footage of the crime scene in the hope that it would lead them directly to the
perpetrators. The search was a little slapdash, because no proper chain of
command had been established in the hours after the explosion and nobody had a
clear idea of where to look.
Most promising were two security cameras perched on the northwest and
northeast corners of the Murrah Building. Both were trained on the Fifth Street
entrance and the parking slots outside; if they had been working, they could have
captured the final moments before the bombing. The equipment was badly
damaged in the explosion, but investigators thought there was a good chance the
footage was recorded remotely and still intact at another location.
Frustratingly, the cameras were not hooked up to any video system, and had
not been for a long time. “The wires were cut ten years before I got here. There
were no monitors, nothing,” said Tom Hunt, the head of Federal Protective
Service, responsible for security at the Murrah Building. It was a cost-cutting
measure, which Hunt said he had “screamed about” since taking the job.
The FBI was furious, particularly since the eyewitness testimony suggested
that McVeigh, and whoever was with him, had not worn masks or other obvious
disguises. “It would have been perfect evidence,” said Danny Defenbaugh, who
would succeed Weldon Kennedy as head of the investigation. “But the morons
didn’t have it fixed.”
The lack of footage seemed so incredible that for years some people believed
the FBI was withholding it to maintain its position that McVeigh acted alone.
Oklahoma City’s Channel 4, the most sensationalist of the local news outlets,
produced a report to this effect in late 1995. And, in 2004, the raw, entirely
unredacted Secret Service timeline of the first few weeks of the investigation
was made public and appeared to show the same thing. The timeline contained
two separate references to such videotape evidence and described more than one
suspect getting out of the Ryder truck. For years after, the FBI was bombarded
with complaints and lawsuits demanding release of the footage.
But the Secret Service had not seen any video footage itself and latering out of the Ryder truck. For years after, the FBI was bombarded
with complaints and lawsuits demanding release of the footage.
But the Secret Service had not seen any video footage itself and later

--- PAGE BREAK ---truck. For years after, the FBI was bombarded
with complaints and lawsuits demanding release of the footage.
But the Secret Service had not seen any video footage itself and later

--- PAGE BREAK ---

acknowledged in court that some of the material in its timeline was based on
speculation only. Some of the things in the timeline ascribed to the tapes were
very similar to eyewitness testimony of Glenn Grossman, Daina Bradley, and
others. FBI agents directly involved in collecting and analyzing the videotape
data later said the Secret Service had confused these things and made a mistake.
It was also possible the confusion arose elsewhere in the heat of a fast-moving,
high-pressure investigation.
The FBI certainly furthered suspicions that videotape evidence had been
suppressed, because it responded evasively to Freedom of Information Act
requests. But caginess by the FBI’s records department is not proof of
concealment. The most unequivocal evidence comes from a Physical Security
Survey Tom Hunt conducted two months before the bombing, which states:
“There are no surveillance systems on the exterior of this building.” Since Hunt
never forwarded his document to the FBI, it is not clear the bureau ever realized
it existed.
The absence of working cameras is arguably a greater scandal than
suppressed footage, because it points to the federal authorities’ fundamental
failure to protect its own employees and the public. After Waco, the FBI and
ATF were picking up endless chatter that they and the federal judiciary were
targets for revenge attacks. A few months before the bombing, a vandal smashed
a window at the Oklahoma City federal courthouse and did more damage inside.
Don Rogers, the General Services Administration’s on-site manager at the
Murrah Building, received a personal threat and set up a video surveillance
camera, with recording capacity, outside his first-floor office door. He also hired
a private security guard. When other agencies in the building asked for video
surveillance equipment, Rogers gave inconsistent responses. The HUD office on
the sixth floor was told yes; the day-care center no.
Rogers and his GSA bosses always cited budget constraints in refusing to
consider video protection for the building as a whole. When Hunt started his job,
two years before the bombing, he was alarmed by the nonfunctioning exterior
cameras for several reasons—including cases where the federal government had
been sued for lulling people into a false sense of security. “I said, we need to get
those cameras fixed,” he recalled. “But nobody would do it. ‘In that case,’ I said,
‘we need to take them down.’ But nobody would do it.”
The camera outside Rogers’s office—which was not authorized by Federal
Protective Service, as protocol dictated—could have been useful, because it
looked directly on the place where the Ryder truck pulled up. There is no
evidence the FBI recovered the camera or even knew about it. When Rogers was
asked in 2011 about his private security setup, he denied knowing anythingace where the Ryder truck pulled up. There is no
evidence the FBI recovered the camera or even knew about it. When Rogers was
asked in 2011 about his private security setup, he denied knowing anything

--- PAGE BREAK ---truck pulled up. There is no
evidence the FBI recovered the camera or even knew about it. When Rogers was
asked in 2011 about his private security setup, he denied knowing anything

--- PAGE BREAK ---

about it. When shown evidence of its existence in the Physical Security Survey
report, he wavered and said: “If there was a security camera, fine. But it was all
so darn long ago.”
And so, the investigation had to look elsewhere. On the morning of April 19,
John Hippard made a first, unsuccessful pass at collecting footage from the
Regency Towers apartment complex, the last big building the Ryder truck would
have passed as it approached the Murrah Building along Fifth Street. He and his
colleagues were seen playing with one of the exterior cameras, which had
become detached from the wall. But it was not until the afternoon that an
Oklahoma City policeman recovered that day’s footage (which was still
recording in the first-floor security office), and it took another week for the
building manager to dig older footage out of the files he kept at home. Hippard
had more luck at the Journal Record Building, where the head of security handed
over everything right away. But with the electricity out, the tapes could not be
ejected from the video machines. Danny Payne, the security chief, simply
handed over the players themselves.
Over the first twenty-four hours, the FBI built up an inventory from six
separate sites: the Regency Towers, the Journal Record Building, the Bank of
Oklahoma at Fourth and Robinson, the Oklahoma Public Library, the
Southwestern Bell Building, and Anthonys department store. Later, they also
received footage from the post office. They tried to recover material from a
number of businesses on Sixth Street, only to discover that the cameras were
dummies, like the ones at the Murrah Building, or captured images in real time
without recording them.
A number of on-scene FBI agents, especially those who had worked bank-
robbery cases, wanted to examine the tapes right away, but they were sent
instead to the Bureau’s crime lab in Washington. Walt Lamar, the Oklahoma City
agent most disappointed by this decision, called the lab technicians a few days
later to ask what they had seen on the tapes. He was told: “Nothing of
evidentiary value.”
Lamar didn’t believe it. As soon as the tapes were returned, he examined the
Regency Tower batch, working his way back from 9:02 A.M. on April 19. It
wasn’t long before he stumbled on grainy footage of a Ryder truck driving past.
“Son of a bitch, there’s the truck!” Lamar exclaimed. The lab technicians had
missed it.
The Regency Towers footage provided the most vivid exhibits presented at
trial: the truck heading toward the Murrah Building a few minutes before the
explosion, and also a snapshot of Terry Nichols’s blue GMC pickup passing on
Easter Sunday, proving that he had come to Oklahoma City to help McVeighoward the Murrah Building a few minutes before the
explosion, and also a snapshot of Terry Nichols’s blue GMC pickup passing on
Easter Sunday, proving that he had come to Oklahoma City to help McVeigh

--- PAGE BREAK ---

drop off the Mercury. The Journal Record Building footage was useless, because
the lone external camera was pointing into bright sunlight. The FBI expended
considerable effort trying to enhance it, appealing to NASA and other
government agencies, to no avail. Much of the rest of the available footage was
of the time-lapse variety and distressingly incomplete. The post office footage
stopped on April 17, two days before the bombing, and did not resume again
until May 25.st of the available footage was
of the time-lapse variety and distressingly incomplete. The post office footage
stopped on April 17, two days before the bombing, and did not resume again
until May 25.

DAVE HOLLAWAY, THE RAZOR-SHARP, INCAUTIOUS DEPUTY DIRECTOR of the CAUSE legal
foundation, cannot account for his whereabouts on April 19. Like Kevin
McCarthy, he has provided a number of versions of his movements, none of
which have stood up to scrutiny. There has been no suggestion from any quarter
that Hollaway was involved in criminal activity, but it seems extraordinary that a
man with a steel trap of a memory should suddenly forget where he was—on
this, of all days. Hollaway claims to have spoken to McVeigh the day before the
bombing and attempted to talk him out of doing anything stupid, but
immediately following that call, Hollaway went to the airport and vanished from
sight. Did he try to stop the attack? Was he checking on one or more of
CAUSE’s clients to make sure they were not involved?
For years Hollaway told people that he flew to Texas for the second
anniversary of the Waco disaster. He said he drove to Waco in a rental car with a
gaggle of high-powered Houston lawyers who, like him, were involved in suing
the federal government over its handling of the siege. He spent the night in a
motel, attended the ceremony, then walked into a media tent, where he first
learned about the bombing. He told the flamboyant litigator Dick DeGuerin he
thought the bomber had called him the day before. DeGuerin told him it would
be smart to call the FBI, which Hollaway subsequently did.
Almost none of this story is true. A number of people who knew Hollaway
well said they were sure he was not at the Waco ceremony. Confronted with this,
Hollaway acknowledged that he did not, in fact, attend. He said he learned about
the bombing as he was about to go to the ceremony and decided at the last
minute to duck out to avoid the media scrutiny. Still, he drove up from Houston
with DeGuerin and two other lawyers.
The lawyers did not concur. DeGuerin was on a ranch in west Texas, not in
Waco, and said he neither saw nor spoke to Hollaway that day. One of the other
lawyers, a friend of Hollaway’s named Joe Phillips, said he didn’t remember
seeing him, either.
When Kirk Lyons, Hollaway’s boss at CAUSE, learned many years later thataway that day. One of the other
lawyers, a friend of Hollaway’s named Joe Phillips, said he didn’t remember
seeing him, either.
When Kirk Lyons, Hollaway’s boss at CAUSE, learned many years later that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hollaway had not attended the memorial, he sounded genuinely surprised. His
best recollection, he said, was that Hollaway called him late that morning and
asked permission to extend his car rental so he could travel to Oklahoma City.
But two of Hollaway’s friends who traveled to the bomb scene, Jim Pate and
Rick Sherrow of Soldier of Fortune magazine, never saw him there. Hollaway
said he might have briefly considered the trip but never went. “In those
circumstances,” he said, “I want to be as far away from Oklahoma City as I can
get.” Asked for a third time where he was that day, he said, irritably: “It’s sixteen
years ago. I mean, who cares?”hose
circumstances,” he said, “I want to be as far away from Oklahoma City as I can
get.” Asked for a third time where he was that day, he said, irritably: “It’s sixteen
years ago. I mean, who cares?”

ONE PERSON WITH A SURPRISINGLY SOLID EXPLANATION OF HIS whereabouts on April 19 was
Andreas Strassmeir, the former German army officer living at Elohim City.
Strassmeir faced all sorts of trouble after the bombing, because he had met Tim
McVeigh at a gun show and formed a bond with him. He had also thrown
considerable energy into arming and training the residents of Elohim City for a
possible showdown with the FBI, violating several federal laws. If anyone in
Hollaway’s circle needed help that day, he was it.
Hollaway acknowledged he didn’t know what his friend was capable of.
“Andi,” he said in 2010, “would be a dangerous guy if you let him loose. He
knows the difference between right and wrong, but if the gloves were off, he’d
be killing as many of them as he could. The only reason he doesn’t is because
he’s intelligent enough to know that the costs outweigh the benefits…. If there
were some kind of revolt in the country, you could count him in.”
Did Hollaway try to contact Strassmeir that morning to make sure he could
account for his whereabouts? Hollaway later insisted he did no such thing. But
Strassmeir, a strikingly disorganized and unworldly person, somehow came up
with a watertight alibi. Even Kirk Lyons, his lawyer, agreed that Strassmeir
wasn’t likely to have come up with this on his own. “Andi had no authorship in
any part of his life here,” Lyons said. “It was all done by other people.”
The authorities were told that Strassmeir and another Elohim City resident
spent the morning of April 19 repairing a fence for an elderly farming couple a
few miles away. Not only did the wife mark the hours the two men worked; at
least one other neighbor remembered that one was called Andi. Aside from his
military career and his flights into the United States, it was perhaps the most
rigorously documented moment of Andreas Strassmeir’s life.neighbor remembered that one was called Andi. Aside from his
military career and his flights into the United States, it was perhaps the most
rigorously documented moment of Andreas Strassmeir’s life.

THERE WERE THINGS ABOUT ANDREAS STRASSMEIR THAT HIS FRIENDS in the revolutionary
Patriot Movement did not know and would have been intrigued, or appalled, to

--- PAGE BREAK ---as Strassmeir’s life.

THERE WERE THINGS ABOUT ANDREAS STRASSMEIR THAT HIS FRIENDS in the revolutionary
Patriot Movement did not know and would have been intrigued, or appalled, to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

find out. Despite his pedigree as the grandson of a Nazi, he was fascinated by
Israel and spent three summers on a kibbutz in the Jezreel Valley, near the Golan
Heights. He had enrolled in Hebrew classes as a teenager in Berlin, and spoke
the language fluently. During his second stint at the kibbutz, he was given an Uzi
and put on security detail; during his third, he was sent on patrol on the Green
Line between Israel and the West Bank, a job usually reserved for the military.
When he was asked in an interview if he had worn an Israeli Defense Force
uniform, Strassmeir’s expression changed noticeably and he broke into an
embarrassed smile before insisting he had gone out in jeans.
Strassmeir acknowledged that he “bumped into” General Rafael Eitan, the
architect of the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon—an encounter captured in a
photograph of them at Golan Beach, near Lake Galilee. And he did not explicitly
deny that he had contact with Mossad, the Israeli security service. Strassmeir
agreed that Mossad was in the habit of meeting its foreign contacts at kibbutzim.
When asked if Mossad ever visited the Tel Yosef kibbutz when he was there, he
answered: “How would I know? If Mossad had been on the kibbutz, nobody
would know—those boys know their business.”
Strassmeir was a German army officer by then, and his career took an
interesting turn when he returned home: he was seconded to intelligence work.
Up to that point, his experience with the Bundeswehr had been unremarkable,
even undistinguished. He washed out of the military academy in Hamburg
without graduating and drifted from assignment to assignment, ending up as a
mortar fire control officer. But his infantry battalion now used him to sniff out
East German informants and spies. At some stage, Strassmeir was asked to fill in
as the head of the battalion’s intelligence unit, which gave him access to the
entire army’s internal reports. Asked if his superiors thought he did a good job,
Strassmeir suddenly became coy. “What superiors?” he said. “I wasn’t doing
this.”
When Strassmeir first came to the United States in 1988, to take part in a
125th anniversary reenactment of the Battle of Gettysburg, he arrived not on a
simple tourist visa but on an open-ended multiple-entry visa, which he obtained,
he said, by “pretending to be a traveling businessman.”
One of the first people he contacted in America was Vince Petruskie, a
retired air force colonel who had spent time in Berlin and appeared to have a
long-standing friendship with Strassmeir’s father, Günter, an influential political
operative in the conservative Christian Democratic Party. Petruskie was also
widely suspected of using the air force as a cover for a CIA career in
counterespionage and counterinsurgency. Strassmeir did not deny that the reason
Petruskie had been in Berlin during the Cold War was to assassinate Sovietthe air force as a cover for a CIA career in
counterespionage and counterinsurgency. Strassmeir did not deny that the reason
Petruskie had been in Berlin during the Cold War was to assassinate Soviet

--- PAGE BREAK ---cover for a CIA career in
counterespionage and counterinsurgency. Strassmeir did not deny that the reason
Petruskie had been in Berlin during the Cold War was to assassinate Soviet

--- PAGE BREAK ---

agents; Kirk Lyons said the family loved to tell him the story of Petruskie killing
a Soviet spy in the 1950s and leaving him hanging in the Reichstag ruins.
Petruskie was also believed to have been part of the Phoenix Program, a covert
CIA operation in the late 1960s and early 1970s to “neutralize” civilian
supporters of the South Vietnamese National Liberation Front.
Strassmeir came to the United States hoping to get hired by Petruskie to
conduct off-the-books drug interdiction operations on the U.S.-Mexico border.
He was told Petruskie was in line for a high-level job with the Drug Enforcement
Administration if George H. W. Bush won the 1988 presidential election, and
that Petruskie was interested in hiring Strassmeir as part of a rejuvenated black-
ops crew, similar to the one he operated during his CIA career. In the end,
though, Bush never invited Petruskie to join his administration and Strassmeir
had to make other plans.
This history strongly suggests that Strassmeir was not the radical right-
winger he appeared to be, and might even have been a government agent of
some sort, spying on extremists in the United States. It is an allegation that first
surfaced soon after the bombing and has prompted much speculation since.
Strassmeir himself acknowledged that it was “not too far-fetched” for people to
think this. “Actually at some point I was recruited, but it didn’t come through,”
he said, clearly referring to his dealings with Petruskie. “Bush wanted him, but
Congress had an objection to Operation Phoenix.”
Who might he have worked for? The Germans were certainly interested in
intelligence on American radicals, because they worried that money and
propaganda materials from the United States were fueling neo-Nazi violence at
home. The Israelis were interested, too. But there are also reasons to doubt
Strassmeir was willing to do this kind of work—or indeed that he worked much
at all.
Strassmeir seemed a different person from the moment his plans with
Petruskie fell through. He struck many of his American hosts as listless and lazy,
wore out several welcomes, and wound up relying on the kindness of Kirk
Lyons, who knew him only indirectly through Civil War reenactment circles, and
Dave Hollaway, whom he met through Lyons.
“We called him Sofa-meir,” Lyons said, “because if you came around at 4:00
P.M., that’s what you saw on my couch—Andi, sacked out.” Strassmeir stayed up
all night painting toy soldiers but showed little interest in anything else.
Hollaway thought he was a “shameless hobo” who couldn’t observe social
niceties or take a hint when he was not welcome. “Remember, Dave, what
happened the last time they frustrated a German artist,” Strassmeir would say.
When Strassmeir’s residual pay from the German army ran out, Hollawayhint when he was not welcome. “Remember, Dave, what
happened the last time they frustrated a German artist,” Strassmeir would say.
When Strassmeir’s residual pay from the German army ran out, Hollaway

--- PAGE BREAK ---

found a way to employ him as a gopher for his computer company. He signed a
bogus consultancy contract with Strassmeir’s brother, who ran a computer firm
in Munich, and reimbursed him for the $2,000 deposited in Andi’s German bank
account each month. When that arrangement broke down—because Hollaway’s
company could no longer afford it—Lyons decided to hand Strassmeir off to
Grandpa Millar. The living in Elohim City was cheap, and Strassmeir stood
some chance of finding a wife there and qualifying for a work permit.
Instead, Strassmeir preached revolution. Lyons and Hollaway strongly
disapproved of his efforts to arm the Elohimites for Armageddon, and
acknowledged they essentially lost control of him. They suspected he had
become a true believer after all, and eventually went to great lengths to bail him
out of trouble. Vince Petruskie was unhappy, too; according to Lyons, he would
“go nuclear” at the very mention of Strassmeir.
If there was a moment when Strassmeir definitively turned his back on
government intelligence work, it might have been June 1990, when Houston
played host to the G-7 summit of world leaders and Lyons somehow rustled up
an invitation for Strassmeir to meet one-on-one with Helmut Kohl, the German
chancellor. “I set it up through the embassy,” Lyons said. “I knew they were
coming, so I asked what would be a good time and set up a meeting.” Clearly, at
that moment, Strassmeir still enjoyed considerable cachet in international
political circles. But he refused to go.were
coming, so I asked what would be a good time and set up a meeting.” Clearly, at
that moment, Strassmeir still enjoyed considerable cachet in international
political circles. But he refused to go.

FEMA, THE FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY, PLAYED a valuable role in
bringing heavy equipment and medical supplies to the disaster site, including
breathing apparatus for the rescuers, but it also threw its weight in ways that
caused deep resentment. The agency deployed more than five hundred staff
members—roughly half of its entire Urban Search and Rescue force—and
instantly rubbed locals the wrong way by treating them as subordinates.
Firefighting and police teams felt they were being shunted aside, as though their
efforts counted for nothing. “I don’t want to sound overly critical,” the assistant
city manager, Joe Van Bullard, said, “but…they were assholes.”
FEMA was in high favor in Washington at the time. James Lee Witt, the
director, was a friend of President Clinton and had run the Arkansas Office of
Emergency Services when Clinton was governor. Witt mistakenly thought he
was acting at the direct behest of the president and could boss everyone around.
Even the army was not immune. FEMA made extravagant demands for military
airlifts to transport men and material, and if its requests were not met, “went
whining through the back door of the White House,” in the words of one military

--- PAGE BREAK ---demands for military
airlifts to transport men and material, and if its requests were not met, “went
whining through the back door of the White House,” in the words of one military

--- PAGE BREAK ---

memo writer. In his memoir, written a few years later, Witt described himself as
“the administration’s voice on the scene” and claimed the authority to take
charge of every other agency. His job, he said, was “keeping these people
moving in the same direction.” Nobody else believed he carried this authority,
and his high-handed manner made him a butt of jokes. The task force nicknamed
him Mr. Nit—for Nit Witt. “That’s what everyone felt about the guy,” one senior
task force member said.
Even the unflappable Weldon Kennedy was taken aback when one of Witt’s
deputies tried to pull rank over the FBI at a conference meeting. Kennedy
recounted: “He starts in, ‘Leon said this, and Leon said that, and Leon said
something else.’ My agent said, ‘Who the fuck is Leon and what does he have to
do with this?’ Turns out, he was talking about Leon Panetta, the White House
chief of staff. We had nothing to do but laugh. I told him, ‘Mr. Panetta is not
directing this investigation.’”
On the second day, FEMA tried to tell the fire department to stop digging, so
its search-and-rescue specialists could insert high-tech cameras and hearing
devices in the rubble. The fire department said the odds of finding anyone else
alive were steepening fast, and they couldn’t afford the time it would take to
plant the devices. FEMA countered that any remaining survivors might be
accidentally bulldozed if rescuers did not locate them first.
Kennedy had to remind FEMA this wasn’t their decision to make, but they
still would not listen. Kennedy called Louis Freeh, who called Janet Reno, who
called the White House. According to Kennedy: “Someone in the president’s
office, I assume Leon, called Mr. Witt and told him to cease and desist. That
didn’t make FEMA very happy.”
According to many people, it made FEMA vindictive. Instead of providing
equipment to anyone who needed it, free of paperwork, they started charging
item by item, even for shovels. FEMA told Don Browning, the Oklahoma City
police canine unit officer, that he and his dog were no longer performing rescue
work and would now provide security for the FEMA rescue teams instead. One
FEMA manager threatened to have Browning arrested for handing out FEMA
rain suits to city firefighters. “He was screaming that it was FEMA’s gear and it
was not to be touched,” Browning said.
Kennedy became increasingly exasperated that Witt would not turn over the
Murrah Building to his criminal investigators, even after it became clear no more
survivors could be found. “We submit,” Kennedy told Witt a week after the
bombing, “that you’re dragging this out as a training exercise for your people.”
The FBI did not gain full control for eleven days.
FEMA even took credit for the rescue effort of others. One news release put, “that you’re dragging this out as a training exercise for your people.”
The FBI did not gain full control for eleven days.
FEMA even took credit for the rescue effort of others. One news release put

--- PAGE BREAK ---

out by a FEMA offshoot from northern California claimed it was FEMA, not the
Oklahoma City Fire Department, that carried the dead bodies out of the Murrah
Building. On FEMA’s main Web site, a summary of events still posted after
more than fifteen years gives the impression that no rescuer entered the Murrah
Building on April 19 until FEMA arrived at 6:00 P.M. “One of the first
assignments,” the site explained, “was to search the second-floor nursery for
victims.” The city fire department was in the building nine hours earlier and
recovered the children’s bodies well before FEMA showed up.
A similar blindness to the fire department’s contribution can be found in
Witt’s book, Stronger in the Broken Places. “In those first hours before the
search-and-rescue teams arrived,” Witt writes, “firemen managed to clear the site
for hazardous materials, create a floor-by-floor manifest of who might’ve been
in the building…and begin the excruciating task of contacting relatives, friends,
and business associates of the Murrah workers.” There is no mention of the
extraordinary effort to rescue Daina Bradley, nothing about the personal hell first
responders went through to bring out the survivors and tend to their injuries.
Many in Oklahoma City never forgave Witt—for any of it.rt to rescue Daina Bradley, nothing about the personal hell first
responders went through to bring out the survivors and tend to their injuries.
Many in Oklahoma City never forgave Witt—for any of it.

IT DIDN’T TAKE THE FBI LONG TO DETERMINE THAT the Ryder truck had been rented from a
body shop in Junction City, Kansas. The owner, Eldon Elliott, had a flourishing
side business moving soldiers in and out of Fort Riley, the home of the army’s
1st Infantry Division, and owned a fleet of trucks. He was called by Ryder
headquarters in the mid-afternoon and told not to talk to anybody until the FBI
showed up. Special Agent Scott Crabtree appeared on his doorstep shortly
afterward.
Elliott told Crabtree that a man calling himself Robert Kling had picked up a
twenty-foot van on Monday, April 17. Elliott had prepared a damage assessment
report, which he gave to his office manager, Vicki Beemer. The man was about
five foot ten, medium build, with light brown hair cut short. Beemer, who was
interviewed next, said Kling had provided a social security number and a South
Dakota driver’s license number, which he read out but did not hand over. When
he gave his date of birth as April 19, 1972, she commented on his upcoming
birthday and joked that she had been married longer than he had been alive.
Kling provided no phone number. His purported new address in Omaha,
Nebraska, 428 Maple Drive, was almost identical to his purported address in
Redfield, South Dakota, 428 Malt Drive, but Beemer didn’t think anything of it.
He was, after all, a cash-paying customer. She had a fuzzier recall of his physical
appearance than Elliott, saying only that he had short light brown hair. She

--- PAGE BREAK ---ink anything of it.
He was, after all, a cash-paying customer. She had a fuzzier recall of his physical
appearance than Elliott, saying only that he had short light brown hair. She

--- PAGE BREAK ---

remembered a second person being in the shop with Kling, but couldn’t describe
him.
The employee with the most vivid recall was Tom Kessinger, a mechanic
who was in the office on his break when Kling and Beemer started talking.
Kessinger described Kling as talkative and nervous. He agreed with the others
about the hair, and also noticed his chin was pushed up and out and had a
wrinkle. Kessinger remembered that the second man wore a black T-shirt, with a
tattoo sticking out below the sleeve on his left arm. He appeared younger than
Kling, and was wearing a ball cap with a blue-and-white zigzag pattern.
Crabtree returned to his office and ran a check on Kling’s official data.
Everything—the driver’s license, the addresses, the social security number—was
bogus. He contacted Elliott’s body shop again, and said all three witnesses had to
come to Fort Riley for fingerprinting and more interviews. In the meantime, they
should not discuss their memories, in case it compromised their testimony.
This sequence is important, because federal prosecutors would later dissect it
to the tiniest detail to argue that Robert Kling must have been Timothy McVeigh,
and that no second person was with him when he rented the truck. Both
contentions would prove problematic.
The follow-up interviews revealed a clearer picture. Kling called the shop on
Friday, April 14, and booked a vehicle through Beemer. He said he was driving
to Omaha, then into Iowa and back to Omaha again. Beemer got the impression
he was an active-duty soldier, and she offered him the standard military discount.
When she asked how big a truck he needed, Kling asked for one that could carry
at least five thousand pounds. This was odd, as customers usually specified the
number of rooms they were moving, not the weight; Beemer had to consult a
chart twice before deciding he needed a twenty-footer. She asked if Kling
wanted some extra miles at no further charge, but he asked for two extra days
instead. She didn’t see why he would need more than the two days he had
already booked if his moving story was genuine, but she said nothing.
Early the next morning, on April 15, Kling came in and paid Elliott the full
$280 on the rental—in cash. That was a little unusual—he was asked only for
the $80 deposit—but Kling said he wanted to make sure he didn’t fritter away
the money over the weekend. And he wanted no insurance. He said he was used
to driving heavy-duty M35 cargo vehicles, “deuce-and-a-halfs,” as part of his
duties at Fort Riley, and felt confident he could handle a similar-size moving
truck. Elliott accepted that.
In this second interview, Elliott said he, too, had seen a second person when
Kling came in to pick up the truck. Like Kessinger, he remembered the cap with
blue stripes and agreed that this second man was shorter than Kling, about fiveid he, too, had seen a second person when
Kling came in to pick up the truck. Like Kessinger, he remembered the cap with
blue stripes and agreed that this second man was shorter than Kling, about five

--- PAGE BREAK ---a second person when
Kling came in to pick up the truck. Like Kessinger, he remembered the cap with
blue stripes and agreed that this second man was shorter than Kling, about five

--- PAGE BREAK ---

foot seven or eight. He had no memory of the man’s face. Prosecutors later
asserted that Elliott had spoken to his coworkers overnight and allowed
Kessinger’s memories to contaminate his. Elliott never accepted this explanation
and maintained that his story was consistent. “I told ’em there was two
gentlemen in here,” he said four years later, after the trials were over. “I never
remembered what the second guy looked like, but there were two guys here
together.” Nothing in the FBI documentation suggests he gave a different
account in the second interview, only that it was fuller. That account included
details Kessinger did not mention, such as Elliott’s memory of a light-blue sedan
parked outside. When Vicki Beemer was reinterviewed, she also recalled a detail
Kessinger had not offered—that the second man had crossed behind Kling to get
an ashtray, suggesting he was a smoker.
The federal prosecutors were right that these weren’t the world’s most
observant or reliable witnesses. Elliott said he saw a car parked outside; Beemer
said there was none. Elliott first described Kling wearing military-type clothing
on the Monday. Then he said he was wearing it on the Saturday; he couldn’t
remember what he was wearing on the Monday.
Still, all three agreed there were two men, and agreed on their basic physical
characteristics. After the interviews, a sketch artist named Ray Rozycki asked
them to match facial features in a book with what they remembered. Kessinger
was by far the most forthcoming witness, but he was not entirely satisfied with
the composite sketches Rozycki produced. The Kling portrait was close enough,
he said, but the second man was hazier. Rozycki had done his second sketch
head-on, even though Kessinger had seen him only from the side, and omitted
the ball cap. But Kessinger did not feel comfortable saying anything at the time.
“Hell, you know,” he said, “when the FBI tells you to point, you point.”had seen him only from the side, and omitted
the ball cap. But Kessinger did not feel comfortable saying anything at the time.
“Hell, you know,” he said, “when the FBI tells you to point, you point.”

TWO HOURS AFTER HE WAS BOOKED INTO THE NOBLE COUNTY JAIL on the gun and license plate
charges, Tim McVeigh tucked into a bologna sandwich and lay down for a nap.
He stayed asleep, or pretended to be, for the rest of the afternoon, rising for just
a few hours before retiring again at about 10:00 P.M.
McVeigh later told his cell mate Herbert Ferguson he was catching up on
sleep he lost in the army. More likely, he was avoiding conversation with the
assorted drunks and petty criminals who were all transfixed by the bombing and
talked of nothing else. Some of McVeigh’s cell mates later expressed skepticism
that McVeigh was sleeping, remembering big bags under his eyes. But extreme
sleepiness is also a symptom associated with withdrawal from crystal
methamphetamine, which McVeigh had been taking regularly.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing, remembering big bags under his eyes. But extreme
sleepiness is also a symptom associated with withdrawal from crystal
methamphetamine, which McVeigh had been taking regularly.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh expected to be granted bail and sent on his way within twenty-four
hours. But on Thursday morning, April 20, he learned his bail hearing was
delayed because the judge was tied up in a divorce case. This was a break for the
FBI, which had not begun to figure out McVeigh’s connection to the bombing.
Had his hearing gone ahead as scheduled, he could have upped and vanished.
McVeigh called Brent Goad, a local bail bondsman, so everything could be
set ahead of time. “Man,” he told him, “I’ve gotta get out of here.”
Goad said he could do nothing until a judge heard his case and set bond.
Even then, someone would need to cosign the paperwork. An unnerved McVeigh
talked about getting out another five or six times in the course of the two-and-a-
half-minute conversation. “He said ‘please,’ he was calm,” Goad said. “But he
was persistent.”
McVeigh recovered his composure and made sure to appear cool before his
cell mates. “He was not nervous,” said Mark Gibson, an assistant district
attorney for Noble County given the job of prosecuting him on the traffic
charges. “He was not upset about being arrested or about being charged. He said
he had never been arrested for anything before. But very militaristic. Everything
was, ‘Yes, sir,’ ‘No, sir,’ speak when spoken to, and standing erect, very polite,
very…soft-spoken.”charged. He said
he had never been arrested for anything before. But very militaristic. Everything
was, ‘Yes, sir,’ ‘No, sir,’ speak when spoken to, and standing erect, very polite,
very…soft-spoken.”

AS SOON AS THE FBI HAD THE COMPOSITE SKETCHES, DETECTIVES from multiple agencies
fanned out from Fort Riley to see who might recognize them. If the bombers
rented the Ryder truck in Junction City, there was a good chance they either
lived or had stayed nearby and someone would know them. If they were out-of-
towners, they might have registered at a motel and left traces there.
Mark Bouton, a burly FBI agent based in Topeka, was paired with a local
sheriff’s deputy, Garry Berges, and together they began what they thought would
be a tedious tour of motels along I-40 on the eastern end of town. One, the
Dreamland, was cut off from the others because of construction work on a
bridge, so they decided they should go there first.
The owner, Lea McGown, was a fastidious German woman who kept a close
watch on her guests. When Bouton and Berges showed her the sketches, she
thought the first one looked like Timothy McVeigh, a guest who had stayed for
four nights over the Easter weekend. But it wasn’t an exact match; she
remembered McVeigh having smaller lips, lighter eyes, and a longer, slimmer
neck. She also remembered him—correctly—as standing about six foot one, not
the five foot ten described by the body shop witnesses.
But McGown had other reasons to be suspicious of McVeigh. He hadn’t

--- PAGE BREAK ---mbered him—correctly—as standing about six foot one, not
the five foot ten described by the body shop witnesses.
But McGown had other reasons to be suspicious of McVeigh. He hadn’t

--- PAGE BREAK ---

wanted to show her his driver’s license. His car, an old Mercury, looked
alarmingly shabby, and had an Arizona license tag, hanging by a single screw,
which did not match the tag number he wrote on his registration card. There was
a further mismatch between the Arizona plate and the Michigan address he gave.
McVeigh said he traveled a lot on the gun-show circuit and didn’t really live
anywhere; the Michigan address belonged to a friend who let him use it on
official forms. McGown deliberately put McVeigh in room 25, next to the office,
where she could keep an eye on him.
News of the bombing gave McGown another big reason to be suspicious;
she had seen McVeigh on several occasions with a Ryder truck. McVeigh said he
was moving into the area and needed a few days to get straight. McGown hadn’t
questioned that at the time, but now she wondered about the truck and a six-foot
trailer McVeigh had parked on the grass in front of her office. The trailer was
loaded with something that jutted up about four feet. She couldn’t tell what it
was, because it was covered with a tarp and tied down with thick coils of rope.
It is not clear how quickly the FBI realized the significance of what
McGown had to tell them. Bouton and Berges, by their own accounts, had
McVeigh’s name as early as 1:30 P.M., and certainly no later than 3:00 P.M. on April
20. Yet several hours went by before this information was relayed to their
superiors back at Fort Riley, and hours more before it was transmitted to
Oklahoma City and Washington, D.C. The Ryder truck sighting, the most
important detail linking McVeigh to the bombing, was not even mentioned in the
criminal complaint supporting McVeigh’s arrest on bombing charges, which was
written around noon the following day. How did it get missed?
According to Bouton, he and Berges spent a few minutes chatting with
McGown about the bombing, then asked if she’d seen anyone over the previous
week with a Ryder truck. “Yes,” she replied, “and he was acting kind of funny
with it.”
McGown told Bouton that McVeigh had trouble closing the rear latch on the
truck and motioned as if he didn’t want her to see what was inside. When
Bouton saw McVeigh’s handwritten registration form, his heart leaped with
excitement, because the writing slanted to the left, just like Robert Kling’s
signature on the Ryder rental form. Bouton said he knew that only 4 or 5 percent
of the population writes with a backward slant.
Bouton interviewed four people that afternoon—McGown, her seventeen-
year-old son Eric, and two construction workers staying at the motel—who
recognized the John Doe One sketch as McVeigh. Bouton said he didn’t have
time to phone in his findings, because the county sheriff sent him and Berges to
another motel to look into a possible John Doe Two. At the second motel, heetch as McVeigh. Bouton said he didn’t have
time to phone in his findings, because the county sheriff sent him and Berges to
another motel to look into a possible John Doe Two. At the second motel, he

--- PAGE BREAK ---ton said he didn’t have
time to phone in his findings, because the county sheriff sent him and Berges to
another motel to look into a possible John Doe Two. At the second motel, he

--- PAGE BREAK ---

phoned an FBI supervisor at Fort Riley, Michael Pulice; according to Bouton,
Pulice refused to get too excited and said to bring his information to a debriefing
session at the army base that evening.
McGown’s version of the encounter was much briefer, and less cordial.
When Bouton and Berges arrived, she said, they barged past an older couple,
who were checking in, and placed some papers in front of her. McGown told the
law enforcement officers to wait until she finished with her guests. When she
looked at the papers and saw the composite sketches, she recognized the John
Doe One as McVeigh, and mentioned his name. But Bouton said they were
looking for someone named Kling, not McVeigh. This upset McGown, who
didn’t like to be second-guessed. She pulled out McVeigh’s registration card, but
when Berges reached out to grab it, she naturally pulled it back. She wanted a
copy for her files before handing it over. Bouton and Berges had no other
questions.
“They took the card, turned around, and left,” McGown said. “And I
thought, ‘That’s it, I’m never gonna see that card again.’”
McGown did not remember Bouton and Berges asking anything about the
Ryder truck, but she must have said something because a teletype to FBI
headquarters based on that day’s investigations described McVeigh leaving the
Dreamland Motel in the early hours of April 18 “in a Ryder rental truck.” That
teletype, however, was not written until 4:15 A.M. the following morning, a
seemingly extraordinary timelag. According to Joseph Bross, who was running
the Fort Riley end of the bombing investigation at the time, supervisors like
Michael Pulice were rapidly growing inured to reports of Ryder rental trucks
because they were receiving so many of them. At the time Bouton called in, the
number one lead the FBI was chasing in Kansas was a military explosives and
ordnance expert named Michael Fleenor, who was suspected—mistakenly—of
going AWOL from the base and was reported—also mistakenly—being seen
filling a Ryder truck with gas shortly before the bombing and asking for
directions to Oklahoma City. (He was quickly cleared of suspicion.)
Even when Bouton presented his findings to an evening meeting of more
than a hundred agents at Fort Riley, the Ryder truck angle—which Bross
remembered him specifically mentioning—did not resonate. The teletype sent to
Washington and Oklahoma City in the middle of the night hardly played it up,
mentioning the truck only in passing several hundred words into the document.
And the emergency response team in Washington was unimpressed. Joseph
Bross said the duty supervisor he spoke to dismissed the entire McVeigh
connection, saying the bureau’s focus at that point was on a Middle Eastern plot.
(In fact, the John Doe sketches had already been made public, and whilevisor he spoke to dismissed the entire McVeigh
connection, saying the bureau’s focus at that point was on a Middle Eastern plot.
(In fact, the John Doe sketches had already been made public, and while

--- PAGE BREAK ---smissed the entire McVeigh
connection, saying the bureau’s focus at that point was on a Middle Eastern plot.
(In fact, the John Doe sketches had already been made public, and while

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Abraham Ahmad, the Jordanian American from Oklahoma City, was still being
questioned, the Middle Eastern angle was fading fast. Ahmad himself was
quickly cleared.)
What is curious is that while investigators failed to recognize the
significance of the Ryder truck, they had no difficulty recognizing the
importance of the registration card. McVeigh did everyone the favor of checking
in under his real name and listing James Nichols’s farm address in Michigan,
when he could have used the Robert Kling alias and the same bogus address in
South Dakota. That information quickly generated leads in Michigan and
brought the Nichols brothers into the picture for the first time. But the truck was
somehow overlooked, and because of that establishing McVeigh as the lead
suspect became much more difficult. Without the link to the truck, McVeigh was
just another guy with a passing resemblance to a police sketch.
Most likely, the Ryder truck lead failed to generate the attention it warranted
at several different points along the way. It is difficult to judge from Bouton’s
paperwork how much he and Berges learned from Lea McGown on their first
visit to the Dreamland, and how much they picked up when they returned the
next day—he combined both visits into a single witness interview report. Bross
said that, from where he was sitting: “We just had so many Ryder trucks.”
Washington, meanwhile, was overwhelmed, especially on the night shift, and
would soon bring in reinforcements to shore up a struggling Criminal Division.
Oklahoma City was also copied in on Bross’s teletype and should have seen the
Ryder truck reference, but did not.
Once Bouton got the full story from Lea McGown, his findings raised two
significant problems that would later dog the federal authorities as they prepared
for trial. First, McGown and others heard voices coming from McVeigh’s room
on Sunday evening, April 16. Asked about this repeatedly over the next two
years, McGown remained adamant that she heard live voices, not the television.
Her testimony implied that at least one other person had access to the room,
because McVeigh had yet to return from Oklahoma City, where he and Terry
Nichols had gone to stash the Mercury. He got back around 1:00 A.M. McGown
remembered a “velvety” male voice she had heard in earlier phone calls she put
through to room 25.
She was not alone in associating other people with McVeigh at the
Dreamland. Bouton also interviewed a Chinese restaurant delivery boy called
Jeff Davis, who brought food to room 25 on Saturday, April 15, and later insisted
that someone other than McVeigh opened the door. The FBI tried repeatedly to
get him to change his testimony, both in their initial interviews and on the eve of
McVeigh’s trial. They felt the man who took the single serving of moo goo gaithe door. The FBI tried repeatedly to
get him to change his testimony, both in their initial interviews and on the eve of
McVeigh’s trial. They felt the man who took the single serving of moo goo gai

--- PAGE BREAK ---

pan must have been McVeigh, but Davis never wavered.
Second, McGown told Bouton she had seen McVeigh bring a Ryder truck to
the motel on Easter Sunday, a day before Robert Kling picked up his vehicle
from Eldon Elliott’s. The FBI would insist she was mistaken. But she and her
son remembered their first sighting of the Ryder in some detail, and their story
was corroborated by at least two other motel guests who testified in court.
Shortly after the McGowns returned from a family Easter lunch, they saw
McVeigh backing up the truck near the swimming pool. They told him he had to
park on the other side of the property, and McVeigh complied without question.
They noticed that this Ryder was different from the one they saw later. It looked
older; its yellow paint was bleached by exposure to the elements, and it had no
writing on the back. The second truck was brighter and newer.
This was the first and, arguably, the strongest of many clues that more than
one Ryder truck was involved. Investigators would grapple with that later. For
now, the priority was establishing Robert Kling’s real identity and running him
to ground. Standard accounts of the bombing suggest Bouton’s visit to the
Dreamland provided the first, and most important, link to McVeigh. But there
was also a second line of investigation, beginning the same day, which yielded
not only McVeigh’s name but also his physical characteristics and contact
details.important, link to McVeigh. But there
was also a second line of investigation, beginning the same day, which yielded
not only McVeigh’s name but also his physical characteristics and contact
details.

SHORTLY AFTER THE JOHN DOE SKETCHES WERE COMPLETED AND distributed, two young
military policemen walked into a well-known firearms and pawn shop near Fort
Riley. They showed the sketches to the owner, Pat Livingston, who recognized
them right away. He told them: “This is a customer of mine, I’ve sold him
several guns. I don’t know his name offhand. I’ll have to get back to you.”
Livingston was also pretty sure he’d seen John Doe One and John Doe Two
together.
Livingston was popular on the base with commanders and the rank and file,
and he also had multiple contacts in law enforcement. He remembered that John
Doe One had something to do with a bounced check, and after looking through
his financial records, came across the name Timothy James McVeigh and all his
details: a bad check McVeigh had written in September 1993 for a TEC-9
semiautomatic, and an ATF background check form known as a 4473, which
gave McVeigh’s full name, height, weight, date and place of birth, and driver’s
license number. McVeigh had purchased three guns from Livingston, starting in
1991, when he was still in uniform. The first was the Glock he was carrying
when Charlie Hanger pulled him over.

--- PAGE BREAK ---mber. McVeigh had purchased three guns from Livingston, starting in
1991, when he was still in uniform. The first was the Glock he was carrying
when Charlie Hanger pulled him over.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“My impression of McVeigh was that he was a gung-ho young G.I.,”
Livingston said. “He was real nice. He didn’t cuss. He was a respectful young
man.” Slowly, he recalled more about McVeigh’s darker-skinned companion, the
one who looked like the John Doe Two sketch. “He was short and stocky,” he
said, “but the thing that was impressive about him was that he had a real thick
neck, an unusual stocky neck. He had pockmarks on his face, and he had that
hat. It looked like a foreign soccer hat, all chartreuse and blue and pink. I
remember that stupid hat, because it was unusual.”
Tom Kessinger had remembered a brightly colored hat, and now Livingston
was noting one as well. And the hat didn’t come from the composite sketch,
because Ray Rozycki, the sketch artist, had left it off. The one thing Livingston
didn’t have was a name for John Doe Two. It wasn’t that he couldn’t remember.
He was pretty sure he never knew it.
Livingston called his best friend in law enforcement, county police detective
Al Riniker. “I told him I knew who the Oklahoma City bomber was,” he said. “I
was excited because I figured I had identified the first terrorist.” Livingston also
called the Criminal Investigation Division at Fort Riley, triggering an initial
discussion of who McVeigh was, where he had served, and how long he had
been out of the army. A check of McVeigh’s records revealed a single bar fight
that ended with him breaking his nose; otherwise, his army disciplinary record
was clean.
The events of the next few hours are something of a blur. It is not clear the
FBI was given the information from Livingston in a timely fashion; Joseph
Bross, who was in charge of the FBI operation at Fort Riley that day, said he
never received it. Communication between Fort Riley and the task force in
Oklahoma City was intermittent, mostly due to the command post being
inundated with tips and potential leads. The FBI in Oklahoma City burned
through two fax machines in the first twenty-four hours. But there were other
organizational issues. “Literally, people in Oklahoma City had no idea what was
going on in Junction City,” said Steve Chancellor, the army CID commander at
Fort Sill, Oklahoma, who drove up to the bomb scene within hours and stayed
for close to three weeks. “I was talking to Mr. Ricks, and he would give me a list
of questions. I would call the army CID at Fort Riley. They would give me the
answers, and I would tell them to Mr. Ricks, who would give me more
questions.”
Chancellor said it took more than twenty-four hours for the commanders at
Fort Riley to pick up the phone and talk directly to Oklahoma City. They did not
fax over Ray Rozycki’s composite sketches until Chancellor asked them to.
When the task force made those sketches public, at about 3:00 P.M. on April 20,d talk directly to Oklahoma City. They did not
fax over Ray Rozycki’s composite sketches until Chancellor asked them to.
When the task force made those sketches public, at about 3:00 P.M. on April 20,

--- PAGE BREAK ---klahoma City. They did not
fax over Ray Rozycki’s composite sketches until Chancellor asked them to.
When the task force made those sketches public, at about 3:00 P.M. on April 20,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the phones and fax lines went even crazier. Half of Middle America, it seemed,
had seen one John Doe or the other.
Still, the puzzle pieces came together. Pat Livingston provided the name
McVeigh and a reason to find him suspicious. In the early evening, when Mark
Bouton came up with the Dreamland Motel registration card, it not only
confirmed McVeigh as a suspect but gave investigators a vital new clue, the
Nichols farm address, which tallied with the information on McVeigh’s
Michigan driver’s license.
In Decker, about a hundred miles north of Detroit, James and Terry Nichols
were known for their connections among the radical fringe of the militia and
“common law” movements, which rejected all personal ties to the government.
The local sheriff told the FBI he regarded both Nichols brothers as “crazies” and
had a thick file on them, including a five-month-old statement from James’s ex-
wife, Kelli Langenburg. She said they had been setting off small homemade
bombs and rockets, and she believed James kept large quantities of fertilizer and
fuel oil on the farm. The FBI contacted Langenburg, who confirmed that
McVeigh was a friend of the Nicholses and had stayed at the farm many times.
She also said her sister Lana used to be married to Terry Nichols and was in
regular touch. By late evening, investigators at the Oklahoma City command
post had half a dozen names, deemed to be “of extreme interest,” pinned up on a
bulletin board. Robert Kling was one. McVeigh was another. Terry and James
Nichols were there, too.
When Pat Livingston heard the investigation was zeroing in on a couple of
guys named Nichols, he looked into his records again and realized he had sold
Terry two Glocks just a few months earlier—the same sort of pistol he had sold
McVeigh in 1991. Terry Nichols, he recalled, was a furtive man who was a
regular at army surplus auctions at Fort Riley. “Nichols was a slimy, conniving
guy who wouldn’t look you in the eye,” Livingston said. “I wouldn’t trust him as
far as I can throw him.” When Nichols came in to purchase his second Glock, he
asked if Livingston sold blasting caps. Later, Nichols asked the same thing at a
nearby store that Livingston also owned. Even in the deeply entrenched gun
culture in and around Fort Riley, people interested in explosive components
tended to trigger alarm bells. “I told him we didn’t deal in anything like that,”
Livingston said. “Knowing me, I probably called the feds.”
Livingston heard from a friend in the surplus business that just a month or
two earlier, Nichols had been shipping military supplies—mostly uniforms and
boots—to the Philippines. He appeared to have come into some money, because
he was spending more lavishly at auctions, and overspending on basic items like
shovels. A few days before the bombing, Livingston sent out a recall notice onred to have come into some money, because
he was spending more lavishly at auctions, and overspending on basic items like
shovels. A few days before the bombing, Livingston sent out a recall notice on

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the Glocks, but Nichols was not responding. “He wouldn’t sign for a registered
letter. Nothing,” Livingston said.
Livingston was not entirely surprised at the bombing of the Murrah
Building, because he’d been hearing noises about just such an attack for months.
He heard a lot of things from behind the counter at Pat’s Pawn & Gun Shop. Two
years before, he had tipped off the army CID that the Michigan Militia was
actively recruiting at Fort Riley and spreading inflammatory rhetoric about
avenging Waco. The CID brass didn’t want to believe him at first. Much more
recently, he had heard that someone was going to blow up a federal building,
probably in Kansas City because the FBI and the ATF shared offices there.
At the end of March, the chatter intensified, but the target changed—instead
of Kansas City, it was Omaha, Dallas, or Oklahoma City. Livingston put in a call
to the Joint Terrorism Task Force in Kansas City and made sure he took down
the name of the officer he spoke to. (His name was Reid, badge number 4857,
and the date was March 30.) “I’d heard so much of this crap, and it sounded kind
of foolish that somebody would do this,” Livingston said. “I didn’t have no
name, or how, or when. I was just hearing rumors. But I called them and warned
them. That’s all a guy can do.”sounded kind
of foolish that somebody would do this,” Livingston said. “I didn’t have no
name, or how, or when. I was just hearing rumors. But I called them and warned
them. That’s all a guy can do.”

ANOTHER CLUE POINTING TO BROADER KNOWLEDGE OF THE BOMB plot arrived on the afternoon
of April 20 at the offices of the Liberty Lobby, a radical right-wing group based
in Washington, D.C., whose publication, The Spotlight, was required reading for
much of the Patriot Movement. The clue was a handwritten envelope,
postmarked “Oklahoma City” and dated April 17. The writing was not an
obvious match for either McVeigh or Nichols. It contained a Depression-era
photograph of rural Oklahoma with the caption: “Dust Storm Approaching at 60
Miles Per Hour” and a newspaper clipping about Gordon Kahl, an iconic gun-
toting tax rebel who died in a shootout with the feds in 1983 and went on to
inspire revolutionaries like Wayne Snell and Bob Matthews.
Mark Lane, the Liberty Lobby’s top lawyer, understood immediately that the
postcard might be evidence and told his colleagues not to touch it. (Too late—
they already had.) He made copies of everything, and mailed the original
envelope and its contents to Janet Reno’s office.
Almost a year later, Lane received a phone call from Larry Mackey, one of
the federal prosecutors, saying he’d heard a rumor about an interesting postcard
but could not locate it.
“Well, you had it,” Lane told him. “And now you don’t have it. Is that
correct?” Lane said he would be glad to send Mackey another copy, but without

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the opportunity to conduct chemical tests on the originals it was unlikely to be of
much value. Lane never heard anything about this again.o send Mackey another copy, but without

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the opportunity to conduct chemical tests on the originals it was unlikely to be of
much value. Lane never heard anything about this again.

TERRY NICHOLS WAS AT LAST SHOWING SIGNS OF NERVOUSNESS. BY his account, he had known
nothing about the bombing until the morning of April 20, twenty-four hours
later, when he visited a cable television shop and was shocked by the news on
the screens. He bought three newspapers to try to determine if this was the bomb
he and McVeigh had built. Again, one senses a wall of denial. Could he really
doubt the origin of the explosion that gutted the Murrah Building? Still, he took
no action until 5:00 P.M., when he drove to the Herington storage unit and cleared
out McVeigh’s belongings.
Even at this point, he appeared to be following McVeigh’s instructions as
much as looking out for himself. One item was a box of three hundred electric
blasting caps, wrapped in Christmas paper, that he and McVeigh considered
using but chose not to. “Tim,” he recounted, “said he’d pick those up later but if
they were still there by Thursday night that I was to pick them up.” Nichols
seemed almost robotic, programmed to go to the storage locker when he was
told. But some self-preservation kicked in, because he also removed McVeigh’s
Ruger mini-30, his rucksack and duffel bag, and the license plate McVeigh had
taken off the back of the Mercury. Nichols also swept up some white ammonium
nitrate pellets he noticed on the floor. “I figured I didn’t want anything left in
there that could be incriminating to me if it was McVeigh who actually did the
OKC bombing,” he later explained. He was still saying “if”—allowing room in
his mind for doubt, or hope.
Nichols drove home and tossed the gear into his garage. Arguably, it was
more of a liability there than in storage, but Nichols seemed oblivious to the
danger. He continued to act as though nothing could happen to him.and tossed the gear into his garage. Arguably, it was
more of a liability there than in storage, but Nichols seemed oblivious to the
danger. He continued to act as though nothing could happen to him.

AT FBI HEADQUARTERS, LOUIS FREEH WAS RIVETED BY THE GROWING evidence on the Nichols
brothers. He wanted a team to surround Terry’s house in Kansas, and another to
raid James’s farm in Michigan. He pestered the local special agents in charge to
make these things happen as fast as possible and was not happy when they
needed more time. Freeh “continued to call and interrogate the SACs almost
continuously,” according to Buck Revell, a veteran G-man who had retired
shortly before the bombing and objected strongly to Freeh’s handling of it.
Pressure from the top continued through the night. Freeh’s own performance
was being scrutinized hour by hour by the attorney general and the White House.
His two top commanders in the bureau’s Strategic Information and Operations

--- PAGE BREAK ---Freeh’s own performance
was being scrutinized hour by hour by the attorney general and the White House.
His two top commanders in the bureau’s Strategic Information and Operations

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Center, the equivalent of the White House Situation Room, monitored the
investigation constantly. Larry Potts, the FBI’s acting deputy director, and Bob
“Bear” Bryant, the assistant director in charge of national security, refused to
leave their desks, even to catch a few hours’ rest. Instead, they downed one
coffee after another and chain-smoked. They were, in the words of their SIOC
colleague I. C. Smith, “out on their feet.” Smith told Potts: “For God’s sakes,
Larry, go home.” But he wouldn’t do it. “They were caught up in this paranoia
that the investigation would go down the tubes if something happened that was
not on their watch,” Smith recalled. “These people were zombies.”
At about 5:00 A.M., April 20, the Secret Service was told the FBI was sending
its elite Hostage Rescue Team to Junction City to smoke out Terry Nichols. At
the same time, the ATF and FBI were en route to the Decker farm for a joint
operation. But the feds still needed more evidence, and some very basic
information, such as an address for Terry Nichols.
Time was of the essence, because nobody at this stage knew if the Oklahoma
bombing was a one-off. The prospect of follow-up bombings was a major
preoccupation in the regular conference calls between the field commanders and
headquarters. “Maybe this wasn’t one person. Maybe it was ten people hitting a
federal building in every city,” one senior FBI manager on the calls said. “There
was intense pressure to get the thing solved.”
Yet the case against the three leading suspects was still painfully thin. Pat
Livingston and Lea McGown had connected the John Doe One sketch to
Timothy McVeigh, who had connections to the Nichols brothers. The brothers’
radical ideas, which McVeigh probably shared, indicated hostility toward the
federal government. James Nichols’s ex-wife talked about ammonium nitrate
bomb experiments on the farm. But that was all. These shards of information
hardly constituted a conclusive case; a little countervailing evidence could
eliminate them as suspects.
The case against McVeigh looked especially problematic at this stage. His
exemplary military record included the Bronze Star for his “flawless devotion to
duty” during the 1991 Gulf War. He had undergone explosives training, but not
enough to teach him to build a large bomb. McVeigh had left the army with an
honorable discharge at the end of 1991, and whatever he had been doing since
did not involve any discernible criminal activity.
In the evening of April 20, Walt Lamar, the FBI agent who had monitored
the video surveillance tapes, suggested an offline search on McVeigh from the
bureau’s National Crime Information Center. Everyone in law enforcement knew
what an online search was—agents could access the NCIC’s computer database
and check a suspect’s criminal record. An offline search involved calling NCIC’sion Center. Everyone in law enforcement knew
what an online search was—agents could access the NCIC’s computer database
and check a suspect’s criminal record. An offline search involved calling NCIC’s

--- PAGE BREAK ---

offices in Clarksburg, West Virginia, and asking a technician to search reel upon
reel of magnetic tape for vehicle or criminal record checks. If McVeigh had ever
been pulled over or asked for his ID, the NCIC might have picked up a trace of
it. Lamar put in the call, saying it was top priority. It was several hours before
the NCIC came back with an answer.ver
been pulled over or asked for his ID, the NCIC might have picked up a trace of
it. Lamar put in the call, saying it was top priority. It was several hours before
the NCIC came back with an answer.

AT FIRST, LANA PADILLA, TERRY NICHOLS’S EX-WIFE, SEEMED TOO normal to have any
association with participants in a bomb plot. She was a real estate agent in Las
Vegas, a homeowner and divorcée with three children, two by a previous
marriage and one, twelve-year-old Josh, by Nichols. When agents Alan Gough
and Dan Walters dropped in on her office at about 8:30 A.M. on April 21, she was
stunned to learn it was about the bombing and even more stunned to see pencil
sketches of McVeigh and her ex-husband. (They probably came from Kelli
Langenburg.) She knew about Nichols’s radical politics, of course. She
mistrusted his friendship with McVeigh, whom she regarded as dangerous and a
bad influence. But she never thought Nichols would involve himself in blowing
up a federal building, if only for the sake of their son, Josh, whom he adored.
Padilla said the sketches were accurate, though she’d never met McVeigh
and recognized him only from photographs. She volunteered Nichols’s address,
and said she had spoken to him that morning. Had he sounded normal? Yes. A
bit rushed but normal. Padilla said they had argued about their son, as they often
did. She did not initially describe the substance of the argument, because it
concerned a troublingly large amount of money she did not know how to
explain. But she went to her safe and copied some documents Nichols had given
her five months earlier. They told the whole extraordinary story all by
themselves.
The previous November, Nichols abruptly left the country for the
Philippines. He had a young Filipina wife, Marife Torres, a mail-order bride he
married when she was still a teenager, and had made several trips to visit her
family. But this time he seemed scared for his life. Padilla had ample opportunity
to size him up, because he stayed with her and her new husband for almost two
weeks before his departure. She wondered if he was suicidal. He insisted on
sleeping with a loaded revolver in his waistband.
At this point, Nichols and McVeigh were in the gun-show business, but their
relationship had deteriorated. McVeigh kept calling, so she did not think the rift
was serious. She assumed Nichols was having money problems and was
depressed about his marriage. Marife had left for the Philippines in September,
right around the time Nichols quit his previous job as a farmhand, and did notNichols was having money problems and was
depressed about his marriage. Marife had left for the Philippines in September,
right around the time Nichols quit his previous job as a farmhand, and did not

--- PAGE BREAK ---oney problems and was
depressed about his marriage. Marife had left for the Philippines in September,
right around the time Nichols quit his previous job as a farmhand, and did not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

say when she might return. Nichols, meanwhile, had no home; he had been
living in cheap motels and communicating with calling cards.
When Padilla asked how long Nichols planned to be in Asia, he responded
by giving her a crudely taped-up brown paper grocery bag and told her to open it
if he did not return within sixty days. Padilla and young Josh both found this
deeply disturbing. “Josh started to cry on the way back from the airport. He said,
‘I’m not going to see my dad again,’” Padilla recounted. The very next day, she
tore open the package despite Nichols’s strict instructions. She found a recent
amendment to his life insurance policy, replacing her with Marife as his
beneficiary. There were two power-of-attorney forms, giving her the authority to
sell a handful of stocks Nichols owned, and some precious metals sitting loose in
the bag. In an envelope addressed to her, she found a list of things “to read and
do immediately.” Two items jumped out. The first was about a recently rented
storage unit in Las Vegas, whose contents he wanted her to sell for Josh. The
second described a package he had hidden behind one of her kitchen drawers,
which he said was intended to provide for Marife and his infant daughter,
Nicole.
Finally, Padilla found a sealed envelope addressed to McVeigh’s sister
Jennifer. Inside was a second envelope, addressed to McVeigh. It was a brief
note, all in upper case, with more references to storage units. Two more lines
leaped off the page. Both were cryptic, but had the unambiguous ring of bad
news. The first was an exhortation to McVeigh: “YOUR ON YOUR OWN. GO
FOR IT!!” The second left Padilla thunderstruck: “As far as heat, none that I
know of, this would be for the purpose of my death.” Her eyes locked on that
last word. “It was a suicide note,” she remembered thinking. “A damn suicide
note. Terry was going to kill himself!”
The FBI focused instead on the word “heat” and what appeared to be a
criminal plot tying him to McVeigh. The “GO FOR IT!!” line suggested Nichols
was an enthusiastic participant in whatever it was. It was not long before Padilla
was whisked to the FBI office for more detailed questioning. The special agent
in charge, Randy Prillaman, told her right away that Nichols and McVeigh “were
both going to fry.”
Padilla kept talking. She said she waited until Josh flew to Michigan for
Christmas in mid-December 1994 before daring to look behind her kitchen
drawer. She and her older son, Barry, dismantled the unit and found a Ziploc bag
stuffed with $20 and $100 bills—$20,000 in all. Padilla was confused, because
she thought Nichols had been on the verge of destitution. “What is he doing?”
she wondered. “Robbing banks?”
Next she visited the storage locker, where she and Barry found gold coins,onfused, because
she thought Nichols had been on the verge of destitution. “What is he doing?”
she wondered. “Robbing banks?”
Next she visited the storage locker, where she and Barry found gold coins,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

gold bars, and silver bullion stacked neatly in boxes, along with some small
green stones that looked like jade. It was all worth many tens of thousands of
dollars. She was not surprised to find Nichols’s tent and fishing gear, along with
supplies of freeze-dried food, but she was baffled by the wigs, masks, makeup,
and pantyhose.
Nichols returned from the Philippines in mid-January, and flew into a fury
with Padilla for opening the brown paper package. When she confessed to taking
$5,000 from the kitchen drawer, he replied: “You can’t do that, Lana. I need that
money.” He was angry; the veins in his neck were bulging. At that moment, the
phone rang, and McVeigh asked for Nichols. When they finished speaking,
Nichols said he needed to lend the money to McVeigh. Padilla was unimpressed,
but in the end she and Nichols compromised. He would take back $2,000,
leaving $3,000 for her and Josh. This was the money the two of them were still
arguing about on the morning of April 21, just before the FBI arrived.
As Padilla kept implicating Nichols further, the agents realized they needed
to keep her and the rest of her family secluded. So they moved into Circus
Circus, one of the less glamorous hotels on the Las Vegas Strip. They were
checked in under assumed names and shuttled from there to the FBI office for
the next six days.
First, the FBI needed Padilla to tell them about Nichols’s psychological
makeup to help them arrest him without anyone getting hurt. They knew he was
now living in a house he had purchased after his return from the Philippines and
feared he might barricade himself in and initiate a long siege. Marife was back
now, too, along with Nicole, so innocent lives were at stake.he had purchased after his return from the Philippines and
feared he might barricade himself in and initiate a long siege. Marife was back
now, too, along with Nicole, so innocent lives were at stake.

THE CASE AGAINST MCVEIGH RECEIVED ANOTHER BOOST EARLY ON April 21, when a man who
had worked with him as a security guard in upstate New York walked into the
FBI’s Buffalo office. Carl LeBron said he had befriended McVeigh, only to
become so alarmed by his talk of radical action he started recording their
conversations. He was afraid McVeigh’s threats had come to fruition in
Oklahoma City, not least because McVeigh looked like the John Doe One sketch
on the front of that morning’s newspaper.
LeBron and McVeigh had teamed up for about eight months in 1992, after
McVeigh left the army, to guard an aerospace research company not far from the
Buffalo airport. McVeigh distributed radical literature and encouraged LeBron to
read The Turner Diaries. The siege at Ruby Ridge was a big topic of
conversation, as was Waco; LeBron said McVeigh had made a pilgrimage to
Texas during the fifty-one-day standoff and came back furious at the ATF and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FBI. In their more recent exchanges, McVeigh talked about “doing something he
had wanted to do” but was unclear about specifics.
LeBron’s tip gave the FBI two things it badly needed to establish probable
cause to arrest McVeigh: a psychological profile suggesting he was capable of
mass murder, and a motive for the bombing. The bureau eventually lost interest
in LeBron because he lacked credibility; he spouted off about UFOs and mini-
submarines the government was using to smuggle hard drugs. In the moment,
though, he was downright providential.t interest
in LeBron because he lacked credibility; he spouted off about UFOs and mini-
submarines the government was using to smuggle hard drugs. In the moment,
though, he was downright providential.

WHEN TERRY NICHOLS AWOKE ON APRIL 21, HE FINALLY STARTED doing something about the
incriminating items around his house. McVeigh still had not shown up and he
understood, somewhere behind the walls of denial he had erected, that this was
ominous.
First he went through McVeigh’s rucksack, telling himself he was doing it to
look for a set of “rabbit ears,” a portable indoor antenna for his television.
McVeigh was supposed to have driven the antenna out from Las Vegas along
with the TV, but Nichols hadn’t found it in the storage locker or anywhere else.
His search became near-obsessive, a pretext perhaps not to think too hard about
events 250 miles to the south. On the morning of the bombing, he went into
town to ask about the price of a basic roof antenna, and balked when he heard it
would be $200 or $300. On April 20, he reluctantly ordered cable service,
rationalizing to himself that Marife would appreciate the choice of channels. Still
he kept looking for his antenna. “Silly as it may sound,” he later wrote, “I did
want those rabbit ears.”
He found no rabbit ears in the rucksack, but he did pull out a hand grenade.
That sobered him in a hurry. As soon as he could get away—after the cable guy
had come and gone—Nichols drove to a river north of town and tossed both the
grenade and the license plate from the Mercury into the rushing spring water. He
also buried an incriminating 50-caliber rifle. On his return, he remembered he
had two half-empty bags of ammonium nitrate in his garage. He emptied them
into a plastic bucket and hastily sprinkled the contents on his front lawn. The
fertilizer was so thick, a seventy-five-year-old farmer across the street later said
it looked like wet snow. The bags had nothing to do with the bombing: Nichols
had bought them a month earlier, thinking he could make money by grinding up
the contents and scooping them into small containers. Several people later
testified they had seen him selling them at gun shows. “He was,” one surplus
dealer said, “the only dumbass I ever did see do it.”
Two more items in the garage worried Nichols: the box of blasting capsestified they had seen him selling them at gun shows. “He was,” one surplus
dealer said, “the only dumbass I ever did see do it.”
Two more items in the garage worried Nichols: the box of blasting caps

--- PAGE BREAK ---

wrapped in Christmas paper, which he had retrieved from the storage locker, and
another box, containing sixty-eight nitromethane tubes, part of a binary
explosive kit called Kinestik. Nichols didn’t want to ditch the boxes, but he
didn’t regard the storage locker as safe, because there was no telling what
McVeigh might reveal if he was in custody. So he dug a hole under the crawl
space in his basement and buried them, along with some Primadet shock tube,
smoke grenades, hand flares, and two bomb-making handbooks.
It wasn’t much of a hiding place, but it was effective.

THE NCIC OFFLINE SEARCH PAID OFF, SHOWING THAT A HIGHWAY PATROL TROOPER in Noble County
had run a criminal record check on Timothy McVeigh about an hour and a half
after the bombing. Mark Michalic, an ATF agent on the task force, looked at a
map and saw that Noble County was directly on the road from Oklahoma City to
Kansas. With mounting excitement, he started making phone calls.
“Holy fuck! He’s sittin’ in jail!” Michalic announced after talking to Charlie
Hanger. That got everyone’s attention.
Michalic called Jerry Cook, the Noble County sheriff. “Have you still got
this guy?” he asked. He hardly believed the good news. “Hold on to him,”
Michalic implored. “Don’t let him go!”
He couldn’t have cut it any finer. The arraignment hearing postponed from
the day before was at last going ahead, and McVeigh was already downstairs,
waiting to enter court. The judge was running late, again, or McVeigh might
have been gone already.
“Spin that boy around and put him back in your hotel,” Michalic said as
calmly as he could manage.
Michalic put his hand over the receiver and told his colleagues: “We got
him.”
The room erupted in cheers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---put him back in your hotel,” Michalic said as
calmly as he could manage.
Michalic put his hand over the receiver and told his colleagues: “We got
him.”
The room erupted in cheers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

{ 4 }
TIM AND TERRY AND JAMES AND … THAT’S IT
Shortly after noon on April 21, Tim McVeigh found himself in an overcrowded
room in the Noble County courthouse under a barrage of questions.
“Do you have any idea why the FBI wants to talk to you?” Agent Floyd
Zimms asked.
“Yes,” McVeigh responded. His eyes were expressionless.
“What do you mean by yes?” asked Zimms’s colleague Jim Norman.
“That thing in Oklahoma City, I guess.”
It was a lame, uncharacteristically incriminating response, but McVeigh was
exhausted and demoralized. Barely two hours earlier, he had still been hopeful as
he waited in an empty courtroom to be called in to the judge. But then Sheriff
Cook, whom he had not previously encountered, told him the judge was running
late, and McVeigh began to suspect something was up.
McVeigh couldn’t help noticing people looking at him strangely. His cell
mates were being taken outside one by one, and he figured, rightly, that they
were being questioned about him.
Meanwhile, Sheriff Cook and McVeigh’s prosecutor, Mark Gibson, had to
decide what protocol to follow before the feds arrived. Gibson didn’t want to
keep McVeigh waiting indefinitely, because he had already been in custody for
forty-eight hours without a hearing, so he pushed to proceed with a bond
hearing. Gibson even got on the phone with the FBI and told them they needed
to hurry. “Until you’ve got something,” he said, “we’ve got to treat this guy like
we treat anybody else. If bond is set, and you’re not ready and he can make
bond, he’s going to make bond.”
Gibson asked McVeigh where he was from and what his financial
circumstances were. He needed to consider how likely it was that his defendant
might flee, or commit other crimes while out on bond. Even without the
bombing, McVeigh fit into a number of high-risk categories. He had been
arrested with a semiautomatic and a cop-killer bullet, and he had no fixed
address. (He told Gibson he was traveling from Arizona to Michigan and lived
“here and there.”)
Bail was set at $5,000, far beyond his means. McVeigh tried to charm the
judge, pointing out that he had no criminal record and meant no harm. The judgerizona to Michigan and lived
“here and there.”)
Bail was set at $5,000, far beyond his means. McVeigh tried to charm the
judge, pointing out that he had no criminal record and meant no harm. The judge

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd lived
“here and there.”)
Bail was set at $5,000, far beyond his means. McVeigh tried to charm the
judge, pointing out that he had no criminal record and meant no harm. The judge

--- PAGE BREAK ---

appreciated his input, but it made no difference. He was sent back to the fourth
floor, where he made three separate calls to a local public defender, Royce
Hobbs. He could only leave a message and, shortly after, the lines went dead. A
passing jail employee told him they must be out of order, and McVeigh slammed
the receiver in frustration.
It was Sheriff Cook who cut the phone lines, on the recommendation of Walt
Lamar, the first FBI agent to arrive in Perry. Lamar told Cook he should lock
down the courthouse, surround it with crime tape, and set up a press area in
anticipation of the coming media scrum. “You really think all that is necessary?”
Cook asked. Lamar knew it was. The first thing he had encountered after
arriving via helicopter was a television news crew from Tulsa. Shortly after, the
phones started ringing with inquiries from other reporters. “If they are calling,”
Lamar told Cook, “they are coming.”
Moments after McVeigh realized the phones were dead, he heard the
whirring of a second FBI helicopter. This one contained a whole team of
investigators, who had first stopped at the site of McVeigh’s abandoned car on I-
35 and discovered its trove of antigovernment literature. That, along with the
timing and location of the arrest, made them feel sure they had their man.
Unfortunately, it also put them in a gung-ho mood that did little to induce
McVeigh to open up. Rather than questioning him in an intimate setting, they
found the biggest room available, the county elections office across the hall from
Sheriff Cook’s cramped workspace, and invited every law officer on the scene to
pile in.
McVeigh answered the agents’ perfunctory questions about his name and
weight and height, but stopped when asked for his birthplace. He was back in
soldier mode, determined to give nothing away to the enemy. He would not even
sign a form advising him of his rights.
“There should have been two people max in the room with McVeigh,” a
seasoned bureau agent on the scene lamented. “I’m in no doubt he wanted to
shout to the heavens that he did this.”
Instead, McVeigh merely listened as the FBI told him how he had been
identified, and showed him the John Doe One sketch. His main concern was that
someone might shoot him as FBI agents escorted him from the building. A
crowd of several hundred was already massing noisily outside.and showed him the John Doe One sketch. His main concern was that
someone might shoot him as FBI agents escorted him from the building. A
crowd of several hundred was already massing noisily outside.

THE ENTIRE DETROIT DIVISION OFFICE OF THE FBI WAS MAKING preparations to descend on
James Nichols’s farm. They took their time, because they wanted to be sure their
raid didn’t turn into an armed standoff, and because they still needed to establish

--- PAGE BREAK ---s to descend on
James Nichols’s farm. They took their time, because they wanted to be sure their
raid didn’t turn into an armed standoff, and because they still needed to establish

--- PAGE BREAK ---

whether Nichols was a suspect, a material witness, or just a guy who kept
spectacularly bad company.
Joe Martinolich, the Detroit special agent in charge and one of the bureau’s
most widely respected senior managers, knew Nichols was a person of interest
by midnight on April 20 and had his assault team assembled by dawn.
Martinolich asked the Sanilac County sheriff, Virgil Strickler, to keep the
growing law enforcement presence hidden until they were ready to pounce.
Strickler knew the layout of the Nichols farm, and also had a good idea who had
been coming and going over the past several months.
Most important, Sheriff Strickler provided access to his informants. One was
Daniel Stomber, Nichols’s neighbor who said he had seen James and Terry make
bombs out of fertilizer, peroxide, and bleach, and detonate them in plastic soda
bottles. He recalled how James Nichols boasted about his bomb-making skills.
He also remembered the brothers’ vitriolic comments about Waco, including
James saying he wouldn’t be sorry to see someone pop off a federal judge or
even assassinate the president. Stomber further remembered a camouflage-clad
friend named Tim—he did not know his last name—who had lived on the farm
for a while but moved away in early 1994.
Another witness said that in December 1993 he saw two white men enter a
hobby shop in Marlette, about ten miles south of Decker, and ask for 100 percent
liquid nitro model airplane fuel. One of the men gave his name as Terry Tuttle
and left a bogus phone number that was one digit off James Nichols’s real
number. The store assistant said he stocked only 10–15 percent liquid nitro but
would order the stronger stuff. Two weeks later, the men returned, but the store
would not or could not fulfill the order—probably because pure liquid nitro
airplane fuel can be used as an explosive. The surname Tuttle was later
established as a frequent alias of McVeigh’s.
This was now more than enough to seek a search warrant on the Decker
farm. And, in the early afternoon, the feds were given the perfect opportunity to
move in, as James Nichols got in his car and started driving south. He later said
he was simply going about his business, stopping at the bank and at an auto parts
store to pay for repairs on a tractor engine. But he also mentioned that, just
before he left his house, a neighbor tipped him off that some farmhouse in
Decker was about to be raided. So he could have left for his own protection.
As Nichols drove south, he saw helicopters, news trucks, and an ambulance
heading in the opposite direction. As soon as he arrived at the bank, he asked the
staff to turn on a radio so he could find out what was going on. He later claimed
he still had no idea this had anything to do with him. His account adopts an
almost ridiculous tone of aw-shucks innocence: “I tried to imagine who in thisfind out what was going on. He later claimed
he still had no idea this had anything to do with him. His account adopts an
almost ridiculous tone of aw-shucks innocence: “I tried to imagine who in this

--- PAGE BREAK ---

area could be involved in anything nasty enough to interest federal law
enforcement agencies,” he wrote. “I couldn’t think of anyone…. Who could it
possibly be?”
Soon, the feds were crawling over every inch of his property. When he
returned from Marlette, the crush of police vehicles and satellite trucks
surrounding his house was so great he had to ask a state trooper for help getting
through. The trooper asked him who he was, then called over an FBI agent, who
conducted a thorough body search and went through the contents of Nichols’s
car.

AGENT STEPHEN SMITH HAD A PROBLEM: HE COULDN’T FIND TERRY NICHOLS’S house in
Herington. He was the advance man for an entire FBI search team, but nobody
had checked the address provided by Lana Padilla before he took off from Fort
Riley. By the time he learned from local police that Nichols lived at 109 South
Second Street, not 901, the rest of the team was already closing in.
Smith did a quick drive-by, noticing Nichols’s blue GMC pickup outside the
modest wood-framed house, before he ditched his rental car and returned with a
colleague in a more weather-beaten Cutlass Supreme. With luck, nobody would
notice them. They sat, and watched, and waited.dest wood-framed house, before he ditched his rental car and returned with a
colleague in a more weather-beaten Cutlass Supreme. With luck, nobody would
notice them. They sat, and watched, and waited.

BACK IN LAS VEGAS, THE FBI HAD BEGUN QUESTIONING TWELVE-YEAR-OLD Josh Nichols.
Agents wanted to know everything—about the week he had just spent in
Herington with his father, about his father’s movements, about any contact he
had had with Tim McVeigh.
The boy was initially leery but opened up a little to a female agent named
Debbie Calhoun. She asked Josh about his family and the time he spent on the
Nichols farm in Michigan. She also asked Josh if he had any contact with
explosives. “My dad has a lot of guns,” the boy replied. “We shoot and we make
some little bombs sometimes.”
Both Calhoun and Lana Padilla, who was in the room at the time, were
stunned. Neither said anything, preferring to let Josh keep talking. “I know how
to build a bomb,” he went on. “It really isn’t hard. My dad and I used to build
them all the time.”
Calhoun was soon convinced Josh knew more about the bombing than he
was letting on—as was his mother. During a break in questioning, shortly after
the family learned that McVeigh had been found, Josh whispered to Padilla:
“Mom, there were going to be other bombs. There were supposed to be three
bombings. Don’t tell anybody.” Josh went on to say: “The plan was to do one,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

followed by two others. Three altogether.”
If Padilla had been able to think straight, she would not have allowed the
FBI to ask another question without calling a lawyer. But she clung to the belief
that Nichols had nothing to do with the bombing. Maybe Josh and Terry had
some information to point the FBI in the right direction, she rationalized. Let
them tell what they know, then the family’s lives could return to normal.do with the bombing. Maybe Josh and Terry had
some information to point the FBI in the right direction, she rationalized. Let
them tell what they know, then the family’s lives could return to normal.

AS HIS BROTHER WAS BEING APPREHENDED IN MICHIGAN, TERRY NICHOLS was driving home
from a lumberyard and heard on the radio that McVeigh had been taken into
federal custody. Even more shocking, he learned that he and his brother were
wanted in connection with the bombing and should be considered “armed and
dangerous.”
He could not drive home fast enough, and immediately asked Marife if she
had been watching the television coverage. She had not. She was fuming about
the conversation he had had earlier that morning with his ex-wife, and was
threatening—not for the first time—to go back to the Philippines. She didn’t like
his relationship with Lana, or with Josh, or with Tim McVeigh, and was sick of
dealing with all of them. Nichols was too frazzled to fight back, so he turned on
the television. When he saw the two composite sketches, he felt momentary
relief—he did not think John Doe One looked like McVeigh, and neither did
Marife. But when he heard Janet Reno, the attorney general, calling for the death
penalty, and President Clinton vowing to deliver justice that was “certain, swift,
and severe,” Nichols had visions of heavily armed agents barreling down on the
house. “I panicked,” he recounted, “and I said to myself, this is a case where
they will definitely shoot first and ask questions later.”
Nichols phoned his brother James, and Lana, but reached neither. When
CNN started calling from Los Angeles, he barked at Marife to pick up their
infant daughter, Nicole, and get in the car. The safest place for them, he decided,
was the Herington police station. In the garage, he gave everything a once-over.
He noticed a fuel meter he had bought a few weeks earlier to resell at a gun
show, only to realize it was broken. “I have to do something about that,” he said
quickly. Interestingly, he disregarded a siphon pump sitting on a shelf directly
above the fuel meter, which he had used three days earlier to mix the bomb
components. The only thing he picked up was a crate McVeigh had dropped off
the previous week. He was concerned about a single item in the box, a mercury
switch, and decided he should get rid of it before going to the police.
Nichols made an otherwise curious stop at a warehouse store on the southern
edge of Herington, where he used the anonymity of the parking lot to smash theuld get rid of it before going to the police.
Nichols made an otherwise curious stop at a warehouse store on the southern
edge of Herington, where he used the anonymity of the parking lot to smash the

--- PAGE BREAK ---fore going to the police.
Nichols made an otherwise curious stop at a warehouse store on the southern
edge of Herington, where he used the anonymity of the parking lot to smash the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mercury switch on the asphalt. Later, he told the feds he intended to go
shopping, but changed his mind once he sensed he was being followed. That,
though, was largely untrue: Stephen Smith and his colleague Jack Foley had
overshot the Surplus City store and turned around only once they realized
Nichols was not heading out of town after all.
Marife was in a daze of her own. She could tell her husband was
extraordinarily agitated, but she had no clear idea why. She blurted out the
question uppermost in her mind: “Are you involved in this?” And Nichols
answered no. He fretted that he did not know the way to the police station;
Marife told him to calm down. He confessed he had not told the truth the
previous Sunday when he said he had gone to Omaha to pick up McVeigh. He
had, in fact, met McVeigh in Oklahoma City, and lied about it at McVeigh’s
direction. That, he said, was the reason he thought the feds might be after him.
Around 3:00 P.M., the Nichols family walked into the police station like three
strays begging for shelter. Nichols told Barry Thacker, the deputy chief, that he
wanted to talk to someone about the radio reports and assured him he was
neither armed nor dangerous. At that very moment, Dale Kuhn, Thacker’s boss,
was on the line with an FBI supervisor, who told him that a hotly sought-after
bombing suspect had just entered the building. Smith, Foley, and two other
agents hovered outside, too afraid to enter as they entertained the notion that
Nichols and his wife and infant daughter might somehow take the police
department hostage. Kuhn assured the supervisor that, no, Nichols was not
threatening anyone. But the police chief certainly understood the significance of
the situation. He raced to the front desk and suggested that everyone move out of
public view. All three Nichols family members were searched for weapons, even
eighteen-month-old Nicole, who was held by her mother as an officer ran a
finger around the top of her diaper.
Then the FBI agents ventured in and ordered everyone into a training room
in the basement. Nichols asked why he was being mentioned in the news reports
about the bombing. The agents said they did not know but wanted to ask him
some questions.
“Good,” Nichols countered, “because I have some questions for you.”e was being mentioned in the news reports
about the bombing. The agents said they did not know but wanted to ask him
some questions.
“Good,” Nichols countered, “because I have some questions for you.”

MORE THAN ELEVEN HUNDRED MILES AWAY, IN KINGMAN, ARIZONA, the news reports on
McVeigh hit his old army buddy Michael Fortier like a punch in the gut. Not
only had Fortier known about the bomb plot; he had come perilously close to
taking part himself. Since the start of wall-to-wall coverage of the bombing, he
had not stopped fretting.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

As soon as McVeigh’s name aired on the news that Friday lunch-time, he
went over to his neighbor Jim Rosencrans’s house and announced: “Tim’s the
one that did it.” Rosencrans’s girlfriend later remembered how nervous he was.
Rosencrans, who was close to Fortier and regularly did drugs with him, never
had any doubts that their friend Tim was involved. “Damn, our boy has been
busy,” he thought.
Fortier shook his head in amazement. “Wow,” he said, “that shit’s intense.”
Then he and his wife, Lori, went around the house, ditching all the incriminating
material they could find.
The FBI came calling that same afternoon.amazement. “Wow,” he said, “that shit’s intense.”
Then he and his wife, Lori, went around the house, ditching all the incriminating
material they could find.
The FBI came calling that same afternoon.

MCVEIGH WAS STILL WORRIED ABOUT HIS SAFETY. HE REMEMBERED how Jack Ruby gunned
down Lee Harvey Oswald in the Dallas police headquarters in 1963, and told his
captors he wanted a helicopter airlift from the courthouse roof rather than having
to face the restive crowd outside. The FBI took his request seriously; if someone
took a potshot, an agent could get hit just as easily as McVeigh. But the roof was
deemed unsuitable for a helicopter landing. So they opted instead to drive him in
a sheriff’s department van to a secured helicopter staging area a short distance
away.
First, though, they had to overcome a legal hurdle, as Royce Hobbs, the
public defender McVeigh had sought to reach, made an unexpected appearance
and demanded a hearing with Judge Allen. The judge agreed—over the
objections of Mark Gibson, who refused to attend. All Hobbs could do, though,
was advise McVeigh to find himself a federal public defender.
Finally, around 5:00 P.M., it was time to move. This was the public’s first
chance to see McVeigh, and the timing was perfect for the evening newscasts.
The prisoner emerged from the courthouse in his orange jailhouse jumpsuit, his
hands cuffed and his legs in irons, and the crowd exploded. People were
shouting “baby killer,” and worse. Several agents clustered around him, scanning
the crowd for signs of trouble. McVeigh looked up at the surrounding buildings,
worried that someone with a rifle might be on the rooftops. His gaze was vacant,
emotionless, a snapshot image the media would feast on and designate as the
face of a ruthless killer.
In a moment, he was gone—into the sheriff’s van and, shortly after, onto a
helicopter to Tinker Air Force Base outside Oklahoma City. Taking him to the
federal courthouse next to the Murrah Building was out of the question; there
was no telling what an incensed crowd would do if it got near him and, besides,
the courthouse was too badly damaged to be functional. Tinker would work fineah Building was out of the question; there
was no telling what an incensed crowd would do if it got near him and, besides,
the courthouse was too badly damaged to be functional. Tinker would work fine

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as a venue for the arraignment. A federal magistrate judge, Ronald Howland,
was ready and waiting. After that, McVeigh would be taken to a specially
prepared wing of El Reno federal prison outside Oklahoma City, his home while
he awaited trial.
The lasting impression that Danny Coulson, the senior FBI agent in Perry,
retained of McVeigh from that afternoon was his utter surprise at finding himself
in the feds’ clutches. “McVeigh,” he said, “regarded his arrest by Charlie Hanger
as a minor inconvenience—he thought he’d be out of jail and on his way in short
order. He was shocked we got to him as fast as we did.” Coulson sat next to him
on the helicopter, putting his hand on McVeigh’s shoulder and telling him sternly
that he needed to behave himself.
“Act like a gentleman, and you will be treated like a gentleman,” Coulson
said. “If not, you will be very sorry. Do you understand me?”
“Yes sir,” McVeigh replied. “I understand.”d to behave himself.
“Act like a gentleman, and you will be treated like a gentleman,” Coulson
said. “If not, you will be very sorry. Do you understand me?”
“Yes sir,” McVeigh replied. “I understand.”

WHEN DANIELLE HUNT, THE FORMER OPERATOR AND DIRECTOR OF the America’s Kids day-care
center, saw McVeigh’s face flash across her television screen, she knew at once
he was involved. He was the same tall, lanky young man with a military buzz cut
who had visited the day-care center in December, claiming he had two young
children and asking her a lot of strange questions. He wasn’t interested in the
kids’ daily routines, or in the teachers and their qualifications. He was interested
only in the layout of the place and the security arrangements—whether there
were cameras, and how many entrances and exits the day care had. He was
transfixed, too, by the plate-glass windows next to the infants’ nap area. “There’s
so much glass,” he said, over and over. Hunt told him how the children liked to
paint pictures on the glass, and look out at the changing seasons. “Now, thinking
back,” she recalled, “he must have been imagining how easy it would be to blow
up the children.”
McVeigh showed up at the tail end of the business day in battle-dress
uniform and said he was a military recruiter transferring from Wichita within a
few months. He was looking for a place for his three-year-old and an infant. He
had no name tag on his uniform, and no badge or other form of identification. He
would not give his name, or his children’s names.
When Danielle’s soon-to-be husband, Tom, the head of the Federal
Protective Service, came to pick her up, McVeigh became visibly nervous. “How
did he get in?” he asked. Danielle Hunt replied: “He’s my husband and he’s also
a federal agent, so he has keys to the whole building.” McVeigh insisted on
moving around a corner where they could not be seen. Shortly after, he left by a

--- PAGE BREAK ---y husband and he’s also
a federal agent, so he has keys to the whole building.” McVeigh insisted on
moving around a corner where they could not be seen. Shortly after, he left by a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

secondary door so he would not have to cross paths with Tom Hunt again.
As the Hunts drove home, Danielle told Tom her visitor didn’t have a name
tag. Tom immediately sniffed trouble. “If he’s a recruiter,” he said, “he has to
have his name and his grade and the words ‘U.S. Army.’” But at that point there
was nothing he could do.
Danielle told her story to the FBI but nothing ever came of it—most likely
because when she gave her account in the immediate aftershock of the bombing,
she confused the timing of McVeigh’s December visit with another incident at
the Murrah Building in early March, involving two suspicious men who went
from office to office telling people they wanted to apply for a job. Her testimony
could have been devastating to McVeigh, forever erasing any doubt that he knew
about the day-care center in advance and strongly suggesting that he targeted the
kids deliberately. If the FBI had reinterviewed her, they could have connected
her story with the known movements of McVeigh and Michael Fortier, who were
in Oklahoma City on December 15 (but in Arizona in early March).
They did not. “I was really shocked they did not call me as a witness,” Hunt
said. “I can’t imagine why they didn’t.”Fortier, who were
in Oklahoma City on December 15 (but in Arizona in early March).
They did not. “I was really shocked they did not call me as a witness,” Hunt
said. “I can’t imagine why they didn’t.”

THE FEDS HAD MCVEIGH, BUT THEY ALSO HAD A PROBLEM. HE WAS not a close fit to the
composite sketch of John Doe One. Once he was in custody, they could have
shown either his picture or the man himself to the employees at Eldon Elliott’s
body shop. But the FBI chose not to, not even when they arranged a lineup for
the Oklahoma City witnesses on the first weekend after the bombing. Eldon
Elliott was not shown a photograph of McVeigh, or formally asked if he was a
match for Robert Kling, until June 8, forty-eight days after McVeigh was tracked
down and arrested on federal charges. If he had an opinion about the face being
flashed all over the news, he didn’t volunteer it.
The feds never properly explained their thinking. They weren’t overly
impressed with the body shop witnesses and might not have wanted to rely on
them too heavily at this early stage. They were even beginning to conclude that
the sketches were unreliable. Though they were growing more certain that
McVeigh was responsible for driving the truck into Oklahoma City and
detonating the bomb, there was the possibility that someone else rented the truck
from Eldon Elliott’s.
Plenty of things did not fit right. McVeigh’s fingerprints were never found at
the body shop—not on the counter, which the FBI took the trouble to dismantle
and haul off to their lab in Washington, and not on the Robert Kling rental
agreement. John Doe One was five foot ten (Vicki Beemer said he was about the

--- PAGE BREAK ---k the trouble to dismantle
and haul off to their lab in Washington, and not on the Robert Kling rental
agreement. John Doe One was five foot ten (Vicki Beemer said he was about the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

same height as her husband), while McVeigh was six foot one. The body type
and the facial features were not quite the same, either. Each witness who had
linked McVeigh to the composite sketch—Lea McGown, Pat Livingston, Carl
LeBron—had other reasons to be suspicious of him. None made the
identification on physical resemblance alone.ch witness who had
linked McVeigh to the composite sketch—Lea McGown, Pat Livingston, Carl
LeBron—had other reasons to be suspicious of him. None made the
identification on physical resemblance alone.

MEANWHILE, SOME STARTLING EVIDENCE SURFACED THAT John Doe One might be someone
else entirely. Once the composite sketches were released, Angie Finley, an ATF
agent in Tulsa, received a phone call from a confidential informant, a slightly
built former debutante on the Tulsa social circuit with killer looks, blond hair,
and a black swastika tattooed on her left shoulder. The informant, who was later
revealed as Carol Howe, had spent much of the previous half-year in Elohim
City, providing evidence of illegal weapons handling and numerous threats by
the residents to wage war against the government.
Howe had come to the ATF as a result of romantic as well as political
entanglements. Following a short marriage to a White Power activist, she
became involved with Dennis Mahon, a bombastic neo-Nazi leader whose
checkered résumé included cross-burnings in Germany and a bizarre appearance
on Oprah Winfrey’s television chat show. Mahon ran a Dial-A-Racist hotline in
Tulsa, which Howe called after she was confronted by some African-Americans
at an outdoor party, fell off a platform, and broke both her heels.
Mahon became Howe’s protector, then her suitor, flattering her into posing
in eccentric military uniforms and draping her in nothing but a Nazi flag. Soon,
though, she was accusing Mahon of molesting her. When she took out a
restraining order, it attracted the attention of the ATF, which had been looking
into Mahon for years. Howe thought working as an informant was an ideal way
to get even, and was soon reporting on Mahon’s fondness for detonating
homemade grenades and outlining plans he had to blow up a Mexican-owned
video store.
The ATF asked Howe to conduct a drug buy on behalf of the Tulsa Police
Department, which they said was to test her loyalty. They also polygraphed her,
and tapped her phone and wired up her apartment for both audio and video.
Amazingly, Mahon was willing to forgive the court order as soon as she renewed
contact with him. And she proved very effective at delivering incriminating
material, both on Mahon and on his friends at Elohim City. Weekends in the
community gradually extended into longer stays, during which Howe
eavesdropped—and reported on—many conversations about fomenting
revolution, including specific threats to blow up government buildings.ommunity gradually extended into longer stays, during which Howe
eavesdropped—and reported on—many conversations about fomenting
revolution, including specific threats to blow up government buildings.

--- PAGE BREAK ---xtended into longer stays, during which Howe
eavesdropped—and reported on—many conversations about fomenting
revolution, including specific threats to blow up government buildings.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Howe said she could provide a match for the composite sketches—to people
other than Tim McVeigh. To her, John Doe One looked like Pete Ward and John
Doe Two resembled his brother Tony. Finley passed the information to her
superiors, who shared it with the FBI. And the FBI, in turn, decided it needed to
talk to Howe. While McVeigh was still being plucked out of jail, Finley and an
FBI agent from Tulsa drove Howe to Oklahoma City to be extensively debriefed.
The encounter did not show the FBI in its best colors. The bureau’s notes,
typed up in an official insert, are marred by every conceivable error, including
grotesque misspellings, inaccurate dates, and a general lack of understanding of
the subject. Still the gist of Howe’s reporting was clear. The two men she
fingered most damningly were Mahon and Andreas Strassmeir. Mahon had not
only expressed a desire to blow up a federal building, he named Tulsa and
Oklahoma City as possible targets. He also had a plan to initiate mass race riots
by destroying power lines at the height of summer and creating panic.
Howe described Strassmeir as contemplating “assassinations, bombings, and
mass shootings,” and characterized Elohim City as an armed encampment whose
armory included more than three hundred rifles, MAC 90s and Ruger mini-14
semiautomatics and “various fully automatic weapons,” possession of which is
flagrantly illegal.
One would think this information constituted a major new lead. But Carol
Howe was a touchy subject for federal law enforcement. The ATF had abruptly
discontinued her services a month before the bombing, claiming that she had
become mentally unstable. Now that decision looked distinctly unwise,
particularly since the information she provided before her dismissal had been
viewed as both credible and alarming by her immediate handlers. So the FBI and
ATF decided, together, to recall her and send her back into Elohim City to see
what connections she could pick up to McVeigh or any possible coconspirators.
It was never more than a halfhearted initiative, and the onus of further
investigation was placed almost entirely on her. The feds sent neither uniformed
agents nor covert operatives into the community to help. No effort was made to
interview Andreas Strassmeir, or Pete or Tony Ward, or any member of the
Millar family except one inconsequential son-in-law who offered nothing useful.
Bob Ricks, the head of the FBI’s Oklahoma City office, who had been aware
of Elohim City for years, maintained that, contrary to appearances, investigators
took a strong interest in links between the community and the bombing. But, he
said, they saw little benefit in conducting aggressive interviews without
acquiring some baseline knowledge first. Elohim City was difficult to penetrate
or monitor—because of its remoteness, because it had no useful phones to tap
(its one main line was too public for sensitive conversation), and because of itst. Elohim City was difficult to penetrate
or monitor—because of its remoteness, because it had no useful phones to tap
(its one main line was too public for sensitive conversation), and because of its

--- PAGE BREAK ---ifficult to penetrate
or monitor—because of its remoteness, because it had no useful phones to tap
(its one main line was too public for sensitive conversation), and because of its

--- PAGE BREAK ---

hostility to outsiders. “Generally we don’t want to ask questions until we know
the answers,” Ricks said, “and we had a vast unknown in Elohim City…. We had
no leverage, no evidence of criminal conduct. Without something to use as a
hammer, conducting interviews would have done us no good.”
That defense holds only to a point. The feds did have considerable leverage
over Dennis Mahon, because of Howe’s evidence that he’d made and detonated
grenades. And they could have had more leverage still over Strassmeir, who was
arming Elohim City even though, as a foreigner, he had no legal right to
purchase weapons.
In these early days of the investigation, though, Elohim City was mostly the
subject of a turf war between the FBI and the ATF. The FBI wanted to know
what the ATF knew, but the ATF—as its director, John Magaw, has subsequently
acknowledged—was reluctant to share. Even after the ATF gave the FBI its
Carol Howe file, the feds continued to suspect that more information was being
suppressed; that the ATF was sitting on potentially explosive information and
running “hip-pocket informants,” in Ricks’s phrase, who were kept out of the
official record for reasons of internal bureaucratic convenience. Danny
Defenbaugh, who would take over leadership of the investigation from Weldon
Kennedy, struggled with the problem for months on end. “When you get
agencies working together in a joint Task Force, they should be holding hands,
not keeping their fingers crossed behind their backs,” he said. “[The ATF] didn’t
handle it well, nor did we know in a timely manner what we should have
known.”
The FBI carries its own share of the blame. It seems inexcusable, given the
bureau’s usual practice of chasing down every lead, that Carol Howe’s
allegations were not pursued more aggressively. At least one senior FBI agent,
Danny Coulson, came to believe the investigation into Elohim City was
deliberately shut down for reasons of bureaucratic cowardice or incompetence.
When Bob Ricks was asked in an interview why Dennis Mahon was never
questioned about his threats to blow up a federal building in Oklahoma, he
answered, simply: “I don’t know.”
Nobody was more delighted or relieved by the feds’ inaction than the
Elohimites themselves. Once the bomb went off, Robert Millar and his followers
feared the FBI and ATF would descend with a full array of paramilitary
hardware. Some of that was fed by paranoia and exaggerated notions of how
much the government was spoiling for a fight. Some of it, though, was entirely
rational, given the community’s ties to right-wing radicals, and its links, both
direct and indirect, to McVeigh.
“The feds were looking for excuses to come after us,” Andi Strassmeir said.s entirely
rational, given the community’s ties to right-wing radicals, and its links, both
direct and indirect, to McVeigh.
“The feds were looking for excuses to come after us,” Andi Strassmeir said.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“We slept in our fatigues and boots, with rifles by our side.”s, both
direct and indirect, to McVeigh.
“The feds were looking for excuses to come after us,” Andi Strassmeir said.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“We slept in our fatigues and boots, with rifles by our side.”

IN THE HERINGTON POLICE STATION, TERRY NICHOLS TOLD THE FBI he was willing to answer
any questions, even without a lawyer present. The agents said repeatedly that he
was not under arrest and could leave any time. He stayed put, partly to support
his contention that he had nothing to hide and partly to figure out how much the
FBI had on him. But if he thought he could outsmart the feds, he was wrong.
The agents found him weird and suspicious, and the impression only
deepened as the hours passed. They were struck when Nichols said he no longer
used his social security number and when he refused to sign a form advising him
of his rights because he objected to the word “interrogation,” which reminded
him of the Nazis.
A short time later, as he authorized the FBI to search his house and his
pickup, he expressed concern that they might mistake some items for bomb-
making equipment. The subject of bombs had not yet come up, and Agent Scott
Crabtree wrote in a search warrant affidavit the following day that Nichols gave
no reason why the FBI might make such a mistake. Rightly or wrongly, the line
struck the agents as a tacit admission. Over the next nine hours, Nichols would
tip his hand further, ducking and evading questions and telling so many
demonstrable lies his credibility never recovered.
Nichols described how he and McVeigh became friends during basic training
at Fort Benning, Georgia, in 1988. They were close for a while, and McVeigh
stayed at the Nichols family farm for several weeks in early 1993. But Nichols
claimed he’d had only minimal contact for several months, and then only to ask
McVeigh to transport his television set from Las Vegas, as he had promised. This
was not true, as phone records and other evidence would later demonstrate.
Nichols continued to use the television to explain away his movements on
Easter Sunday, when he helped McVeigh stash the Mercury in Oklahoma City.
He said he drove to Oklahoma City alone—in fact, he and McVeigh convoyed
down—and picked up both McVeigh and the TV on a street corner. (The
television, which Nichols genuinely wanted, was in a storage locker in Kansas
all along.)
Years later, Nichols acknowledged that he agreed to drive to Oklahoma City
not because of the TV but because he was afraid of what McVeigh would do to
his family if he said no. He could not tell the FBI that, because it would open
him up to other questions about his involvement, which he was not ready to
answer. “I lied to them and said I had picked up my TV…to make my story
sound more plausible,” he said. “I was in denial at that time and was trying toabout his involvement, which he was not ready to
answer. “I lied to them and said I had picked up my TV…to make my story
sound more plausible,” he said. “I was in denial at that time and was trying to

--- PAGE BREAK ---t, which he was not ready to
answer. “I lied to them and said I had picked up my TV…to make my story
sound more plausible,” he said. “I was in denial at that time and was trying to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

distance myself from McVeigh and his evil act as much as possible.”
Still, Nichols dropped hints that McVeigh was up to no good—in ways that
did not involve him. In his account of their return journey to Kansas, Nichols
told the FBI that McVeigh had pointed out the upcoming Waco anniversary and
announced, cryptically: “You will see something big in the future.”
“What are you going to do,” Nichols recalled asking, “rob a bank?”
“Oh, no,” McVeigh responded. “I got something in the works.”
McVeigh later complained to Michel and Herbeck that Nichols had “hosed”
him with lines like these, and the judge presiding over the two men’s trials
certainly believed Nichols had incriminated his partner. Nichols described
McVeigh as “nervous” and “hyper,” and when asked about the bombing told the
FBI his friend “could be capable of doing it.” But Nichols later insisted: “I did
not rat him out. I did not admit McVeigh actually did the bombing. I really didn’t
give the FBI much useful information.”
That much appears to be true. Nichols’s interview did far more immediate
damage to his own cause than it did to McVeigh’s. Time and again, his responses
made him look like he was hiding something. He claimed he couldn’t remember
much about the rest of the journey back to Kansas, because he became “sleepy-
tired” and kept losing the thread of the conversation. He said that several times
during the drive McVeigh asked him what they had just talked about, and he
couldn’t remember. Nichols’s interrogators thought that was a lame excuse to
drop an uncomfortable subject. Their sense was that McVeigh and Nichols were
in the final stages of planning the bombing and had plenty more to talk about
that Sunday night.
Some of Nichols’s lies were more sophisticated. He realized that someone—
the fisherman and his son, for example—might have seen his pickup at the lake.
He said McVeigh had called early that morning to borrow his truck, saying he
wanted to drive around and shop for a new car. Nichols collected him at a
McDonald’s and asked to be dropped off at Fort Riley so he could attend a
surplus auction. McVeigh was supposed to pick him up at noon but did not arrive
until after 1:00 P.M. When McVeigh was late, Nichols went to a different auction
in another building, the one he really attended and signed in for, and hung
around for the extra hour.
By this stage, however, Nichols couldn’t put any story past his interrogators.
They had already decided to take him into custody as a material witness and
were mostly stringing him along until the warrant arrived. In fact, their bosses in
Kansas City had the warrant ready as early as 4:45 P.M. but sat on it while they
waited to see what Nichols would spill on his own. Nichols’s defense team
would later argue that denying him knowledge of the warrant was deliberatelydy as early as 4:45 P.M. but sat on it while they
waited to see what Nichols would spill on his own. Nichols’s defense team
would later argue that denying him knowledge of the warrant was deliberately

--- PAGE BREAK ---

misleading. A federal public defender who heard about the interrogation on the
radio made several attempts to let Nichols know he was volunteering his
services, but the message never got through. Nichols chose to believe he would
soon be back in his car, heading home with Marife and the baby.eral attempts to let Nichols know he was volunteering his
services, but the message never got through. Nichols chose to believe he would
soon be back in his car, heading home with Marife and the baby.

WHEN JENNIFER MCVEIGH HEARD HER OLDER BROTHER’S NAME ON the radio, her first concern
was to avoid being sucked into the bombing conspiracy herself. She was in
Florida, visiting friends and family on an extended spring break. But many
people knew she was close to Tim, despite their six-year age difference, and
knew she shared many of his political ideas. She was not surprised that he had
involved himself in a big, revolutionary act, because he had all but told her
already.
A month or two earlier, Tim had written to warn her that something big
would happen “in the month of the Bull” and that she should stay in Florida for
as long as possible. He wanted to protect her and told her to burn the letter,
which she did the same day. Jennifer was living in her father’s house in
Pendleton, New York, and working (much to the FBI’s amusement) at a Jell-O
wrestling bar while attending community college; so she had some flexibility in
her schedule. He wrote a follow-up at the end of March, making sure she had
done as he asked. “Send no more [mail] after the first of April,” he said, “and
then even if it’s an emergency, watch what you say because I may not get it in
time and the G-men might get it out of my box, incriminating you.”
Jennifer understood the need to take precautions. The night before she took
the long drive down to Pensacola, she separated everything she had from her
brother into two boxes. She kept the first one, containing his high school
yearbooks, military records, medal citations, and other personal documents, in
her closet. McVeigh had sent most of this material at the beginning of the year
for safekeeping; he hadn’t told her why, but she must have guessed he was
preparing for a new life underground. The second box, containing McVeigh’s
letters, photographs, political literature, and a videotape accusing the
government of mass murder at Waco, was more sensitive. She asked her best
friend, Rose Woods, to keep it at her house while she was away.
When she heard about the bombing, she was staying with an old friend,
Dennis Sadler, and his family in the Florida Panhandle. She kept her reactions
quiet until she heard about her brother’s arrest. She was out on a driving errand
with Sadler at the time, and immediately asked him to take the wheel. She
smoked a lot of cigarettes on the way back to the house. When she called her
family, she learned the FBI was already at her father’s house, asking about hermmediately asked him to take the wheel. She
smoked a lot of cigarettes on the way back to the house. When she called her
family, she learned the FBI was already at her father’s house, asking about her

--- PAGE BREAK ---

relationship with her brother. She did not have much time. She took a handful of
clippings from The Turner Diaries she had with her and burned them in Sadler’s
laundry room. When the FBI appeared, a short time later, they searched the
house and Jennifer’s pickup, finding a collection of right-wing literature.
The FBI wanted to bombard her with questions, but she would not
cooperate. Like her brother, she saw the feds as the enemy. They came back to
question her again and again over the course of the weekend, and she became
only more resistant. “Defiant” was the word the feds used to characterize her.
But she soon learned how persuasive the FBI can be.

SINCE MCVEIGH HAD BEEN IN THE MILITARY, THE ARMY WAS GIVEN the job of rounding up look-
alikes to participate in a lineup for eyewitnesses who had seen him with the
Ryder truck on the morning of the bombing. Twenty-four men were dispatched
to Oklahoma City from Fort Sill, and five were selected. At first, the task force
leadership worried the similarity was just too great and told Steve Chancellor,
the army’s point man: “You got McVeigh’s brother, cousin, and uncles.” They
were, Chancellor said, “scared shitless.”
But the witnesses did fine. Mike Moroz, the mechanic at Johnny’s tire shop
who had reported McVeigh asking for directions around 8:30 A.M., was the only
one who hesitated a little. He chose two people, including the man in custody.
McVeigh was clearly fingered as a guilty man—by people who also swore they
had seen him with others.0 A.M., was the only
one who hesitated a little. He chose two people, including the man in custody.
McVeigh was clearly fingered as a guilty man—by people who also swore they
had seen him with others.

AT 9:00 P.M. THAT NIGHT, A GAGGLE OF FBI AGENTS DESCENDED ON Okemah, a tiny speck of a
town about seventy miles east of Oklahoma City, convinced they were about to
make another major arrest. The name of their hot lead was Ray Jimboy, a Native
American who had served in McVeigh’s unit during the Gulf War. He was a
ringer for John Doe Two—short, stocky, muscular, with dark hair and deep
brown eyes. His fellow soldiers reported he had a temper and was covered with
scars from knife fights. He also had a history of political activism.
Louis Freeh was so gung-ho for Jimboy that he sent Bob Ricks and a handful
of his best men to supervise the operation. But it didn’t work out as planned.
Jimboy not only had an alibi, he was falling-down drunk, and had clearly been
on the bottle for years, in no state to participate in a major criminal conspiracy.
Ricks broke the bad news to Freeh, only to have the director tell him to put
Jimboy under twenty-four-hour surveillance—personally.
Ricks couldn’t believe it. “I got to watch this drunk myself,” he said, “and I
was a special agent in charge.” It took another full day before the FBI brass

--- PAGE BREAK ---

finally cleared Jimboy, by which time the humiliation of Bob Ricks had
descended to a whole new level.as a special agent in charge.” It took another full day before the FBI brass

--- PAGE BREAK ---

finally cleared Jimboy, by which time the humiliation of Bob Ricks had
descended to a whole new level.

TERRY NICHOLS WAS DIGGING HIMSELF IN EVER DEEPER. HE SAID HE had some knowledge of
bomb-making, but insisted he’d never put it to use. Eight hours in, close to
midnight, he acknowledged that he had bags of ammonium nitrate in his house,
the ones he stored to sell off at gun shows. He said he hadn’t mentioned this
earlier because he was worried it would “make me look guilty to a jury.”
By this time, the interviewing agents knew about the material witness
warrant and felt they could throw tougher questions at him. Agent Crabtree
asked about the package of materials Nichols had left for Lana Padilla when he
flew to the Philippines the previous November. Nichols described it as a sort of
will, drawn up in case he did not return. Nichols was flummoxed when Crabtree
asked him about the two most incriminating phrases—the “go for it!!” line and
the sign-off, “As far as heat, none that I know of.”
Agent Smith later testified: “He sat there and looked at us for approximately
a minute, and did not respond to the question.” The warrant was served shortly
afterward.
Even at this stage, the FBI lacked concrete evidence to tie Nichols to the
bombing. Mostly, they had leads to check out—the ammonium nitrate bags,
McVeigh’s possessions in his garage, the Herington storage locker. Two FBI
agents sent to guard his house pending a formal search spotted some blue-
rimmed barrels in the garage, reminiscent of a large number of blue plastic
shards found at the bombing scene. (The government would later argue that
these were incriminating, but they were most likely from recycling bins on the
Murrah Building’s first floor.) The agents also saw a large number of
ammunition and fuel cans, and picked up a strong odor of ammonium nitrate.
None of this looked good, but it didn’t prove anything, either.
When investigators went to U.S. District Judge David Russell for the
warrant to hold Nichols as a material witness, they chose not to tell him that their
suspect was, of his own free will, sitting in the Herington police station and
talking up a storm—a symptom, perhaps, of their nervousness about the solidity
of their case. A first version of the warrant stated, erroneously, that Nichols had
attempted to leave the country and would be a flight risk if he was not taken
immediately into custody. The Justice Department later explained this away as
an innocent blunder by Jim Reynolds, the department’s top anti-terrorism lawyer.
A new warrant was subsequently drawn up, this one stating that if Nichols
were “left to his own devices, it would be impracticable to secure hism Reynolds, the department’s top anti-terrorism lawyer.
A new warrant was subsequently drawn up, this one stating that if Nichols
were “left to his own devices, it would be impracticable to secure his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

presence”—a tortured form of wording that, again, ducked the fact that he was
very much present and cooperating.

AS THE INITIAL FLURRY OF BREAKTHROUGHS BEGAN TO SLOW, THE FBI resorted to its hallmark
taste for extreme thoroughness to hunt down additional suspects. The mania for
detail started with Louis Freeh, who made it his personal business to pick out the
lineup photographs that witnesses would be shown alongside McVeigh’s. This
was normally a low-level job for a field agent. “I was micromanaging,” Freeh
acknowledged in his autobiography, “which nobody likes the boss to do.”
The bureau was prepared to track every last person McVeigh had
encountered in the military, if that was what it took to find coconspirators. Steve
Chancellor, the army’s point man on the task force, was asked early on how
many people trained with McVeigh at Fort Benning, and he said about a
hundred. Then he was asked how many were in his infantry company, and
Chancellor said just a few more. But, he cautioned, they should take a baseline
number—120, say—and double it to account for a large turnover during the
three years McVeigh served. The agents soon returned to ask how many people
were in McVeigh’s battalion. Chancellor said between 500 and 600, maybe 1,200
over three years. Soon they were asking about the entire brigade.
Chancellor looked skeptical. “Now you’re talking in the thousands. Five, ten
thousand people over three years,” he said. And how many people were
stationed at Fort Riley? “I looked at this guy,” Chancellor recounted, “and
thought, you got to be shittin’ me. We’re looking at 32,000 people. And the agent
said, ‘Okay, I think we’ll stop.’”le were
stationed at Fort Riley? “I looked at this guy,” Chancellor recounted, “and
thought, you got to be shittin’ me. We’re looking at 32,000 people. And the agent
said, ‘Okay, I think we’ll stop.’”

CHARLIE HANGER RETURNED TO PATROL DUTY ON SATURDAY MORNING after two days off and
instinctively checked the inside of his police cruiser to make sure nothing
connected to McVeigh was left behind. On the rear floor behind the passenger
seat, he spotted something: a crumpled business card for Paulsen’s Military
Supply in Antigo, Wisconsin. The front had an ink drawing of a tank and a
military helicopter. The name DAVE, all in upper case, and a Chicago-area
phone number were on the back, along with these words, in McVeigh’s
unmistakably spindly handwriting: “TNT. $5 a stick. Need more.” And, beneath
the phone number: “Call after 01 May, see if I can get some more.”
Dave was Dave Paulsen, the son of the owner of Paulsen Military Supply,
who had been in frequent contact with McVeigh in late 1994 and early 1995.
When the FBI first saw the card, they immediately suspected Paulsen of
providing McVeigh with bomb-making materials. TNT could have been used as

--- PAGE BREAK ---cVeigh in late 1994 and early 1995.
When the FBI first saw the card, they immediately suspected Paulsen of
providing McVeigh with bomb-making materials. TNT could have been used as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a detonator in Oklahoma City; the feds did not yet know any different.
When the FBI tracked him down, the following evening, Paulsen
acknowledged meeting McVeigh at a gun show in Kalamazoo in December 1994
and said he purchased some AR-15 assault weapon parts that McVeigh had on
his display table. In exchange, McVeigh said he wanted dynamite. Paulsen told
him repeatedly over the next few weeks that he could obtain some, but he had no
intention of following through. They arranged a meeting to make the swap, but
Paulsen was a no-show.
Paulsen was on the lookout for “interesting” gun parts and figured McVeigh
was a good source. McVeigh also offered him blasting caps, at $500 a pop, and
Paulsen said at the gun show that he was interested in those, too. McVeigh
subsequently called him more than thirty times, both at work and at home—
more calls than Paulsen was prepared to admit to initially.
Paulsen told the FBI he never intended to purchase blasting caps from
McVeigh and only told him he would to maintain their connection. The FBI
became suspicious enough to put him through a long grind of interviews, and
these intensified after Paulsen failed a polygraph test. Paulsen was asked if he
sold explosives to McVeigh; if he had discussed blowing anything up with
McVeigh; and if he had more than one face-to-face meeting with McVeigh. On
all three questions, Paulsen answered no; on all three, the polygraph showed his
responses were “indicative of deception.”
Paulsen remained under investigation for weeks until the FBI was satisfied
he was not involved in the bombing. At one point, he broke down in tears in
front of an agent, clenched his fists and exclaimed: “That son-of-a-bitch
McVeigh, that cocksucker skinny son-of-a-bitch, I could kill him!”
His frustration and anger were understandable: McVeigh had dropped his
business card in Trooper Hanger’s cruiser as a deliberate act of revenge, exacted
because Paulsen had let McVeigh down. McVeigh acknowledged as much to
Michel and Herbeck. He let Terry Nichols know, before the bombing, that he not
only planned to make trouble for Paulsen but would do the same to anyone who
got in his way. McVeigh even showed Nichols the business card with his
incriminating scrawl on the back.
“The impression I got was Tim was telling me this as a warning to me not to
betray him,” Nichols recounted. “McVeigh said that whenever someone screws
him, his act of retribution in return would be multiplied by a factor of ten, at the
minimum.”this as a warning to me not to
betray him,” Nichols recounted. “McVeigh said that whenever someone screws
him, his act of retribution in return would be multiplied by a factor of ten, at the
minimum.”

THE SEARCH OF TERRY NICHOLS’S HOUSE IN HERINGTON WAS NOT exactly the FBI’s finest

--- PAGE BREAK ---ws
him, his act of retribution in return would be multiplied by a factor of ten, at the
minimum.”

THE SEARCH OF TERRY NICHOLS’S HOUSE IN HERINGTON WAS NOT exactly the FBI’s finest

--- PAGE BREAK ---

moment. Early on, they decided to seek court warrants for the search and not use
the consent forms signed by Nichols and Marife. The agents wanted to take the
time to assemble a full evidence recovery team and make sure the place was not
booby-trapped. While the Nicholses were being questioned, however, the
perimeter was breached at least once.
According to the Nicholses’ home phone records, a call was placed from the
house to James Nichols’s farm in Michigan at about 8:40 P.M. on April 21 and
lasted close to twenty minutes. Terry Nichols was in the police station basement,
so he could not have made that call. Marife Nichols was not allowed home that
night, not even to pick up a few toiletries and a change of clothes for herself and
the baby. And James Nichols could not have received the call, because he was in
federal custody. One possible explanation is that an FBI agent in Herington
entered and got on the line to a colleague in Decker in violation of all the
safeguards. An FBI report detailing the activities of the on-scene agents stated
that “no law enforcement officers had entered the Nichols residence or the
detached garage,” but failed to offer any alternate explanation for the phone call.
The evidence recovery team came in from Omaha the following morning,
supplemented by local agents and forensics and fingerprint experts flown in
from Washington—fifteen people in all. It wasn’t until 4:30 P.M. that they
received the all-clear to move in, by which time they could have been amply
briefed on information provided by Nichols. He had drawn a map of the property
showing the location of all his firearms and ammunition, and had gone through
the inventory of his gun-show supplies, including the ammonium nitrate
sprinkled on his lawn and the broken fuel meter. He said the duffel bag and
rucksack in the garage were McVeigh’s, as well as the Ruger. For some reason,
none of this was passed on, making the search seem much more hazardous.
The initial search lasted close to twelve hours, and yielded some valuable
evidence, including five sixty-foot lengths of Primadet shock tube with
nonelectric blasting caps attached, and a pink customer receipt for forty large
bags of ammonium nitrate fertilizer purchased at the Mid-Kansas Co-op on
September 30, 1994, by Mike Havens, later established as a Terry Nichols alias.
The receipt would be pivotal at trial, because it had McVeigh’s fingerprints on it.
Its discovery, though, was a little odd: it was found in a kitchen drawer, behind
some dish towels, wrapped around two gold coins Marife intended to use to pay
for her passage home. Why would Nichols keep such an incriminating piece of
evidence? Why would he keep it there?
Nichols himself insisted he gave the receipt to McVeigh at the time of the
purchase and never saw it again. “Why would I wrap that receipt around two
one-ounce coins and put it with my other coins? It makes no sense,” he wrotee gave the receipt to McVeigh at the time of the
purchase and never saw it again. “Why would I wrap that receipt around two
one-ounce coins and put it with my other coins? It makes no sense,” he wrote

--- PAGE BREAK ---o McVeigh at the time of the
purchase and never saw it again. “Why would I wrap that receipt around two
one-ounce coins and put it with my other coins? It makes no sense,” he wrote

--- PAGE BREAK ---

years later, long after he had admitted purchasing the ammonium nitrate and
using it to mix the bomb.
It might be easier to accept the good faith of the FBI recovery effort were it
not for the breach in security the night before, and the lack of a fully rigorous
sequence of photographs—showing the unopened drawer, the drawer with the
exact placement of the contents, and the contents separated one by one. Nichols
believed the FBI might have planted the receipt, but had no corroborating
evidence. McVeigh might also have planted it to incriminate the Nichols
brothers. He was never formally invited into the Herington house, but he could
have gone there on the night of April 17, while Terry and Marife were driving
Josh to the Kansas City airport.
The first search ended at about 4:00 A.M., but soon the team was sent back to
retrieve a number of items they overlooked the first time. They had missed the
fuel meter, which was sitting in pieces on a crate in the garage. They also had to
collect Nichols’s old Michigan license plate and sift through the garbage cans. In
their first search of Nichols’s books, they managed to pull out works on health
food and cancer but missed Nichols’s copy of Hunter, William Pierce’s follow-
up to The Turner Diaries, which features sniper killings of interracial couples
and the destruction of a Mossad office by an ANFO bomb. On Sunday
afternoon, more than twenty-four hours after the search began, Marife Nichols
wondered why there was still no sign of the $5,000 in cash and a bag of gold
coins she knew were hidden beneath her mattress.
FBI managers and street agents who heard about the botched search could
only shake their heads. When agents came back a third and fourth time for
additional search warrants, a U.S. attorney dealing with the paperwork was
overheard saying: “You gotta be kidding me.” Back at headquarters, assistant
director Bear Bryant was about to ream out the Omaha special agent in charge
for sending such a lousy evidence response team when he learned that the
operation was being directed by the Kansas City SAC, a protégé of his named
Dave Tubbs. He went quiet again.
Two weeks later, on May 8, Marife was given permission to collect clothes
and toys from her house. When the FBI agents accompanying her—not recovery
specialists—reminded her of a story she had told about her husband grinding up
fertilizer, they asked if they could take the food mixer into evidence. She agreed
and went straight to the kitchen cupboard where it was still sitting.
The mishandling of the search affected the way some evidence was
characterized in court. Of the six most incriminating items listed in the initial
affidavit supporting Nichols’s prosecution, only two—the Primadet and the
fertilizer receipt—constituted evidence of Nichols’s guilt. The fuel meter hadmost incriminating items listed in the initial
affidavit supporting Nichols’s prosecution, only two—the Primadet and the
fertilizer receipt—constituted evidence of Nichols’s guilt. The fuel meter had

--- PAGE BREAK ---

nothing to do with the bombing. Neither did the gas cans found in the garage or
the containers of ground-up ammonium nitrate Nichols sold at gun shows. The
white barrels from Nichols’s garage were erroneously described as having “blue
lids made from material resembling the blue plastic fragments found at the bomb
scene.” Actually, the barrels had no lids at all.
The government made other blunders. It never recovered the siphon pump,
which Nichols used in the mixing of the bomb materials. And it never figured
out that the duffel bag and rucksack were McVeigh’s, even though Nichols told
the FBI they were. The question of where McVeigh left his personal effects
would end up consuming untold man-hours and send agents on at least one wild-
goose chase into the Arizona desert. The answer was under their noses all the
time.
Also undiscovered were the blasting caps and nitromethane tubes Nichols
had buried beneath his crawl space. These could have had a profound impact on
the investigation and trials, and perhaps led to the indictment of other
coconspirators. Instead, they lay undisturbed for another ten years.his crawl space. These could have had a profound impact on
the investigation and trials, and perhaps led to the indictment of other
coconspirators. Instead, they lay undisturbed for another ten years.

THE AGENTS AT TERRY NICHOLS’S HOUSE MADE ONE DISCOVERY THAT became a central part of
the bombing investigation. It was a telephone calling card in the name of Daryl
Bridges, obtained through the far-right publication The Spotlight. In an age
before cell phones, these cards were the easiest way for people of limited means
to stay mobile and still keep a single telephone account. Subscribers called an
800 number, entered a PIN number, and then used as many minutes as they had
paid for.
Nichols had purchased the card, using the made-up name, when he was still
living with his brother in Michigan. He maintained a ledger of payments, also
found by the FBI, to keep the card solvent. There was nothing criminal about
running a calling card under an assumed name, but as investigators started to dig
through the card’s phone records, it became clear that Nichols and McVeigh had
used it to talk to each other, to talk to friends and contacts like Michael Fortier
and Dave Paulsen, and to contact potential vendors of key bomb components—
everything from the nitromethane to the Ryder truck.
Published accounts suggest that the Daryl Bridges investigation began when
the physical card was discovered by the FBI on April 23. But forty-eight hours
earlier, a Miami-based Secret Service agent named Mary Riley had already
established some key links between the card and the bombing conspiracy.
Riley’s field notes indicate that she pulled together several pieces of the puzzle,
via a maze of telephone companies, switchboard protocols, computer database

--- PAGE BREAK ---bombing conspiracy.
Riley’s field notes indicate that she pulled together several pieces of the puzzle,
via a maze of telephone companies, switchboard protocols, computer database

--- PAGE BREAK ---

interfaces, and other technological complexities. But something went wrong—so
wrong that when it was time to present the case in court, all of Riley’s work, and
even her name, had disappeared from the record.
Riley was one of the savviest telecommunications and computer
investigators in federal law enforcement. But, instead of working solely with the
task force to obtain subpoenas for the relevant records, she established a second
line of communication with Donna Bucella, one of Janet Reno’s top aides in the
Justice Department. It is not entirely clear who initiated contact with whom—
neither would return messages requesting an interview. They were friends from
Bucella’s time as a federal prosecutor in southern and central Florida. Bucella
was now deputy director of the Executive Office of U.S. Attorneys, overseeing
top prosecutors around the country. According to several FBI veterans, Riley’s
channeling of information to Bucella broke the chain of command, which should
have gone directly through the task force leadership in Oklahoma City. There
was also a secondary problem of overreaching, which according to the FBI
risked jeopardizing the admissibility of the phone records—the guts of the
government’s case against McVeigh and Nichols—as evidence in court.
Riley’s big break came on April 21, when she heard that someone had called
Eldon Elliott’s body shop using the calling card number, 1-800-793-3377, which
was traced to the Spotlight company. Spotlight, she discovered, was an MCI
subscriber, and MCI’s security department told her that the Spotlight account had
been sold to a company called West Coast Telephone. John Kane, the
entrepreneur behind WCT, was happy to look through his company’s records and
even called MCI to consult their confidential reverse directory to identify the
subscriber.
That brought up the name Daryl Bridges and a Michigan address, matching
the Nichols brothers’ information. Riley then asked Kane for any calls Bridges
might have made on April 14, the day Robert Kling called Vicki Beemer for a
Ryder truck rental. Kane discovered that two calls had gone out in quick
succession, the first to Terry Nichols’s home in Herington and the second to
Eldon Elliott’s. It was not immediately clear where these calls originated, or
whether they were made by the same Spotlight subscriber. Kane also contacted
the Boston Financial Group, which handled payments on the Spotlight cards, and
gave them the PIN number associated with the Bridges calls. Boston Financial
reconfirmed the subscriber as Daryl Bridges and said he had $117 left on his
account.
All this was privileged information with implications for subscriber privacy.
It was perhaps understandable, given the speed of Riley’s work and the urgency
of the investigation, that she did her digging first and, to judge by her ownn with implications for subscriber privacy.
It was perhaps understandable, given the speed of Riley’s work and the urgency
of the investigation, that she did her digging first and, to judge by her own

--- PAGE BREAK ---for subscriber privacy.
It was perhaps understandable, given the speed of Riley’s work and the urgency
of the investigation, that she did her digging first and, to judge by her own

--- PAGE BREAK ---

records, worked on securing subpoenas thereafter. Not even her fiercest FBI
detractors begrudged her that—they said they would have done the same, and
could not imagine a judge or jury objecting, given the scale and urgency of the
investigation. The executives at MCI and WCT were on stickier ground, because
of their own obligations to protect their customers’ privacy. But the time lag
between information and legal cover was not great at this stage.
Then the information flow turned from a trickle to a flood. Already on April
21, Riley had a printout from Kane of hundreds of Daryl Bridges calls from
December 1993 to April 17, 1995, two days before the bombing. These included
calls to Terry Nichols’s number in Herington, Lana Padilla’s number in Las
Vegas, and a cluster of numbers in the Philippines. Riley also learned that the all-
important call to Eldon Elliott’s body shop on the morning of April 14 came
from a pay phone in Junction City—a discovery that would establish a
significant link to McVeigh, because he had been across the street that morning,
exchanging his clapped-out station wagon for the Mercury Marquis.
Riley’s notes indicate that she believed her findings would move quickly
into the hands of front-line investigators. She even communicated directly with
some FBI agents. But the task force commanders somehow did not receive the
information. Riley faxed everything to Don Stephenson, the Secret Service
liaison in Oklahoma City, who should have briefed the task force leadership.
While there is evidence Stephenson spoke to individual FBI agents, it’s unclear
if he did or did not talk to their commanders. There was definitely a monstrous
communication failure. The FBI team who questioned Terry Nichols in the
Herington police station would have been delighted to know about the Bridges
card on the night of April 21; Riley had the information that afternoon, including
evidence contradicting Nichols’s assertion that he and McVeigh had had no
phone contact for months before Easter Sunday.
Was the Secret Service leadership holding on to the information for itself, as
some senior FBI agents have alleged? Or did something go wrong in the internal
workings of the FBI? The available documentation, along with the memories of
senior investigators and prosecutors, make it difficult to draw a conclusion,
except that miscommunication was rampant. In one instance, Riley called a
phone company in Michigan to get a subscriber name for what turned out to be
James Nichols’s number, only to be told that a bureau agent had already been in
touch to ask the same question. (The bureau person, though, had two of the
digits transposed.)
The problem with the second line of communication started on April 22,
when, according to Riley’s notes, Bucella asked her to send four pending
subpoena requests through her. Soon, they were in regular contact by both phonecond line of communication started on April 22,
when, according to Riley’s notes, Bucella asked her to send four pending
subpoena requests through her. Soon, they were in regular contact by both phone

--- PAGE BREAK ---cation started on April 22,
when, according to Riley’s notes, Bucella asked her to send four pending
subpoena requests through her. Soon, they were in regular contact by both phone

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and fax.
It was not a widely advertised relationship. The task force leadership was
unaware of it, and remained so until some were questioned about it for this book.
Weldon Kennedy said: “If I’d have known that, I would have taken her head off.
I would have thrown her off the task force in a heartbeat.” Another top FBI case
manager was equally harsh on Bucella: “If she didn’t know the basics of that,
then she sure should have. She was one of the DOJ’s lead prosecutors at that
time.”
Two days later, on April 24, Riley and the FBI were at cross-purposes again.
Someone went to a pay phone near the Fort Riley command post at 3:30 A.M. and
used the Daryl Bridges card to call a second pay phone nearby. Nobody picked
up. This had to have been an FBI agent testing the card, but neither Riley nor
John Kane at West Coast Telephone understood that, because the FBI did not tell
them. They thought they might have picked up the trail of another conspirator.
And so, they spent hours addressing an issue that was, in fact, no issue at all.
Later that same day, Riley contacted the Boston Financial Group and asked
for the payment records of every Spotlight calling-card holder—about five
thousand people in all. According to Riley’s notes, she fired off a subpoena
request to Don Stephenson in Oklahoma City, and Stephenson later told her the
subpoena had been issued. But the FBI soon came to worry that this line of
inquiry was too broad, and that it somehow threatened the admissibility of the
phone records. And it was not just the FBI that was concerned. By the next day,
a manager at the Liberty Lobby, the avowedly racist organization behind The
Spotlight, called John Kane’s office, demanding assurances that no information
on his customers would be divulged. On April 26, the FBI decided, as one agent
told John Kane, to “start at the beginning” and reanalyze the phone records as
though Mary Riley never existed.
Nobody at the FBI has ever given a satisfactory explanation of what Riley
did to incite the bureau’s wrath. Weldon Kennedy suggested she made mistakes
in the actual technical analysis of the phone records. But Riley’s field notes
address the points Kennedy raised. Kennedy’s successor as head of the task
force, Danny Defenbaugh, said more explicitly he could not talk about the
subject in any detail. When asked if Riley or the Secret Service had somehow
overreached in the number of records they requested, Defenbaugh replied:
“That’s a great theory.” He also confirmed that once the FBI took control, they
no longer pursued the financial records of the Spotlight card holders.
There has been no explanation, either, of why the FBI placed so much blame
solely on Riley. Didn’t she have bosses? Didn’t someone sanction what she was
up to? What about Don Stephenson, who received her field notes on a regularn, either, of why the FBI placed so much blame
solely on Riley. Didn’t she have bosses? Didn’t someone sanction what she was
up to? What about Don Stephenson, who received her field notes on a regular

--- PAGE BREAK ---e FBI placed so much blame
solely on Riley. Didn’t she have bosses? Didn’t someone sanction what she was
up to? What about Don Stephenson, who received her field notes on a regular

--- PAGE BREAK ---

basis? Was the FBI entirely blameless, given the contact its own agents had with
Riley?
Riley was fired from the task force within days of her trip to Oklahoma City
and ended up under internal investigation by the Secret Service—an inquiry that
was not made public but resulted in Riley being cleared, leaving government
service, and moving into a high-level, high-paying job with Bank of America.
Donna Bucella’s career was left entirely unblemished. She was soon
promoted to head of the Executive Office of U.S. Attorneys and has since
occupied high-level government jobs in the FBI and customs and border patrol,
interspersed with stints in private practice. Interestingly, she also worked at Bank
of America for a while.
Not everyone blamed Riley. John Kane, who worked equally closely with
the FBI when they took over the records search, saw her as the victim of a crude
power play: the FBI was jealous of her work, and wanted to take credit for it.
“She was as committed to finding the answers in this case as anybody could be,”
he said. “Her attitude was, I don’t care what badge I’m carrying in my pocket….
Anything that could be done to get after these guys sooner, faster, better, she was
all over it.”
When a couple of FBI agents visited Kane’s California offices and said they
were there to investigate Riley, Kane wasn’t pleased. “I rolled my head and my
eyes and said, fine, whatever…. They probably spent an hour and a half asking
questions that didn’t seem like anything I could relate to the case,” he said. “She
lost, and they won.”
Riley’s field notes were never handed over to the defense teams ahead of
McVeigh’s and Nichols’s federal trials—a potential violation of the rules of
evidence. The task force leadership insisted it, too, never saw the notes. “This is
the first time I’ve seen this,” one senior FBI manager said when shown them. “If
Judge Matsch sees this, I don’t even want to be in the same country as the guy.
He will blow up, he will be seething, he will go try to find heads, and I don’t
want him to go find mine.”
A more nuanced view was offered by a member of the federal prosecution
team, who did not think the notes would cause much of a stir more than a decade
after the trials, because they were not exculpatory to either McVeigh or Nichols.
The prosecutor agreed that the primary problem was a turf war between the
Secret Service and the FBI, in which nobody was blameless.
“The Secret Service was dying to do everything they could to hold on to that
piece,” he said, “and they got shut out. There was a fundamental quandary
whether they had the experience to do the job. But I never doubted Mary Riley.”to do everything they could to hold on to that
piece,” he said, “and they got shut out. There was a fundamental quandary
whether they had the experience to do the job. But I never doubted Mary Riley.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---y could to hold on to that
piece,” he said, “and they got shut out. There was a fundamental quandary
whether they had the experience to do the job. But I never doubted Mary Riley.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE FBI WENT OVER EVERY INCH OF JAMES NICHOLS’S FARM, BUT they did not find a whole
lot. For Nichols, having the feds crawling over his private property was the
nightmare his radical politics had taught him to fear the most. He railed that he
was never shown a search warrant and he might have been right about that—the
warrant was signed by a judge at 6:54 P.M., more than four hours after the raid
began.
“You people have no right to be in here,” Nichols remembered shouting. “I
demand to see a Fourth Amendment warrant. I demand to talk with Janet Reno.”
An ATF agent supposedly responded: “Oh shut up. We have more rights in here
than you do.”
Still, Nichols answered all the feds’ questions. He was not shy about his
friendship with McVeigh or their shared interest in explosives. But he was
quicker than his brother in understanding the seriousness of his situation, and his
show of candor was almost certainly calculated to minimize the trouble he faced.
Nichols told the FBI that, in 1992, he, his brother, and McVeigh made bottle
bombs out of brake fluid, gasoline, and diesel fuel and detonated them on the
farm, just for kicks. He also constructed small bombs using prescription vials,
Pyrodex, blasting caps, and safety fuse. But he had never bought ammonium
nitrate and did not know if his brother or McVeigh had purchased any. He said
Terry owned a bunch of bomb-making books. And he was “confident” McVeigh
had the knowledge to manufacture one from ammonium nitrate.
Like his brother, James Nichols made insinuations about McVeigh’s
involvement in the bombing, without offering evidence that might smack of
collusion or out-and-out betrayal. He was also careful to proclaim Terry’s
innocence. Since he claimed never to have visited Terry in Herington—
apparently true—he could make a plausible case that he knew nothing about any
interactions between his brother and McVeigh in the final days before the
bombing.
The feds found no ammonium nitrate on the farm; the best they came up
with were twenty-eight fifty-pound bags of fertilizer “containing ammonium
nitrate,” which was far from the same thing. They found several large tanks of
diesel fuel, some nonelectric blasting caps, Pyrodex black powder, and safety
fuse. None of this was evidence of collusion in the bomb plot. These were
commonplace farm items; such explosives are often used to blow out tree stumps
or remove boulders.
At Joe Martinolich’s direction, agents divided the farm up into a grid, and
went over all of it with metal detectors. But Martinolich ultimately concludedd to blow out tree stumps
or remove boulders.
At Joe Martinolich’s direction, agents divided the farm up into a grid, and
went over all of it with metal detectors. But Martinolich ultimately concluded

--- PAGE BREAK ---tumps
or remove boulders.
At Joe Martinolich’s direction, agents divided the farm up into a grid, and
went over all of it with metal detectors. But Martinolich ultimately concluded

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the feds had no grounds to arrest James Nichols. This was not what Louis Freeh
wanted to hear, and he said so. He wanted James Nichols charged with
conspiracy. Martinolich responded, as calmly as he could, that he didn’t have
probable cause to seek an arrest warrant.
Freeh flew into a fury and said: “If you don’t do it, I’ll find someone who
will.”
“We don’t have the evidence,” Martinolich told him.
“We’ll sort it out later,” Freeh insisted.
Martinolich shared his director’s gut feeling that Nichols was somehow
involved in the bombing, but he questioned the ethics and the tactical wisdom of
arresting him on charges that could not be backed up by real evidence. Freeh
worried that Nichols might somehow disappear if he was not taken into federal
custody. Martinolich was offended that Freeh questioned his ability to keep
Nichols under surveillance; he understood the pressure Freeh was under to solve
the case, but he also had his professional pride. The next day, he called
headquarters and offered his resignation.
The last thing the FBI needed at this moment was a high-level defection
pointing the finger at Freeh’s leadership skills. Bear Bryant called Martinolich at
once, apologizing profusely for the way he had been treated and promising that
his concerns would be addressed. The bureau then appealed to the Justice
Department, which fashioned a compromise. Nichols would be arrested, but
instead of bombing charges, he would be accused of conspiring to possess
unregistered firearms and explosives. It was not much of a charge—who makes a
bottle bomb and registers it?—and it was thrown out as soon as it was heard by a
judge. Still, it provided a temporary way for all parties to save face.
The episode killed Martinolich’s desire to pursue his long and illustrious FBI
career. He did not leave the bureau right away; it took another botched FBI job,
the investigation of the 1996 Olympic Games bombing in Atlanta, to convince
him to do that. Still, the pattern was set. For the second time in a few days, Freeh
had ridden roughshod over one of his most experienced managers, exactly the
sort of person he should have turned to, not against, during a major investigation.For the second time in a few days, Freeh
had ridden roughshod over one of his most experienced managers, exactly the
sort of person he should have turned to, not against, during a major investigation.

THE HIGH-PROFILE ARRESTS OF MCVEIGH AND THE NICHOLS BROTHERS were hailed at the time
as great breakthroughs, but they came at a price, because they closed down
avenues that could have led to other potential coconspirators. Nobody was a
better candidate for more subtle treatment than James Nichols: the feds could
have put him under surveillance, given themselves time to analyze his phone
records, and waited to see who visited or called over the next several days.

--- PAGE BREAK ---mes Nichols: the feds could
have put him under surveillance, given themselves time to analyze his phone
records, and waited to see who visited or called over the next several days.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Someone important might still seek refuge in Decker, or receive a phone call
from Nichols to discuss another planned attack.
That was certainly on the minds of task force leaders in Oklahoma City. “At
the beginning, we were not even sure McVeigh was the one responsible,” Bob
Ricks recalled. “Was he part of some larger conspiracy?…Was he just a driver?
A lot of times police arrest a driver, and the bad guys disappear.”
The investigation was further hampered by its inability to prevent media
leaks. If the Nichols brothers’ names had not been all over the radio and
television in the late morning of April 21, both brothers could have been put
under surveillance. Lana Padilla, or Josh, could have made a monitored call to
Terry to see what he might volunteer—not as a suspect in custody but as a free
man. Mary Riley and the executives at West Coast Telephone could have kept
monitoring the Daryl Bridges card.
The task force leadership did not understand at first why crucial leads were
seeping into the public arena. Then Weldon Kennedy learned that ATF
headquarters was routinely forwarding the Oklahoma City briefings to its entire
staff, and so creating hundreds of potential news media sources around the
country. “I blew up,” Kennedy said. “I went completely nutso.”
He plugged the leak as quickly as he could, but others soon developed in its
place. For example, a reporter for the Dallas Morning News in Oklahoma City
was having an affair with an ATF agent she knew from Texas and was pumping
him for everything he knew. Several front-page scoops later, the agent was sent
back to Dallas.
For these reasons, the early arrests were never more than a qualified success.
Members of the Decker raid team became convinced that James Nichols had
known they were coming and removed incriminating evidence—something
Nichols himself has always denied. One odd thing Nichols insisted on was that
his incarceration was somehow designed to prevent him from retrieving crucial
evidence from the scene in Oklahoma City, which he said could have exonerated
him, and his brother, and McVeigh, and pointed to the “real” perpetrators.
What was it that James Nichols was so anxious to do in Oklahoma City?
Why, too, did he seem determined to make contact with Terry and McVeigh?
Over and over, Nichols expressed a wish to talk to one or both of them face-to-
face, a move he seemed to think would help clear all their names but which, to
law enforcement, suggested he wanted the three of them to get their stories
straight.
Such face-to-face meetings might have been very useful to the investigation,
of course, if the participants could somehow have been lulled into thinking they
were not being monitored or recorded. Once the feds launched their raid,ht have been very useful to the investigation,
of course, if the participants could somehow have been lulled into thinking they
were not being monitored or recorded. Once the feds launched their raid,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

however, this was no longer an option.

--- PAGE BREAK ---uld somehow have been lulled into thinking they
were not being monitored or recorded. Once the feds launched their raid,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

however, this was no longer an option.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

{ 5 }
WAR FEVER
Tim McVeigh woke up on February 24, 1991, to the greatest test of his young
life, the launch of the ground war to expel Iraqi forces from Kuwait. The battle
plan envisaged up to 70 percent casualties, effectively turning McVeigh’s
company and others like it into sacrificial lambs for the next wave of tanks and
ground troops. They expected to encounter mines, barbed wire, artillery and
antitank fire, and maybe nerve gas. “Take your worst nightmare, then quadruple
it, then quadruple it again,” a Vietnam veteran who led the platoon next to
McVeigh’s said, “and you still won’t get to where you’ll be this time tomorrow.”
At 3:00 P.M., a line of M1 Abrams tanks, equipped with giant blades, began
plowing up the desert sand. McVeigh’s job, as a gunner atop his own infantry
tank, a Bradley Fighting Vehicle, was to take out enemy positions before they
could fire on him. “No one knows,” he later told the journalist Jonathan
Franklin, “what the feeling is like to know that any second you could be hit by a
bullet or shell from indirect fire or from a tank.”
Once the fighting began, the Iraqi frontline units—tired, hungry, lice-
infested conscripts—wanted nothing more than to surrender. Many did not get
the chance. Those who crawled out of the sand churned on top of them by the
M1 tanks immediately faced Bradley gunners like McVeigh. The battlefield was
a slaughterhouse. Trench by trench, the Iraqis were given sixty seconds to
surrender, and those who hesitated, or did not hear the warning, were buried
alive or blown to smithereens. Thousands of Iraqis were pulverized,
dismembered, or burned. Many were plowed into shallow desert graves.
This went on for four straight days. When McVeigh wasn’t manning his gun,
he took hundreds of photographs of corpses and mangled Iraqi equipment. James
Rockwell, the unit’s supply sergeant, was given several as keepsakes. “One of
them,” Rockwell said, “was of an Iraqi soldier sitting in a deuce-and-a-half truck
that had been bombed. The guy was literally burned like a piece of toast, but his
hands were still on the steering wheel.”
McVeigh and his comrades were high on killing. “If it’s in front of us, it
dies” was one infantry company’s slogan. McVeigh nicknamed his Bradley “Bad
Company,” after the rock song he liked to blast through the vehicle. The crew
sang along to the lines about killing “in cold blood,” and fighting, gun in hand,ogan. McVeigh nicknamed his Bradley “Bad
Company,” after the rock song he liked to blast through the vehicle. The crew
sang along to the lines about killing “in cold blood,” and fighting, gun in hand,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“’til the day I die.” On the second day, McVeigh wowed everyone with his
gunnery skills, using just a single round to hit two Iraqi soldiers dug in at a
machine-gun emplacement a thousand yards away. He hit the first man in the
chest, obliterating his upper body and leaving a red vapor trail where his head
used to be. The episode became legendary across the 16th Infantry, earning
McVeigh an Army Commendation Medal. That was one of five awards he won
by the end of Operation Desert Storm, including the Bronze Star. He was
described as an inspiration to his fellow platoon members and a credit to the
army—the most lavish praise he had received over his brief and troubled life.
And it stemmed from his skills as a killer of devastating efficiency.on to his fellow platoon members and a credit to the
army—the most lavish praise he had received over his brief and troubled life.
And it stemmed from his skills as a killer of devastating efficiency.

EVEN BATTLE-HARDENED VETERANS OF VIETNAM AND OTHER WARS thought the rout of the Iraqi
forces was particularly grim, a spilling of largely innocent life that prompted
lawyers and human rights activists to accuse the United States of war crimes.
The dead were not counted or identified, much less “honorably interred” as the
Geneva Conventions prescribed. And there were multiple reports of Iraqis being
killed after they had dropped their weapons and put their hands up.
According to at least three of his fellow soldiers, McVeigh breached a
number of the rules of war himself. After the Oklahoma City bombing, Larry
Frame, Richard Cerney, and Todd Regier disclosed that McVeigh had shot
surrendering soldiers, including four who had already been taken prisoner.
Frame told the FBI he was in the Bradley Fighting Vehicle directly behind
McVeigh’s and saw him kill “several” Iraqi soldiers as they climbed out of a
trench. Cerney called McVeigh a “cold-blooded bastard” who thought life was
very cheap. When the FBI brought these allegations to McVeigh’s old company
commander, Scott Rutter, he worried he was being investigated for war crimes
himself and refused to answer their questions.
It is impossible to know how these experiences altered McVeigh’s psyche or
otherwise hardened him for the slaughter he would perpetrate four years later.
But his exposure to combat certainly changed his outlook and behavior. Before,
he always strived to be the ideal soldier. He did not allow himself to succumb to
boredom or get demoralized by the long months of waiting in the Arabian desert,
as many of his fellow soldiers did. He took the conditions as a challenge and
somehow kept his 25-mm cannon as well-greased as it would have been back at
Fort Riley. Scott Rutter felt in retrospect he was almost too good. His
compulsion to perform at the highest levels was in some ways a facade, a show
of bravado covering something darker beneath.
After his return home, McVeigh lost focus. In the spring of 1991, he flew tocompulsion to perform at the highest levels was in some ways a facade, a show
of bravado covering something darker beneath.
After his return home, McVeigh lost focus. In the spring of 1991, he flew to

--- PAGE BREAK ---m at the highest levels was in some ways a facade, a show
of bravado covering something darker beneath.
After his return home, McVeigh lost focus. In the spring of 1991, he flew to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fort Bragg in North Carolina to try out for Special Forces, but had to withdraw
on the second day because his feet were too badly blistered to complete a five-
mile march. This should have been only a temporary setback; everyone
understood he was out of condition after his stint in the Gulf, and he was invited
to come back for another shot. But McVeigh took this as a signal to get out of the
army.
McVeigh had been thinking about his time in the Middle East and now
recoiled at his own gung-ho enthusiasm amid the slaughter. He became
convinced that the government had manipulated him into fighting an army of
hapless conscripts who were not really enemies at all. “We were falsely hyped
up [to kill Iraqis], and they are normal like you and me,” he told Jonathan
Franklin.
McVeigh’s epiphany about American power was not a condemnation of neo-
imperialism or of a lust for oil. He felt the military’s role was strictly to defend
America’s domestic borders, and that the United States had been hoodwinked
into a United Nations policing operation. These thoughts fed into his long-held
belief that the United States’ true enemy was an international cabal of money-
grubbing liberals, multiculturalists, and Jews intent on stripping citizens of their
basic rights, starting with the right to bear arms. This view had been ingrained in
him over and over in The Turner Diaries, a book he discovered during his
earliest days in uniform.
Politics was the means by which McVeigh forged a new identity for himself
after the security of his old world—the army, and his place in it—fell apart. Most
likely, his fixation on government manipulation masked a severe bout of post-
combat depression, as the psychiatrists who examined him after the bombing
would later postulate. James Rockwell, the Charlie Company supply sergeant,
remembered McVeigh coming into his storeroom at Fort Riley and talking about
having a computer chip in his backside. It was not clear if he meant this
metaphorically or literally. McVeigh said he was leaving the army, because the
military had done things to him he didn’t like.
“Like what?” Rockwell asked.
“I think they’ve brainwashed me or injected me with something,” McVeigh
said.
Rockwell was astonished. He probably knew the men as well as anyone; he
encouraged McVeigh to sit and talk whenever he came in for tank supplies or
tools. McVeigh visited regularly and opened up in ways he rarely did to others.
He talked about his parents’ divorce when he was sixteen years old, and the
bitter fights, about his mother moving to the next town with his two sisters and
leaving him with his dad. Still, Rockwell saw McVeigh as the ultimate “squarede when he was sixteen years old, and the
bitter fights, about his mother moving to the next town with his two sisters and
leaving him with his dad. Still, Rockwell saw McVeigh as the ultimate “squared

--- PAGE BREAK ---

away” soldier, a man so in control it was hard to imagine him encountering
anything he couldn’t deal with. The government conspiracy talk made no sense.
“Tim, you don’t really believe that, do you?” he asked.
McVeigh replied: “Yes, I do.”
Rockwell asked why he would throw away his promising military career and
the recognition he had earned. McVeigh delivered a line Rockwell later recalled
with a shiver. “There’s things I got to do, Sergeant Rock,” he said, “and I cannot
do it from within here.”y career and
the recognition he had earned. McVeigh delivered a line Rockwell later recalled
with a shiver. “There’s things I got to do, Sergeant Rock,” he said, “and I cannot
do it from within here.”

AFTER TRYING AND FAILING FOR THREE DAYS TO CONVINCE Jennifer McVeigh to talk, the FBI
put her on a plane back to Buffalo and got her father to urge her to cooperate.
When she said no, she was taken to the FBI office and put on the phone to her
mother. Still she would not answer questions about the bombing. “I didn’t know
what was going on,” she said, over and over. She was clearly frightened.
The FBI had been through her room at her father’s house and found some
incendiary documents on her computer. They were written by her brother, but the
feds made it clear that if she didn’t speak up she would have to answer for the
contents herself. The first document was a letter to the American Legion and
characterized the ATF, FBI, DEA, and U.S. Marshals Service as “a bunch of
fascist tyrants” and “power-hungry stormtroopers of the federal government.”
The second document was an unsigned one-paragraph rant about the ATF. “All
you tyrannical motherfuckers will swing in the wind one day,” it read, “for your
treasonous actions against the Constitution and the United States. Remember the
Nuremberg War Trials. But…but…but…I was only following orders!………Die
you spineless, cowardice bastards!”
Jennifer’s interviewers let her sleep on that, then upped the pressure the next
morning by displaying poster-size photographs of her and Tim, along with a
timeline of their movements leading up to the bombing and a list of charges they
said they were considering. The agents even opened a book of federal statutes
and showed her some choice paragraphs. “Whoever commits an offense against
the United States or aids, abets, counsels, commands, induces or procures its
commission, is punishable as a principal,” one of them read. Next to the printed
words, an agent had scrawled: “I.e., death.” The next page had a section on
treason, this time with a handwritten addendum that said: “Penalty equals
death.”
Jennifer began talking and didn’t stop for the next eight days. She didn’t
know the FBI’s threat to bring capital charges against her was strictly a scare
tactic, or that treason can be prosecuted only in wartime. She talked until herstop for the next eight days. She didn’t
know the FBI’s threat to bring capital charges against her was strictly a scare
tactic, or that treason can be prosecuted only in wartime. She talked until her

--- PAGE BREAK ---

head was spinning and she was crying so hard she was all but gasping for breath.
For the first several days, she was determined not to rat out her brother, but
the FBI kept applying more pressure. “They told me he was guilty,” she later
testified, “and that he was going to fry.” She understood that if she did not want
to be prosecuted herself, she needed to tell them everything she knew. It took her
a full week to do that; she reached her breaking point only after the agents forced
her to look at graphic, full-color photographs of mangled babies’ bodies from the
Murrah Building.
“It was controversial at the time to show her pictures of dead children,”
Weldon Kennedy, who gave the authorization, acknowledged—so controversial
that it was omitted from the official record.
But the move paid off, and Jennifer was ultimately smart enough not to
throw her own life away after her brother’s. “I think that was the reason, the
tipping point, that made her decide she would cooperate,” Kennedy added.
“There’s no question a lot of pressure was put on her.”er own life away after her brother’s. “I think that was the reason, the
tipping point, that made her decide she would cooperate,” Kennedy added.
“There’s no question a lot of pressure was put on her.”

LIKE MCVEIGH, NICHOLS WAS ROCKED BY HIS PARENTS’ DIVORCE. AS a child, he sat so quietly
in class his teachers wondered if he had hearing difficulties. Long after his arrest,
it was determined that he had Asperger syndrome. Still, he was smart and
resourceful, and dreamed of a career in medicine. But when his mother was
given the Decker farm in her divorce settlement, she ordered him to leave
college and help her run it. He complied without a murmur. The farm crisis of
the early 1980s was setting in, compounded by floods that turned the Michigan
fields to mud. Right away, the bounties of Terry’s childhood gave way to poverty
and constant struggle. He hardly talked to his father anymore, and his older
brother Les was an abiding worry after a horrific accident at a grain elevator,
which left him with burns over 95 percent of his body. Joyce, a matriarchal
figure with a propensity to drink, rammed her car into her ex-husband’s tractor,
and was once found by a sheriff’s deputy throwing beer cans into a cornfield.
When he challenged her, she turned on him with a chain saw. Mercifully, she
was too drunk to start it up and threw it at him instead.
Nichols dabbled in property investment with the help of his real estate agent,
then known as Lana Osentowski. She was twice divorced, with two children, and
she encouraged Nichols to follow her into a sideline selling insurance. They
married in 1981, and Josh was born a year later. By 1988, the marriage was in
trouble, and Lana suggested that Terry enlist in the army. She filed for divorce
shortly after he left for basic training, by which time she was living fifty miles
away in Bay City and checking in on her three children, whom she left with

--- PAGE BREAK ---She filed for divorce
shortly after he left for basic training, by which time she was living fifty miles
away in Bay City and checking in on her three children, whom she left with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

various relatives, just once or twice a week. Nichols requested a discharge so he
could return home and take care of Josh.
James Nichols was no luckier in his marriage to Lana’s younger sister, Kelli.
Their 1987 divorce was so contentious that Kelli accused her husband of
molesting their son. Nichols eventually managed to rebut the charge, but he
could not forgive his ex-wife, or the courts; it was a turning point in his hostility
toward the government.
By the end of the 1980s, James and Terry were back on the farm. Terry
wanted to get married again, so he flew to the Philippines and selected a
seventeen-year-old mail-order bride in Marife Torres, the daughter of a
provincial police chief. Months went by while they processed the paperwork
enabling Marife to come to the United States. And when Nichols flew back to
the Philippines in June 1991 to pick her up, he discovered she was five months
pregnant by another man—“complicating matters some,” as he later put it.
Just about the only thing Nichols did not regret was his bond with Josh.
Father and son were so close that Lana could not believe Nichols would ever
jeopardize the relationship by involving himself in a major criminal conspiracy.
Years later, as Josh struggled with drug and alcohol addictions and shuttled in
and out of the Nevada criminal justice system, Padilla could not contain her
anger at Nichols for abdicating his parental responsibilities. “I truly believe
[Josh] is in prison because he depended on a father who abandoned him,” she
said. “Not to mention a mother who abandoned him, too. But I didn’t blow up a
building. People get divorced every day, but their ex does not blow up a
building.”ed on a father who abandoned him,” she
said. “Not to mention a mother who abandoned him, too. But I didn’t blow up a
building. People get divorced every day, but their ex does not blow up a
building.”

EARLY IN THE INVESTIGATION, THE FBI THOUGHT MCVEIGH AND NICHOLS might be gay lovers,
or at least that they had a strong homoerotic bond. Padilla said McVeigh was
certainly controlling and possessive of Nichols, almost to the point of jealousy.
But that, Padilla said, was as far as it went: “McVeigh never approached Terry,
you know…in that way. He was always high on methamphetamines.”
When they met, Nichols was thirty-three, at least ten years older than most
of the recruits in basic training. They saw him as a natural leader, none more so
than McVeigh, a skinny twenty-year-old unsure of his physical abilities.
McVeigh began working out obsessively to build up his muscle strength, and
would clean and re-clean every item of his equipment while others went out
drinking and partying. He and Nichols stayed on their commanders’ good side,
but ran in a wild crowd including a kid from Boston who once lobbed a CS gas
canister into a topless bar; Mike Fortier, who was into drugs; and another

--- PAGE BREAK ---their commanders’ good side,
but ran in a wild crowd including a kid from Boston who once lobbed a CS gas
canister into a topless bar; Mike Fortier, who was into drugs; and another

--- PAGE BREAK ---

troublemaker who accompanied them on secret outings to detonate black-
powder bombs.
McVeigh and Nichols also delved into white supremacist literature. McVeigh
read The Turner Diaries first, then passed it on to Nichols, Fortier, and anyone
else in the unit he thought might be receptive. They were radicalized by the
book’s revolutionary spirit more than its breathtaking racism. Still, McVeigh and
Nichols had grown up in places where there was a casual disdain for blacks,
Jews, and foreigners, and they were uncomfortable around many of the African-
Americans in their unit. They weren’t beyond cracking jokes about “niggers”
and “porch monkeys,” as McVeigh freely acknowledged in his prison interviews.
Before he was out of uniform, McVeigh also signed up with the Ku Klux Klan.weren’t beyond cracking jokes about “niggers”
and “porch monkeys,” as McVeigh freely acknowledged in his prison interviews.
Before he was out of uniform, McVeigh also signed up with the Ku Klux Klan.

SENIOR CASE MANAGERS BEGAN TO SUSPECT SOMETHING WAS WRONG with the sketch of John Doe
Two. They issued two versions, one bare-headed and one with the zigzag-
patterned cap described by Tom Kessinger, but the leads these generated were a
waste of time. By April 26, a week after the bombing, the task force brought in
Jeanne Boylan, a different sort of sketch artist, whose technique did not involve
showing witnesses stock facial features but rather used an idiosyncratic method
of interviewing subjects to draw out their memories strand by strand. Time and
again Boylan had corrected the work of conventional artists and helped crack
cases. Now Danny Coulson was instructing her tersely: “Find out what’s wrong
with these damn drawings.”
Within hours, Boylan was face-to-face with Kessinger at Eldon Elliott’s shop
and picking up a welter of new details. Kessinger had seen John Doe Two only
from the side, not head-on as the original sketch portrayed him, and many of the
facial details were wrong. Kessinger saw him only briefly, as he stood with his
arms crossed in front of a poster, but noticed his muscular frame and the
beginnings of a tattoo poking out from beneath his left T-shirt sleeve. Boylan
started working up a brand-new sketch.
Kessinger also wanted to talk about John Doe One and offered a fascinating
new detail. Robert Kling was a tobacco-chewer, and did something that made
Kessinger stare and stare. “When a guy chews,” he told Boylan, “he tucks the
chaw over to one side or the other so he can talk, know what I mean? But he
doesn’t divide it in two. This guy standing at the counter had a long, thin face,
blue eyes, this sorta flat-top hair like an army guy, and two puffs, two plugs of
chew, one tucked over on each side of his bottom lip. Funniest damn thing I ever
seen.”
The FBI was working on the basis that McVeigh and Kling were the samee an army guy, and two puffs, two plugs of
chew, one tucked over on each side of his bottom lip. Funniest damn thing I ever
seen.”
The FBI was working on the basis that McVeigh and Kling were the same

--- PAGE BREAK ---

person, but McVeigh was not a tobacco-chewer. With the other inconsistencies
raised by Kessinger and his fellow employees—that Kling was five foot ten
(three inches shorter than McVeigh), had a line or deformity across his chin, and
rough skin (McVeigh’s was smooth)—the government’s case was starting to look
shaky.
When Boylan told one of the top FBI supervisors what Kessinger had said,
he had her escorted to a hotel room in Junction City and told her to stay put until
further notice. Two agents subsequently grilled her about her interview with
Kessinger. She felt she was being interrogated and told them to lighten up.
Come on, she said, we’re all on the same side. They paid no attention.
An hour later, one of the agents returned to her room. “Ms. Boylan?” he
said, looking straight at her. “The information you produced this afternoon does
not exist.”
Boylan was stunned. “Wh-what information?” she stammered.
“Very good,” the agent replied. He nodded once, turned around, and left.at her. “The information you produced this afternoon does
not exist.”
Boylan was stunned. “Wh-what information?” she stammered.
“Very good,” the agent replied. He nodded once, turned around, and left.

IN THE WINTER OF 1991–92, TERRY AND JAMES NICHOLS BEGAN FOLLOWING Ralph Daigle, a
local extremist preacher, who persuaded Terry to max out his credit cards on the
quaint theory that the banks were not backing up their money with silver or gold,
and so were defrauding the American people every time they made a loan.
Daigle—who was later prosecuted and convicted of tax evasion—was a
common-law advocate who argued that the government and the banks were an
offense to the Constitution. Daigle derived many of his ideas from a notorious
racist preacher James Wickstrom, who once argued that “Jew money barons”
created the farm crisis of the 1980s and were “financially and morally rap[ing]
the white Christian-American people.” Credit card bills, Daigle preached, merely
needed to be returned with the phrase “dishonored with due cause,” and the
banks would have no option but to cancel the debt.
The Nichols brothers certainly liked the idea of fleecing the banks,
especially now Terry was married and starting a new family, and signed up to the
ideology that went with it. Terry ran up credit card bills of more than $26,000
with Chase Manhattan and the First Deposit National Bank of Pleasanton,
California, and then tried to challenge his creditors in court, acting as his own
counsel.
It did not go well. Nichols argued that the court had no jurisdiction and the
banks should pay him damages of $50,000, or 14,200 ounces of silver, for “fraud
and misrepresentation.” He also attempted to invalidate his own signature as a
way of nullifying the pledge he made on his credit card applications to honor his

--- PAGE BREAK ---silver, for “fraud
and misrepresentation.” He also attempted to invalidate his own signature as a
way of nullifying the pledge he made on his credit card applications to honor his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

debts. He was a no-show when the First Deposit National case came up for trial.
And in the Chase Manhattan hearing, he refused to recognize the Chase lawyer
and said he wanted the bank’s whole board of directors to come and face him
instead. He refused to approach the microphone recording the proceedings,
saying he didn’t want to acknowledge the court by walking all the way into the
room. The judge threatened to throw him in jail for contempt.
By June 1993, even Nichols realized his quixotic adventures in court were
futile. His only choices were to conjure up more than $30,000 in debt and
accumulated interest, or drop out of the system. He chose the latter. “I was
pissed at Ralph [Daigle], the banks, and myself, and I decided not to pay the
judgment,” he said. “I went on a cash basis with everything…. And I decided not
to put my name on anything that would be on a database to where the banks
could track me down.” And so Nichols sabotaged any remaining chance of a
normal life.asis with everything…. And I decided not
to put my name on anything that would be on a database to where the banks
could track me down.” And so Nichols sabotaged any remaining chance of a
normal life.

MCVEIGH WAS ALSO COMING UNSTUCK FROM MAINSTREAM SOCIETY. Quitting the military left
him with few enviable options. It was not a good time to be a white working-
class man. The Buffalo area was depressed, and the only work he found was as a
minimum-wage security guard. On the side, he joined the National Guard
reserves and found a part-time job at a gun store.
For more than a year, McVeigh wavered between depression and anger. He
read comic books and spent money he did not have betting on the Buffalo Bills.
With thoughts of suicide in his head, he called a Veterans Administration
hospital in Florida and asked about mental health counseling. But he let the idea
go when he was told he had to give them his name. He dropped his memberships
to the Ku Klux Klan and the National Rifle Association because he could not
afford them. But he was still absorbed by politics and read radical right-wing
periodicals and books voraciously.
In early 1992, he wrote a revealing letter to the local paper, expressing his
belief that stable employment and anti-Communism seemed to be giving way to
social incoherence and political corruption. “America is in serious decline,” he
wrote. “We have no proverbial tea to dump. Should we instead sink a ship full of
Japanese imports? Is a civil war imminent? Do we have to shed blood to reform
the current system? I hope it doesn’t come to that, but it might.”
This is when McVeigh started spending weekends at gun shows. He was
interested in firearms and thought he could generate a little extra income by
selling blast simulators, smoke grenades, and copies of The Turner Diaries.
Principally, though, the shows offered McVeigh a new social network, one where

--- PAGE BREAK ---a little extra income by
selling blast simulators, smoke grenades, and copies of The Turner Diaries.
Principally, though, the shows offered McVeigh a new social network, one where

--- PAGE BREAK ---

taboo ideas like white supremacy, nostalgia for the confederate South, and
radical antigovernment action could be discussed openly. William Pierce, the
author of The Turner Diaries, described the gun shows as a “natural recruiting
environment” for his brand of race warriors; the number of shows, and of
firearms changing hands outside the context of licensed gun dealerships,
increased so rapidly in this period that both the government and the gun-control
lobby lost count.
The militancy of the shows escalated decisively after the Ruby Ridge
incident of August 1992. What began as a misguided attempt to dismantle the
Aryan Nations turned to needless tragedy, as the man the ATF tried to recruit as
an informant, Randy Weaver, refused to play along and slowly grew in agents’
minds into a Rambo-style menace.
Weaver reacted angrily when an undercover ATF agent sold him an illegal
weapon and tried to trap him into ratting out his friends in the white supremacist
movement. He became angrier still when the government pressed charges,
retreating up his mountain and refusing to come down no matter how many
times he was summoned to court. Weaver’s wife, Vicki, then raised the stakes by
writing a letter to the local U.S. attorney, whom she described as “the servant of
the Queen of Babylon,” and declaring that a war was imminent.
Eventually, a small army of federal agents surrounded the Weavers’ cabin to
bring matters to a head. Shooting began when the Weavers’ Labrador heard the
surveillance team and started barking. Minutes later, the dog, fourteen-year-old
Sammy Weaver, and a U.S. marshal were all dead. The next day, an FBI
sharpshooter, operating under hugely controversial rules of engagement
authorizing him to shoot to kill on sight, hit Vicki Weaver in the face while she
was cradling her fourteen-month-old baby. She died instantly. Randy Weaver and
a family friend were wounded, and it seemed they were all destined to die before
the siege was over. The feds, though, revoked the rules of engagement they had
imposed, and open hostility gave way to more psychological forms of
confrontation.
After nine days of negotiation, the surviving members of the Weaver
household gave up peacefully and were later absolved of murder and multiple
other charges. The government walked away shamed and humiliated.
The mainstream media hardly covered Ruby Ridge, but its impact on the
populist right was profound. On the radical fringe, it inspired a widely publicized
meeting of the country’s top neo-Nazis and antigovernment agitators, who
vowed to resist a federal government “gone mad”—Louis Beam’s words—with
bloodlust for its own citizens. “Over the next ten years you will come to hate
government more than anything else in your life,” Beam told his fellow Patriotsrnment “gone mad”—Louis Beam’s words—with
bloodlust for its own citizens. “Over the next ten years you will come to hate
government more than anything else in your life,” Beam told his fellow Patriots

--- PAGE BREAK ---uis Beam’s words—with
bloodlust for its own citizens. “Over the next ten years you will come to hate
government more than anything else in your life,” Beam told his fellow Patriots

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in Estes Park, Colorado. “If you think that this generation of men will maintain
its present freedoms without also having to fertilize the tree of liberty with the
blood of both patriot and tyrant, then you are mistaken.”
McVeigh was as transformed by the moment as anyone. The “tree of liberty”
line would, of course, end up on the T-shirt he wore when he was arrested. He
was also deeply influenced by an essay Beam had republished earlier that year,
which advocated a revolutionary strategy of “leaderless resistance.” If the
soldiers of the radical right worked autonomously or in small cells instead of
taking orders from a centralized command, Beam argued, law enforcement
agencies and their informants were less likely to find out about their plots in
advance and could never catch up with the entire movement. “Let the coming
night,” he declared, “be filled with a thousand points of resistance.”
McVeigh was determined to be one of those resistance points and started
cutting many old ties. He had already quit the National Guard. In September
1992, he sold a rural plot of land near Buffalo he had bought in his more
narrowly survivalist pre-army days and used the $9,000 proceeds to travel more
extensively, including his first trip to the Nichols farm in Decker. He also built a
file of newspaper and magazine clippings pointing to egregious abuses of
government power—a list of grievances that would feed his growing rage for the
next two and a half years. Usually the episodes involved federal agents acting on
faulty information, who burst into the homes of innocent citizens: a computer
executive from San Diego shot three times by customs and DEA, or a
Washington housewife slapped in handcuffs while the feds tore the place apart,
leaving her twenty-one-month-old daughter alone in a bathtub.
In early February 1993, McVeigh piled some possessions into his trusty
1987 Chevy Geo Spectrum and left New York for good. He later told Michel and
Herbeck that the spur for leaving was losing a thousand-dollar bet he made on
the Buffalo Bills in that year’s Super Bowl. But McVeigh had quit his security
guard job on January 26, five days before the game, and had been selling off
anything he could not comfortably fit in his car.
A more likely motivation was an invitation to go into business with a rich
gun dealer in his late fifties, whom he had met at a recent show in Fort
Lauderdale. The dealer was known to McVeigh as Bob Miller, but his real name
was Roger Moore. He would play a pivotal role in the events leading to April 19,
1995.he had met at a recent show in Fort
Lauderdale. The dealer was known to McVeigh as Bob Miller, but his real name
was Roger Moore. He would play a pivotal role in the events leading to April 19,
1995.

THE FBI AGENTS QUESTIONING JENNIFER MCVEIGH WERE INTRIGUED by a December 24, 1993,
letter from her brother that suggested he was funding his revolutionary enterprise

--- PAGE BREAK ---

through bank robberies. The letter denounced the banking system as the financial
arm of a corrupt and evil government, echoing the “common law” language
Ralph Daigle had used with Terry Nichols. And it cast robbers, credit fraudsters,
and illegal arms traffickers as romantic heroes fleecing the rich to champion the
poor. McVeigh said he and his unnamed friends were justifiably breaking the law
to fight against a “higher evil.” He continued: “We are at war with the system,
make no mistake about it…. We have to fund our war efforts with, sometimes,
‘covert’ means.”
Jennifer could not, or would not, say what those covert means were.
McVeigh referred to a “friend who knocks over banks,” and a credit scam of
some sort. “In the past,” McVeigh wrote, “you would see the news and see a
bank robber, and judge him a ‘criminal.’ But, without getting too lengthy, the
Federal Reserve and the banks are the real criminals, ‘cash’ as we know it is
counterfeit, and a dollar is just worthless paper, so where is the crime in getting
even…? I guess if I reflect, it’s sort of a Robin Hood thing, and our gov’t is the
evil king.”
On the third day of Jennifer’s questioning, one of the agents asked the FBI
crime lab in Washington to check McVeigh’s and the Nichols brothers’
fingerprints against evidence left behind at a string of unsolved bank heists
across the Midwest. This was the beginning of an attempt to tie McVeigh to the
Aryan Republican Army. It was never discussed in court, but it would consume
untold man-hours over the next several months.ross the Midwest. This was the beginning of an attempt to tie McVeigh to the
Aryan Republican Army. It was never discussed in court, but it would consume
untold man-hours over the next several months.

CHRISTOPHER BUDKE, AN FBI AGENT FROM KANSAS CITY, WAS IN line at the Fort Riley
Burger King when a man in uniform approached and asked: “How long are you
all going to be here?”
Budke was startled and initially brushed him off. But the man approached
again and introduced himself as Sergeant Rick Wahl. He explained how he had
gone fishing at Geary Lake with his son the day before the bombing and had
seen a Ryder truck with a second vehicle. Wahl knew right after the disaster that
his information could be important, and he put in a call to the FBI’s tip line. A
dispatcher said someone would get back to him, but nobody had in days.
Budke scrawled a few notes in pencil and promised to follow up. Wahl
would soon prove invaluable, telling the FBI where and when the bomb was
built and leading them to the exact site. A more alert FBI could have started
working on all that on April 19 or 20. As it was, only a chance encounter almost
a week later prevented them from missing it altogether.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t site. A more alert FBI could have started
working on all that on April 19 or 20. As it was, only a chance encounter almost
a week later prevented them from missing it altogether.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TIM MCVEIGH WAS WEARING HIS FULL GULF WAR BATTLE DRESS and carefully polished black
boots when he encountered Roger Moore for the first time. Moore had never
seen combat duty, but he was fascinated by anyone who had. So he and McVeigh
started talking about McVeigh’s service in Desert Storm and his political ideas.
They became fast friends.
Ostensibly, Moore should have been enjoying his retirement but he was also
driven by an abiding anger against the government, if not the world. He had
made a fortune in the boat-building business in the 1970s, and now divided his
time between Arkansas and southern Florida. He had a wife, who generally
stayed in Florida, and a girlfriend he kept openly in Arkansas. He ran an
ammunition supply business with his girlfriend, because it gave him an excuse to
travel to gun shows and meet fellow right-wing radicals. Officially, the company
was called the American Assault Company, but more commonly it went by the
nickname, The Candy Store.
After the bombing, Floyd Hays, an FBI agent in Arkansas, spent many hours
with Moore and described him as “infatuated” with McVeigh. That Desert Storm
uniform clearly spoke volumes, because everything else about McVeigh was
down-at-the-heels that January weekend at the National Guard Armory in Fort
Lauderdale. He barely had money for gas, slept in his car, and was never sure
where to find his next meal. Moore’s wife, Carol, took pity on him and fetched
some sandwiches. Later, Moore invited him to split the costs of a table at an
upcoming gun show in Miami’s Coconut Grove. McVeigh was thrilled. A few
weeks later, Moore called McVeigh at his sister’s house near Miami to confirm
the invitation. They worked the show together, then planned to meet again for
another show in April.
At the end of February, McVeigh’s antigovernment fire was further fueled by
the botched ATF raid on the Branch Davidian compound outside Waco. The ATF
believed the community had built an armory of automatic weapons, grenades,
assault weapons, and 50-caliber Barrett rifles and launched a full-scale assault on
the property. The Davidians, though, were forewarned, and soon four ATF agents
and six Davidians lay dead, with two dozen others injured. The FBI moved in,
for what would turn into a fifty-one-day siege. Unlike Ruby Ridge, this grim
spectacle was prime-time news on every station, confirming to citizen militias
and the Patriot Movement every suspicion they had harbored about the
government’s propensity for waging war against its own citizens. The FBI
borrowed hardware from the military, including a line of Bradley Fighting
Vehicles, which were particularly shocking to McVeigh, because he knew
firsthand how much damage they could do.
McVeigh drove to Waco in the middle of March. He could not get withinf Bradley Fighting
Vehicles, which were particularly shocking to McVeigh, because he knew
firsthand how much damage they could do.
McVeigh drove to Waco in the middle of March. He could not get within

--- PAGE BREAK ---

three miles of the compound, because of police barricades and checkpoints, so
he parked his car in a field alongside dozens of others and laid out a bunch of
bumper stickers. FEAR THE GOVERNMENT THAT FEARS YOUR GUN, one read. WHEN GUNS ARE
OUTLAWED, I WILL BECOME AN OUTLAW, read another.
Although McVeigh never said so, one person he probably met in Waco was
Louis Beam. Beam arrived as a credentialed journalist for the far-right magazine
Jubilee and drew immediate attention when he likened the ATF to the Nazis and
the KGB at a press briefing on March 14 and asked if a police state was on the
way. Beam was swarmed by police and security guards, who checked him for
outstanding warrants before letting him go. Three days later, when he tried to
return for another briefing, he was slapped in handcuffs and arrested for
trespassing. Beam relished the attention, telling every television reporter he was
being punished for asking “the forbidden question.”
McVeigh almost certainly heard about Beam’s misadventures, and would
have had plenty to talk about if he sought him out. Was this where the godfather
of “leaderless resistance” passed on some lessons to his most ruthless disciple?
FBI and ATF agents worried about the radical far-right at the time were in no
doubt about Beam’s potential for fomenting violence on an alarming scale. Jim
Cavanaugh of the ATF described him as “the most dangerous man in America.”
Beam and his blisteringly charismatic speaking style were to the Patriot
Movement, Cavanaugh said, what Reinhard Heydrich, Hitler’s pitiless protégé,
had been to the planning of the Holocaust at Wannsee.m and his blisteringly charismatic speaking style were to the Patriot
Movement, Cavanaugh said, what Reinhard Heydrich, Hitler’s pitiless protégé,
had been to the planning of the Holocaust at Wannsee.

THE FBI KNEW MICHAEL FORTIER WAS TROUBLE WHEN HIS FRIEND and neighbor, Jim
Rosencrans, came at them screaming and waving an SKS assault rifle. That was
on April 21. They couldn’t help noticing, too, the coiled-snake flag in the front
yard of Fortier’s trailer home bearing the Revolutionary War slogan DON’T TREAD ON
ME. This guy did not love the federal government.
The agents grilled Fortier for four days while he continued to say he knew
nothing and that McVeigh was not capable of slaughtering so many innocent
people. The FBI became ever more suspicious that he had foreknowledge of the
bombing or that he had played a direct role. The more they delved, the more
obvious it became that Fortier was lying. He said, for example, that McVeigh
had not visited Kingman before February 1995, but the FBI knew McVeigh had
been using a Kingman address for his correspondence for close to two years.
The FBI asked Fortier to take a polygraph test. He agreed to be asked about
his whereabouts leading up to the bombing, but not about his knowledge of the
plot itself. Having first pleaded ignorance, he now pleaded fear. “If I tell you

--- PAGE BREAK ---eed to be asked about
his whereabouts leading up to the bombing, but not about his knowledge of the
plot itself. Having first pleaded ignorance, he now pleaded fear. “If I tell you

--- PAGE BREAK ---

what you want to know,” he said on the fourth day, “I’m a dead man.” The
agents were unimpressed. Kenneth Williams (who would later become known as
the author of the “Phoenix Memo,” one of the disregarded pre-9/11 warnings
about Middle Easterners enrolling in flight schools) called Fortier a “baby killer”
and tried to scare him straight. It didn’t work.
When Fortier and his wife, Lori, were home alone after their interrogations,
they tried to rid their house of incriminating items. Even before the FBI first
came, Lori realized her typewriter ribbon still bore the imprint of the name
Robert D. Kling, which McVeigh had typed onto his fake driver’s license. As
soon as she heard the news that Kling had rented the Ryder truck, she ripped out
the ribbon and burned it. Michael had taken a 50-caliber rifle and some
explosive components and hidden them inside a kit car at his brother’s house on
the other side of town. He still had to worry about a half-empty bag of
ammonium nitrate, which Fortier and McVeigh had used to make test explosives;
some galvanized steel tubing typically used to make pipe bombs; and a .22
Hornet rifle and scope left over from the stash of weapons he had obtained from
McVeigh the previous December.
Fortier did not dare carry any of the items off his property himself, so he
passed them over the fence to his meth-head buddy Rosencrans, who agreed to
dispose of them. Rosencrans buried the ammonium nitrate in the desert, where it
was recovered three months later, and he pawned off the rifle for cash and
another weapon. Fortier also handed Rosencrans a paper grocery bag with a
miscellany of smaller items from McVeigh, including books, two videotapes on
Waco, an army supply catalogue, and a copy of the radical right-wing Patriot
Report. Rosencrans took these to the safest place he knew, a house shared by his
mother and his half-brother Chuck, who—improbably—was also his stepfather.
The only drug-related object the feds found at the Fortiers’ house was an old
tinfoil pipe containing marijuana residue, raising the question of whether they
had ditched drugs, too. Michael Fortier denied any attempt at concealment when
he took the stand in McVeigh’s trial; he wanted the jury to believe his house had
been empty of any illegal narcotics since the eve of the bombing, when he spent
all night tweaking on crystal meth with Jim Rosencrans. Had they really smoked
their way through everything? The feds did not pursue this. The FBI was itching
for a member of McVeigh’s inner circle to come forward about the bomb plot,
and Fortier seemed the most likely candidate. So Weldon Kennedy sent Danny
Coulson, one of the bureau’s most experienced agents, to turn one or both
Fortiers around. Coulson first applied for a warrant to search the Fortiers’ home,
and then he drew up a proffer letter, a take-it-or-leave-it deal under which Fortier
was invited to talk without risk of self-incrimination as a prelude to a pleawarrant to search the Fortiers’ home,
and then he drew up a proffer letter, a take-it-or-leave-it deal under which Fortier
was invited to talk without risk of self-incrimination as a prelude to a plea

--- PAGE BREAK ---

bargain. The one condition was that he could not lie.
With the warrant in hand, Coulson invited Fortier to meet him and his
colleague Bob Walsh at a sheriff’s substation near his house. They promised the
search would be as noninvasive as possible. Fortier was welcome to stick around
and watch. Coulson, who was intimately familiar with the mentality of right-
wing radicals, also did his best to disarm any notion that the search constituted
an assault on Fortier’s fundamental rights. “This is not a war,” he told him. “You
and your friends may be at war with your government. Your government is not at
war with you.”
Coulson wasn’t just making a fine speech; he was also playing for time,
because he knew that agents were already swarming over the Fortier property.
The media was right outside, tipped off by the local police scanner. So, too, was
Jim Rosencrans, who was again brandishing his SKS rifle and doing a little
dance up and down McVicar Avenue. He was raving about the “fucking FBI”
and telling anyone willing to listen that the sheriff’s department was stockpiling
ammunition under the Kingman hospital for the United Nations and its New
World Order shock troops. When he strapped on a gas mask and announced he
was going coyote-hunting, sheriff’s deputies and the FBI chased him into a field
and disarmed him. The FBI search team, meanwhile, took advantage of Fortier’s
temporary absence to bug the phone and place listening devices around the
house. Coulson’s kid glove concealed a sharp fist.d disarmed him. The FBI search team, meanwhile, took advantage of Fortier’s
temporary absence to bug the phone and place listening devices around the
house. Coulson’s kid glove concealed a sharp fist.

MCVEIGH’S FIRST TRIP TO KINGMAN IN THE SPRING OF 1993 WAS A quick one. He dropped in on
Michael Fortier and scouted for gun-show material. He also set up a mailbox,
signaling his intention to return. But soon he was off again to a big gun show in
Tulsa a thousand miles to the east. He was supposed to meet Roger Moore there,
but ended up introducing himself instead to Moore’s girlfriend, Karen Anderson,
who was working their table alone. The next day, McVeigh brought his things
and asked if he could share the space. Clearly, they got along, because by the end
of the weekend, Anderson and Moore invited McVeigh to follow them back to
the ranch for several days.
First, McVeigh made another significant acquaintance. Andreas Strassmeir,
fresh in from Elohim City, wandered by the table and ended up buying
McVeigh’s Desert Storm battle uniform for $2—a terrific bargain, he later told
Justice Department lawyers—as well as a pair of gloves. Even better, he sold
McVeigh a knife he’d been trying to offload all day. The two men talked and
found they had similar views on Waco.
McVeigh joked around with Strassmeir, who wore a black leather jacket and

--- PAGE BREAK ---a knife he’d been trying to offload all day. The two men talked and
found they had similar views on Waco.
McVeigh joked around with Strassmeir, who wore a black leather jacket and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

camouflage pants. “I was a little worried, because you looked like a Nazi,” he
said. “I’m glad you’re not a Nazi.” Strassmeir said he was relieved that McVeigh
was not a “right-winger,” apparently meaning he was not an overt racist. “He
definitely was not a right-wing guy, I would not say that. And he liked the fact
that I was not one,” Strassmeir insisted. “Tim was not antigovernment. He was
against certain agencies making war against their own citizens.”
There is an irresistible streak of comedy in two adherents of radical right-
wing ideology insisting that neither was right-wing at all. Clearly, though, they
found each other memorable, far more so than Strassmeir was willing to admit
after the bombing. According to McVeigh, Strassmeir called over the two friends
he was with—most likely Pete and Tony Ward, or Dennis Mahon—and told
them: “This guy feels the way we do.” The feeling was mutual: McVeigh
thought he and Strassmeir were “brothers in arms.”
When reporters and investigators asked Strassmeir about the encounter two
years later, he told them he could barely remember it and had not recalled
McVeigh’s name until it was plastered all over the news. But his pinpoint
recollection of their Nazi banter and the exact terms of the purchases they made
from each other suggests otherwise.
Another indicator that Strassmeir felt a kinship with McVeigh was that he
gave McVeigh a business card with the Elohim City address and phone number,
and an invitation to drop by any time. Grandpa Millar had given Strassmeir some
cards mostly to ensure he would not forget the Elohim City phone number; he
certainly did not want him passing them out indiscriminately. “I was very careful
handing out the Elohim City business card,” Strassmeir later acknowledged.not forget the Elohim City phone number; he
certainly did not want him passing them out indiscriminately. “I was very careful
handing out the Elohim City business card,” Strassmeir later acknowledged.

SOMETIME IN LATE APRIL, STEVE CHANCELLOR, THE ARMY CID man in Oklahoma City,
noted the FBI’s interest in Elohim City and in Strassmeir. Chancellor had just
come home from an undercover narcotics case in Hamburg, which was the last
place Strassmeir had been stationed before coming to the United States.
Chancellor told his colleagues: “I have a fantastic German informant from
Hamburg. I’m telling you, he could talk the underwear off Mother Teresa. He’s
that good. If you want, I’d be glad to introduce you guys.”
At this stage, the FBI had Carol Howe’s reports about Strassmeir’s threats to
blow up buildings and wage war against the federal government. And the Daryl
Bridges phone records indicated that one of the card users had made a two-
minute call to Elohim City on April 5, two weeks before the bombing. At least
some
government
agencies—the
State
Department,
Immigration
and
Naturalization Service, and ATF—also knew that Strassmeir had overstayed his

--- PAGE BREAK ---weeks before the bombing. At least
some
government
agencies—the
State
Department,
Immigration
and
Naturalization Service, and ATF—also knew that Strassmeir had overstayed his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

visa.
Chancellor persuaded his army superiors to fly his informant in from
Germany. “I had him meet with the FBI and ATF, and I made arrangements for
him to work up a cover story [to go into Elohim City]. I think he would have
been very successful,” Chancellor said. But the task force turned down his offer.
Perhaps the investigation leadership was counting on Carol Howe to come back
from Elohim City with some actionable intelligence. The State Department’s
diplomatic security section had asked after Strassmeir’s criminal record, and
reported back to the task force that he was clean.
Chancellor was surprised. “My feeling was, they didn’t believe this guy,
which was too bad,” he said. “I offered it to the FBI. They chose to go a different
way, or maybe they thought it wasn’t important. I just moved on.”ed. “My feeling was, they didn’t believe this guy,
which was too bad,” he said. “I offered it to the FBI. They chose to go a different
way, or maybe they thought it wasn’t important. I just moved on.”

ON APRIL 19, 1993, MCVEIGH WAS AT THE NICHOLS FARM IN DECKER and loading up his
Road Warrior to take both brothers down to Waco, when Terry yelled at him to
come inside. The television news was showing flames licking up around the
Branch Davidian compound.
It was the fifty-first day of the siege, and the FBI had decided to choke the
Branch Davidians out with CS gas. When that did not work, they punctured big
holes in the property with M728 combat engineer vehicles on loan from the
army. Soon, three separate fires fueled by sixty-mile-per-hour winds were raging
in the main building, consuming everything.
Seventy-five people died, including twenty-five children. Some were burned
to death, while others, including David Koresh, were found with gunshot
wounds. In his own account, McVeigh was speechless and felt tears running
down his cheeks. He and the Nichols brothers convinced themselves that the FBI
had set the fires—not the Davidians, as the government and a number of
subsequent official inquiries would conclude.

WHEN THE FBI SEARCHED MCVEIGH’S MAILBOX IN KINGMAN, THEY found an extraordinary
unopened letter sent from Little Rock, Arkansas, nine days before the bombing.
Written in a near-illegible scrawl, it was signed by “Bob” and written to Tim
Tuttle. There was no return address. Next to Bob’s signature, in block capitals,
was the word BURN. The letter appeared to be answering a previous letter from
McVeigh, and that made it even more difficult to decipher. One particularly
alarming line read: “Plan is to bring the country down, and have a few more
things happen, then offer the 90 percent a solution. (Better Red than Dead).” The
letter referred to a robbery, to worries about security being compromised, and to

--- PAGE BREAK ---have a few more
things happen, then offer the 90 percent a solution. (Better Red than Dead).” The
letter referred to a robbery, to worries about security being compromised, and to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a plan for May that Bob said should now be dropped. It also mentioned someone
named Karen, who was “not interested in risks” and “not interested in the
slightest at this point.”
The FBI’s linking of this letter to Roger Moore was one of its more inspired
pieces of detective work. Agents had been working for days to figure out the
significance of two safety-deposit keys found in Terry Nichols’s garage. One
was traced to a Union Bank of North Carolina branch in Florida and the other to
the Arkansas Bank & Trust in Hot Springs. The banks said the keys belonged to
Moore and reported that a few months earlier he had changed safety-deposit
boxes because of a security problem connected to the loss of the keys.
A check on Moore revealed he had a live-in girlfriend named Karen
Anderson, who was a plausible fit for the Karen in the letter. They also learned
that the previous November Moore had reported a robbery at the ranch, in which
he said he lost $60,000 in guns, precious stones, gold and silver bars,
photographic equipment, and rare artifacts, as well as almost $9,000 in cash.
Among the missing items were the two keys. Moore had volunteered the three
names he thought most likely to have pulled off the robbery, and one was Tim
McVeigh.
The FBI was perplexed. It had strong grounds to suspect McVeigh and
Nichols of carrying out the robbery. But Roger Moore was also exchanging
cryptic messages with McVeigh months later, suggesting that the two men still
trusted and confided in each other. Was the Moore robbery intended as a fund-
raiser for the bombing? Or was the robbery a scam orchestrated by Moore as
well as McVeigh, either to defraud the insurance company or to create some
plausible distance between them as they plotted an antigovernment revolution?
Investigators initially worked on both scenarios.
Moore was extremely indignant when he was brought in to meet with the
FBI at the Garland County Sheriff’s Office in Hot Springs. “I obviously was lied
to and fooled,” he said about the bombing. “I almost shit when I saw it on TV.”
He gave the first of many accounts of the robbery, describing how a masked man
with bad body odor, full camouflage dress, and Israeli combat boots confronted
him with a shotgun fitted with a garrote. The intruder trussed him up like a
turkey and spent ninety minutes ripping through the house in search of valuables
before taking off in one of Moore’s own vans. In this iteration—the details
would change over the next two and a half years—the man had a dark
complexion and a beard visible beneath his ski mask. His accomplice stood
ready to pounce at the slightest sign of struggle, and later helped load the wares.
Moore said neither man was McVeigh—the intruder was shorter and thicker-set
—but he suspected that whoever robbed him had done so at McVeigh’s behest.ign of struggle, and later helped load the wares.
Moore said neither man was McVeigh—the intruder was shorter and thicker-set
—but he suspected that whoever robbed him had done so at McVeigh’s behest.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

When the FBI showed Moore the safety-deposit key from the Arkansas Bank &
Trust, he exclaimed: “He robbed me!” Moore assumed the FBI had recovered
the key from McVeigh; he didn’t know about the Terry Nichols connection.
Moore became discombobulated when he was shown the letter he had sent to
McVeigh shortly before the bombing. He acknowledged he had written it and
said “Bob” was a shortened version of his alias Bob Miller. But he insisted that
most of the letter was about the gun-show business and the robbery. His aim was
to lure McVeigh back to the ranch and figure out if he had been responsible. He
said the line about security being compromised was a reference to the robbery
and the fact that someone clearly knew he had a large number of valuables in the
house. When he wrote that Karen was not interested in risks, he was referring to
their efforts—which Karen no longer wished to make—to track down their
stolen weapons in the militia movement.
Moore was winging it. When asked about the lines “the important thing is to
be as effective as possible” and “let’s let May go,” he said he couldn’t remember
what they meant. But the FBI was more inclined to believe him than not. In the
official write-up of that first interview, the agents did not mention the most
startling line in the letter, the one about the “plan to bring the country down.”
They also appear to have forgotten to ask why he wrote BURN in upper case
next to his signature.
Moore insisted he had nothing to do with the bombing and was never told
anything about it. McVeigh was smart, he said, but probably it was the other guy
—John Doe Two—who was the brains of the operation.re insisted he had nothing to do with the bombing and was never told
anything about it. McVeigh was smart, he said, but probably it was the other guy
—John Doe Two—who was the brains of the operation.

ONE MONTH AFTER WACO, MCVEIGH ORDERED A BOOK CALLED Homemade C-4, published by
Paladin Press in Boulder, Colorado, a fertile source of how-to books on guns,
ammo, and explosives. It was sent to his mailbox in Michigan at a time when he
was traveling extensively, so it probably sat around for several months before he
read it. Over time, though, it would prove almost uncannily influential on the
Oklahoma City bomb plot.
The term “homemade C-4” has nothing to do with plastic explosive; it is
paramilitary slang for ammonium nitrate bombs, so called because they pack a
big wallop and because their ingredients are readily available to ordinary
citizens. Ragnar Benson, the book’s pseudonymous author, suggested purchasing
the AN at farm-supply stores, which is exactly what McVeigh and Nichols ended
up doing. He talked about the standard blend of AN and fuel oil commonly used
by miners and farmers, but he also suggested using nitromethane. “The stuff is a
real pisser,” he wrote, “as fast as TNT, with just as high a brisance. It is useful

--- PAGE BREAK ---l commonly used
by miners and farmers, but he also suggested using nitromethane. “The stuff is a
real pisser,” he wrote, “as fast as TNT, with just as high a brisance. It is useful

--- PAGE BREAK ---

for cutting steel and other paramilitary survival applications.” The best way to
find nitromethane, Benson went on, was at drag strips and stock-car races.
Sometimes, it could be found in hobby shops. McVeigh and Nichols would
explore all of those options to obtain their own nitromethane.
All of that still lay some way off, however. McVeigh settled in Kingman for
a while, finding a place of his own and a new job as a security guard. He was
still doing gun shows, and sometime in June or July, he came across a videotape
titled Waco: The Big Lie, which restoked the radical fire within him because it
purported to show that the government had used tank-mounted flamethrowers to
start the blaze that consumed the Branch Davidians at Mount Carmel.
The video gave McVeigh grounds to believe the incident was a premeditated
crime. “No convincing will come close if you don’t actually see it for yourself,”
the film’s promotional teaser said. “But be warned, you may not be able to sleep
again.” McVeigh brought a copy to Kingman to show Mike Fortier. It was his
new Turner Diaries, the call-to-arms he felt compelled to share with everybody.“But be warned, you may not be able to sleep
again.” McVeigh brought a copy to Kingman to show Mike Fortier. It was his
new Turner Diaries, the call-to-arms he felt compelled to share with everybody.

JENNIFER MCVEIGH WANTED TO LOOK OUT FOR HER BROTHER’S INTERESTS, but her resolve was no
match for the FBI’s pummeling. On the eighth day of questioning, after her
mother was flown in from Florida to plead with her, she finally spilled her guts.
“Tim is fried anyways, so I might as well tell you,” she said. She was scared and
exhausted and looking for a way out.
Her most startling stories concerned a visit McVeigh made to Pendleton in
November 1994 to help settle the affairs of their grandfather, who had died a few
weeks earlier. Jennifer said he had a wad of $100 bills, three of which he asked
her to exchange for other banknotes. When she asked where the money came
from, he said it was his take from a bank robbery. Jennifer’s impression was that
the robbery had taken place recently. Her brother told her he had not participated
but knew the people who had. Her affidavit refers to “participants,” indicating
more than one.
The affidavit also describes a time when Jennifer found her brother in a
“fuming” rage. On the spur of the moment, Tim told her to leave him alone, but
the next day he said that someone he knew had failed to carry out a murder as
planned. “I believe my brother was then trying to decide what to do about the
individual who had failed to carry out these orders,” the affidavit said. “I recall
that prior to this revelation he had been awaiting a telephone call, and I now
believe that this call was directly related to this murder plan.”
The intended murder victim was most likely Roger Moore. Maybe the
robber was supposed to carry out the killing, or maybe someone was supposed to

--- PAGE BREAK ---ectly related to this murder plan.”
The intended murder victim was most likely Roger Moore. Maybe the
robber was supposed to carry out the killing, or maybe someone was supposed to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

come in afterward to kill Moore. Michael Fortier testified at McVeigh’s trial that
the motive for the robbery was to find a list of names of people Moore had
threatened to turn over to the federal government if he ever got into trouble. That
doesn’t sound like a persuasive motive for a robbery—Moore would have been
more likely to go to the feds, not less, if he felt under attack—but it could have
been a plausible motive for murder.
Jennifer left the FBI office on May 2 determined to find a lawyer and
negotiate an immunity deal in exchange for her testimony. The FBI came away
with an impression of McVeigh as a multifaceted criminal more akin to a mafia
boss than a lone-wolf domestic terrorist.
“I believe that my brother was more involved as a leader in his group rather
than as a follower,” Jennifer said in her affidavit. The bank robbery and the
attempted murder were, in her eyes, an indication that he had moved past the
propaganda stage of his revolution. “My assumption,” she said, “is that my
brother was now taking some kind of action in support of his political beliefs.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---at he had moved past the
propaganda stage of his revolution. “My assumption,” she said, “is that my
brother was now taking some kind of action in support of his political beliefs.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

{ 6 }
THE GREAT JOHN DOE TWO DISAPPEARING ACT
By September 1993, McVeigh’s antigovernment fury had grabbed the attention
of law enforcement. Operating under his alias Tim Tuttle, he was at the
Crossroads of the West gun show in Phoenix, when Al Shearer, an undercover
hate-crimes investigator with the Maricopa County Attorney’s Office, started up
a conversation. McVeigh began telling him how to convert flares into
rudimentary explosive shells and said: “It’s great for shooting down ATF
helicopters.” Shearer was alarmed and called the local offices of both the ATF
and FBI.
To his amazement, the feds said they couldn’t do anything because selling a
flare gun was not illegal. Technically, this was correct, but after Waco the
assumption was that the feds were more attuned to trouble from the radical right.
As Shearer’s supervising attorney put it: “The issue wasn’t so much that this guy
was trying to sell flare guns. It’s that he was a nut.”
It was, in retrospect, a tantalizing early opportunity to put McVeigh on the
law enforcement radar. But Shearer’s instinct for danger was overlooked.rying to sell flare guns. It’s that he was a nut.”
It was, in retrospect, a tantalizing early opportunity to put McVeigh on the
law enforcement radar. But Shearer’s instinct for danger was overlooked.

OKLAHOMA CITY WAS THE CASE DANNY COULSON HAD BEEN PREPARING for all his life. He knew
his way around right-wing radicals. He had managed tricky arrests and
potentially explosive stand-offs, had set up the FBI’s elite Hostage Rescue Team,
and had a reputation for doggedly following leads, no matter how difficult or
politically inconvenient. He knew Weldon Kennedy was about to be replaced
and assumed he was in the running for his job. But, shortly after he left Kingman
in early May, he was called off the case completely.
“I was absolutely shocked,” he said. “I should have been given the job of
commander. I would have given the job to me.”
First Bob Ricks, then Joe Martinolich, and now Coulson: the body count of
senior bureau figures was mounting. Coulson abilities were impressive, even if
he was not a universally loved figure. His maverick streak, and periodic
insistence that he knew better than his bosses, did not always sit well. And he
was definitely no “Friend of Louie.”
Louis Freeh chose this same moment to appoint Larry Potts, one of his

--- PAGE BREAK ---ence that he knew better than his bosses, did not always sit well. And he
was definitely no “Friend of Louie.”
Louis Freeh chose this same moment to appoint Larry Potts, one of his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

closest associates, as the bureau’s permanent deputy director—despite his
controversial role in drafting and approving the rules of engagement at Ruby
Ridge. Everybody thought Potts’s career would be stalled until the Justice
Department finished its investigation and determined whether or not he was
responsible for the shoot-to-kill policy that led to Vicki Weaver’s death. But
Freeh believed the media was now distracted, and Potts was earning plaudits for
his work directing the Oklahoma investigation’s day-to-day operations.
Freeh’s faith in Potts—stemming from their days working a mail-bombing
case in Georgia in the late 1980s—was not misplaced. He was a bureau golden
boy, an investigator of extraordinary talents with a glittering future. Still, Freeh
had to expend much political capital to get his way. Congress had reacted poorly
to an internal FBI investigation that rebuked Potts only for poor oversight at
Ruby Ridge, and was considering hearings. And Jamie Gorelick, the tough-as-
nails deputy attorney general, reacted to the proposed promotion with a flat no.
Freeh told Gorelick that if he did not get his way, relations between the
Justice Department and the bureau would be irreparable. A game of political
brinksmanship followed. The Justice Department had completed a report on
Ruby Ridge in June 1994 in which it found that Potts and another senior FBI
commander were responsible for drawing up the controversial rules of
engagement; the report also found “numerous shortcomings” in the FBI’s
oversight of the operation. This report was not made public, but releasing it was
an option the Justice Department had up its sleeve. Freeh, meanwhile, knew that
Potts had observed Gorelick and Janet Reno closely during Waco, when he
served as the bureau’s liaison to the attorney general’s office. In the end, Reno
blinked first, publicly praising Potts as “the very best the FBI has” and
announcing the appointment herself at one of her regular post-bombing news
briefings.
The Potts promotion created an immediate backlash. Gene Glenn, who had
been the FBI’s on-scene commander at Ruby Ridge and was given a demotion
and a fifteen-day suspension, complained to the Justice Department that he was
being made the scapegoat even though Potts had conceived, drawn up, and
approved the altered rules of engagement. Glenn accused the FBI’s internal
investigators of asking skewed questions to reach predetermined conclusions,
adding that they were more interested in protecting senior management than in
unearthing the truth. Glenn’s reaction drew the ire of Freeh’s general counsel,
Howard Shapiro, who called his allegations “absolutely irresponsible and
destructive to the FBI” when the bureau was engaged in a vast criminal
investigation. Shapiro was right that the controversy was a dangerous distraction
from the Oklahoma City case. But the distraction originated with Louis Freeh.he bureau was engaged in a vast criminal
investigation. Shapiro was right that the controversy was a dangerous distraction
from the Oklahoma City case. But the distraction originated with Louis Freeh.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Potts remained nominally in charge of the bombing investigation, but he
spent most of the next six weeks fighting for his job and reputation. The Justice
Department’s Office of Professional Responsibility opened an investigation into
Glenn’s allegations, and an incandescent Republican majority in the House of
Representatives monitored it all closely.
Over time, it became clear that the bombing investigation’s high points had
already come and gone by May 3, 1995, the day the Potts furor broke. Individual
street agents continued to do sterling work and make important breakthroughs,
but for the institution it was all downhill from there.and gone by May 3, 1995, the day the Potts furor broke. Individual
street agents continued to do sterling work and make important breakthroughs,
but for the institution it was all downhill from there.

RICK WAHL, THE ARMY SERGEANT WHO WENT FISHING AT GEARY LAKE on April 18 with his son,
did not see the Ryder truck and pickup arrive or leave. Neither he nor a second
witness who drove by, Bob Nelson, spotted anyone inside. So the feds set up a
roadblock on Route 77, by the Geary Lake turnoff, and asked passing drivers if
they had seen anything.
The results were notable, but not for reasons the government might have
expected.
More than twenty witnesses said they had seen a moving truck at the lake,
and at least five said they had seen it in the week before Easter as well as the
Tuesday after. Georgia Rucker, a Herington real estate agent who helped Terry
and Marife Nichols purchase their house on South Second Street, drove Route
77 twice a day to take her son to and from school. She saw a Ryder truck on
Monday, April 10, and said it was still there on the next two days. She did not
drive the route from Thursday to Monday. On Tuesday, April 18, she saw the
truck shortly before 8:00 A.M.; but that afternoon it was gone. At times, Rucker
saw the Ryder with other vehicles, but she could not recall what they looked like.
Seeing the truck by the lakeshore was so odd, she and her son started to look out
for it. “We joked that those people must have a real big fish to pack away,” she
said.
James Sargent told a similar story. On April 10, he retired from the army and
instantly went fishing at Geary Lake. He remembered the day clearly, down to
the pear he brought for a snack. He arrived in the early afternoon and spotted a
Ryder truck on the shore. After a couple of hours, he saw a white car and a rust-
colored pickup drive up. He saw the Ryder again on April 11 and 12,, and he
probably saw it on April 13, although he was not certain. Sargent said he
enjoyed a drink or two on these outings, but he was also sure that alcohol had
not distorted his memory. “It’s pretty hard for someone to forget something when
they have seen it four days in a row,” he testified.ink or two on these outings, but he was also sure that alcohol had
not distorted his memory. “It’s pretty hard for someone to forget something when
they have seen it four days in a row,” he testified.

--- PAGE BREAK ---outings, but he was also sure that alcohol had
not distorted his memory. “It’s pretty hard for someone to forget something when
they have seen it four days in a row,” he testified.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

These accounts all bolstered the theory, which the FBI and prosecution
considered, that a second Ryder truck was involved in the bombing. Lea
McGown and her son Eric said they had seen McVeigh with a Ryder on Easter
Sunday, more than twenty-four hours before the one used to destroy the Murrah
Building was rented from Eldon Elliott’s. Other witnesses later came forward
with similar stories, notably three dancers from a Tulsa strip club, whose voices
were captured on a security tape on April 8 as they discussed an obnoxious client
matching McVeigh’s description. “On April 19, 1995,” the client said, “you will
remember me for the rest of your life.” A yellow moving truck was parked out
back at the time. Now two new witnesses who seemed credible were talking
about a Ryder truck popping up in the very place where McVeigh and Nichols
would later mix the bomb.
What purpose could a second truck have served? Was it the bomb truck, but
broke down or otherwise failed to meet the plotters’ requirements? Was it a
decoy? In the end, the government chose not to address these questions. Some
members of the prosecution thought they were too difficult to answer with any
certainty; others were incensed that the FBI erected the roadblock at all, because
it developed material they might now have to argue against in court. “It only
undermines the proof,” one prosecutor said impatiently. “We already had Wahl.
We didn’t need all this other junk.”
Bob Ricks, for one, disagreed with this vigorously; it was not enough to
wish a difficult problem away. “Some things that were reported were obviously
physically impossible,” he said, “but you have to weigh all of that…. That’s the
nature of eyewitness testimony.
“The roadblock also led to people we believe were highly credible, who
could give us valid descriptions of what was taking place there at Geary Lake. It
doesn’t have to be consistent with the theory. What we are trying to find are the
facts.”
This episode highlighted a growing tension between the Justice
Department’s more aggressive lawyers and many of the task force’s top
managers. While the prosecutors wanted to tie up loose ends and secure
convictions, the FBI’s gut instinct was to keep digging and figure out what
happened. The friction was not without its complexities: some prosecutors were
more willing than others to let the case head in unforeseeable new directions,
and some investigators were more fearless than others in standing up to the
Justice Department’s pressure. On this, though, the hardliners prevailed: the
second Ryder truck was soon dropped as a subject for investigation.s were more fearless than others in standing up to the
Justice Department’s pressure. On this, though, the hardliners prevailed: the
second Ryder truck was soon dropped as a subject for investigation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---than others in standing up to the
Justice Department’s pressure. On this, though, the hardliners prevailed: the
second Ryder truck was soon dropped as a subject for investigation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IN THE FALL OF 1993, MCVEIGH CONTINUED TO ATTEND GUN SHOWS and told his sister he was
establishing a “network of friends.” It is likely that these included Richard
Guthrie, the wild man of the Aryan Republican Army. Pete Langan later said that
Guthrie met McVeigh on the gun-show circuit, and one plausible venue was a
big show in Knob Creek, Kentucky, that October. McVeigh attended, and it
would have been an easy commute for Guthrie from his hideout in Cincinnati.
After the show, Guthrie and Langan made plans to rob an armored truck in the
Fayetteville area in northwestern Arkansas. McVeigh’s previous work as a
security guard on an armored truck made him the right sort for Langan and
Guthrie to approach for help.
If McVeigh and Guthrie did not meet at a gun show, they could have been
introduced by Thom Robb, a Ku Klux Klan leader based in Harrison, Arkansas,
near Fayetteville. Guthrie was in regular contact with Robb from about 1992,
and Nichols supplied evidence suggesting McVeigh knew him, too. When
Nichols and McVeigh drove through Missouri and Arkansas in October, Nichols
remembered being surprised by how well McVeigh knew the area, and how he
talked about a KKK sign just north of town before they had driven past it. This
was Robb’s property.
Nichols later claimed he made this trip because he was thinking of moving
his family to the Ozarks, and he was looking for land suitable for a blueberry
farm. But it is also remarkable how close they skirted to Elohim City, including
one documented instance when McVeigh was pulled over and cited for illegal
passing less than ten miles away. McVeigh had held on to Strassmeir’s business
card after meeting him six months earlier. This was also the period when Mike
Brescia, Kevin McCarthy, and Mark Thomas’s teenage son Nathan all moved to
Elohim City—and all but Nathan would later be deeply involved with the Aryan
Republican Army.
Nichols denied knowing these people, but he did suggest someone else that
he and McVeigh met: George Eaton, who was friendly with the Elohimites and
lived in the next town. Eaton was the publisher of the Patriot Report, which
McVeigh and his sister Jennifer read enthusiastically. McVeigh mentioned Eaton
as the two of them were driving around. Nichols added: “Tim definitely knew
the area and some people who lived there.” McVeigh also described an ideal
place, a “safe haven” where someone could lie low for a while. “This place was
on the border of the Oklahoma and Arkansas state line,” Nichols recalled. This
had to be a reference to Elohim City.
Eaton, Strassmeir, Brescia, Guthrie, Robb—all were plausible members of
McVeigh’s “network of friends.” And, in the fall of 1993, they all had revolution
on their minds.be a reference to Elohim City.
Eaton, Strassmeir, Brescia, Guthrie, Robb—all were plausible members of
McVeigh’s “network of friends.” And, in the fall of 1993, they all had revolution
on their minds.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ohim City.
Eaton, Strassmeir, Brescia, Guthrie, Robb—all were plausible members of
McVeigh’s “network of friends.” And, in the fall of 1993, they all had revolution
on their minds.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IN ARIZONA, THE FBI WAS TOLD THAT STEVE COLBERN, A FEDERAL fugitive with a
biochemistry degree and a fascination with explosives, kept a mailbox with the
same service McVeigh used in Kingman. The tip was not correct, but by the time
the FBI established that, it had learned that Colbern had been under ATF
investigation for months, because he was suspected of possessing a .50-caliber
Browning machine gun. And the more the FBI dug, the faster he shot up their
suspect list.
The previous November, a Metropolitan Water District employee had found
a mysterious note attached to a power utility pole near Needles, on the
California-Arizona border. It was addressed to “S. C.” and appeared to be a
recruitment letter. Its most inviting line was: “A man with nothing left to lose is a
very dangerous man and his energy/anger can be focused toward a
common/righteous goal.” It also included this line: “I’m not looking for talkers,
I’m looking for fighters.”
When the FBI agents saw the note, they immediately recognized McVeigh’s
handwriting and saw it was signed “Tim T.,” a shortened version of Tim Tuttle.
Was “S.C.” Colbern? And, if so, had he joined McVeigh’s bomb plot? Colbern
had the qualifications to build a bomb and, as the FBI soon learned, the
ideological inclination as well.
The FBI soon learned, too, that in November 1994, one day before the
robbery at Roger Moore’s ranch, Colbern was in Texarkana, no more than two
hours’ drive from Moore’s property, and mailed a resignation letter to his boss at
Cedars-Sinai hospital in Beverly Hills, California, where he did DNA research.
Colbern also owned a 1975 brown Chevy pickup, the same vehicle associated
with McVeigh multiple times on April 19.
The feds found Colbern’s pickup in Bullhead City, Arizona, in the yard of a
double-wide vacation trailer belonging to his family. He lived there in the early
1990s with an Armenian wife he had since divorced. The neighbors said he was
a freak in military fatigues, who lived in abject squalor and had snakes and other
animals crawling all over the house.
The vehicle was not quite the jackpot the FBI had hoped for. It had not been
driven in years, ruling it out as one of the vehicles seen in Oklahoma on April
19. But inside the car, the agents did find two bags of ammonium nitrate, one full
and one glaringly empty.had not been
driven in years, ruling it out as one of the vehicles seen in Oklahoma on April
19. But inside the car, the agents did find two bags of ammonium nitrate, one full
and one glaringly empty.

BY LATE 1993, MCVEIGH HAD COME TO REGARD TERRY NICHOLS AS some combination of
friend, ideological soul mate, and open-door hotelier. Nichols had a robot-like

--- PAGE BREAK ---one glaringly empty.

BY LATE 1993, MCVEIGH HAD COME TO REGARD TERRY NICHOLS AS some combination of
friend, ideological soul mate, and open-door hotelier. Nichols had a robot-like

--- PAGE BREAK ---

habit of doing whatever he was told, and McVeigh—like Joyce Nichols, Lana,
and Ralph Daigle—took full advantage. Earlier in the year, when McVeigh was
flitting between the Midwest and Arizona, he asked Nichols to drive to
Pendleton, a ten-hour round-trip, and pick up his television set, a baseball glove,
some cooking utensils, and a batch of sandbags. Nichols agreed without a
murmur. Now McVeigh decided to base himself at the Decker farm, doing no
more than occasional chores and begging off farmwork altogether, because, he
said, the hay bothered his sinuses.
This arrangement came to a halt on November 22, when Marife found Jason,
the Nicholses’ two-year-old son, unconscious on his bedroom floor with a plastic
grocery bag over his head. At the time, Terry and Marife were preparing to move
to Las Vegas. Marife immediately assumed that Jason had climbed out of his crib
to play with some packing materials left in the middle of the room. Terry and
James, she later recalled, were in the fields, and McVeigh was still asleep. She
picked up Jason, removed the plastic bag, and banged frantically on McVeigh’s
door. While McVeigh administered CPR, she ran out of the house screaming for
her husband. Nothing, though, could revive the boy.
Local officials ruled Jason’s death an accident, as there was no evidence to
suggest anything more sinister. But the medical examiner refused to talk to Terry
and Marife after the funeral, and Marife was herself riddled with doubts, mostly
about her husband. She was convinced that Terry told the 911 dispatcher about
the plastic bag before she had a chance to tell him about it. And it was Terry who
had insisted on storing the packing materials in Jason’s room. Had he harbored a
plan to kill Jason? Was McVeigh in on it too?
Jason had been a cause for distress ever since Marife confessed to Terry in
June 1991 that the child she was carrying had been conceived with her old
boyfriend, Jojo Angelito Florita. She told Nichols it was too late for an abortion
and would understand if he divorced her. Nichols chose to accept the
circumstances, signed the birth certificate as Jason’s father, and, by all accounts,
treated the boy lovingly enough. Marife later complained that other members of
the Nichols family refused to accept Jason, and even told Terry to use cloth
diapers on him, because the boy wasn’t good enough for disposable ones. Terry,
for once, paid no attention.
After the bombing, the FBI reexamined Jason’s death, wondering if they
could pin one more murder on McVeigh or Nichols. They suspected that
McVeigh might have killed the boy in some grotesque experiment, to see if he
could snuff out a child’s life, as he planned to do many times with the bomb.
But, in the end, the feds found no more evidence than the county authorities.
Marife realized her initial suspicions might have been the result of shock,as he planned to do many times with the bomb.
But, in the end, the feds found no more evidence than the county authorities.
Marife realized her initial suspicions might have been the result of shock,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and the need to blame someone. But she found it impossible to trust her husband
again. When Nichols purchased The Poisoner’s Handbook, she wondered
whether he intended to murder her and Nicole to collect the life insurance. Bills
from the hospital, the ambulance company, and the doctor who treated Jason
kept arriving, and Nichols ignored them for so long they started coming in
Marife’s name.
To escape their creditors, the Nicholses moved to Las Vegas at the turn of
1994. Yet Marife still felt trapped and desperate. Twice, she dreamed she was on
a boat landing, walking toward a small craft containing the entire Nichols family,
when she heard Jason’s voice begging her to go no farther. She could only
interpret it as a warning from her dead son to get out of Terry Nichols’s life
before it was too late.entire Nichols family,
when she heard Jason’s voice begging her to go no farther. She could only
interpret it as a warning from her dead son to get out of Terry Nichols’s life
before it was too late.

THE EVIDENCE RECOVERY TEAMS AT THE MURRAH BUILDING HAD picked the place pretty much
clean, but a huge pile of rubble, two stories high and thirty feet across, still
covered one of the building’s key structural supports. It was impossible to tell
how solid that support still was. Engineers warned that if the rubble pile was
disturbed, the rest of the structure could tumble and bury everyone. The teams
painted the pile red and left it alone; it became known as the red pyramid.
Right after the bombing, the White House had directed the General Services
Administration to preserve and rebuild the building, as a gesture of defiance
against those who had destroyed it. But that was no longer realistic. “More than
once,” Weldon Kennedy remembered, “we had pretty serious thunderstorms and
had to evacuate the building on the advice of the engineers.”
Demolition was the only option. The evidence teams wanted to sort through
the red pyramid, but couldn’t as long as the building’s shell was still standing.
The fire department was sure two or three more bodies remained buried, and
pressure was mounting to pull them out. Criticism would later fly that, by
knocking down the building, the task force was effectively burying evidence
about the size and composition of the bomb. Actually, demolition was the only
way to extract the remaining evidence.
From an investigative standpoint, the bomb site continued to be as chaotic as
it had been in the first few days. For nearly two weeks, there were reports of
government agents sneaking out automatic weapons, ammunition, and small
packages that looked, to trained eyes, like C-4. Some reports were probably
accurate; others were fueled by a mounting distrust pitting federal agencies
against each other. “It was comical in a way, because the ATF didn’t want the
Secret Service to see them remove things, and DEA didn’t want the others toy a mounting distrust pitting federal agencies
against each other. “It was comical in a way, because the ATF didn’t want the
Secret Service to see them remove things, and DEA didn’t want the others to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

know what they were doing,” Oscar Johnson, an elevator technician who stayed
on site as a volunteer, recalled. “They all acted like little kids hiding stuff from
each other.”
One senior ATF agent, Harry Eberhardt, was eventually asked to leave the
task force, because Danny Defenbaugh, who arrived in Oklahoma at the end of
April and soon took over from Weldon Kennedy, suspected he had entered the
building without authorization to remove a possible weapon. “He had a device,
and he went back into the building to get it,” Defenbaugh said. Eberhardt denied
any wrongdoing and said he felt Defenbaugh victimized him because of an
unconnected grievance between the FBI and the ATF. But Defenbaugh insisted:
“He was seen, he lied about it, and then he was investigated.”oing and said he felt Defenbaugh victimized him because of an
unconnected grievance between the FBI and the ATF. But Defenbaugh insisted:
“He was seen, he lied about it, and then he was investigated.”

AMONG THOSE OPPOSED TO DEMOLISHING THE MURRAH BUILDING was Stephen Jones, the
newly appointed chief defense counsel for Tim McVeigh. Jones was a
loquacious Southern gentleman, an inveterate Anglophile, a man of breeding and
eclectic tastes, and a wily, well-connected political operator with a residual
admiration for Richard Nixon, for whom he had worked as a young man. He
seemed an incongruous fit for McVeigh, with his blue-collar roots and spiky
resentment of privilege in all forms. Sure enough, they got along horribly.
Jones was not McVeigh’s first choice. After his two court-appointed public
defenders recused themselves, McVeigh wanted Gerry Spence, the flamboyant
Wyoming lawyer who claimed he’d never lost a case and rubbed the
government’s face in the dirt when he defended Randy Weaver. When Spence
was ruled out—it is not clear if he said no or was never asked—McVeigh
pursued Dick DeGuerin, a similarly flamboyant Texan who had represented
David Koresh. But DeGuerin turned down the case as well. Representing the
most hated man in America was not an assignment to take on lightly.
Jones got the job because he was law-school buddies with David Russell, the
federal judge in charge of finding legal representation for McVeigh and Nichols,
and also because he was brave, or rash, enough to take it on. Criminal defense
was not his specialty, although he had worked more than two dozen capital cases
over his career; he called himself a county-seat lawyer, occupied mostly with
clients like a local religious college or his hometown newspaper, the Enid News
and Eagle. Just prior to the bombing, he had served as special counsel to Frank
Keating, the newly elected governor of Oklahoma and a former FBI agent. Jones
and McVeigh were out of step immediately. “I haven’t been brainwashed,”
McVeigh said at their first meeting. “I did this for the movement, and no one else
paid for it.”a and a former FBI agent. Jones
and McVeigh were out of step immediately. “I haven’t been brainwashed,”
McVeigh said at their first meeting. “I did this for the movement, and no one else
paid for it.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Jones was intending to base his defense on the existence of a broader
conspiracy, in which McVeigh was just a bit player. But now his client was
telling him he was not willing to go along with a search for coconspirators. It
was a problem he would not resolve for as long as he was on the case.
Jones’s opening gambit in federal court, to forestall the demolition of the
Murrah Building, was equally inauspicious. Every civic leader from the state
congressional delegation to the mayor had endorsed the General Services
Administration’s finding that the wreckage posed a significant safety hazard.
Jones, though, described the building as “the single most important item of
evidence in this case” and asked for time to conduct an independent analysis.
The request was granted, and demolition was postponed for almost two
weeks so Jones could send in a bomb expert and a small team of lawyers. They
found nothing. Staff for John Coyle, one of the public defenders who represented
McVeigh for the first two weeks, felt a bittersweet twinge as they watched the
new defense counsel go about his business. “You watch,” a Coyle clerk who
knew Jones was overheard saying, “he’ll make it all about himself.” McVeigh
certainly came to believe that he did.watched the
new defense counsel go about his business. “You watch,” a Coyle clerk who
knew Jones was overheard saying, “he’ll make it all about himself.” McVeigh
certainly came to believe that he did.

DURING THE FIRST WEEK OF MAY, THE FBI BECAME CONVINCED that the second person at the
Ryder truck rental was twelve-year-old Josh Nichols. The Oklahoma City
command post even told division offices around the country to stop looking for
anyone else. This made little sense, because Josh was not tied in any way to the
acquisition of materials, and he had a rock-solid alibi for April 19. Even if he
looked a little like the sketch of the second man seen at Eldon Elliott’s, he
wouldn’t have gone there without his father, and Terry Nichols was not there.
The FBI essentially mistook Josh’s knowledge of the bomb plot—of which there
were many tantalizing clues—for actual criminal involvement.
Until he was confronted directly with his resemblance to the mystery co-
conspirator on May 6, Josh had been willing to answer just about any question
thrown at him. He even made phone calls to Agent Calhoun after hours to tell
her what was on his mind. The FBI, though, preferred to ratchet up the pressure
to see if Lana, Josh, or Terry might crack and disclose something new. But they
didn’t; they just lawyered up.
Twice, agents asked Padilla to fly out to Oklahoma City to testify before the
grand jury. The first trip was canceled at the last minute. The second time, there
was still no grand jury hearing, only reporters and camera crews at the
Oklahoma City airport, who had been tipped that Josh was now a John Doe Two
suspect and ambushed her with questions. Padilla was appalled, but she still

--- PAGE BREAK ---ers and camera crews at the
Oklahoma City airport, who had been tipped that Josh was now a John Doe Two
suspect and ambushed her with questions. Padilla was appalled, but she still

--- PAGE BREAK ---

continued to cooperate. The FBI asked her to repack the bag Josh had taken to
Kansas for his Easter trip, so the clothes could be tested for bomb-making
residue. She did so, and they were clean. A few days later, the FBI asked her for
every baseball cap in Josh’s collection so they could be compared to witness
sightings of the cap worn by John Doe Two. Again, Padilla complied.
For about eight days, the FBI allowed the circus surrounding Josh to bring
the hunt for John Doe Two to a complete standstill. According to the Secret
Service, up to 150 new leads were held back from investigative field offices
around the country. When it finally became clear, on May 11, that no joy was to
be had from Josh, they were sent out again.Service, up to 150 new leads were held back from investigative field offices
around the country. When it finally became clear, on May 11, that no joy was to
be had from Josh, they were sent out again.

IN EARLY 1994, MCVEIGH PAID AN IMPROMPTU OVERNIGHT VISIT TO Karen Anderson at the
Arkansas ranch while Roger Moore was in Florida for the winter. Anderson
cooked him a steak, and they talked about Waco. But did something else
happen? Anderson, in one of her early FBI interviews, said McVeigh slept in her
bed that night. She quickly added that she moved to the other bedroom, the one
usually occupied by Moore (they kept separate rooms). Hers was next to the
bathroom and she thought McVeigh would be more comfortable there. But this
was a rather odd explanation. Had she really given up her bedroom, the
government wondered, or had she invited him to join her?
Anderson denied any such thing; she thought of McVeigh “as a son.” Still,
many of McVeigh’s friends and acquaintances noticed a pattern: McVeigh would
form strong, almost obsessive attachments to his closest male friends and then
hit on their wives or girlfriends behind their backs.
A few months later, McVeigh began dropping in regularly on Michael
Fortier’s then-fiancée Lori at the tanning salon where she worked. At the same
time, McVeigh and Michael Fortier were so tight that Jim Rosencrans teased his
neighbor about having a “second wife.” Rosencrans had a similar dynamic with
McVeigh; his girlfriend Patty complained about being treated like a second-class
citizen, but she also recalled a time Rosencrans walked in on one of her own
conversations with McVeigh and accused him of making a move on her.
There are two schools of thought about McVeigh’s sexuality. The first says
he was a highly ascetic person who sublimated whatever sexual energy he had
into his war on the government. Sex either did not interest him or it scared him
because he was unsuccessful at it. Much later, when he was on death row in
Indiana, his fellow inmates nicknamed him “Virgin McVeigh.”
But there is also evidence he was highly interested in sex, and grabbed at it
wherever he could. Beyond his flirtations, he almost certainly had a brief affairinmates nicknamed him “Virgin McVeigh.”
But there is also evidence he was highly interested in sex, and grabbed at it
wherever he could. Beyond his flirtations, he almost certainly had a brief affair

--- PAGE BREAK ---

with Marife Nichols in the summer of 1994. Marife testified about it at trial, and
Terry Nichols subsequently confirmed he had been betrayed by his wife and his
best friend.
McVeigh seems to have viewed sex much as he viewed his need for food, as
a craving to satisfy efficiently so he could get on with something more
interesting. To stave off his appetite, he often resorted to military MREs, or
Meals Ready to Eat; to assuage his interest in sex, he looked for people he could
use quickly and discreetly.
Rosencrans told the FBI McVeigh was always talking about “getting a piece
of ass” and was even willing to pay for it. Rosencrans described him as “a weird,
quiet, and clean guy.”ickly and discreetly.
Rosencrans told the FBI McVeigh was always talking about “getting a piece
of ass” and was even willing to pay for it. Rosencrans described him as “a weird,
quiet, and clean guy.”

ON MAY 10, A RURAL PROPERTY BROKER IN SOUTHWESTERN MISSOURI named Bill Maloney
contacted the FBI and said he had met McVeigh, Nichols, and their presumed
coconspirator. Maloney saw news reports about two drifters getting arrested
thirty-five miles away in Carthage, Missouri, and recognized one of the names,
Robert Jacks. The man he had met with McVeigh and Nichols was called Jacks,
too, though he spelled it Jacques or Jocques. And he was very different from the
drunken drifter—quickly dismissed as a suspect—who had been found with a
bunch of discarded beer bottles and pizza boxes.
Maloney said that McVeigh had called the previous October from Kansas in
response to an ad offering a forty-acre parcel “in the middle of nowhere.” Two
weeks later—the date was later fixed as November 2—two men walked into
Maloney’s office and introduced themselves as Jacques and Nichols. Someone
had already made an offer on the forty-acre parcel, but Maloney offered them a
larger one bordered on three sides by national forest. They were interested in
that, too. After ten or fifteen minutes, a third man entered, wondering what was
taking so long. The others called him Tim.
Maloney’s ability to recall the tiniest detail seemed almost too good to be
true. He described, for example, how McVeigh was drawn to a green Remington
shotgun shell on Maloney’s desk. Maloney said he used those to hunt coyotes,
and McVeigh opened his mouth to laugh. Maloney recounted: “I could see a
discolored eyetooth on the upper right side of his mouth. He had a filling
showing through the enamel. I also remember that he had unusual hands that
were deep set between the thumb and the forefinger. His hands looked like they
could break if they were gripped very hard.”
Maloney was an ex-serviceman who had conducted eyewitness recall
exercises with naval intelligence and was proud of his razor-sharp recall. Heed like they
could break if they were gripped very hard.”
Maloney was an ex-serviceman who had conducted eyewitness recall
exercises with naval intelligence and was proud of his razor-sharp recall. He

--- PAGE BREAK ---reak if they were gripped very hard.”
Maloney was an ex-serviceman who had conducted eyewitness recall
exercises with naval intelligence and was proud of his razor-sharp recall. He

--- PAGE BREAK ---

remembered that Jacques wore olive-colored hiking boots with little suction cups
and cleats on the soles. Jacques, he said, was a muscular man with large biceps
and a bulging neck, about five foot eleven, swarthy complexion, possibly
American-Indian, with a tattoo on his left forearm showing wings or some other
insignia. He also had an unusually pointed, narrow nose, unlike the sketch.
All three were military types, Maloney said, and carried themselves
confidently. Their inquiries suggested they were looking for a place to hide, but
they did not have a vehicle appropriate for the terrain, only an old sedan, which
Maloney would later recall as a Chevy Monte Carlo. Maloney became
suspicious enough that he asked Jacques to handle a brand-new topographical
map of the area and then put it in his safe, in case the FBI ever needed
fingerprints. He handed it to his first FBI interviewer.
Maloney’s uncanny command of detail was counterbalanced, over time, by
indications that news reports were distorting his memory. Investigators did not
know quite what to make of him. “Either Bill Maloney had fallen from the sky
as a pure gift from the heavens, or he was completely certifiable,” said Jeanne
Boylan, the sketch artist, who interviewed him and produced a John Doe Three
drawing based on his recollections. It is curious that the description Boylan got
from Maloney was an almost exact match for a sketch she developed from
Debbie Nakanashi, a downtown post office worker injured in the explosion.
Nakanashi remembered seeing a Jacques look-alike, complete with tattoo on his
left arm, with a tall, wiry blond guy, not unlike McVeigh, a day or two before the
bombing. Investigators also found the name “Jacques” scrawled, in a number of
different spellings, in Marife Nichols’s address book. If Jacques was a phantom,
he certainly had a way of popping up all over the place.
The easiest of Maloney’s observations to check was the discolored tooth.
Bill Teater, an Oklahoma City–based FBI agent, looked up McVeigh’s military
health records and discovered he had had a procedure, probably a root canal, on
his right lateral incisor. A few weeks later, Teater observed McVeigh in person,
when a gaggle of agents and lawyers met him at the federal courthouse in
Oklahoma City, ostensibly to obtain handwriting samples. Teater’s job was to
watch his mouth. “I got him to smile,” Teater recounted, “at which time I saw
the tooth with a root canal.”
The Jacques investigation would go on for close to five years. It generated
just enough promise to keep going: a pair of Jacques brothers who went to
school with McVeigh; and a Robert Jacquez, now apparently dead, who once
shared a mailbox with Jim Rosencrans in Odessa, Texas. But certain FBI agents
and federal prosecutors, especially those who felt confident of where the case
was going, suspected it might also be a colossal waste of time.h Jim Rosencrans in Odessa, Texas. But certain FBI agents
and federal prosecutors, especially those who felt confident of where the case
was going, suspected it might also be a colossal waste of time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Odessa, Texas. But certain FBI agents
and federal prosecutors, especially those who felt confident of where the case
was going, suspected it might also be a colossal waste of time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the end, their biggest problem was not with Robert Jacques, whose
existence remains a question, but with Danny Defenbaugh, the new task force
leader, who kept Jacques on his priority list long after the prosecution team had
lost interest. Defenbaugh, they felt, did not command the respect necessary to
fulfill his responsibilities. He had spent most of his FBI career as a bomb
technician, traveling the world to investigate attacks from Puerto Rico to Beirut.
He had been in charge of violent crime investigations in Miami and had served
as the number two in Mobile, Alabama. But he had never commanded a field
division or occupied a high position in headquarters.
Most seriously, he was not seen as a leader with the authority to corral rival
agencies, push for what he needed from his own bosses, and find a coherent path
through a torrent of information. Defenbaugh was the straightest of straight
arrows, but he was also impulsive, gruff, and had a volcanic temper. He made
enemies as easily as he made friends, and freely acknowledged he was an
investigator at heart, not a manager.
“The common view was that he was not the right choice that would get us to
where we needed to be,” said one senior agent who might have expected the job
for himself. Another overlooked candidate was blunter. “When I heard they’d
made Defenbaugh commander, I just about crapped out,” he said. “He’s the last
person I would have picked.” I. C. Smith, the top agent in Arkansas at the time,
concurred that Defenbaugh was not highly regarded, and said: “The only thing
he had going for him was that he was a butt-boy to Bear Bryant.” (Smith used
the term “butt-boy” in a strictly figurative sense to imply that Defenbaugh did
Bryant’s bidding in a sycophantic or servile way.) Bryant, the head of the
National Security Division at headquarters, indeed became Defenbaugh’s
champion and maintained close contact throughout the investigation.
Louis Freeh had already shown he was more interested in imposing his
leadership stamp than in promoting harmony in the ranks. “My gut feeling is,
they couldn’t control [Kennedy],” Smith said. “They wanted people there who
were pliable.” Defenbaugh would defer to Bryant, because he did not have the
political wherewithal to push his own agenda, and Bryant would make sure the
task force did the director’s bidding. Defenbaugh all but acknowledged this
when he characterized his role as “making a coordinating effort to make sure that
certain things get done, that certain things do not fall through the cracks, that
somebody doesn’t make an independent decision on their own that may or may
not be approved by others.”
The result was that an enormous amount of energy was expended on certain
investigative strands—beyond Robert Jacques, the FBI collected more than 13
million paper motel registration records—while other topics, such as Elohimnormous amount of energy was expended on certain
investigative strands—beyond Robert Jacques, the FBI collected more than 13
million paper motel registration records—while other topics, such as Elohim

--- PAGE BREAK ---

City or Roger Moore, were not investigated enough because Defenbaugh did not
have the clout to insist. Some people, including members of the prosecution
team, accused him of overreaching when he tried to broaden the case in one
direction or another, while others accused him of lacking the nerve to do what it
took to find McVeigh’s coconspirators. The experience eventually left
Defenbaugh burned and embittered.
“What they needed was a highly centralized investigation with clear lines of
authority,” Smith observed. “It didn’t happen here.”tors. The experience eventually left
Defenbaugh burned and embittered.
“What they needed was a highly centralized investigation with clear lines of
authority,” Smith observed. “It didn’t happen here.”

AFTER A WEEKLONG SEARCH, THE FEDS FOUND STEVE COLBERN IN the semi-abandoned mining
town of Oatman, about twenty minutes west of Kingman, where he shared a
filthy trailer with three other drifters and he manufactured crystal meth in an
outhouse. At first, he denied knowing McVeigh or having any involvement in the
bombing. But he broke down quickly, especially when pressed for an alibi for
April 19. “If I, like, tell you everything I know, can I, like, make a deal and get a
break on my charges?” he asked.
Since his arrest in California, Colbern had spent several months in the
Arizona desert, including extended periods in abandoned mineshafts. Most
likely, he had also been on the road in his red Volkswagen Bug, as attested by the
Texarkana postmark on his resignation letter to Cedars-Sinai hospital. His
whereabouts on April 19 were uncertain. Preston Haney, the owner of his trailer,
said he had been holed up for days, watching television and subsisting on a diet
of spaghetti, beans, and vitamins. But agents had also accumulated reasons to
wonder if he was not hundreds of miles away with McVeigh. The day before his
arrest, his most recent girlfriend, Barbara Harris, had produced a letter he wrote
the previous fall—also postmarked Texarkana and dated November 4—in which
he talked about his desire to avenge Waco. On the day of his arrest, the ATF
showed his picture to Lynda Willoughby, the manager of the Mail Room on
Stockton Hill Road, and she said she recognized him as someone who had come
in to pick up McVeigh’s mail in the month before the bombing.
Extraordinarily, the FBI appeared indifferent to this information,
disregarding not only the new leads from the ATF but also the unresolved
question of the Browning machine gun.
Some iteration of the usual interagency rivalry was probably at work here.
The FBI had a bombing to investigate, and apparently regarded the firearms
violations as distractions from their goal of coaxing Colbern into talking about
McVeigh. But they were also oddly quick in dismissing Colbern as a suspect,
relying on information from Colbern’s uncle, a retired orthopedic surgeon fromir goal of coaxing Colbern into talking about
McVeigh. But they were also oddly quick in dismissing Colbern as a suspect,
relying on information from Colbern’s uncle, a retired orthopedic surgeon from

--- PAGE BREAK ---

California, that he was a paranoid schizophrenic. But Dr. Edwin Colbern had
said more than that: he also had been afraid, from the time Steve was a teenager,
that his nephew would one day become a “mad bomber.”
Asked specifically about Oklahoma City, Dr. Colbern said he “believed
Steven was capable of being involved.” The FBI not only disregarded this; the
information was not handed over to the defense teams representing McVeigh and
Nichols. “They even knew what Colbern smelled like,” Nichols’s lead defense
lawyer, Michael Tigar, complained many years later, “but didn’t think to let us
see the evidence against him.”

WHEN MICHAEL FORTIER HEARD ABOUT COLBERN’S ARREST, HE jumped into his Jeep
Wrangler and drove over to one of the FBI agents keeping him under
surveillance a block and a half away. Fortier passed him a Kit Kat candy
wrapper, on which he had scrawled in block letters: “Heard about Caulbern [sic]
on the news. Want see his picture. Maybe I could be of help.”
He also let the agent know he was at last willing to accept the government’s
offer to consider a plea deal in exchange for his cooperation. “Talking to attorney
today,” the Kit Kat wrapper added.lp.”
He also let the agent know he was at last willing to accept the government’s
offer to consider a plea deal in exchange for his cooperation. “Talking to attorney
today,” the Kit Kat wrapper added.

ON MAY 17, THE NEW YORK TIMES FEATURED A FRONT-PAGE STORY that said McVeigh had
claimed responsibility for the bombing. For a man planning to plead not guilty in
a death penalty case, it was not exactly ideal headline material. Many people
assumed that prison guards at El Reno must have overheard something. But the
source was McVeigh’s lawyer, Stephen Jones.
Jones had had a busy first week on the job. He initially wanted to strike a
plea-bargain deal to save his client’s life. In his account, he lobbied for a meeting
with Janet Reno, telling Justice Department officials he might be able to offer up
John Doe Two if, in exchange, the government took the death penalty off the
table. McVeigh never publicly acknowledged the existence of a John Doe Two,
so we have only Jones’s word on that. In any event, McVeigh had an apparent
change of heart and told Jones to cancel the meeting. “I would have argued for
his life,” Jones said, “but he withdrew that authority.”
What McVeigh wanted, Jones said, was to plead a “necessity defense”—to
admit his guilt but claim his actions were justified. Jones told him such a defense
would never fly in court, but McVeigh would not accept his advice. Jones
worried that McVeigh would make some glaringly public confession making him
impossible to defend. And that was when the story appeared in the New York
Times.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cept his advice. Jones
worried that McVeigh would make some glaringly public confession making him
impossible to defend. And that was when the story appeared in the New York
Times.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the revised 2001 edition of his memoir Others Unknown, Jones
acknowledged his responsibility for the leak but described it as a form of
damage control, a way to satisfy McVeigh’s itch for notoriety while minimizing
the risk that he would call 60 Minutes or ABC News and offer a lengthy, on-the-
record disquisition. He and McVeigh discussed making a public admission but
went back and forth on how it should be done. “It was incumbent on me,” Jones
wrote, “to find a way to protect Tim and at the same time assuage his craving for
fame.”
It was never clear how this protection was achieved by a front-page
confession in the country’s most authoritative newspaper, but Jones insisted he
had McVeigh’s full permission to speak to the Times. His book reproduces a
letter of authorization initialed at every paragraph and signed by McVeigh on
May 18—the day after the Times story appeared. Another lawyer on the defense
team reported that Jones was very pleased with himself when he secured
McVeigh’s signature. “Jones talked to Tim alone when he got that paper signed.
He had a chalk-striped suit on,” the lawyer recalled. “He was patting the lapel of
his suit and bragging…that he’d gotten it.”
Jones also wrote that he agreed to the leak on condition that McVeigh not do
any leaking of his own. “I wanted his pledge,” he said. “No more.” But there
was no evidence McVeigh had made any attempt to talk to the press, so the “no
more” line is a little baffling. Rob Nigh, Jones’s number two on the defense team
who got to know McVeigh better than anyone, directly contradicted Jones’s
premise. “I don’t believe he [McVeigh] was itching to say anything,” Nigh said.
“If he had been, he would have said it.”
Nigh also said McVeigh was not only interested in a necessity defense. He
was also willing to sit back and say nothing, while the government struggled
with the holes and contradictions in its evidence and—with luck—failed to
prove its case, as was then happening in the O. J. Simpson trial in Los Angeles.
“If you wanted to embarrass the federal government,” Nigh said in an indication
of his client’s mind-set, “what better way than to be found not guilty?”
McVeigh later complained that Jones leaked the Times story entirely on his
own. “S.J. gave that to ’em, my own attorney!” he told Michel and Herbeck. “I
don’t get this. I tell my attorney something, and it goes into the newspaper.”
When asked about this, Jones first offered no comment and then, a few days
later, said he had McVeigh’s oral permission before speaking to the Times
reporter. But the other member of Jones’s defense team questioned the accuracy
of this, saying that Jones leaked the story by himself and sought permission only
subsequently.
Jones, the lawyer said, was trying to push a different talking point in theteam questioned the accuracy
of this, saying that Jones leaked the story by himself and sought permission only
subsequently.
Jones, the lawyer said, was trying to push a different talking point in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Times story. “The strategy was to get out in front on the subject of the kids.
That’s item number two in Tim’s sworn statement and also in [the] story. The
line Stephen wanted to push was that McVeigh had been past the building but
not in it, and didn’t know about the day-care center.” Sure enough, the Times
reported that McVeigh had no idea there were kids in the building and was
“surprised” to learn that many of them had been killed. In the authorization
letter, which Jones drafted in his own handwriting, McVeigh signed off on a
similar sentiment—“that I am saddened children were killed 4/19/95.”
This strategy would mean that, barely a week into his tenure as McVeigh’s
lawyer, Jones had all but given up on seeking an acquittal and was now hoping
to soften the public’s view of McVeigh by characterizing the children’s deaths as
an unfortunate mistake.
Jones was certainly smart. If he had to cajole McVeigh into signing the
authorization letter, he most likely appealed to McVeigh’s desire to protect his
friends and coconspirators. McVeigh’s claim of sole responsibility sent a
reassuring message to the people under the most pressure from the FBI. Jones
wrote in his book that this was never explicitly discussed, but he acknowledged
it might have been a motivator for McVeigh.
“If Mike and Lori Fortier and James and Terry Nichols knew he was not
‘ratting them out,’” he wrote, “they wouldn’t be inclined to turn against him.”
They could also do what it took to limit their own exposure to prosecution, in the
knowledge that they had McVeigh’s blessing and protection.he wrote, “they wouldn’t be inclined to turn against him.”
They could also do what it took to limit their own exposure to prosecution, in the
knowledge that they had McVeigh’s blessing and protection.

AFTER THE FBI BUGGED THE FORTIERS’ HOUSE AND PHONE, THEY overheard one indiscretion
after another. Michael laughed at the idea of being called as a witness in federal
court and said he would “sit there and pick my nose and flick it…and kind of
wipe it on the judge’s desk.” He said he would sell his story to the tabloids, and
bragged in the cockiest way imaginable about being “the key” the government
needed to crack the case. Investigators found this insufferable, but they knew
Fortier was right. They needed an insider to testify against McVeigh, and he was
it.
Michael and Lori were taken to Oklahoma City and began providing rich
and interesting material, though it was hard to tell how much of it was true. And
the FBI seemed afraid to ask. They were interviewed together rather than
separately, and afforded an hour of complete privacy to go over what they
intended to say.
Fortier did most of the talking, focusing mainly on the trip he and McVeigh
took to Oklahoma and Kansas in December 1994. McVeigh said he had a lot of

--- PAGE BREAK ---er what they
intended to say.
Fortier did most of the talking, focusing mainly on the trip he and McVeigh
took to Oklahoma and Kansas in December 1994. McVeigh said he had a lot of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

guns to pick up in the Midwest, and Fortier was welcome to resell them for his
own profit. The only thing McVeigh wanted in exchange was a wooden gun
stock from Fortier’s collection. Fortier suspected something fishy, but McVeigh
handed him an AR-15 rifle and said he could keep it as long as he accompanied
him to retrieve the rest. The deal was on.
The guns were in Kansas, but McVeigh detoured to Oklahoma City to show
Fortier a building he intended to blow up. Fortier said the target was tall, U-
shaped, with glass frontage—an adequate description of the Murrah Building but
one he could easily have picked up from the news after the bombing. Fortier said
they did a quick drive-by and left—a statement contradictory to the eyewitness
reports of McVeigh walking into the Murrah Building that same day and asking
unusual questions.
The next day, Fortier rented a Crown Victoria sedan to transport the guns
back to Arizona. They headed to a nearby storage locker—he did not remember
the exact location—where McVeigh gave him twenty-five or thirty rifles and
shotguns. Fortier asked where they’d come from, and McVeigh told him: “Bob
in Arkansas.” Fortier asked if they were stolen, and McVeigh winked. Fortier did
not take this entirely as a yes; he told the FBI he thought “Bob in Arkansas” was
John Doe Two and that the guns somehow tied him and McVeigh together.
Fortier said that McVeigh repeatedly attempted to recruit him for the
bombing. At one point he asked McVeigh why he was targeting Oklahoma City,
and McVeigh answered: “Because it’s easy.” McVeigh asked what would
persuade him to join the plot, and Fortier said he would not act until he saw a
United Nations tank in his front yard.
Fortier and the prosecution team later agreed that the tank-in-the-front-yard
conversation took place in August 1994. But if McVeigh had told him about the
Oklahoma City plan then, why did Fortier characterize it as a revelation when
they were en route to Kansas four months later? Fortier would acknowledge
under cross-examination in the trial that he lied to the FBI that day. And the FBI
did not call him on it.s a revelation when
they were en route to Kansas four months later? Fortier would acknowledge
under cross-examination in the trial that he lied to the FBI that day. And the FBI
did not call him on it.

BY THE SPRING OF 1994, MCVEIGH APPEARED TO BE LIVING A NORMAL life in Kingman,
working a stockroom job at True Value Hardware, earning extra money as a
gardener, and continuing to peddle his wares at gun shows. But this was all a
cover for his true passion: heading out to the desert for target practice and trial
runs with pipe bombs and other explosives.
He was putting himself through a rigorous training program for his future as
an outlaw. Jim Rosencrans remembered several occasions when Lori Fortier

--- PAGE BREAK ---pe bombs and other explosives.
He was putting himself through a rigorous training program for his future as
an outlaw. Jim Rosencrans remembered several occasions when Lori Fortier

--- PAGE BREAK ---

drove her husband and McVeigh to the middle of nowhere and left them, with
full backpacks and weapons over their shoulders, for two or three days at a time.
Other times, they would all go out with Ruger mini-14s and Glocks and shoot
the crap out of rocks and empty cans.
They also experimented with explosives but had little success. Their pipe
bombs were not much better than giant firecrackers. Fortier testified that on one
occasion McVeigh placed a large pipe bomb under a boulder, hoping it would
split apart, but the boulder merely trembled and rolled a little.
McVeigh’s first forays into criminality were equally unimpressive. One
night, he and Fortier headed to the National Guard armory to check a rumor that
United Nations troops were massing in Kingman. When a diesel truck pulled in
with its headlights blazing, they stole some tools from the undercarriage of two
Humvees and fled. This was hardly the way to start a revolution.
Around this time, they met Walter “Mac” McCarty, a grizzled former marine
who shared much of their antigovernment fervor. Fortier first spotted the pistol
on McCarty’s hip as he was walking the aisles of True Value. Soon the three men
were regularly discussing the Trilateral Commission and the New World Order
and going to McCarty’s house for handgun shooting lessons. McCarty liked the
young men, particularly McVeigh, but did not see them as sophisticated thinkers,
or leaders. “They are both frustrated men and great brainwashing material, very
impressionable,” he said after the bombing. “They remind me of recruits I had in
boot camp. You could feed them, teach them the Marine Corps hymn, creeping
and crawling and ‘yes sir, no sir,’ lull them into becoming fighting machines, and
send them overseas to kill.”
Another person McVeigh almost certainly encountered—though both later
denied it—was Jack Oliphant, the leader of a right-wing revolutionary gang
called the Arizona Patriots, who attempted an armored car robbery in Nevada in
the 1980s and plotted a string of bomb attacks across the Southwest. The Patriots
were, in many ways, a knock-off of The Order, the notorious white supremacist
gang from the Pacific Northwest, who pulled off a string of assassinations and a
spectacular armored car robbery before going down in flames in a showdown
with the FBI near Seattle in 1984. The worst damage Oliphant ever caused was
to himself, shooting off his right arm in a misadventure with a shotgun. Still, his
armored car robbery plan, involving a staged traffic accident and sleeping gas to
neutralize the guards, earned him four years in prison.
Oliphant’s remote Hephzibah Ranch was a gathering spot for local skinheads
and an ideal place for weapons or explosives training. The caretaker of the Lazy
L ranch next door, Dyane Partridge, told the FBI after the bombing that she
regularly heard gunfire, although no explosions. She also remembered seeingr explosives training. The caretaker of the Lazy
L ranch next door, Dyane Partridge, told the FBI after the bombing that she
regularly heard gunfire, although no explosions. She also remembered seeing

--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh, Nichols, and another man chop wood with Oliphant sometime during
the winter of 1993–94. (Nichols had just moved to Las Vegas, ninety miles
away.) She remembered the encounter because Oliphant had made it clear that
she and her dog should not get too close.
When Oliphant’s wife, Margo, spoke with the FBI, she referred fondly to
“Timmy,” leaving the interviewing agent skeptical of her claim that she did not
know McVeigh. Oliphant kept a mailbox at the same office as McVeigh. And
McVeigh acknowledged that one of his favorite shooting spots was right around
the Oliphant ranch.
If McVeigh did, in fact, know Oliphant and sought to learn from him, the
chances are he did not get too far. The Arizona Patriots veteran Tom Hoover
described Oliphant’s crowd as “a ragtag bunch of dipshits from the weeds with
shoulder weapons” and remembered only one explosives expert, a character
named Lefty, who accidentally blew his thumb off while fooling around with a
grenade.
The Fortiers’ social circle was no more promising for fomenting a bomb
plot, because it was as much about crystal methamphetamine as it was about
revolution. Jim Rosencrans told the FBI: “Getting high is the only thing left we
can do in America.” While McVeigh used the drug himself, especially to stay
awake on cross-country car journeys, he also understood that if he wanted to
complete his mission, he would need to find other friends.merica.” While McVeigh used the drug himself, especially to stay
awake on cross-country car journeys, he also understood that if he wanted to
complete his mission, he would need to find other friends.

PERHAPS THE MOST INTERESTING THING STEVE COLBERN TOLD FEDERAL prosecutors was that he
was put in touch with McVeigh by Roger Moore and Karen Anderson. Colbern
was a regular customer of the couple’s ammunition business, the Candy Store,
and in late 1994 he asked if they knew of a hard-core antigovernment group he
could join. Anderson mentioned McVeigh by his alias Tim Tuttle, and gave
Colbern his P.O. box number.
Colbern and McVeigh corresponded to set up first one, then another meeting,
but McVeigh never showed. When Colbern learned—from Roger Moore—about
the message McVeigh left on the power utility pole, he was too scared to pick it
up. In the end, he said, he never met McVeigh, and gave up on the idea of
joining a radical group.
The attorneys accepted this, despite the ATF’s evidence that Colbern and
McVeigh were acquainted. This was likely influenced by Lori Fortier, who told
the FBI three days earlier that McVeigh had not been interested in reaching out
to Colbern. The prosecutors—led by Janet Reno’s top aide, Donna Bucella—
either ignored or were never given the countervailing evidence. Dennis Malzac,

--- PAGE BREAK ---n interested in reaching out
to Colbern. The prosecutors—led by Janet Reno’s top aide, Donna Bucella—
either ignored or were never given the countervailing evidence. Dennis Malzac,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

one of Colbern’s roommates at the Oatman trailer, told the ATF he had heard
Colbern talking about making an ammonium nitrate bomb and adding
nitromethane to “step it up a little.” If the FBI had talked to Malzac, they might
have pressured him to say what he told a California detective five years later—
that a clean-cut man with blond hair and a military bearing had visited Colbern
at the trailer a week or two before the bombing. Malzac was 90 percent sure the
visitor was McVeigh. Around the same time, he remembered Colbern asking an
odd question: he wondered how big a bomb it would take to destroy the federal
building in Oklahoma City.
This material does not create a criminal case against Colbern, because he
could have been interested in ammonium nitrate bombs independently of
McVeigh, and Malzac could have been exaggerating or lying. But the FBI and
the Justice Department did not pursue this, just as they did not pursue the
possibility that Colbern owned an enormously dangerous 50-caliber machine
gun. The deal that prompted Colbern’s release as a bombing suspect did not say
anything about this gun, despite evidence he had bought ammunition for it from
Moore and Anderson. The gun never came up in any of Colbern’s subsequent
dealings with the criminal justice system, and was never recovered. Colbern’s
lawyer, Richard Hanawalt, called it “the eight-hundred-pound elephant in the
room.”
Colbern served less than four years for the charges arising from his 1994
arrest in California, and he was barely mentioned in any of the Oklahoma City
bombing trials. According to Bob Sanders, a former deputy director of the ATF,
Colbern could—and probably should—have been sentenced for life, given his
serious weapons violations and links to McVeigh. “I’m very surprised,” Sanders
said, “that this guy is walking the streets today.”ern could—and probably should—have been sentenced for life, given his
serious weapons violations and links to McVeigh. “I’m very surprised,” Sanders
said, “that this guy is walking the streets today.”

CAROL HOWE RETURNED TO ELOHIM CITY FOR THREE DAYS IN EARLY May and reported that
someone there had talked about a “big secret” connected to the bombing. She
had not been able to figure out what this secret was. As the government’s sole
eyes and ears in the community, she was debriefed by both the ATF and the FBI
in Oklahoma City—the FBI never produced a paper trail connected with the
meeting—and then returned home.
Only on May 18, when she was formally reinstated as an ATF informant and
paid $250, did she agree to have another go at penetrating the community. But
she never made it back. Within days, Howe called her handler, Angela Finley,
and said she’d received two separate warnings to stay away. The ATF later
learned that Grandpa Millar had fingered Howe as a government snitch, a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

potential death sentence. They never sent her to Elohim City again.te warnings to stay away. The ATF later
learned that Grandpa Millar had fingered Howe as a government snitch, a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

potential death sentence. They never sent her to Elohim City again.

MICHAEL TIGAR, THE LEAD COUNSEL APPOINTED TO REPRESENT Terry Nichols, won his client’s
confidence with an immediate string of courtroom victories. Tigar was one of the
more brilliant defense attorneys in the country—dogged, erudite, charming, and
a scourge to underprepared prosecutors and law enforcement agents. On May 25,
he poured out a torrent of indignation at the treatment not only of his client but
also his client’s wife, who had been held in “protective custody” at a variety of
motels in Kansas and Oklahoma for thirty-four days. Marife Nichols, he
charged, was being kept “virtually incommunicado and without counsel” even
though she was accused of no wrongdoing. She was interrogated continuously,
denied access to her husband’s lawyers—never mind her husband—and
subjected to search and seizure of her personal property, including her journal.
Tigar said this was grossly unfair, and reflected the “lamentably thin” case
against Terry Nichols.
Some of this was lawyerly bombast, calculated to secure his client’s
cooperation as much as it was a shot at the Justice Department. But his
description of Marife’s predicament was on point. Shortly after Nichols’s arrest,
Marife learned she was pregnant, but did not dare tell her husband right away.
She was still hoping to catch a flight to the Philippines on May 10. When that
became impossible, she begged the FBI for the $5,000 they took from her
bedsprings so she could make new plans to leave. They refused.
Once Tigar got involved, she and Nicole were allowed to visit Nichols. She
was also given the $5,000 and allowed to book a flight to the Philippines. Still,
she was mad that the FBI had transported her to Oklahoma City but now would
not pay for a hotel or take her back to Kansas. She left a scathing voice-mail
message with Gene Thomeczek, an FBI agent who had questioned her
extensively back in Kansas. “I’m still in Oklahoma City and everything is going
bad,” she said. “I mean, thanks a lot…for leaving me here. I just feel like, you
know, this is a great time really. You really are a nice guy, but I can’t believe
these people are doing this to me.”
She and Nicole flew to the Philippines the next day.e here. I just feel like, you
know, this is a great time really. You really are a nice guy, but I can’t believe
these people are doing this to me.”
She and Nicole flew to the Philippines the next day.

JUST AS THE FBI WAS TIRING OF THE HUNT FOR JOHN DOE TWO, AN army sergeant newly based
in Fort Benning, Georgia, came forward with information suggesting he might
never have existed. Sergeant Michael Hertig told agents that he and a friend had
rented a Ryder truck from Eldon Elliott’s the day before the Oklahoma City
bombing. He thought he should mention this, because his friend Todd Bunting

--- PAGE BREAK ---ents that he and a friend had
rented a Ryder truck from Eldon Elliott’s the day before the Oklahoma City
bombing. He thought he should mention this, because his friend Todd Bunting

--- PAGE BREAK ---

looked a bit like John Doe Two and, at the time of the rental, was wearing a
multicolored Carolina Panthers ball cap, not unlike the one in the composite
sketch.
Agents viewed this as a near-providential answer to one of their biggest
problems. The man calling himself Robert Kling had rented his Ryder truck on
April 17, one day before Hertig and Bunting, and at almost exactly the same
time in the afternoon. Had Tom Kessinger and his colleagues confused John Doe
Two with Bunting, and, if so, did that mean McVeigh had come into the shop
alone?
The FBI tracked down Private Bunting at Fort Riley, and he was indeed a
plausible fit for the composite sketch—muscular, with tattoos on both biceps.
Bunting said he was a smoker and might have lit up at the body shop, just as
Vicki Beemer remembered. Bunting allowed the agents to photograph him
wearing the Carolina Panthers hat and the same T-shirt he had worn on April 18
so they could gauge the precise way the tattoos jutted out from below the sleeve.
The look was remarkably close to Tom Kessinger’s description.
After this, the FBI held firm to its belief that the events Kessinger and the
others described seeing on April 17 had actually occurred a day later. The match
was far from perfect. The body shop witnesses remembered John Doe Two being
shorter than Kling, but Bunting was five foot ten, about the same height or
slightly taller than Hertig. And Hertig did not look like John Doe One, because
he had a bushy mustache on the day of the rental; Kling, everyone agreed, was
clean-shaven. There were two other major flaws in the government’s theory.
First, Eldon Elliott was away on the afternoon of April 18, so he could not have
confused Bunting with the second man he saw accompanying Kling. Second,
Vicki Beemer knew Michael Hertig and recognized him when he came in on
April 18. For that reason, she was certain she did not confuse him with Kling.
What really happened? Tom Kessinger probably did confuse some of Todd
Bunting’s features with what he remembered of John Doe Two—particularly the
arm tattoo sticking out from beneath the sleeve of his T-shirt. But that did not
mean he was wrong about his recollection of how many people came into the
body shop on Monday, April 17.
Many people saw the Todd Bunting theory as a genuine breakthrough.
Danny Coulson thought so at first, until he heard the objections raised by Elliott
and Beemer and determined that the FBI was hiding the John Doe Two problem
instead of getting to the bottom of it. “The bureau ended up undercutting its own
witnesses,” Coulson said. “They wanted only one guy.” He felt this constituted a
violation of the FBI’s fundamental mission. “If I was a commander and they
were coming up with invented stuff,” he said, “I’d be pulling their tongueswanted only one guy.” He felt this constituted a
violation of the FBI’s fundamental mission. “If I was a commander and they
were coming up with invented stuff,” he said, “I’d be pulling their tongues

--- PAGE BREAK ---

through their butts.”
Bunting caused some friction among the FBI’s higher-ups, too. I. C. Smith,
back in Arkansas after his stint in Washington, remembered asking Bob Blitzer
of the bureau’s counterterrorism section about “Unsub Number Two”—their
term for John Doe Two—and being surprised when Blitzer said he did not exist.
“Is the issue that he doesn’t exist,” Smith countered, “or that you couldn’t find
him?”ion about “Unsub Number Two”—their
term for John Doe Two—and being surprised when Blitzer said he did not exist.
“Is the issue that he doesn’t exist,” Smith countered, “or that you couldn’t find
him?”

MICHAEL FORTIER WAS BECOMING A REGULAR LAW ENFORCEMENT tour guide. He took the FBI
to the storage locker where McVeigh had stashed blasting caps and other
explosive components at the end of 1994, and showed them where he and
McVeigh liked to camp and shoot. He also told them about a duffel bag full of
supplies that McVeigh buried in the desert so he could hide out after the
bombing.
The feds had a few theories on where McVeigh would have gone if he had
not been arrested. The one that intrigued them most had him heading to a major
airport, either in Wichita or Kansas City, and flying to Arizona—even though
this would have forced McVeigh to go through airport security.
Fortier told the FBI he thought McVeigh had filled up several bags with
food, money, guns, and ammunition, and stashed them all over the desert. And
he mentioned one instance in which he had driven McVeigh into a box canyon
and waited for an hour while his friend dumped a green duffel bag somewhere in
the wilderness. The feds asked Fortier for directions, and started hunting. “We
had the army, the FBI—every method known to man—searching by grid and by
rock, but we never found that duffel bag,” Weldon Kennedy said. “I presume it’s
still out there.”
Fortier could easily have fabricated the whole thing. But the FBI did not
seem to consider that. “Why would Fortier make up a story like that?” Kennedy
asked, years later. “There was no reason for him even to tell us that.” No reason
—other than Fortier’s desire to tell the feds what they wanted to hear, and the
pleasure he would get from wasting their time. The question of where McVeigh
was heading after the bombing has never been resolved.Fortier’s desire to tell the feds what they wanted to hear, and the
pleasure he would get from wasting their time. The question of where McVeigh
was heading after the bombing has never been resolved.

BEYOND THE JOHN DOE TWO DILEMMA, THE FBI HAD TO STRETCH the evidence to prove that
McVeigh was John Doe One. Not only did they lack physical evidence putting
him in the Junction City body shop, they could barely figure out how he arrived
in time to sign the rental contract.
A video surveillance camera at a McDonald’s just over a mile away captured

--- PAGE BREAK ---Junction City body shop, they could barely figure out how he arrived
in time to sign the rental contract.
A video surveillance camera at a McDonald’s just over a mile away captured

--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh at 3:57 P.M. on April 17, the day the Ryder truck was rented. McVeigh
no longer had a car and, according to the government, was alone, so he
presumably walked to Eldon Elliott’s, a good twenty minutes away. In the FBI’s
narrative, he made it there in time to enter, introduce himself, and have Vicki
Beemer print out the rental form, which was time-stamped at 4:19 P.M. It was
raining at the time—a “light mist,” as Elliott later testified—but when Kling
arrived at the body shop, he was dry. The FBI assigned an agent from the Kansas
City bureau to reproduce McVeigh’s movements and see if he could make the
journey in time. Agent Gary Witt left McDonald’s at 3:57—perhaps a touch
earlier than McVeigh’s actual departure—and arrived at 4:16, with three minutes
to spare. One can assume he didn’t dawdle; one of his colleagues conceded he
walked “at a brisk pace.”
When McVeigh talked to Michel and Herbeck, he felt compelled to give a
more elaborate explanation of how he got to Eldon Elliott’s. About three-
quarters of the way there, he said, a young man pulled over and asked if he
needed a ride. In the car, he “ran a hand through his brush cut, drying off his
hair.” No man has ever come forward to match McVeigh’s account, and even the
FBI gave it no credence. That leaves two other possible scenarios. Either
McVeigh was not alone at the body shop, and was driven there by John Doe
Two; or he never went at all, and John Doe One was an associate who looked a
little like him but was shorter, with rougher skin and an odd way of chewing
tobacco.
Most agreed that the best evidence tying McVeigh to the Ryder rental was
not the eyewitness testimony, or the John Doe One sketch, but the name Kling, a
known alias for which McVeigh had prepared a fake ID with the help of Lori
Fortier’s typewriter and iron. But McVeigh could have given this ID to someone
else so the rental could not be traced directly to either of them. College students,
after all, lend their driver’s licenses—both real and fake ones—to underage
friends. This would not be much different.
McVeigh left no fingerprints at Eldon Elliott’s, on the counter or on the
rental form. And the handwriting on the rental papers was also inconclusive. A
prominent handwriting expert consulted for this book said that the evidence
presented at trial linking McVeigh to the Robert D. Kling signature was too weak
to determine they were the same. Linda James, the president of the National
Association of Document Examiners, said the signature was clearly disguised
writing, and “only indications at most” suggested that the originator was
McVeigh. Even the backward slant that had excited Agent Mark Bouton did not
prove anything, she said, because seven out of eight people who disguise their
writing—as was the case here—slant it in a different direction.backward slant that had excited Agent Mark Bouton did not
prove anything, she said, because seven out of eight people who disguise their
writing—as was the case here—slant it in a different direction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---had excited Agent Mark Bouton did not
prove anything, she said, because seven out of eight people who disguise their
writing—as was the case here—slant it in a different direction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

By early June 1995, the investigation was driven by two deeply flawed
principles. The first was that the eyewitnesses were unreliable and could be
dismissed if their contentions clashed with the government’s theory of the case.
This became a circular argument, to the extent that testimony was then cherry-
picked to reinforce a predetermined viewpoint. Of course, assessing
eyewitnesses’ reliability is important, but there is little evidence it was done
dispassionately or fairly in this case.
Prosecutor Scott Mendeloff gave a revealing illustration of the mind-set
when he insisted that the Dreamland witnesses must have been mistaken about
seeing a second Ryder. “They got their timing off,” he said. “There is no
indication McVeigh rented a second truck. There’s one truck.” Perhaps the most
instructive way to understand Mendeloff’s argument is to read his sentences in
reverse, beginning with the last one. He started from the premise that there was
only one truck—a notion that four eyewitnesses, interviewed separately, all
challenged. Rather than allowing himself to challenge the premise, he challenged
the eyewitnesses.
The second flawed principle was that the Daryl Bridges phone records could
track anything and everything related to the bomb plot. Certainly, a lot of things
could be—the hunt for bomb components, the attempt to secure help from
people like Dave Paulsen, the frequency of communications between McVeigh
and Nichols, and their movements around the country. But the phone records
were elevated beyond an investigative tool. “There is absolutely, unequivocally,
no way there could have been other conspirators, because the phone records
would have shown that,” Weldon Kennedy argued. “We interviewed every single
recipient of a phone call from Nichols or McVeigh.” Kennedy rejected the notion
that Elohim City, for example, had not been properly investigated—he called the
idea “bullshit.” “There was no extensive investigation of Elohim City,” he said,
“because there was only one call there, which lasted a few seconds.”
This reliance on phone records lost sight of a number of things. First, the
records could not identify who was making a call. (At least three people—
McVeigh, Nichols, and Marife—had the PIN code, and they could have passed it
to others.) Second, even though Nichols purchased the card, McVeigh could
have used it to set his friend up as a fall guy. And, third, the dependence on the
Bridges records assumes that McVeigh and Nichols had no other means of
making phone calls away from home.
The last assumption seems particularly perilous. Roger Moore and Karen
Anderson told the FBI about phone calls they received from McVeigh, none of
which appeared on the Bridges records. Anderson testified, for example, that he
phoned just hours ahead of his overnight visit in early 1994; it was not a Bridgess they received from McVeigh, none of
which appeared on the Bridges records. Anderson testified, for example, that he
phoned just hours ahead of his overnight visit in early 1994; it was not a Bridges

--- PAGE BREAK ---

call. Years later, Terry Nichols described how it was a constant source of
irritation that McVeigh kept using the card, and he badgered him to get one of
his own. According to Nichols, when they met in Kansas on April 14, 1995,
McVeigh had obtained a prepaid debit card, and showed it to him to end the
argument. There may have been other cards besides.
In June 1995, the investigation had been going just over a month and
already, despite the FBI’s protestations about leaving no stone unturned, the
shape of the government’s case was set. It was as notable for what it left out as it
was for the oddly truncated version it presented as the whole story.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing no stone unturned, the
shape of the government’s case was set. It was as notable for what it left out as it
was for the oddly truncated version it presented as the whole story.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

{ 7 }
THE MANY MYSTERIES OF “BOB FROM ARKANSAS”
When Roger Moore was asked by investigators about his relationship with Tim
McVeigh, he described it as a catalogue of disappointments and betrayals. Moore
had welcomed the young man into the gun-show business, he said; he had fed
him, let him share hotel rooms, and invited him to the ranch in Arkansas. In
return, McVeigh sponged off him, embarrassed him in public, stole his idea for
converting flare guns into rudimentary rocket-launchers, and set him up for a
robbery in which Moore lost tens of thousands of dollars’ worth of cash,
precious stones, and firearms, as well as personal keepsakes—rare curios from
his travels and a .22 Hornet Winchester rifle given to him by his father—which
no amount of money could replace.
As FBI agents broadened their investigation, they understood that Moore
and his girlfriend, Karen Anderson, had played down both the number of times
they had met McVeigh and the length of their encounters. The couple described
big, blow-up arguments, including one at the Soldier of Fortune Convention in
Las Vegas in 1993, in which McVeigh got into Moore’s face “like a top sergeant”
before storming out. But they offered no explanation of why they continued to
extend invitations to him. This seemed particularly puzzling, since the couple
was intensely private and had offered hospitality to only three or four other
people in their ten years in Arkansas.
Moore described McVeigh as paranoid to the point of instability. On an April
1994 visit, he had insisted on sleeping near a window with his Glock .45 under
his pillow. He spent hours feeding bullets into his Ruger mini-30 and cranking
them out again on Moore’s gravel driveway, apparently convinced that the
government was after him and likely to pounce at any moment. Such bizarre
behavior did not deter Moore from continuing to write to McVeigh and, as we
have seen, using a near-impenetrable private language to convey sensitive
information.
In the run-up to the trials, the government largely accepted Roger Moore’s
account and groomed him as a prosecution witness. But the government’s own
information, along with previously unpublished research by defense
investigators and a firsthand account from Terry Nichols, all suggest that Moore
could as easily have been a participant in the plot, not only facilitating theeviously unpublished research by defense
investigators and a firsthand account from Terry Nichols, all suggest that Moore
could as easily have been a participant in the plot, not only facilitating the

--- PAGE BREAK ---research by defense
investigators and a firsthand account from Terry Nichols, all suggest that Moore
could as easily have been a participant in the plot, not only facilitating the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

supposed robbery but also offering valuable instruction on bomb-building.
Moore and Anderson said the April 1994 visit was McVeigh’s last, but
McVeigh’s defense team later obtained information suggesting that he returned
once or twice more that summer to pick up batches of Kinestik, a binary
explosive kit whose components were ammonium nitrate and nitromethane—the
very ingredients later used to blow up the Murrah Building. Moore, according to
this information (later deemed genuine by McVeigh in his interviews with
Michel and Herbeck), had cases of the stuff and did not sell it “to just anybody.”
Terry Nichols said Kinestik packs supplied by Moore were used as boosters for
the ammonium nitrate barrels he and McVeigh mixed at Geary Lake. According
to Nichols, Moore also gave McVeigh blasting caps and cannon fuse.
Nichols is not a neutral source, of course. Since 2005, when he first started
talking about his own role in the bomb plot, he has pushed to have Moore
arrested and prosecuted as a coconspirator. He told the FBI they could find
Moore’s fingerprints on a box of nitromethane tubes, originally components
from Kinestik kits, which were hidden beneath his house in Herington. When
Nichols’s accusations first surfaced, Moore not only denied any wrongdoing; he
accused Nichols of acquiring the Kinestik himself because he was an “angry
man” with his own agenda. The FBI found fingerprint traces on the box Nichols
was talking about, but they did not test them for almost three years and then
concluded that the prints were unreadable.
McVeigh certainly obtained Kinestik from somewhere. He told Michel and
Herbeck he possessed “a couple of small cylinders,” one filled with white
powder and the other a red liquid—an exact description of Kinestik, even if he
chose not to call it that. (The white powder would have been the ammonium
nitrate, the red liquid nitromethane.) According to Nichols, McVeigh had
bragged about having Kinestik since mid-1993; in September 1994, they
detonated a kit in a creekbed in Kansas.
We also know that, before then, McVeigh’s trials with explosives had come
to naught. Afterward was a different story.k since mid-1993; in September 1994, they
detonated a kit in a creekbed in Kansas.
We also know that, before then, McVeigh’s trials with explosives had come
to naught. Afterward was a different story.

BY THE SUMMER OF 1994, TERRY NICHOLS WAS WORKING AS A FARMHAND outside Marion,
Kansas. The work was tough and offered little financial reward. And it did
nothing to improve his marriage: Marife had taken Nicole back to the
Philippines earlier in the year, and was planning to attend college there in the
fall. Nichols still dreamed of starting a blueberry farm and settling down
properly, but he had hardly shaken off the radical antigovernment ideology he
developed in Michigan. One of the first things he did when he moved to Kansas

--- PAGE BREAK ---y farm and settling down
properly, but he had hardly shaken off the radical antigovernment ideology he
developed in Michigan. One of the first things he did when he moved to Kansas

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was to walk into the local county clerk’s office and, using a lot of the pseudo-
legal language he learned from Ralph Daigle, renounce his U.S. citizenship. The
clerk remembered him as polite but “not friendly.”
One day, McVeigh showed up on one of his frenetic cross-country road trips
and suggested they go full-time into the gun-show business together.
Immediately, McVeigh suggested buying fifty-pound bags of ammonium nitrate,
ostensibly to sell to survivalists and homemade explosives enthusiasts. Nichols
paid no attention to this red flag. Following McVeigh appealed to his romantic
spirit of rebellion, and he gave his employer a month’s notice.
Nichols had about $12,000 in cash, from the sale of a farm he and Lana had
owned, plus another $12–15,000 in gold coins he bought with the proceeds of
his credit-card scams. He turned almost all of it over to McVeigh, who assured
him he would get it all back once the business was up and running. McVeigh,
though, wanted the money to purchase bomb components. He was essentially
leeching off Nichols and relying on his naive willingness to do whatever he was
told.
McVeigh didn’t just take Nichols’s money. He also slept with his wife over
several days in September 1994, while Nichols was still working in the fields
and she was preparing to leave for the Philippines. McVeigh’s motivation—
absolute ownership over Nichols—was a lot clearer than Marife’s. She later said
McVeigh had simply “taken over,” helping himself to her like he did to
everything else. Nichols concurred: “McV was clearly in the mind-set of using
everything I had—my home, my phone, my food, my truck, my trust, myself,
and even my wife! And [he] did it all as a means of setting me up to take the fall
as part of his goal to achieve his mission.”
Nichols, though, did not know how to resist McVeigh’s demands, and
McVeigh seemed to derive sadistic pleasure from pushing him ever further.
Prosecutors would later argue that Nichols unambiguously crossed the line
between coercion and cooperating with McVeigh, but the evidence suggests that
he did not always understand the difference. One day McVeigh wanted to
demonstrate what it was like to be shot at, as he had been in the Gulf War. So he
took Nichols into the fields, told him to crouch behind a big rock, and opened
fire, most likely with his Ruger assault rifle. “When I count, you roll,” he
ordered. Nichols was terrified, but did exactly as commanded.the fields, told him to crouch behind a big rock, and opened
fire, most likely with his Ruger assault rifle. “When I count, you roll,” he
ordered. Nichols was terrified, but did exactly as commanded.

INVESTIGATORS WORKING FOR THE NICHOLS DEFENSE TEAM SPENT two years unearthing
everything they could about Roger Moore. And the more they dug, the more
bewilderingly complex the man became. He had spent years working for the

--- PAGE BREAK ---SE TEAM SPENT two years unearthing
everything they could about Roger Moore. And the more they dug, the more
bewilderingly complex the man became. He had spent years working for the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

federal government he later professed to hate, first for the Social Security
Administration in Iowa, and then for the air force. In the 1960s, he and his wife,
Carol, had jobs and top-secret security clearances at North American Aviation.
From there, they moved to Florida, where they made a fortune in the boat-
building business, cashing out in 1977 to settle into a long retirement.
The impression Moore gave to his neighbors and acquaintances in Arkansas
was of an angry, suspicious, conspiracy-spewing, tight-fisted gun nut who did
not know how to make friends or observe basic rules of civility. He would fire
high-powered rifle-rounds and mortars on his ranch after dark, which even in
rural Arkansas was regarded as eccentric. Once, he let off a smoke bomb and
knocked one of his neighbors unconscious for twenty minutes. He never
apologized.
His aversion to having people in the house went back at least to 1986, when
a housekeeper ran off with thousands of dollars in cash, and a friend he and
Anderson invited to house-sit committed suicide in their garage. He didn’t even
like attending gun shows much. Bill Stoneman, a local gunsmith, who was the
closest thing Moore had to a best friend, said Moore usually let Karen Anderson
go by herself so he could stay home with the horses, ducks, geese, parrots, and
cats. When he did tag along, Anderson would lug all the gear and do most of the
selling. “I hate this shit,” Moore himself acknowledged to defense investigator
Roland Leeds. “It bores me to death.”
Still, rumors about Moore abounded. Some of the more fantastical—and
unverified—stories that circulated after the bombing suggested he might have
taught sabotage techniques for the CIA at the Camp Peary military base in
Virginia, or had been a participant in the Reagan administration’s illicit efforts to
sell arms to the Nicaraguan contras, or had manufactured pontoon boats used by
the CIA to mine three Nicaraguan ports in 1984, or had funneled information to
the government on Barry Seal, a former CIA pilot who organized drug transports
to Central America from Mena, Arkansas, not far from Moore’s ranch.
The Nichols team did not know what to make of such stories, but they found
more reasons of their own to question Moore’s connections and activities.
Despite his background as a successful businessman, and the existence of at least
two bank accounts in his name, they found he had almost no credit history. They
never figured out why. They also puzzled over a line Moore had given to
Rodney Bowers of the Arkansas Democrat-Gazette shortly after his first FBI
interviews became public.
“Whatever I was doing for the FBI,” Moore said, “is fucked up, because they
blew my cover.” Bowers later told defense investigators that Moore had called
him in a fury when he saw this quoted in the paper. But he would not elaborateI,” Moore said, “is fucked up, because they
blew my cover.” Bowers later told defense investigators that Moore had called
him in a fury when he saw this quoted in the paper. But he would not elaborate

--- PAGE BREAK ---

on what he meant.they
blew my cover.” Bowers later told defense investigators that Moore had called
him in a fury when he saw this quoted in the paper. But he would not elaborate

--- PAGE BREAK ---

on what he meant.

FBI AGENTS WITH THE BOMBING TASK FORCE ALSO FOUND REASONS to raise questions about
Moore’s past. They learned that, in 1988, he was caught up in an FBI sting
operation, code-name Operation Punchout, which tracked the theft of equipment
and supplies from Hill Air Force Base near Salt Lake City. Items as big as F-16
engines—worth about $2 million each—were disappearing and ending up in the
hands of private military surplus dealers. So the FBI set up a fake storefront
staffed by a team of undercover agents and handed out flyers at gun shows to
lure the thieves into doing business with them. Among the first people to
respond to the flyers were Roger and Carol Moore.
Hidden cameras recorded the Moores as they sold $2,100 worth of .223-
caliber ammunition and said they could also come up with explosives and a large
number of bootlegged porn videos. The agents asked about their suppliers and
they said they were plugged into an “underground” network.
A major investigation appeared to be warranted, but none ever took place.
The ammunition rounds the Moores sold were reloads, which made it less likely
they had been stolen from the air force. The FBI did not pursue this or any other
angle, according to the available records, so the U.S. attorney in Salt Lake City
had no grounds to prosecute. A member of the Arkansas State Police Intelligence
Unit later said he and a Garland County police lieutenant had looked into the
porn distribution issue and could not substantiate it. Oddly, the Garland County
Sheriff’s Department kept no paperwork on the investigation and, when asked,
said there was none.
Moore caught another lucky break in 1989. Using his gun-show alias Robert
Miller, he struck a deal with a man in Florida, who said he wanted a hundred
pounds of C-4 plastic explosive. They exchanged addresses and phone numbers,
and Moore said he would send the C-4 by UPS once he was home in Arkansas.
But the man was an undercover informant for the ATF, and he passed Moore’s
personal information to his handlers. Then something strange happened. The
same Arkansas State Police Intelligence Unit officer who found no evidence of
wrongdoing in the porn investigation started to pursue a different Robert Miller,
a young gangbanger involved in drugs and sex crimes. The officer, Don
Birdsong, said he never received Moore’s contact details or other information
that would have told him he should have been looking for a middle-aged arms
dealer.
Four years later, the ATF was on Moore’s tail again, this time in response to
an alert that Moore and Anderson were selling incendiary ammunition roundsave been looking for a middle-aged arms
dealer.
Four years later, the ATF was on Moore’s tail again, this time in response to
an alert that Moore and Anderson were selling incendiary ammunition rounds

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and flares to an ex-convict in Oregon. Federal law forbade out-of-state sales to
anyone without a federal firearms license, much less a convicted arsonist and
attempted murderer who could not legally buy weaponry at all. The ATF
considered bringing a case but ultimately decided not to.
Did this history of abortive investigations indicate that Moore enjoyed
special protection? Bill Buford, the head of the ATF in Arkansas in the early
1990s, did not exclude it. He cited other possible reasons—evidence rules and
gun lobby pressure not to enforce federal firearms license regulations—why the
two ATF-related cases did not go forward. Buford would not confirm that the
ATF faced political obstacles beyond these procedural difficulties. But he also
did not deny it.license regulations—why the
two ATF-related cases did not go forward. Buford would not confirm that the
ATF faced political obstacles beyond these procedural difficulties. But he also
did not deny it.

ON SEPTEMBER 13, 1994, PRESIDENT CLINTON APPROVED A TEN-YEAR assault weapons ban,
and McVeigh wondered if he hadn’t been plunged into the opening chapter of
The Turner Diaries, in which passage of a repressive new gun law inspires the
beginnings of a white supremacist resistance movement. Nichols said McVeigh
experienced the weapons ban as a “prophecy…coming true before his very
eyes.” There and then, McVeigh started driving around Kansas looking for bags
of ammonium nitrate. He needed eighty or ninety bags for his bomb, but he
never found more than a few at a time. Nichols chalked this up to McVeigh’s
“city mind,” and told him to go to a farm co-op. He even told McVeigh how to
look one up in the yellow pages.
They ended up going together to the Mid-Kansas Co-op in McPherson,
immediately after Nichols finished his last day’s work on the farm. But McVeigh
had apparently decided he did not want to be seen making the purchase. As they
were approaching the co-op, he jumped out of Nichols’s pickup, saying he
needed to make some phone calls. Nichols bought forty fifty-pound bags of
ammonium nitrate on his own, in cash, and told the salesman, Rick Schlender,
that he was planning to spread them on some freshly planted wheat fields.
Schlender found that odd, because the weather was not good for planting and
most wheat farmers used liquid fertilizer. Schlender had no strong memory of
the man—or men—who made this purchase; he told the FBI he remembered two
of them. Since it was raining, Nichols bought a light-colored camper shell to fit
over his truck bed—a feature many witnesses would pick up in the months to
come.
He and McVeigh dumped the ammonium nitrate in a storage locker in
Herington, where Nichols had originally intended to store his furniture. Now he
noticed that McVeigh had not rented the space in his name, as he requested, butammonium nitrate in a storage locker in
Herington, where Nichols had originally intended to store his furniture. Now he
noticed that McVeigh had not rented the space in his name, as he requested, but

--- PAGE BREAK ---a storage locker in
Herington, where Nichols had originally intended to store his furniture. Now he
noticed that McVeigh had not rented the space in his name, as he requested, but

--- PAGE BREAK ---

under the alias Shawn Rivers. It was another warning sign about McVeigh’s
intentions that he failed to pick up on until much later.
That night, McVeigh pushed Nichols further into criminality by suggesting
they scope out a nearby mining quarry and take whatever explosives they could
find, just for fun. McVeigh presented it as something similar to his misadventure
with Fortier at the National Guard armory in Kingman. But, this time, he and
Nichols conducted a thorough reconnaissance and made plans to come back the
next night. They brought Nichols’s Makita drill to break the padlocks and took
care to park McVeigh’s Chevy a quarter-mile away on the far side of a field.
They hauled away enough material to build several large bombs: 299 sticks
of Tovex, 544 electric blasting caps, and 93 lengths of Primadet shock tube fitted
with nonelectric caps. Even now, Nichols would not see what trouble McVeigh
was leading him into. “I was in denial that this one act would suck me into worse
things that McVeigh had up his sleeve,” he wrote in 2010.
They were remarkably lucky they weren’t caught. A trucker named Craig
Knoche usually parked his vehicle outside the quarry at midnight so he could
catch a few hours’ sleep before loading up in the morning. That Saturday,
though, he was out late and did not pull in until about 4:00 A.M. He spotted lights
from a stationary vehicle half a mile away, but nodded off to sleep when he saw
no signs of people moving about. When the local sheriff, Ed Davis, investigated,
he found four padlocks missing but recovered a fifth, which had been drilled
through and abandoned—possibly because McVeigh and Nichols heard the truck
coming.
Sheriff Davis drew up a list of suspects, but Nichols and McVeigh would not
have crossed his radar, because they did not have criminal records. Besides,
Nichols and McVeigh were gone the next day—off to Arizona with eight and a
half boxes of Tovex beneath Nichols’s camper shell and the blasting caps in the
trunk of McVeigh’s Spectrum. Any obvious trace in Marion County was gone
with them.day—off to Arizona with eight and a
half boxes of Tovex beneath Nichols’s camper shell and the blasting caps in the
trunk of McVeigh’s Spectrum. Any obvious trace in Marion County was gone
with them.

IN OCTOBER 1993, ROGER MOORE WAS SLUNG IN JAIL IN WAGONER, OKLAHOMA, for pulling a
loaded gun during a road-rage incident. The Oklahoma Highway Patrol could
never prove that Moore opened fire, as the occupants of the other vehicle
alleged. But they still charged him with illegal possession—of the gun, and of
“controlled dangerous substances” they found in his car.
As soon as Karen Anderson heard, back in Hot Springs, she started digging
for $50,000 in cash she had buried at the ranch and sped to Oklahoma to bail
him out. She tried to hand the money in great wads to the sheriff’s office, but the

--- PAGE BREAK ---she started digging
for $50,000 in cash she had buried at the ranch and sped to Oklahoma to bail
him out. She tried to hand the money in great wads to the sheriff’s office, but the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

desk officer wouldn’t accept it and sent her to a bail bond agency across the
street. Anderson befriended the agent, and was soon in touch with the best-
connected lawyer in town, Richard McLaughlin. Soon after, Moore walked away
with just $303 in fines and court costs.
The story might have ended there, except that six months after the Oklahoma
City bombing Moore reappeared in McLaughlin’s office and complained he had
been overcharged. He was so obnoxious that McLaughlin lost his temper and
told Moore he hoped the FBI indicted him for the bombing. Moore said the feds
would not touch him, “because he was a protected government witness.”
McLaughlin either missed the significance of this or did not believe it. Instead,
he accused Moore of financing the bombing. Moore, in McLaughlin’s account,
“got a funny look on his face.” Sensing that things were about to get violent,
McLaughlin reached for his gun, pointed it at his client, and told him to get out.
He kept an eye on Moore all the way to the parking lot.
When McLaughlin told this story to Moore’s bail agent, Dianna Sanders
Burk, he heard an even stranger one in return. In April 1995, right after the
bombing, Burk learned that Moore had been trying to reach her to get someone
out of jail. In fact, he drove to Wagoner just to see her. She had sold her business
by then and did not see him or speak to him for several days. They maintained
regular contact over the next few months, and Burk became ever more intrigued
when Moore started talking about his friend Tim McVeigh, who he said was “not
a bad guy” but had been set up by the feds.
Even before she swapped notes with McLaughlin, Burk became convinced
that Moore had come looking for her in April to bail McVeigh out of the Noble
County jail.ad guy” but had been set up by the feds.
Even before she swapped notes with McLaughlin, Burk became convinced
that Moore had come looking for her in April to bail McVeigh out of the Noble
County jail.

BACK IN KINGMAN, MCVEIGH AND NICHOLS COULD NOT WAIT TO test their new explosives, so
they went to the desert to detonate an improvised ammonium nitrate and
nitromethane device inside a gallon milk jug. It did not work. Nichols thought
McVeigh did not allow enough time for the liquid to soak in. McVeigh was too
embarrassed to talk about it, and just kept experimenting. A few days later, he
went back to the desert alone and this time, he said, the mixture blew without a
hitch.
McVeigh used some of the new materials that he and Nichols had stolen
from the quarry, but the bulk of the Tovex and blasting caps were now in a
storage unit in Kingman, which McVeigh rented as soon as he arrived. Then, on
October 11, McVeigh called Nichols back from Las Vegas, where he was visiting
Josh, and insisted they move the blasting caps—just the caps—right away to a

--- PAGE BREAK ---n as he arrived. Then, on
October 11, McVeigh called Nichols back from Las Vegas, where he was visiting
Josh, and insisted they move the blasting caps—just the caps—right away to a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

new storage unit 140 miles away in Flagstaff. Ostensibly, McVeigh did this to
spread the risk of discovery, but Nichols said there might have been another
purpose. “McVeigh had to hand about half of those blasting caps off to
someone,” he said, “because only about half were ever recovered.” The FBI
never looked into it, because they never knew about the Flagstaff storage locker;
Nichols did not disclose this until 2007.
On October 16, the tension between the two men exploded into open
animosity. They were driving from a gun show in Colorado Springs back to
Kansas when McVeigh gave the order to buy a second ton of ammonium nitrate.
Nichols asked what it was for, then tried to say no when McVeigh spelled it out
for him. “He became very angry,” Nichols recounted. “As he spoke, he shifted
his body, turning toward me a bit, lifted up his left arm over the top of the seat
back, which caused his plaid flannel shirt to swing back…, and exposed his
Glock .45 handgun.”
McVeigh said he knew where Nichols’s son Josh lived, where his brother
James lived, where his mother lived, and would have no problem “eliminating
them” if necessary. If he even suspected Nichols of running to the authorities, he
would put a bullet in his head. “No one is going to stop me carrying out my
plans,” he said.
This was the turning point, Nichols said, the moment when he finally
understood how much trouble he was in. But he was too scared by McVeigh’s
volcanic moods and too confused to know how to back out. So he kept doing as
he was told.
The next day, McVeigh extended the contract on the Herington storage
locker, still using his alias Shawn Rivers, and told Nichols it was no longer
available for his furniture. Nichols found another space and lugged his things
without a protest. A day later, Nichols bought the second ton of fertilizer at the
Mid-Kansas Co-op.
Next, McVeigh demanded another $4,000 to pay for the rest of the bomb
components. Nichols said the only way he could get the money was to sell off
part of his gold coin collection. McVeigh ordered him to do it and accompanied
him to his coin dealer in Wichita to make sure it happened.
So it went with the rest of the shopping spree. When McVeigh and Nichols
visited a stock-car race south of Dallas the next weekend, they had no problem
acquiring three fifty-five-gallon barrels of nitromethane; the salesman was happy
to take the cash—Nichols’s cash—and ask no questions. That left just a dozen
barrels to complete the bomb components. McVeigh was so particular about
what he wanted that it took almost a week of driving around Kansas to find
them. They eventually picked up six refurbished black steel barrels withthe bomb components. McVeigh was so particular about
what he wanted that it took almost a week of driving around Kansas to find
them. They eventually picked up six refurbished black steel barrels with

--- PAGE BREAK ---McVeigh was so particular about
what he wanted that it took almost a week of driving around Kansas to find
them. They eventually picked up six refurbished black steel barrels with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

removable lids from a recycling center, and six white plastic barrels from a dairy
processing plant. The total cost of all twelve: just $54.
McVeigh and Nichols stored everything in the Herington locker and headed
back to Kingman. Despite Mike Fortier’s later testimony, it seems unlikely
McVeigh had picked out a specific date or target city yet. Nichols was sure he
was planning a bombing for Thanksgiving, Christmas, or New Year’s. Either
way, his intention was set. He told Fortier he intended to inflict mass casualties,
which he rationalized by likening his targets to storm troopers in Star Wars.
“They may be individually innocent,” he said, “but they are guilty because they
work for the Evil Empire.”
Nichols headed back to Las Vegas to visit Josh, and to put some distance
between himself and McVeigh’s plans, but within days McVeigh was ordering
him to come back to Kingman again. McVeigh was going to New York because
his grandfather just died and he wanted to give Nichols instructions before he
left. Nichols was afraid of what those would entail, so he blew off the meeting
and headed to Kansas where he did not think he could be discovered.
To his astonishment, McVeigh showed up the next morning at the Geary
Lake camping ground where he had pitched his tent—a favorite spot that was
probably not all that difficult to guess—and told him the new assignment had to
do with “Bob from Arkansas.” Nichols thought McVeigh was going to suggest
bringing Roger Moore into their gun-show business; he had mentioned in the
past that “Bob” was interested in providing sale items to help get them going.
But McVeigh had a completely different proposal. “We are going to rob
him,” he said. Or, more specifically, Nichols was going to rob him. “It will be
much easier than you think,” McVeigh said. “He will be like a kitten and give
you absolutely no trouble at all. Just trust me.”e said. Or, more specifically, Nichols was going to rob him. “It will be
much easier than you think,” McVeigh said. “He will be like a kitten and give
you absolutely no trouble at all. Just trust me.”

ON THE MORNING OF SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 5, ROGER MOORE WAS wandering out to feed the
animals when a masked man pointing a pistol-grip shotgun ordered him to lie
flat on the ground. Soon he was lying trussed up on the living-room couch while
the intruder picked the house clean. Nichols, who carried out the robbery, felt it
was all too easy and couldn’t help wondering if it had been prearranged with
Moore’s consent. He was not the only one who thought the whole thing stank.
Moore told many different versions of the story, and they all begged a lot of
questions. According to most of his accounts, he was initially immobilized with
plastic police ties but successfully sweet-talked the gunman into replacing them
with duct tape, because they were cutting off the blood circulation to his hands.
The unusually indulgent robber was also thoughtful enough to leave an opened

--- PAGE BREAK ---n into replacing them
with duct tape, because they were cutting off the blood circulation to his hands.
The unusually indulgent robber was also thoughtful enough to leave an opened

--- PAGE BREAK ---

penknife on an end table next to the couch, enabling him to slice through his
bonds once the robbery was over. Moore described the intruder as a ruthless
Special Forces type, but the man’s behavior seemed neither ruthless nor
especially careful. Beyond the penknife, he also left a loaded stainless-steel
revolver sitting in a magazine box just a few feet from his purported victim.
Moore said the robber took more than seventy firearms, but the insurance
adjuster noticed that the closets where the guns were supposedly kept were too
small to hold that many. Bill Stoneman told investigators that Moore and
Anderson usually kept their cash and jewelry buried on the property, but the
robber found silver and gold coins and bullion, precious, and semiprecious
stones, pre-Columbian jade from Costa Rica, and close to $9,000 in cash all
lying openly around the house.
Moore’s uncanny memory of the robber’s appearance was also suspect. In
his court testimony, he described a swarthy man, just under six feet tall, who
stank like a “pig yard” and was wearing a black serge ski mask with generous
eye and mouth openings, and unusual gray Israeli combat boots. Terry Nichols
later contradicted this by saying he wore 1990s-era camouflage gear, ordinary
brown jersey gloves, and standard-issue black boots. He had a nylon stocking
over his head, not a ski mask, with holes cut out for his eyes and his glasses
perched on top.
“My glasses on the outside should have been obvious to Moore, but he never
describes the robber as wearing glasses,” Nichols wrote in 2010. Nichols’s
lawyers suggested in court that Moore had taken his description of the black
mask from a photograph on a gun-show flyer, which the FBI found in his van.
If Moore’s description was wrong, could it have been an attempt to protect
Nichols, or to incriminate someone else? Richard Guthrie, the Aryan Republican
Army bank robber, was one of the few people on the radical right who had a pair
of Israeli combat boots and he was also known to neglect his personal hygiene.
Had he done something to anger Moore? Intriguingly a Robert Miller driver’s
license and several Kinestik packs were recovered after Guthrie and Pete
Langan, his fellow ARA ringleader, were arrested in early 1996. But the FBI
never made serious inquiries into this link.iver’s
license and several Kinestik packs were recovered after Guthrie and Pete
Langan, his fellow ARA ringleader, were arrested in early 1996. But the FBI
never made serious inquiries into this link.

MCVEIGH TOLD NICHOLS THAT ROBBING MOORE WOULD BE HIS reward for fronting so much
money over the previous two months. All McVeigh wanted were the guns and a
$2,000 cut of the cash; Nichols was welcome to the rest. In the run-up to the
robbery, McVeigh told Nichols with great precision where to find everything—
including Moore’s camper van, which was parked by the back door for easy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

loading. McVeigh said the robbery had to take place on November 5, because
Karen Anderson would be away at a gun show—something she had told almost
nobody, according to an interview she later gave the FBI. McVeigh also knew
that Moore would walk out of the house around 9:00 A.M.
Nichols found everything as McVeigh described, except the cash, which was
not in a filing cabinet but—even more obviously—on Moore’s desk. Nichols,
ever the stickler for following instructions, had to ask Moore for help locating it,
prompting a sarcastic comeback from Moore. He took nothing of value from
Anderson’s room, as instructed, although he did help himself to two pillowcases
to carry some smaller items, and removed the quilt from her bed so he would
have something to cover the loot in the back of Moore’s camper van. The quilt
later showed up on the Nicholses’ bed in Herington.rry some smaller items, and removed the quilt from her bed so he would
have something to cover the loot in the back of Moore’s camper van. The quilt
later showed up on the Nicholses’ bed in Herington.

ROGER MOORE’S NEIGHBOR VERTA “PUDGE” POWELL THOUGHT HE was playacting from the
moment he rang her doorbell and said he had been robbed. His phone lines had
been cut, and he barged past her, demanding to use the phone. She glowered
when she saw a revolver sticking out of his sweatpants.
Pudge said Moore talked in a suspiciously low voice on his calls. When her
husband came home, they found out Moore had not even phoned the police.
Moore said something about the government trying to shut down a movement he
was leading and suggested he had been robbed to keep him “in check.” When
the sheriffs arrived, at Powell’s insistence, they asked Powell if he thought the
robbery was genuine. He, like the rest of the family, did not believe any of it.
Farmers Insurance was also skeptical. The company adjuster handling
Moore’s claim thought the story sounded like a “rehearsed script.” He would
have launched a full investigation, but the caps on Moore’s policy left more than
90 percent of his claim uncovered. Quibbling over a $5,900 settlement was not
worth the company’s time, so he let it go unchallenged.
Moore had no apparent problem with the money—he had deliberately
underinsured himself because he didn’t want anyone, even his insurance
company, to know how many valuables he kept on his property. But he was
oddly upset not to have the robbery investigated. He made an angry phone call to
his insurance agent and told her daughter, who answered the phone, he would
“smear [her] all over the counter.”

ON THE EVENING OF THE ROBBERY, MCVEIGH CALLED MICHAEL FORTIER and told him that
“Terry did Bob.” He also advised him to watch his back. “He thought that Bob
would send private investigators out to Arizona to look for him,” Fortier later

--- PAGE BREAK ---RTIER and told him that
“Terry did Bob.” He also advised him to watch his back. “He thought that Bob
would send private investigators out to Arizona to look for him,” Fortier later

--- PAGE BREAK ---

testified. “And if those investigators would be in Kingman, they would find me,
because I’m associated with Tim.”
Curiously, McVeigh knew all about the robbery before Nichols had a chance
to tell him. The Daryl Bridges records show that Nichols did not call McVeigh
that day; Nichols said he did not contact McVeigh until Monday, November 7,
after he had dumped the robbery loot in a new storage locker in Council Grove,
Kansas.
If Nichols did not tell McVeigh the robbery had gone off smoothly, then
someone else must have, possibly Moore himself. McVeigh was at a gun show in
Akron, Ohio, and not easy to reach, but he could have waited by a pay phone at a
prearranged hour, or used an intermediary at the gun show to take a message for
him. The FBI preferred to believe that the phone call to the Fortiers did not take
place until several days later—even though it is in the Bridges records at 8:09 P.M.
Eastern Time on November 5.for
him. The FBI preferred to believe that the phone call to the Fortiers did not take
place until several days later—even though it is in the Bridges records at 8:09 P.M.
Eastern Time on November 5.

ONCE NICHOLS HAD SECURED THE GUNS, HE DROVE TO LAS VEGAS with the rest of the stolen
goods. He had decided he wouldn’t tell anyone where he had stashed everything;
he had a feeling that if McVeigh found out, the loot would not remain his for
long, But he found himself telling McVeigh about the guns anyway as soon as he
was asked. He was angry with himself about that, and determined not to let
anything else elude his grasp.
Nichols’s plan was to fly to the Philippines and stay until the New Year so he
could not be blamed for any catastrophes over the holidays. The Philippines was
not exactly a risk-free destination; he was deathly afraid of Marife’s ex-
boyfriend, and far from convinced that Marife still wanted to be married to him.
But that was a chance he would have to take.
He arrived at Lana Padilla’s house beside himself with paranoia. He was
terrified about being drawn into a criminal conspiracy and did not know how to
share his troubles without burdening Lana or Josh with guilty knowledge. Lana
thought his strange behavior was a sign of suicidal depression. Nichols had been
out of touch for the second half of October, and while he hadn’t told Lana about
quitting his farm job, she suspected it, because he was no longer answering his
phone there. Eventually, she sent a note to his post office box in Kansas, which
said: “Call me. It’s urgent. We need to talk about Josh.”
Nichols needed to devote some proper time to his son, so he postponed his
flight to the Philippines until November 22—the anniversary of Jason’s death—
and started planning the disposal of his property in case he didn’t make it out of
Southeast Asia alive. In context, the “Go for it!” note from Nichols to McVeigh

--- PAGE BREAK ---of Jason’s death—
and started planning the disposal of his property in case he didn’t make it out of
Southeast Asia alive. In context, the “Go for it!” note from Nichols to McVeigh

--- PAGE BREAK ---

takes on new, or at least more shaded, meanings. This phrase follows on from a
paragraph describing locker #37 in Council Grove, the one with Moore’s guns in
it. Nichols explained—and it seems plausible—that the line “As for heat, none
that I know of” refers to the Moore robbery, not the purchase of bomb
components. And “Your on your own, go for it!!” could mean: if I’m out of the
picture (because I’m dead), take the guns and do what you will with them.
Nichols barely made it out of the country. As he boarded the first leg of his
flight, from Las Vegas to Los Angeles, a security guard spotted a stun gun in his
hand luggage. He had packed two as gifts for Marife’s family. Although carrying
an offensive weapon on a passenger aircraft was a federal offense, the episode
was treated, amazingly, as no big deal. Nichols repacked the stun guns in his
checked luggage and was allowed to proceed.an offensive weapon on a passenger aircraft was a federal offense, the episode
was treated, amazingly, as no big deal. Nichols repacked the stun guns in his
checked luggage and was allowed to proceed.

ONCE MCVEIGH REALIZED NICHOLS WAS OUT OF THE COUNTRY, HE turned to his other best
friend, Michael Fortier, and used the loot from the Moore robbery as leverage to
try to talk him into helping carry out the bombing.
His promise of a $10,000 payday certainly concentrated the Fortiers’ minds.
Lori ironed the plastic cover on McVeigh’s fake Robert Kling ID and disguised
the blasting caps from the quarry robbery by wrapping them in Christmas paper.
According to Lori, McVeigh also performed a little demonstration, taking a pile
of soup cans from the Fortiers’ kitchen cupboard and arranging them into the
configuration he had in mind for the ammonium nitrate and nitromethane
barrels. The prosecution used this story at McVeigh’s trial to show a high degree
of premeditation, but there are grounds to doubt its veracity. When Michael
Fortier was asked on the witness stand if Lori had told him the story before she
shared it with the FBI, he said she had not.
Either way, McVeigh lured Michael Fortier into traveling with him to Kansas
and Oklahoma with two boxes of blasting caps in the trunk. But he could not
convince him to carry out the bombing then and there. A frustrated McVeigh
drove on to Michigan, but on the way, his car was hit hard from the rear on the I-
90 highway. “In ½ a second,” he later wrote, with his customary blend of fact
and self-dramatization, “I restarted the car, floored it and popped the clutch.”
With his front wheels spinning and his back wheels dragging against the
smashed fender, he maneuvered himself out of danger in the nick of time.
The stark reality, not lost on McVeigh, was that the thump could have set off
one or more of the blasting caps and blown him to smithereens. By the time
McVeigh wrote about the accident—to Roger Moore, of all people—he had
convinced himself that the accident was intentional, most likely the work of ating caps and blown him to smithereens. By the time
McVeigh wrote about the accident—to Roger Moore, of all people—he had
convinced himself that the accident was intentional, most likely the work of a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

government agent. “This makes me real nervous. Has anyone else had anything
happen to them?” he asked in his letter, dated January 10, 1995.
Why was Moore still corresponding with the man he saw as the lead suspect
in the robbery? Moore said he wanted to draw McVeigh back to the ranch and
confront him face-to-face. “I could kill that motherfucker for robbing me,”
Moore later railed to a defense investigator. “I didn’t need this.” The surviving
correspondence, however, suggests that Moore and McVeigh were on
remarkably good terms, writing cryptically but unmistakably about starting a
revolution against the government. “The important thing is to be as effective as
possible,” Moore wrote in the letter recovered from McVeigh’s mail drop after
the bombing. Was he really just talking about recovering his guns?vernment. “The important thing is to be as effective as
possible,” Moore wrote in the letter recovered from McVeigh’s mail drop after
the bombing. Was he really just talking about recovering his guns?

AFTER THE BOMBING AND THE INITIAL ROUND OF INTERVIEWS, the FBI assigned Mark Jessie, an
agent out of the Hot Springs office, to keep an eye on Moore. But Moore did not
get along with Jessie, and he was replaced with a softer agent, Floyd Hays, who
struck up an unlikely friendship with Moore that earned him repeated—and
unheard of—invitations to the ranch. “Roger was a person who wanted everyone
to like him,” Hays said years later. “He was a little bit different. But he was not a
mean guy or a bad guy.”
This was hardly conventional wisdom in Hot Springs. But it was not an
uncommon view in the FBI, where Moore was being considered as a prosecution
witness, and any suspicions about him were increasingly viewed as an
inconvenience. Jon Hersley, an agent from Oklahoma City who helped interview
Moore and Anderson and later helped prepare the case for trial, believed
everything Moore said and, in a book he cowrote, argued that Moore’s
association with McVeigh was the consequence of an overly trusting nature.
“Moore had learned over the years that being in the gun-show business meant
meeting all kinds of people,” Hersley wrote. “Some were wonderful—and there
were some whose intentions were not so noble.” Somehow, Roger Moore had
morphed into a poor, fragile flower of a man. “He was nervous about being
suspected,” Hays concurred, “almost to the point of crying.” Within months, all
investigative interest in him evaporated.had
morphed into a poor, fragile flower of a man. “He was nervous about being
suspected,” Hays concurred, “almost to the point of crying.” Within months, all
investigative interest in him evaporated.

NARROWING THE INVESTIGATION’S FOCUS WAS NOT MET WITH UNIVERSAL approval, even within
the government. “There was intense discussion inside the prosecution team, in
terms of…whether McVeigh and Nichols were the only two responsible,” said
Larry Mackey, one of the prosecutors most open to new avenues of
investigation. Some of Mackey’s colleagues were willing to give up on John Doe

--- PAGE BREAK ---were the only two responsible,” said
Larry Mackey, one of the prosecutors most open to new avenues of
investigation. Some of Mackey’s colleagues were willing to give up on John Doe

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Two and accept the Todd Bunting theory, while others remained skeptical. Some
were intrigued by Robert Jacques. The possible link to the bank robberies grew
more enticing after a newspaper article about the Murrah Building bomb was left
at the scene of an ARA heist in Missouri in August 1995.
John Magaw, the ATF director, spent the summer expecting Roger Moore to
be indicted, along with at least one or two others. “Any investigative effort worth
its salt would have pursued it, and pursued it hard,” he said of Moore. “That may
be one of the people I felt all along was culpable—involved in one way or
another.”
Broadening the investigation’s focus, however, became unlikely once the
Fortiers struck a deal on August 4 to testify against McVeigh and Nichols.
Michael Fortier pled guilty to charges of transporting and selling stolen weapons
and failing to alert the authorities to the bombing in advance. In exchange, the
government promised to go easy on his sentence, provided he held up his side of
the bargain on the witness stand. Lori Fortier, who was four months pregnant,
was given immunity.
The indictment, which appeared six days later, set the start of the conspiracy
at September 13, 1994, but did not explain why. This led to speculation in some
quarters that the date was somehow connected to Elohim City, because McVeigh
checked out of a nearby motel in eastern Oklahoma that morning. The date,
though, had nothing to do with the evidence. It was the day President Clinton
signed the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act, which first
introduced the death penalty for using, or conspiring to use, a weapon of mass
destruction. Prosecutors worried that if they put the start of the conspiracy any
sooner, the capital charges might get thrown out. It didn’t mean that evidence
before that date was inadmissible; plenty was admitted, in both trials. It was a
technicality—“legally relevant,” in Mackey’s words, “but factually irrelevant.”
The indictment was not entirely blind to the continuing investigation and
referred to “others unknown” besides McVeigh and Nichols. But it did not point
fingers at anybody else by name. It was, in essence, a promissory note on the
outcome of further investigation, which never materialized.ers unknown” besides McVeigh and Nichols. But it did not point
fingers at anybody else by name. It was, in essence, a promissory note on the
outcome of further investigation, which never materialized.

--- PAGE BREAK ---McVeigh and Nichols. But it did not point
fingers at anybody else by name. It was, in essence, a promissory note on the
outcome of further investigation, which never materialized.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

{ 8 }
OKLAHOMA’S OWN PRIVATE AFGHANISTAN
Even before Carol Howe learned Andreas Strassmeir’s full name, she had him
marked for a dangerous man. They met when she and Dennis Mahon drove up to
Elohim City for weekends in the fall of 1994, and she was immediately startled
by the vehemence of Strassmeir’s antigovernment rhetoric. “His plans,” she
wrote in her notes, which she later passed on to the ATF, “are to forcibly act to
destroy the U.S. government with direct actions and operations. Assassinations,
bombings, mass shootings etc. He believes we cannot outbreed the enemy so we
must use mass genocide against them and of course the biggest enemy—the U.S.
government.”
Howe saw Strassmeir and his ragtag security team on their regular patrols
around the perimeter of Grandpa Millar’s community, and she heard him talk
about converting an SKS rifle to full automatic using a piece from a food can.
When he boasted he was stockpiling weapons and might have access to an M60
machine gun—a serious piece of military hardware unavailable on the open
market—her handlers’ ears pricked up and they told Howe to find out as much as
she could about the strange, belligerent man she knew as Andi the German.
As an attractive blonde in a predominantly male world of gun nuts and
would-be revolutionaries, Howe did not have to try hard to coax Strassmeir, or
anyone else, to open up. She accompanied him to a nearby swimming hole,
giving him a good look at her inky-black swastika tattoo, and flashed her
knowledge of military hardware. Howe knew she had Strassmeir’s attention
when he shoved his hand down her shirt, although she later wondered if he was
feeling for a wire. By Christmas 1994, she had his full name and birth date,
enabling the ATF to check his immigration status and establish he was an
overstay on his visa.
Howe was equally efficient in collecting evidence against Mahon. She gave
him grenade hulls, which she obtained from Angela Finley, her ATF handler, and
induced him on at least two occasions to fill them and detonate them in the
woods. She recovered shrapnel pieces to pass on to the ATF, and she also
reported with glee how he “hauled his fat butt” to safety after he had pulled the
grenade pin, then demanded sex, or at least a back rub, as a reward for what he
had done. “You realize we just committed a major felony here,” she reported himbutt” to safety after he had pulled the
grenade pin, then demanded sex, or at least a back rub, as a reward for what he
had done. “You realize we just committed a major felony here,” she reported him

--- PAGE BREAK ---er he had pulled the
grenade pin, then demanded sex, or at least a back rub, as a reward for what he
had done. “You realize we just committed a major felony here,” she reported him

--- PAGE BREAK ---

saying with obvious elation. Howe rejected his advances and said that if he
found her cold, it was because good terrorists needed ice in their veins; he had
told her so himself.
Nothing in Howe’s file suggests she came across Tim McVeigh or Terry
Nichols at Elohim City, but she provided plentiful information pointing to threats
of violence from within the community. As 1995 dawned, she told her handlers
about a sermon in which Millar gave his blessing to a war against the ATF and
the rest of the government. Patriots from Texas, Missouri, Arkansas, and
Oklahoma would join forces for the coming fight, Millar predicted, and carve
out a swath of independent territory. She also reported Mahon boasting about a
five-hundred-pound ammonium nitrate bomb he set off in Michigan.
Several people in and out of government have attempted to discredit Howe
as a fantasist and a liar. Strassmeir dismissed her, with the benefit of hindsight,
as a “dress Nazi”; Kirk Lyons, apparently taking umbrage at the way she flirted
with Strassmeir to win his confidence, called her “a very screwed up little
vamp.” But her work proved to be right much more than it was wrong. Bob
Sanders, a former deputy director of the ATF, was impressed when he reviewed
her file in 1997, and saw no reason to think she attempted to fabricate
information, deceive anyone, or exaggerate. Dave Roberts, Angela Finley’s boss
at the ATF’s Tulsa office, told a grand jury hearing in 1998: “I felt that Carol
Howe was being effective as an informant, and I felt that she was sincere in her
efforts.”
And yet her information did not lead to a broader investigation, or even to
explosives and weapons charges against Strassmeir and Mahon, as Howe and her
handlers expected. Bob Sanders thought this was an outrage. “The entire
manpower devoted to this investigation seems to have been nothing but one
trainee agent [Finley],” he wrote incredulously in a report for Howe’s legal
representatives. “If the information provided by [Howe] is to be believed, as it
clearly was, then the lack of investigation by BATF amounts to gross
nonfeasance per se…. This was amateur hour in Oklahoma.”
It was not the first time the federal government had tiptoed around Elohim
City, only to lose its nerve and shy away. Nor would it be the last. After the
Oklahoma City bombing, many people in law enforcement wanted to know what
had gone on there, and felt there was a strong chance it had some connection to
McVeigh. But they were either reluctant to investigate, or ordered not to.people in law enforcement wanted to know what
had gone on there, and felt there was a strong chance it had some connection to
McVeigh. But they were either reluctant to investigate, or ordered not to.

JACK KNOX KNEW ELOHIM CITY WOULD BE A PROBLEM AFTER THE bombing, because he had
come unstuck in his own efforts to investigate the place eight years earlier.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e, or ordered not to.

JACK KNOX KNEW ELOHIM CITY WOULD BE A PROBLEM AFTER THE bombing, because he had
come unstuck in his own efforts to investigate the place eight years earlier.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

At that time, he was still an FBI agent, based in Fort Smith, Arkansas, and
he had a very personal reason to be suspicious of Grandpa Millar, because he
had been targeted for assassination by Millar’s friends Jim Ellison and Wayne
Snell. Both of those men were now serving hard time, but Knox and the U.S.
Attorney’s Office in Fort Smith had ambitious plans to retry them, along with
their most prominent brothers in arms, for the rarely prosecuted crime of
sedition. It was only the third time in the country’s history that such a charge had
been brought, but the government was determined to eradicate the threat from
the radical far right once and for all. Many of the defendants in the case were in
prison already but some, including Louis Beam, now started appearing on FBI
Wanted posters.
One fugitive of particular interest to Knox was James Wallington, who had
been a peripheral figure in The Order, the most dangerous of the 1980s white
supremacist gangs. Wallington was suspected of having transported and hidden
millions of dollars from a spectacular armored-truck robbery in northern
California in 1984. And now the word was that he was hiding out at Elohim
City.
Knox had Millar’s blessing to visit the community, but when he arrived with
a full FBI search party, he was greeted by a posse of teenagers with
semiautomatic and fully automatic weapons. “We radioed down for Millar and
an assistant of his to come before there was an incident,” he recalled. The
teenagers backed off.
Knox was disinclined to ruffle community feathers by sending armed agents
into the Elohim City church, so he told Millar they would stay away as long as
he had his word that Wallington was not inside. Millar assured him he was not.
“I didn’t think they would disrespect God so much that they would hide a
fugitive in there,” Knox said.
But Knox heard a few days later that Wallington was in the church after all.
He had been living in a disused bus under the alias Charlie Green and raising a
daughter, Sarah, who later married Dave Hollaway of the CAUSE Foundation.
Sarah had vivid memories of spending part of her itinerant childhood sleeping on
a sack full of banknotes from the California robbery in the back of a truck. The
money was never recovered.
The sedition trial did not go well, either. Jim Ellison was the star prosecution
witness, but he had no credibility, because he was so manifestly in it to reduce
his prison sentence at everyone else’s expense. The defendants hated him for
ratting them out, and the jurors were little better disposed. In the words of one
observer, he came across as a “lying, deceiving sociopath.”
The dock included former members of The Order and Ellison’s Covenant,m out, and the jurors were little better disposed. In the words of one
observer, he came across as a “lying, deceiving sociopath.”
The dock included former members of The Order and Ellison’s Covenant,

--- PAGE BREAK ---s were little better disposed. In the words of one
observer, he came across as a “lying, deceiving sociopath.”
The dock included former members of The Order and Ellison’s Covenant,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the Sword, and the Arm of the Lord, plus the radical right’s three most
recognizable national leaders: Richard Butler of Aryan Nations; Robert Miles,
an incendiary Ku Klux Klan leader from Michigan accused of plotting to put
cyanide in the nation’s water supply; and Beam, who was arrested at a lakeside
hideout in northern Mexico after a dramatic shootout with the federal police.
To the government’s dismay, Judge Morris “Buzz” Arnold dispensed with
the usual jury selection procedure and handpicked an all-white jury who knew
nothing about the defendants’ crime sprees and previous trials. One juror flirted
openly with David Lane, who was involved in the murder of the Denver radio
host Alan Berg, and another ended up marrying David McGuire, one of Jack
Knox’s suspected would-be assassins. “The judge,” Knox complained, “was
dredging right at the bottom of the barrel.”
After seven weeks of testimony, the jury acquitted everybody—a humiliation
for the government and an unalloyed triumph for the radical right. The
defendants marched from the courthouse to a nearby Civil War memorial and
raised a Confederate flag. “The message was the same one God told Pharaoh,”
the Arkansas Klan leader Thom Robb crowed. “‘Let my people go.’”
The FBI conducted an agonizing postmortem. “The bottom line was, the jury
couldn’t understand how a dozen people could get together and overthrow the
country,” Horace Mewborn of the bureau’s domestic terrorism unit said. The FBI
decided that if it ever tried another case against white supremacists, it would
keep the evidence as simple as possible: no subplots, no overreaching, and no
attempts to tie individual crimes to a broader movement.
“We learned that the hard way with Fort Smith,” Mewborn said. Inevitably,
this influenced FBI thinking after the Oklahoma City bombing and accounted for
some of the reluctance to take the case beyond McVeigh and Nichols.
Soon, the FBI was further hamstrung by a scandal over its monitoring of
CISPES, a left-wing group opposed to the Reagan administration’s policies in
Central America. Since Watergate, the Justice Department had insisted that the
bureau focus only on bona fide crime investigations, to the exclusion of more
speculative intelligence-gathering. But when the FBI director was forced to
admit to Congress that the bureau’s lengthy investigation into CISPES was
groundless, the rules were tightened, and any subject that risked blurring the line
between violence and legitimate political speech was suddenly deemed
radioactive. That included investigations into the far right. “Everybody just
walked in fear of domestic terrorism cases,” Mewborn said. “They were positive
they were going to blow up in their face.”
The FBI never went back into Elohim City. Mewborn lobbied for a new
warrant on Wallington and won the backing of the FBI’s Little Rock division.ere positive
they were going to blow up in their face.”
The FBI never went back into Elohim City. Mewborn lobbied for a new
warrant on Wallington and won the backing of the FBI’s Little Rock division.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

But Bob Ricks, then a deputy assistant director, killed it in Washington. “I don’t
even remember if he gave me a reason,” Mewborn said.
The decision was almost certainly not Ricks’s alone, nor was it necessarily
the wrong one at the time. “I was told that everybody was armed in there,” Ricks
said in a 2010 interview. “The element of danger was extremely high…. A lot of
people would have gotten killed, more than likely, all for a potential witness. It
seemed to me that other means needed to be deployed.”
Sooner or later, though, the notion that the FBI would do nothing about
Elohim City because it was dangerous risked looking like a dereliction of its
fundamental responsibilities.ded to be deployed.”
Sooner or later, though, the notion that the FBI would do nothing about
Elohim City because it was dangerous risked looking like a dereliction of its
fundamental responsibilities.

BY THE TIME ANDREAS STRASSMEIR CROSSED PATHS WITH CAROL HOWE, he assumed he was
going to die in a firefight with the FBI or ATF. Years later, he made the
extraordinary admission that he was more afraid of being sent back to Germany
than of getting shot to pieces by the feds. “I wished they had come,” he said in a
2010 interview. “Why didn’t they?”
Since the Waco siege, the Elohim City elders had been jumpy about being
next on the government’s hit list, and Strassmeir made it his business to ensure
the community would not go down without a fight. He attended gun shows—
where he befriended McVeigh—and arranged purchases of weaponry and
ammunition. He organized platoons of young men, set up a shooting range, and
showed them how to handle grenades and Claymore mines. With his military-
trained eye, he surveyed the hilly terrain and saw in it “a mix of the Afghani
mountains and the Vietnam jungle.”
“Helicopters are useless, tanks are useless,” he said. “It’s all about infantry.”
At different times, his crew included Pete Ward, Kevin McCarthy, and Mike
Brescia, with whom he shared a house. He taught Cheyne Kehoe to shoot and
remembered him as a “rebellious spirit” and a “cool guy.” Once, a sheriff’s
department narcotics officer dropped in unannounced and walked straight into an
armed exercise. “He was impressed,” Strassmeir recalled. “The message was:
We’re not some Jesus freaks on the mountain. It won’t be a cakewalk.”
Grandpa Millar placed greater confidence in Strassmeir and his military
experience than in Zera Patterson, his nominal security chief, who had been
Strassmeir’s host when he first arrived. Strassmeir’s ambition was to equip every
adult with at least two firearms, and Millar gave his blessing to acquire SKS
assault rifles, AR15s, and Ruger mini-14s.
Since nobody at Elohim City had any money, the budget did not permit a lot
of frills. Strassmeir purchased Chinese SKS knockoffs by the crateload, andre SKS
assault rifles, AR15s, and Ruger mini-14s.
Since nobody at Elohim City had any money, the budget did not permit a lot
of frills. Strassmeir purchased Chinese SKS knockoffs by the crateload, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---s, AR15s, and Ruger mini-14s.
Since nobody at Elohim City had any money, the budget did not permit a lot
of frills. Strassmeir purchased Chinese SKS knockoffs by the crateload, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ammunition to go with them. “You get the rifle, bandolier, stripper clips, and
folding bayonet for fifty dollars,” he said. A crate of 7.62 × 39–mm ammo,
containing more than a thousand rounds, ran to just $90.
The ATF eventually caught up to his cut-price suppliers, warning thirty-five
leading importers and all federal firearms license-owners in early 1994 that the
government now regarded the ammunition as armor-piercing and therefore
illegal. Strassmeir and his friends raced around every tackle shop they could find
to snap up the dwindling supplies of “Chink” ammo.
Strassmeir was walking a dangerous line between defensive maneuvers and
outright provocation. He knew he could not provide real protection from a full-
on federal raid, but that did not deter him. “The funny thing,” said Dave
Hollaway, who was furious when he found out about his friend’s activities, “is
that Andi can’t shoot himself. He’s prehistoric, man, prehistoric!…You can only
keep people out of trouble if you can command respect yourself. Andi was a
quarter-eyed guy.”
It didn’t help that, as a foreign national, Strassmeir was not legally permitted
to purchase firearms, or that he had ignored the stamp in his passport limiting his
last entry into the United States to three months. Before he went to live in
Elohim City, in 1991, he had kept his immigration status in order, either by
flying back to Germany or hopping over the Mexican border. Now, though, he
was an overstay, at risk of deportation at any time.
He was appropriately cautious about one thing, and that was the risk of
informants. “Betraying the right wing in America,” he said, “is a career, not a
death sentence.” He was forever telling Grandpa Millar not to trust outsiders, but
Millar, to his endless frustration, paid no attention, repeating only that everyone
came to him from Jesus.
This Strassmeir, the paramilitary radical, was very different from the young
man who impressed the Israeli army and talked a seasoned CIA operative into
considering him for a high-risk job on the Mexican border. He had been sucked
into the far right during his time with Lyons and Hollaway in Texas and
immediately felt comfortable mixing with weekend-warrior types. One place he
visited was a gunnery range that Louis Beam co-owned in the mosquito-ridden
rice fields east of Houston. Hollaway was married at the time to the daughter of
Beam’s business partner, a Korean War veteran named Bob Sisente, whom
Hollaway himself described as a “freakin’ gangster” with a “concrete head, neck,
and shoulders, and a body of metal.” Lyons fell in love with the sister of David
Tate, a member of The Order serving a life sentence for murdering a Missouri
state trooper, and married her in a double ceremony with his best friend Neill
Payne, who paired up with another Tate sister. The ceremony was at Aryanserving a life sentence for murdering a Missouri
state trooper, and married her in a double ceremony with his best friend Neill
Payne, who paired up with another Tate sister. The ceremony was at Aryan

--- PAGE BREAK ---nce for murdering a Missouri
state trooper, and married her in a double ceremony with his best friend Neill
Payne, who paired up with another Tate sister. The ceremony was at Aryan

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nations headquarters in Idaho, with Richard Butler officiating and Louis Beam
as best man.
Strassmeir was so enamored of this world that it did not occur to him that
Lyons and Hollaway sent him to Elohim City to get rid of him. He said he loved
the frontier spirit of rural Oklahoma, and loved being able to get by on just a few
days’ construction or wood-chopping work each month. He lived for long
stretches off homemade bread, garden cucumbers, poached deer jokingly known
as “wild goat,” and expired almond butter supplied in industrial quantities by
Tony Alamo, an eccentric preacher later convicted of child abuse and
pornography crimes in Arkansas.
Strassmeir needed no money for everyday transactions, because Elohim City
operated on a barter currency based on glass beads known as “glows.” Until the
advent of a phone line, which the Elohimites rigged up by digging a trench and
extending the public line, the only way to communicate with the outside world
was to walk a mile and a half to a phone in a padlocked shed, nicknamed “EC
phone home.” Strassmeir marveled: “We were like the first settlers on the
continent, with a gun rack in the church…. It was like going back three hundred
years.”
Strassmeir’s rural idyll was not without its deeper oddities. In February
1992, Pete Ward borrowed his car to buy some chewing tobacco, only to be
pulled over by a state Highway Patrol trooper who had been on the lookout for
Strassmeir for some time. Trooper Vernon Phillips issued Ward with two tickets
—for driving without Oklahoma plates and failing to produce a license—and
had the car impounded and searched. When Strassmeir found out, he had “an
absolute fit,” according to the tow truck driver, Kenny Pence, and demanded his
car back, claiming diplomatic immunity.
A flurry of phone calls followed—from Kirk Lyons, and from people saying
they were officials from the state police, the military in North Carolina, and the
State Department in Washington. Pence found the whole thing a “really strange
deal.” One caller told him the governor was involved and urged him to release
the vehicle without delay. Pence, assuming these people were who they said they
were, complied.
Strassmeir gave the impression, once again, of having friends in very high
places.urged him to release
the vehicle without delay. Pence, assuming these people were who they said they
were, complied.
Strassmeir gave the impression, once again, of having friends in very high
places.

THE FBI TALKED TO ROBERT MILLAR ON A REGULAR BASIS BEFORE the Oklahoma City
bombing, but could never tell if he was a stand-up guy or just stringing them
along. Horace Mewborn said his domestic terrorism unit in Washington would

--- PAGE BREAK ---IS BEFORE the Oklahoma City
bombing, but could never tell if he was a stand-up guy or just stringing them
along. Horace Mewborn said his domestic terrorism unit in Washington would

--- PAGE BREAK ---

funnel questions through the Muskogee resident agent, but would never receive
helpful answers. “I don’t know who was playing whom,” he said. “Sometimes I
got the feeling Millar was playing the resident agent, and feeding us a bunch of
poop. It was all general information, of no help to us.”
The ATF also kept an eye out, liaising with the Oklahoma Highway Patrol to
watch the roads so they could track who was coming and going. Periodically, the
ATF and FBI would get together for informal meetings to pool their knowledge
on Elohim City. But Bill Buford, who was the ATF’s top agent in Arkansas at the
time, said these were a joke, because nobody knew much, and nobody was
willing to give away what little they had. “If the FBI had information,” he said,
“they wouldn’t share it with us. And when we got information, we wouldn’t
share it with them.”
This was a crucial period in the development of Louis Beam’s “leaderless
resistance” movement, and Elohim City was as regular a meeting point for
revolutionary fighters as anywhere in the country. Among those known to have
sought shelter and support in the community at the time were Willie Ray
Lampley, who was plotting bomb attacks on abortion clinics, gay bars, and
antiracist groups; Chevie Kehoe, who murdered a gun dealer and his family in
Arkansas in early 1996; and, of course, Mahon and most of the Aryan
Republican Army.
Yet the feds were only dimly aware of the danger these men posed and—
with the exception of just a handful of agents—did not think it worth the trouble
to find out. Buck Revell, a veteran of the FBI’s top brass, felt the bureau knew
“almost nothing” about the radical right, because of its aversion to intelligence-
led investigations. Certainly, if McVeigh had visited—one of the persistent
unknowns of the Oklahoma City investigation—there was no direct channel of
communication to let them know, or to tip them off to what it portended.
Millar was a slick operator, rarely turning down an invitation to talk to law
enforcement, or to the media. Each time, he drew on the pacifist rhetoric he had
learned from his father, a Canadian Mennonite preacher, to depict Elohim City
as a wholly innocent place of close-knit family values, hard work, and self-
sufficiency. His credit with the feds went back to 1985, when he helped the FBI
negotiate a peaceful end to a siege at Jim Ellison’s compound at Bull Shoals
Lake, Arkansas. Danny Coulson, the head of the FBI’s Hostage Rescue Team
who oversaw the operation, remembered Millar as a spindly figure who strolled
up the road “dressed as if a pretty widow had invited him to an ice cream
social,” in a vanilla suit and shiny alligator shoes.
To many in federal law enforcement, Elohim City seemed more pleasantly
quirky than dangerous. The Elohimites ran their clocks on sundial time, used thel,” in a vanilla suit and shiny alligator shoes.
To many in federal law enforcement, Elohim City seemed more pleasantly
quirky than dangerous. The Elohimites ran their clocks on sundial time, used the

--- PAGE BREAK ---t and shiny alligator shoes.
To many in federal law enforcement, Elohim City seemed more pleasantly
quirky than dangerous. The Elohimites ran their clocks on sundial time, used the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hebrew calendar, organized daily services at high noon in a church with only
circular walls, spoke in tongues, and healed the sick by laying on hands. To earn
a living, they had a sawmill and a trucking company, which were run by two of
Millar’s sons. On his business card, Millar proclaimed his community “a city of
the universe.”
But there was a darker side. Millar was fascinated from an early age by
theories of racial separation and the apocalypse. When he first settled in the
United States, he established a community school in rural Maryland, whose
brochure depicted him with a pencil mustache and arm outstretched in a Nazi
salute over the caption: “Heil Hitler.”
He not only befriended Jim Ellison but anointed him “King James of the
Ozarks,” the direct heir to King David. Two nasty child-custody disputes from
this time, the early 1980s, elicited testimony depicting Elohim City as a cultlike
community in which obedience was all, polygamy and incest ran rampant, and
the Millar clan routinely took the law into its own hands. When one father
showed up with a custody order to demand his daughter, he was beaten back by
men with guns. The neighbors testified they were afraid of being “burned out” if
they crossed the Millars in any way. A Canadian court, where one of the cases
was heard, denounced a “lifestyle that reeks of hypocrisy and self-indulgence.”
Much of this history was overlooked or forgotten by the mid-1990s. Tim
Arney, the FBI’s agent in Muskogee, drove to Elohim City several times—part
of a nationwide initiative to sound out isolationist communities for signs of
trouble after Waco—and never saw anything he found disturbing. “Most of them
were pretty sweet people,” he recalled. “They didn’t flash guns, or throw up
roadblocks…. Millar certainly attracted a lot of nutcases and right-wingers, but I
think he left them disappointed.”
Arney was taking direction from his boss in Oklahoma City, Bob Ricks, who
also appeared to view Millar as a reasonable man; he felt Millar would neither
encourage violence nor do anything to provoke a government attack. According
to Danny Coulson, Ricks and Millar talked once a week.
Was the FBI too indulgent? Arney and Ricks both bridled at the suggestion.
“Don’t get me wrong,” Arney protested in a 2010 interview, “I’m not saying
Millar is an innocent guy. He always looked unhealthy when I visited.” Ricks
said it was an “overstatement” to say, as Coulson had, that he felt Elohim City
was under control. But he acknowledged he had been reassured by Millar’s
repeated undertakings to cooperate in the event of a crisis. “Anything you want
to see,” Ricks remembered him saying, “we’re open.”
Regrettably, the FBI never properly took him up on that offer.lar’s
repeated undertakings to cooperate in the event of a crisis. “Anything you want
to see,” Ricks remembered him saying, “we’re open.”
Regrettably, the FBI never properly took him up on that offer.

--- PAGE BREAK ---takings to cooperate in the event of a crisis. “Anything you want
to see,” Ricks remembered him saying, “we’re open.”
Regrettably, the FBI never properly took him up on that offer.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE ATF HAD TWO REASONS NOT TO GO AFTER DENNIS MAHON after Carol Howe delivered
the shrapnel pieces and the descriptions of him making grenades. The better
reason was that the agency was investigating Mahon for as many as ten attacks
on people and property since the early 1980s, and did not want to stop building
its case for the sake of two harmless detonations in the woods. The less good
reason was that the ATF did not want to share its information with the FBI.
The ATF needed the FBI’s help to make its case because of the bureau’s
broader experience of criminal prosecutions. But it also knew the FBI was
unlikely to help, because the bureau had looked at Mahon, too, and concluded he
was all talk, a provocateur too unstable to be trusted with a real mission. And so
the ATF decided to keep its information to itself.
After the bombing, the FBI was furious not to have been informed when
Howe first reported on Mahon and Strassmeir. And Tommy Wittman, the ATF’s
assistant special agent in charge in Dallas who kept a supervisory eye on Howe,
said the bureau was right to be furious. The layers of bureaucratic infighting, as
he described them in a 2010 interview, were almost too dizzying to comprehend.
“The thinking was, we don’t want to talk to Mahon, because, if we did, he’d
know we’re super-interested in him and he might change his activities,” Wittman
said. “But of course he already knew we were interested. The thinking was also,
we don’t know if the FBI or another agency may be looking at him, so we won’t.
If we make an inquiry, they’ll want to know what we know, and we don’t want
others to know, because they’ll know we are interested and won’t share
information with us.”
This was Milo Minderbinder logic straight out of the pages of Catch-22. “In
hindsight,” Wittman acknowledged, “a lot of things should have been done very
differently. A lot of things that made sense then look very different now, from the
outside.”
The government tried to argue after the bombing that Howe’s evidence
against Mahon did not amount to much. One federal prosecutor called it “crap.”
But it wasn’t seen that way in the ATF. Tristan Moreland, an ATF agent who
eventually arrested Mahon on bombing charges in Arizona in 2009, said the
decision not to go after him was purely strategic. “If they had prosecuted him
then for weapons manufacture and possession,” he said, “I have no doubt Mahon
would have gone to prison.”
The awkward truth was that the ATF’s confidence was shot in the wake of its
disastrous mishandling of Ruby Ridge and Waco, and senior managers did not
want to confront another group of heavily armed survivalists with a grudget the ATF’s confidence was shot in the wake of its
disastrous mishandling of Ruby Ridge and Waco, and senior managers did not
want to confront another group of heavily armed survivalists with a grudge

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce was shot in the wake of its
disastrous mishandling of Ruby Ridge and Waco, and senior managers did not
want to confront another group of heavily armed survivalists with a grudge

--- PAGE BREAK ---

against federal agents.
“Elohim City, to me, was a situation [where] we had to be very delicate,” the
head of the ATF’s Dallas field division, Lester Martz, later testified. “I
specifically told Angie [Finley], Dave Roberts, and ASAC Wittman that I do not
want any overt, covert, on-the-property surveillance—nothing done in Elohim
City without my prior approval.”
The ATF knew, too, that the last thing the FBI wanted was to bail them out
of another botched raid, as it had in Idaho and Texas. As the saying in bureau
ranks had it at the time: “We’re not taking a bite out of that shit sandwich.”
In some ways it is remarkable, given the ATF’s pervasive fear of another
armed standoff, that the Carol Howe investigation went as far as it did. Dave
Roberts kept going mostly because of Howe’s report about the M60 machine
gun. Roberts gave preliminary briefings to the U.S. Attorney’s Offices in Tulsa
and Muskogee, and sought advice on whether Howe’s sexual history—
particularly her liaisons with people she was investigating—might affect her
credibility in court.
Finley asked the Immigration and Naturalization Service for a formal
certificate that Strassmeir was in the country illegally. She also invited the INS
to participate in a raid the Tulsa office was planning to arrest Strassmeir—an
invitation they took under advisement.
All the while, Howe’s work continued unabated. In January 1995, she
accompanied Grandpa Millar and a group of elders on a trip to Oklahoma City,
where they met, incongruously, with the pastor of a mixed-race Baptist church.
Howe said Millar and the pastor talked about going into the weapons business—
another potential violation of numerous gun laws.
The ATF also continued to talk to the Oklahoma Highway Patrol. In early
February, Wittman and Finley decided they should join an OHP flight to conduct
aerial reconnaissance over Elohim City and see the extent of Strassmeir’s
preparations for war. Ordinarily, the ATF would use its own planes, but Wittman
understood that if he asked Lester Martz for one, he would be turned down. So
he, Finley, and an ATF photographer hitched a ride with pilot Ken Stafford on
his Highway Patrol plane and scoured the landscape for signs of military
defenses, gun positions, trenches, or razor wire. “It doesn’t stick out in my mind
that [the flight] was overly productive,” Wittman recalled.
That was the moment the Strassmeir investigation started falling apart.
Somehow, the Elohimites heard rumors of an impending raid. Most likely, this
was from a trooper safety notice put out by the OHP in mid-February, describing
Strassmeir as an illegal alien who carried a .45. Millar was alarmed enough to
visit Tim Arney in Muskogee and demand an explanation. Arney didn’t havee put out by the OHP in mid-February, describing
Strassmeir as an illegal alien who carried a .45. Millar was alarmed enough to
visit Tim Arney in Muskogee and demand an explanation. Arney didn’t have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

one. But he did alert Bob Ricks, and Ricks was staggered by what he heard.
“My thought was, Jimminy Christmas, are we going to do that again?” he
said. Ricks chewed out the ATF office in Tulsa, demanding to know if they
really were contemplating a raid. They said no. Still, he wanted to know what
information they had. Did it warrant an FBI investigation?
The ATF told Ricks nothing—about Howe, or Mahon, or Strassmeir. Ricks
said he arranged a lunch with Lester Martz, because he had a feeling the ATF
was stonewalling. But Martz insisted there was nothing going on. “He passed off
what I was hearing as greatly exaggerated,” Ricks said. “It was not a lengthy
meeting. I tried to make it unequivocal, that if there was going to be a raid, we
wanted to know about it. I didn’t want to be called upon to clean up their mess.”,” Ricks said. “It was not a lengthy
meeting. I tried to make it unequivocal, that if there was going to be a raid, we
wanted to know about it. I didn’t want to be called upon to clean up their mess.”

AS SOON AS TERRY NICHOLS WAS BACK FROM THE PHILIPPINES IN mid-January, McVeigh
pressed him to keep helping with the bomb plot. Nichols wanted to say no:
Marife was returning to America, he was looking for a house to buy, and he had
started attending surplus auctions at Fort Riley to get back in the gun-show
business, as a solo operator this time. But something about McVeigh, once again,
proved too strong to resist.
McVeigh gave Nichols the impression he had changed his intended date or
his intended target, but he offered no specifics. All McVeigh said—following the
plot of his second-favorite book, Hunter—was that he was acting at the behest of
a high-level government handler who had switched the mission. McVeigh called
this handler “Potts,” after the FBI’s acting deputy director, Larry Potts. An
overtrusting Nichols believed the handler really was Potts. But the name was
most certainly symbolic, an indication that Waco was in the forefront of
McVeigh’s mind and he had now chosen April 19, the day David Koresh’s
compound went up in flames, as his new day of action.
Meanwhile, McVeigh was out of money. He told Nichols he needed $2,000
to pay for a Ford Ranger truck, which, in reality, he had already purchased. (This
was the mystery vehicle for which the FBI subsequently found title documents
but no other trace.) Simultaneously, he told Michael Fortier he needed $2,000 to
repay Nichols; he didn’t mention that Nichols already had the Roger Moore loot
to compensate him for everything he had fronted in September and October.
In short, McVeigh lied to both of them.
Fortier said he was broke, too, so McVeigh asked what he had done with
Moore’s guns. When McVeigh learned they had not yet been sold, he drove
straight to Kingman and dragged Fortier to gun shows in Reno and St. George so
he could start offloading them and generating some cash. Fortier later went to aned they had not yet been sold, he drove
straight to Kingman and dragged Fortier to gun shows in Reno and St. George so
he could start offloading them and generating some cash. Fortier later went to a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

third show to sell the rest.
McVeigh understood at this point that he probably needed new recruits.
Investigators on his defense team found witnesses who said that, around this
time, he made repeated contact with Dick Coffman, a leading neo-Nazi in
Arizona, and through Coffman introduced himself to a Utah skinhead leader
named Johnny Bangerter.
McVeigh also made an offer to Jim Rosencrans. He needed someone, he
said, to drive him a long way across the country and drop him off at an airport. If
Rosencrans was willing to do this, he could have the car, plus $300 in cash and a
rifle. Rosencrans, who was even more broke than McVeigh, discussed the offer
with his girlfriend, Patty Edwards, but she was immediately suspicious. Why
would McVeigh offer his car so freely? She told Rosencrans if this was
something dangerous, he would have to make a choice between the job and her.
He chose her.ut she was immediately suspicious. Why
would McVeigh offer his car so freely? She told Rosencrans if this was
something dangerous, he would have to make a choice between the job and her.
He chose her.

IN FEBRUARY 1995, HOWE TOLD HER HANDLERS SHE COULD NOT SUBSTANTIATE the M60 story,
knocking the legs out from Dave Roberts’s best justification for pursuing
Strassmeir. Then she failed to return to Elohim City as expected and cut back
dramatically on her contacts with Finley. Finley stalled as long as she could,
telling her bosses Howe “had personal matters to attend.” Howe herself claimed
she was infiltrating a skinhead group in Tulsa at Finley’s direction, but the ATF
later accused her of associating with the skinheads without authorization. Given
how quickly their relationship soured, it is hard to say who was right.
In mid-March, Finley unexpectedly heard from Howe’s landlord, who said
he knew about Howe’s informant work—a serious security breach in itself—and
also that she had been admitted to a mental institution. Howe had gone to
Parkside Mental Health Center with a police escort, on February 8, after officers
found her with self-inflicted cuts on her face, neck, arms, and hands. They
described her as “out of control.” Howe later confirmed the bulk of this, saying
she felt under enormous pressure because of her ATF responsibilities. She spent
just four hours at Parkside before transferring to a regular hospital.
On March 19, the Tulsa police told Finley that Howe was back in the
hospital, this time because she had been pistol-whipped by an African-American
man while out on paramilitary night exercises in the woods. The next day, the
ATF severed its relationship with her, saying she was “no longer loyal or
competent to operate.”
The ATF later made many excuses for failing to follow up on the leads
Howe had established at Elohim City. One was that Howe had been a nightmare

--- PAGE BREAK ---er loyal or
competent to operate.”
The ATF later made many excuses for failing to follow up on the leads
Howe had established at Elohim City. One was that Howe had been a nightmare

--- PAGE BREAK ---

from start to finish and her information unusable—an argument undermined by
the reliability of much of what she reported back. Another was that they were
ordered by Bob Ricks to back off. That, too, appears to be untrue. John Magaw,
the ATF director at the time, said the decision to stop almost certainly came from
within his agency, before Ricks had a chance to express an opinion.
“I wanted to make sure that before we conducted any more raids of those
kinds of places, we were properly retrained, had the right equipment, did really
good intelligence, and had done very good practicing and planning,” Magaw
explained in a 2010 interview. “We weren’t ready at that time.”
Magaw could not remember exactly how the decision was made, but Lester
Martz most likely brought the problem to him, and he and his assistant director
for operations supported Martz’s inclination to close Howe down. Remarkably,
Magaw also acknowledged that the decision might have cost the federal
government an opportunity to prevent the bombing.
When reminded of the human toll at the Murrah Building, Magaw blanched
visibly, and did not deny that it might have had something to do with the
decisions he made about Elohim City. He said his room for maneuver was
constrained by the culture of the time: the aversion to domestic intelligence work
(even though the ATF did not operate under the same restraints as the FBI), the
frustrating reality that the ATF did not know how to handle volatile standoffs
with extremists, and a generalized inability to assess threats from the radical
right.
“It was a situation where everyone was hands-off,” he said. “Would Waco
happen now? Absolutely not. Would the Oklahoma City bombing have
occurred? Probably not. We would have moved in on that group [at Elohim
City]. But at the time I wasn’t about to take chances I didn’t need to take.”
A case has been made over the years that Howe gave the government enough
material to see the Oklahoma City bombing coming. But that is not corroborated
by the available documentary evidence of her informant work. Howe certainly
reported on Strassmeir, Mahon, and Millar expressing a desire to set off bombs
and attack government buildings, but she offered nothing more specific than that
before April 19, 1995. (Afterward was a different story.)
Were there grounds to follow up on these threats anyway? Bob Sanders, the
former deputy director of the ATF, certainly thought so, and so did Tristan
Moreland, the agent who pursued and ultimately arrested Dennis Mahon. “If
they had looked into the files, they would have seen Mahon had a predisposition
to blowing up buildings,” Moreland said. If Howe’s information was deemed to
be solid and the concern was about her stability, Moreland argued, the logical
thing to do would have been to replace her, not shut down the entire operation.said. If Howe’s information was deemed to
be solid and the concern was about her stability, Moreland argued, the logical
thing to do would have been to replace her, not shut down the entire operation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rmation was deemed to
be solid and the concern was about her stability, Moreland argued, the logical
thing to do would have been to replace her, not shut down the entire operation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the heat of the bombing investigation, the government took the line that
the threats were not a big deal because such talk was part of the rhetoric of the
radical right and did not, on its own, imply anything. That was Finley’s line of
defense when she was questioned in court in 1997. She confirmed she had heard
threats to blow up government buildings, but only “in general.”
It was also the official position of the Justice Department once news of
Howe’s existence became public in early 1997. Don Thrasher, a producer with
ABC News who was working on pieces about Howe and Elohim City,
remembered being warned by Leesa Brown, the department spokeswoman,
about the danger of jumping to conclusions based on threats alone.
“If you go beyond the story of an informant in a white supremacist
compound hearing all of these stories,” he quoted Brown saying, “what have you
got? This happens all the time.”
“Yeah, but there’s one difference here, Leesa,” Thrasher responded.
“What?”
“The goddamn building blew up, that’s what.”
The government, of course, had every reason to be defensive. The ATF had
had a pair of eyes and ears in Elohim City and pulled her out, not because she
was failing to pick up indications of serious criminality—she was—but because
the agency was too afraid to act on them. It adopted a posture of studied
ignorance and hoped for the best.
After the bombing, the ATF wanted desperately to avoid talking about
Elohim City. Even after the FBI was given the Carol Howe file, Bob Ricks and
Danny Defenbaugh never quite believed they had the full story. “Shame on
them,” Defenbaugh said. “In upper case—SHAME ON THEM. Sometimes
dealing with other players in this is like pulling teeth from a toothless tiger. Ask
them why [they didn’t tell everything they knew]. They didn’t ever give me a
good reason.” A contrite Magaw did not say a lot in the ATF’s defense. “He’s
right,” he responded when Defenbaugh’s words were read back to him. “If we
did know something and didn’t bring it forward, then shame on us.”
The FBI was far from blameless itself, having avoided looking into Elohim
City for years. The decision to expend only token energy on the community after
the bombing was the bureau’s alone. That mystified some of the FBI’s old pros,
none more than Danny Coulson, who had spent his career chasing right-wing
radicals and found the idea of shying away from Elohim City offensive and
ridiculous.
“You still do your job, I’m sorry,” Coulson said. “You’ve taken an oath.
You’re a professional, you figure out a way to do it. They’re afraid of another
Waco…. If that’s your attitude, get out of the business. Go into the shoem sorry,” Coulson said. “You’ve taken an oath.
You’re a professional, you figure out a way to do it. They’re afraid of another
Waco…. If that’s your attitude, get out of the business. Go into the shoe

--- PAGE BREAK ---

business. Be a chef. By its nature it’s risky. You’ve got to be smarter than that.”’re afraid of another
Waco…. If that’s your attitude, get out of the business. Go into the shoe

--- PAGE BREAK ---

business. Be a chef. By its nature it’s risky. You’ve got to be smarter than that.”

LATE ONE NIGHT IN FEBRUARY 1995, TIM MCVEIGH WAS WALKING across the Colorado River
bridge from Nevada to Bullhead City, Arizona, when a man in a Ford Mustang
slowed down and asked if he wanted a ride. McVeigh had no better idea how to
get back to Kingman, which was thirty miles away, and offered him $5. The
man, whose name was Richard Rogers, laughed off the offer; he was looking not
for payment but for casual sex. He had spent the evening at a casino in Laughlin
and, as he later told the FBI, was feeling “a little horny.”
McVeigh’s camouflage fatigues and combat boots did not exactly fit the
sexpot mold. But Rogers recognized him from an earlier hitchhiking encounter
and remembered how McVeigh played with his penis and asked if he wanted to
party. Rogers hadn’t been interested at the time, because he was on his way to
meet another friend.
The conversation quickly turned to sex, and McVeigh asked Rogers, as he
had six months earlier, if he wanted to party.
Rogers responded: “What do you mean?”
McVeigh spread his legs and groped himself. “We could have a really great
time,” he said. McVeigh started rubbing Rogers’s penis through his clothes.
An hour later, the two of them were in Rogers’s trailer ten miles north of
Kingman, sizing each other up and half-wondering if this was really a good idea.
McVeigh talked about Waco, nobody’s idea of good foreplay, and peppered
Rogers with questions about an airstrip in the desert hills. At 3:00 A.M., McVeigh
grabbed his crotch again and said it was time for bed.
They took their clothes off and went at it. McVeigh’s tongue and throat
action, Rogers later told the FBI, was “incredible”: “He was good at what he
did.” McVeigh expressed an interest in anal sex, but Rogers turned him down,
because he didn’t have a condom. According to Rogers, they were both too tired
to reach orgasm. In the morning, Rogers made McVeigh eggs and bacon, and
drove him into Kingman. Apart from brief sightings in the grocery store, they
never saw each other again.
Assuming this story is broadly true—the FBI found Rogers credible enough
to interview him seven times—it suggests that McVeigh, like Pete Langan, had
some personal baggage he was not in a rush to share with the rest of the Patriot
Movement. Rogers thought it unlikely he was actually gay, just fooling around.
He told the FBI McVeigh was most likely bisexual.
Intriguingly, this is the one intimate encounter of McVeigh’s anybody has
ever come forward to describe—either in the graphic detail offered by Rogers, orold the FBI McVeigh was most likely bisexual.
Intriguingly, this is the one intimate encounter of McVeigh’s anybody has
ever come forward to describe—either in the graphic detail offered by Rogers, or

--- PAGE BREAK ---

any other way.bisexual.
Intriguingly, this is the one intimate encounter of McVeigh’s anybody has
ever come forward to describe—either in the graphic detail offered by Rogers, or

--- PAGE BREAK ---

any other way.

OF ALL THE MYSTERIES SURROUNDING ELOHIM CITY, NONE IS MORE vexing than the question of
whether McVeigh visited and, if so, whether he derived any part of the bomb
plot—inspiration, training, manpower—from the contacts he established in the
community. Nobody has come forward with definitive evidence that McVeigh
spent time at Elohim City. On the other hand, a large number of people—from
law enforcement, the federal prosecution team, the radical far right, and even
Elohim City itself—have dropped hints that he was there, that the government
either knew or strongly suspected he was there, and that the information was
kept quiet to prevent the criminal case spiraling out of control.
We know McVeigh called Elohim City for just under two minutes on April
5, 1995, because there is a record of it on the Daryl Bridges card. Millar’s
daughter-in-law took the call and later said the young man on the line was
looking for Andi the German. McVeigh told her he was thinking of visiting in
the next few days, and Joan Millar replied that, as a friend of Strassmeir’s, he
was welcome any time.
The timing of the call was interesting: McVeigh had just spoken to a Ryder
truck rental agency in Lake Havasu City, not far from Kingman, and was
presumably making his bomb delivery plans. Was Strassmeir, or his planned
visit to Elohim City, part of the calculation? Was he, as an FBI teletype later
surmised, looking for new recruits because he did not think he could count on
Nichols or Fortier?
The FBI files contain a reference to a second call from McVeigh to
Strassmeir at Elohim City, this one on April 17, the day the Ryder truck used in
the bombing was rented from Eldon Elliott’s. The information on this call is
sketchier, because it was never linked to a specific set of phone records.
According to an FBI teletype discovered in 2003, the bureau heard about the call
from the Southern Poverty Law Center, the anti-extremist campaign group, but
the SPLC has been reluctant to vouch for its authenticity ever since. Richard
Cohen, the group’s president, said it was possible that the line in the teletype
referring to a call “two days prior to the OKBOMB attack” could have been a
clerical error and that the line should have read “two weeks.” In other words, just
another reference to the April 5 call.
Over the years, the SPLC has backtracked from a lot of information
connecting McVeigh with Elohim City. Twice in the 1990s, the group’s founder,
Morris Dees, was quoted saying that he had information that McVeigh visited
numerous times. He said it in answer to a reporter’s question at the Denver press. Twice in the 1990s, the group’s founder,
Morris Dees, was quoted saying that he had information that McVeigh visited
numerous times. He said it in answer to a reporter’s question at the Denver press

--- PAGE BREAK ---, the group’s founder,
Morris Dees, was quoted saying that he had information that McVeigh visited
numerous times. He said it in answer to a reporter’s question at the Denver press

--- PAGE BREAK ---

club in May 1996, and he said it in an interview with the Indiana State
University criminologist Mark Hamm in 1999. But when he addressed the issue
again during a talk at Southeastern Oklahoma State University in 2004, he
played down his previous statements. “McVeigh probably was at Elohim City,
based on evidence we’ve been able to pick up—stuff I really can’t go into,” he
said. “But I don’t think the entire connection is really there.”
If Dees was suddenly tentative on the question, other SPLC officials were
emphatic: as far as they knew, McVeigh never went to Elohim City. “[Dees] may
have said it,” a surprisingly dismissive Mark Potok, editor of the SPLC’s
Intelligence Report, said in 2010, “but I very much doubt it’s true.” Both Potok
and Cohen sought to minimize Dees’s role in the organization’s intelligence-
gathering, and refused to make him available for interview.
All of this was starkly out of character for the SPLC, which usually
broadcasts any sinister connection involving the radical right as loudly as it can.
One possible reason for its reticence was its close relationship with the Justice
Department, which had every reason to play down links between McVeigh and
Elohim City. (Its official position throughout the federal trials was that no such
link existed.) If the government had information, even secondhand information,
placing McVeigh at Elohim City, failing to hand it over to the defense teams
could have constituted a serious violation of the rules of evidence.
Did the government have such information? Bill Buford, the former ATF
chief in Arkansas, said he was briefed on both verbal and written reports putting
McVeigh at Elohim City. The material was not handed over in discovery, he said,
but was put into a summary report written by the FBI and sent to the Justice
Department. “I’d heard it by word of mouth and it was also in the report,”
Buford said. “There’s a lot of information in there that has not been made
available to the public.”
Buford could not remember the specifics, but the information referred to an
actual visit, not just the April 5 phone call. How sure was he about this
clamorous revelation? “I’m sure,” he said.
A number of other senior law enforcement officials were approached about
Buford’s information, and none denied it. Bob Ricks said the FBI had found no
evidence that McVeigh spent evenings or nights at Elohim City, but
acknowledged: “He was always passing through.” Danny Defenbaugh said he
could not remember what was in the FBI reports sent up to the Justice
Department, but did not exclude it. Perhaps the most revealing line came from
Scott Mendeloff, one of McVeigh’s prosecutors, who sought to argue forcefully
that Elohim City was irrelevant to the investigation. “It’s not like we didn’t think
he was there,” he said testily. “So he visited, but so what?”McVeigh’s prosecutors, who sought to argue forcefully
that Elohim City was irrelevant to the investigation. “It’s not like we didn’t think
he was there,” he said testily. “So he visited, but so what?”

--- PAGE BREAK ---s, who sought to argue forcefully
that Elohim City was irrelevant to the investigation. “It’s not like we didn’t think
he was there,” he said testily. “So he visited, but so what?”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

When McVeigh’s own legal team asked about Elohim City, he did not
acknowledge having been there, but he seemed to know all about Strassmeir
patrolling the perimeter and standing guard in the driveway when visitors pulled
up. McVeigh told his defense lawyer Randy Coyne that Elohim City was “pretty
fucking hard-core.” And he said that Strassmeir and he were “brothers in arms.”
When would McVeigh have been at Elohim City? He received a traffic ticket
just over the Arkansas state line in the fall of 1993, and spent the night in a
nearby motel on September 12, 1994. Those have to be strong possibilities.
Another intriguing date is November 1, 1994, when Tom Metzger, one of the
godfathers of the radical right, paid a visit to Elohim City with Dennis Mahon.
As Metzger remembered it, he spoke for half an hour in the church, watched the
kids perform a dance, shook a few hands, and left again. But he also dropped a
hint of more. “Those stories about sitting in another room and talking about
stuff,” he said, without prompting, “that didn’t happen.” Was this Metzger
pointing to the very thing he sought to deny? It is tempting to think McVeigh
would have been there to take lessons from the master, and it was not far out of
his way—he was driving from Kansas to upstate New York at the time. It would
also have been an opportunity to meet Strassmeir, McCarthy, and Brescia.
The last time McVeigh could have visited—following the intentions he
announced in his phone conversation with Joan Millar—was during the two
weeks before April 19. This would put Elohim City at the center of the bomb
plot. The timing would have been tight: McVeigh checked out of the Imperial
Motel in Kingman on April 11, bought an oil filter in Arkansas City, Kansas—
just over the Oklahoma state line—on April 13, and arrived at the Dreamland in
Junction City on April 14. But it is also possible that he made a quick trip to the
Midwest between April 7 and April 11. He was checked into the Imperial Motel
on those dates, but the owner later said he did not see him, he used no towels,
and his bed was undisturbed. There was a flurry of Daryl Bridges calls from the
Imperial up to April 6, then nothing. Would McVeigh have wanted to keep
paying for an empty motel room? He might have done if, say, he was
transporting blasting caps, or the second Ryder truck seen by Lea McGown and
her son on Easter Sunday. It was one way to cover his tracks and minimize the
risk of exposure.
If all that sounds speculative, it is. The first two weeks of April are a big
mystery when it comes to McVeigh’s movements, activities, and associations.
On Saturday evening, April 8, a dancer at the Lady Godiva strip club in Tulsa
was told by someone she later believed to be McVeigh that on April 19, 1995,
she would remember him for the rest of her life. He was with two other men. Did
they travel from the club to Elohim City? Kirk Lyons, of all people, did notieved to be McVeigh that on April 19, 1995,
she would remember him for the rest of her life. He was with two other men. Did
they travel from the club to Elohim City? Kirk Lyons, of all people, did not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

exclude it—and he would have had an opportunity to know, because he was
Strassmeir’s lawyer and confidant. “It’s possible he went through there on a
weekend before the bombing,” Lyons said of McVeigh. “That’s possible.”
Grandpa Millar also did not exclude that McVeigh had been to Elohim City.
A defense investigator who spoke to him in 1995 reported Millar saying “it was
possible that he could have met Mr. McVeigh once or twice and that it was also
possible that Mr. McVeigh could have visited Elohim City.” Millar was fiercely
protective of his community, more interested in damping down speculation about
criminal associations than in talking them up, so the indiscretion was unusual. In
1997, he was strikingly forthcoming once again when asked by the journalist
Jonathan Franklin if any Elohim City residents were involved in the bombing.
“There are legitimate questions to be asked, though I don’t know the answers,”
he said. “I don’t mind an honest investigation.”
By that point, of course, Millar knew that no investigation had taken place,
and after the trials there was little danger of one starting up. He had played the
government masterfully for more than a decade. Jim Ellison’s disenchanted
former deputy Kerry Noble summarized it neatly. “Two things the government
doesn’t want,” he said, “another sedition trial that fails, and another Waco that
fails. What have you got with Elohim City? A possibility of another sedition and
conspiracy trial that fails, and another raid that fails. That makes Elohim City,
unfortunately, have the upper hand.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---u got with Elohim City? A possibility of another sedition and
conspiracy trial that fails, and another raid that fails. That makes Elohim City,
unfortunately, have the upper hand.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

{ 9 }
ARYAN PARADISE LOST
One day after McVeigh and Nichols were indicted, Larry Potts was booted out
as deputy director of the FBI and Danny Coulson was dismissed as special agent
in charge in Dallas. They and three other senior agents associated with Ruby
Ridge were placed on indefinite administrative leave. They were never told why
they were suspended, nor were they formally accused of anything—not even by
the Justice Department, which continued to hold on to its 1994 report holding
Potts jointly responsible for the change in the rules of engagement at Randy
Weaver’s cabin. Over time, it became clear that their removal was Louie Freeh’s
way of being seen to do something to address a scandal that refused to go away.
But it also had a chilling effect on the bombing investigation.
“They took out my unit chief, my section chief, the assistant deputy, Danny
[Coulson], and Larry Potts. I lost the next four levels above me,” said Horace
Mewborn, an agent with the FBI’s domestic terrorism unit, who specialized in
the radical far right. “I thought, God, this couldn’t happen at a worse time.”
Buck Revell, who had recently retired as associate deputy director, called it
an unprecedented abuse of authority and said: “At least Senator Joe McCarthy
confronted his victims with his misplaced suspicions, hearsay, and innuendo, and
they had an opportunity to respond.”
Coulson and Potts were eventually absolved and allowed to retire. But for
the next two years, they were forbidden to talk to each other—about Oklahoma
City or anything else. Coulson never lost the feeling that parts of the bombing
investigation were dropped when he and his colleagues were removed. “I’ve
been involved in thousands of investigations, but I’ve never seen that before—
that the bureau would shut down an investigation to focus guilt on one person,”
he said. It was something that he and Potts would never have tolerated.investigations, but I’ve never seen that before—
that the bureau would shut down an investigation to focus guilt on one person,”
he said. It was something that he and Potts would never have tolerated.

NICHOLS’S LAWYER, MICHAEL TIGAR, BELIEVED THE ONLY WAY TO guarantee a fair trial—to
provide a “sanctuary in the jungle” for his client, as he put it—was to move
proceedings out of Oklahoma. Wayne Alley, the Oklahoma City judge who had
been assigned the case by lottery, did not agree, and would not recuse himself
even when Tigar pointed out that his offices were right next to the Murrah

--- PAGE BREAK ---klahoma City judge who had
been assigned the case by lottery, did not agree, and would not recuse himself
even when Tigar pointed out that his offices were right next to the Murrah

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Building and the windows of his chambers had shattered in the bombing. “I have
experienced greater loss of courtroom time because of water leaks and utility
failures,” Alley said.
Tigar found this response cavalier and irresponsible, and his fury only grew
when Alley announced that the trial would take place in Lawton, a town a
hundred miles from Oklahoma City, which presented considerable logistical and
security challenges. Tigar won the argument: the Tenth Circuit appeals court
moved the trial to Denver and assigned Richard Matsch, a judge with previous
experience of trying right-wing revolutionaries, whom Tigar had wanted all
along.
Tigar had to make this argument alone, though, because Stephen Jones did
not want to ruffle judicial feathers in his home state and would not join him on
the appeal. They argued about the reasons for years, but for Tigar, at least, this
was the moment when their relationship soured decisively.
Tigar did not respect Jones, and Jones found Tigar to be insufferably sure of
himself. To some extent, the tension reflected the conflicting interests of their
clients: Tigar’s team argued that McVeigh had manipulated Nichols and set him
up, while the McVeigh team portrayed Nichols as a conniver and a liar. But it
also had to do with the differences in their assignments.
Tigar had the easier case. His client was not in Oklahoma City when the
bomb went off, had voluntarily answered the FBI’s questions, and was now
talking in great detail to his legal team. From the beginning, Tigar formulated the
mantra he would take to court: that in April 1995 Terry Nichols had been
building a life, not a bomb.
Jones, on the other hand, did not like or trust his client and was not sure he
could construct a viable defense for someone who was both manifestly guilty
and unwilling to tell his full story. “I could file all the procedural motions I
wanted, but ultimately, when the trial started, I had nothing with which to defend
him,” Jones later wrote. He became so exasperated he forced McVeigh to
undergo a polygraph and tried to confront him over the signs of evasion he
showed when he was asked about the involvement of others besides Nichols.
Jones took more pleasure in building relationships with news reporters,
sharing his thoughts, and parts of the evidence, in exchange for any information
or leads to witnesses they had. The strategy was unceasingly controversial, and
at one early hearing, Judge Matsch rebuked Jones for trying the case in the press.
“We don’t want to be talking about the evidence outside,” Matsch told him
sternly. “It’s not productive.”
Jones understood he needed to court Matsch’s favor assiduously, and made
every effort not to upset him again. But he never stopped talking, or sharing” Matsch told him
sternly. “It’s not productive.”
Jones understood he needed to court Matsch’s favor assiduously, and made
every effort not to upset him again. But he never stopped talking, or sharing

--- PAGE BREAK ---

documents with the media..”
Jones understood he needed to court Matsch’s favor assiduously, and made
every effort not to upset him again. But he never stopped talking, or sharing

--- PAGE BREAK ---

documents with the media.

IN LATE SUMMER 1995, GRANDPA MILLAR TOOK ANDREAS STRASSMEIR aside and told him he
had to leave Elohim City immediately, because the feds were after him. A
government informant had recently spotted Strassmeir at a gun show with an
SKS rifle and revolver, and Millar had enough to worry about after the bombing
without answering for Strassmeir’s illegal weapons. As Strassmeir and others
later understood it, Millar reached an agreement with his law enforcement
contacts that Elohim City would not be raided as long as he got rid of the
troublesome German.
Strassmeir hitched a ride to Black Mountain, North Carolina, the new home
of Kirk Lyons’s CAUSE Foundation, because he didn’t know where else to go.
“I figured I would find a way to get back and straighten things out with Millar,”
he said. “I had no alternative plan.”
But when he returned to Elohim City for his things, he found them either
stuffed haphazardly in the back of his car, the Suburban he had bought from
Scott Stedeford, or abandoned on a roadside. Strassmeir struggled to come to
terms with the many ways that Elohim City rejected him or played him for a
fool. Once he had left, Grandpa Millar and the other elders told the media that
Strassmeir might well have been involved in the Oklahoma City bombing. They
repossessed the stone house Strassmeir thought he had bought. And he learned,
much later, that the car he had purchased was “hot,” because Stedeford had used
it in the bank robberies. He had even been the unwitting recipient of stolen
money: a $100 bill Mike Brescia had given him as a thank-you for hosting
Stedeford and McCarthy over Easter, which also came from a bank job.
“I’m over it now,” Strassmeir said fifteen years later, “but it took many,
many years…. I got exiled from Paradise. The Garden of Eden is gone for me.”hy over Easter, which also came from a bank job.
“I’m over it now,” Strassmeir said fifteen years later, “but it took many,
many years…. I got exiled from Paradise. The Garden of Eden is gone for me.”

THE FBI’s INTEREST IN ELOHIM CITY WAS SO LOW AFTER THE BOMBING that Millar came to
them, not the other way around. He traveled to Oklahoma City in June 1995,
after news stories began linking his community to the bomb plot, and seemed to
work his way around every question the feds asked him. He remained entirely in
the clear, in fact, until Richard Reyna, a defense investigator for McVeigh,
started visiting Elohim City and learned it was Strassmeir McVeigh had asked
for when he called on April 5.
Reyna’s motivation was straightforward: if he could incriminate Strassmeir,
it might diminish his own client’s guilt. So he threw himself into the task,
interviewing Strassmeir in Black Mountain and concluding that Strassmeir’s

--- PAGE BREAK ---ould incriminate Strassmeir,
it might diminish his own client’s guilt. So he threw himself into the task,
interviewing Strassmeir in Black Mountain and concluding that Strassmeir’s

--- PAGE BREAK ---

relationship with McVeigh extended well beyond the one meeting they both
acknowledged in Tulsa in 1993. When Reyna made his next trip to Elohim City,
Millar fueled his suspicions by telling him that Interpol was interested in
Strassmeir. Strassmeir, he said, was either a German government agent, or
McVeigh’s accomplice, or perhaps both. Reyna reported that Millar “did not
think [Strassmeir] could orchestrate something so big such as the bombing in
Oklahoma City, but…[he] could be depended upon to follow orders with
precision.”
Kirk Lyons knew Strassmeir was in trouble, because reporters started calling
him and asking about Reyna’s findings. The mounting suspicions dealt an
immediate blow to the CAUSE Foundation’s credibility, especially its efforts to
sue the government on behalf of some of the Waco survivors and family
members, which had earned Lyons and Hollaway unprecedented mainstream
respectability. The Strassmeir controversy “put the CAUSE Foundation out of
business,” Lyons said. “If I ever committed actionable malpractice, it was
allowing Andi to talk to Reyna.”
Shortly before Christmas, Strassmeir told Hollaway he had not only met
McVeigh but owned his Gulf War field jacket. “Oh come on, Andi,” Hollaway
remembered saying. Strassmeir became angry that his friend wouldn’t believe
him, and pulled a duffel bag from his closet. “There it was,” Hollaway said,
“with the insignia of the Big Red One on the frickin’ sleeve and the name
McVeigh on the front.…I said, ‘Holy fuck!’ You can quote me on that. Holy
fuck! I almost had a fucking heart attack.”
Lyons and Strassmeir insisted there was no McVeigh label on the jacket, but
Hollaway was absolutely sure. “The only reason I was struck dumb was because
it had the frickin’ name on it,” he said. “All sorts of things flew through my
mind. I wondered, maybe he really was John Doe Two.” He said Lyons cut the
tags off as a precaution. “I called Kirk right away,” Hollaway recalled. “Holy
mackerel, man…. What are the odds, what are the frickin’ odds?”
Lyons and Hollaway realized that if reporters were asking questions, the FBI
could not be far behind. When they received a tip, in mid-December, that
Strassmeir was on a government watch list, they decided he needed to leave the
country immediately, before a warrant went out for his arrest. One of their most
loyal donors FedExed $7,000 overnight, and Lyons pulled Strassmeir out of the
lunch shift at the Berliner Kindel restaurant, where he worked as a short-order
cook. He was given just ten minutes to pack before Hollaway started driving him
toward the Mexican border.
There was no time to formulate a plan. Strassmeir had recently obtained a
valid passport, but it was an open question whether he could present his ID atstarted driving him
toward the Mexican border.
There was no time to formulate a plan. Strassmeir had recently obtained a
valid passport, but it was an open question whether he could present his ID at

--- PAGE BREAK ---

any U.S. Customs post without risking arrest.o formulate a plan. Strassmeir had recently obtained a
valid passport, but it was an open question whether he could present his ID at

--- PAGE BREAK ---

any U.S. Customs post without risking arrest.

THE DEFENSE TEAMS STRUGGLED TO MAKE PROGRESS ON THE CASE, BECAUSE the government would
not hand over its witness interview reports and other crucial discovery
documents. In theory, the prosecution team had an “open file” policy, allowing
the defense to look at anything, but over the first eight months the Jones and
Tigar teams received only a handful of lab reports, without accompanying
explanations. They tried to interview key witnesses themselves, only to learn
that the FBI had issued instructions telling them not to talk. The government said
repeatedly that it needed more time. Stephen Jones described the attitude as “the
prosecutorial equivalent of ‘the check is in the mail.’”
In December 1995, Judge Matsch agreed the government needed to hand
over material from the investigators more quickly and also catalogue and explain
it. He would not tolerate an indiscriminate document dump, a “go fish” approach
to discovery, which courts almost always frown upon.
The two sides hammered out a deal that should have clarified everyone’s
responsibilities. Ron Woods, the chief negotiator for the defense and Tigar’s
deputy on the Nichols team, had been an FBI agent and a federal prosecutor and
knew the culture he was dealing with. He persuaded the government to hand
over all its witness interview reports, with an index, all shorter investigative
memos known as inserts, plus handwritten lead sheets and the agents’ original
notes. This was far from usual practice in criminal cases, and the prosecution
wanted to know what it could expect in return. Woods agreed the defense would
hand over its own investigative reports—another departure from usual practice
—except those on the defendants themselves and their families.
In January 1996, the government unloaded an initial eleven thousand FBI
witness interview reports, or 302s. The number would eventually balloon to
more than eighteen thousand, and the total number of discovery materials would
rise to about a million pages. Still, defense lawyers never stopped feeling the
government was holding out and noticed one thing after another that appeared to
be missing. Early on, Jones had to badger the chief prosecuting attorney, Joseph
Hartzler, for 302s on the body shop witnesses, the Fortiers, Lea McGown, and
other key players. Later, there were complaints about missing documents on
Elohim City, Steve Colbern, and witnesses who saw other people with McVeigh
and Nichols. The delays and omissions were always most pronounced on the
issue of possible coconspirators. “It’s about the worst I’ve ever seen,” said Rob
Nigh, McVeigh’s number two lawyer, who had worked as a federal public
defender before entering private practice. “It didn’t matter how specific we were,“It’s about the worst I’ve ever seen,” said Rob
Nigh, McVeigh’s number two lawyer, who had worked as a federal public
defender before entering private practice. “It didn’t matter how specific we were,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the government’s response was that everything had been provided.”
The government had its own pressures: an almost unimaginable avalanche of
material, close public scrutiny of its every move, and a basic lack of experience
in disclosing so much. The stakes were almost impossibly high. “If you
convicted [McVeigh] but did not get the death penalty, that would not be okay,”
prosecutor Scott Mendeloff said. “A lot of the victims were pinning some sense
of resolution on us getting justice for this guy. We couldn’t lose this…. It was
like a pressure cooker.”
Nigh acknowledged that, culturally, the disclosure requirements were
difficult for the prosecution. But he and Ron Woods both expressed astonishment
at how little the discovery agreement was respected. “We thought we were
dealing with honorable people,” Woods said. When asked who was least
honorable on the prosecution team, he answered, cautiously: “I think that Larry
Mackey and Joe Hartzler were honorable people.”ere
dealing with honorable people,” Woods said. When asked who was least
honorable on the prosecution team, he answered, cautiously: “I think that Larry
Mackey and Joe Hartzler were honorable people.”

BY THE TIME DANNY DEFENBAUGH BECAME INTERESTED IN ANDREAS STRASSMEIR, it was already
too late. A report from the Southern Poverty Law Center, sent to the task force
on December 21 from the FBI’s field office in Mobile, where Defenbaugh had
recently been posted, described Strassmeir as an “associate” of McVeigh’s and
also appeared to disclose—the redactions make it less than clear—that McVeigh
visited Elohim City shortly before the bombing. But, by then, Strassmeir had
already left Black Mountain.
Two weeks later, a second FBI report based on SPLC information reported
that Strassmeir was now planning to leave the country via Mexico. The bureau
issued an alert to the Immigration and Naturalization Service, urging them to
arrest Strassmeir on sight. “Subject is possibly armed and may be dangerous,” it
said. But Strassmeir slipped across the border anyway.

DAVE HOLLAWAY CALLED HIS ESCAPE PLAN OPERATION NACHT UND NEBEL—a Nazi-inspired
name also used by President Nixon’s Plumbers. Hollaway thought it was a
mistake to try to cross the border quickly, while any alert was at its highest. So
he drove Strassmeir to Port Aransas, near Corpus Christi, and left him with a
friend for Christmas while he returned to his children in Houston. Really, his
plan was to have no solid plan at all.
Just after New Year’s, Hollaway persuaded Strassmeir to give an interview
to Rick Sherrow, the former ATF agent turned reporter for Soldier of Fortune
magazine. “I wanted something on the record that would show Andi was not
involved in the bombing,” Hollaway explained. Sherrow did as asked,

--- PAGE BREAK ---turned reporter for Soldier of Fortune
magazine. “I wanted something on the record that would show Andi was not
involved in the bombing,” Hollaway explained. Sherrow did as asked,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

publishing his piece long after Strassmeir was gone, but he also took a
photograph that was reproduced across the Internet and probably did more than
anything to fuel the rumor that Strassmeir was John Doe Two. “It pissed me off
that Sherrow was brought in,” Kirk Lyons said. “We never heard the end on that
stinking picture.”
Strassmeir and Hollaway did not cross the border until mid-January 1996.
They chose Nuevo Laredo, just 130 miles from Corpus Christi, but Hollaway
decided that driving there would be too obvious. He told Strassmeir to book a
plane ticket to join him in Houston, and then book another flight from Houston
to Laredo. He also promised Strassmeir he wouldn’t need to present an ID on a
domestic flight, which was not true, even in the pre-9/11 era. Strassmeir cursed
Hollaway as he approached the ticket counter in Corpus but somehow managed
to think on his feet. He had his host in Port Aransas, Claud Brown, purchase the
ticket and walk with him through security, as though Brown were the traveler
and he was a friend accompanying him to the gate. Strassmeir had to show his
driver’s license but was not obliged to have a ticket to go with it. Once through
the metal detectors, he took the ticket and traveled under Brown’s name, while
Brown turned around and left. Strassmeir’s ID was not checked again.
In Laredo, he and Hollaway took a taxi from the airport and talked the driver
into taking them through to Mexico. At the crossing, Strassmeir noticed no other
taxis were in line and said he wanted to walk across the footbridge, leaving
Hollaway to bluff his way past the border police. But Hollaway told him to stay
put.
U.S. Customs immediately ordered everyone out of the car. Strassmeir and
Hollaway were asked to produce their passports, and uniformed officers went
through their luggage. “Shit,” Strassmeir thought, “we’re fucked.” The first thing
that grabbed the officials’ attention were some charcoal pills Strassmeir had
handy in case of diarrhea. Hollaway, being Hollaway, turned them into a joke.
The officers were briefly charmed, taking him and Strassmeir for a harmless gay
couple. Then they found a copy of Playboy in Strassmeir’s bag, they weren’t gay
any more, and the mood turned.
Strassmeir shot a panicked look at Hollaway as if to ask, should I run for it?
Hollaway shot a look back that said: relax. He later claimed he had known they
would be all right, because Strassmeir’s name was spelled wrong in the FBI
computer files. In fact, the INS alert had the spelling right, but in Strassmeir’s
German passport the double “s” was rendered with the Germanic ß, which to
American eyes would look like a capital B. Customs most likely ran a check on
Andreas STRABMEIR and didn’t come up with anything. Their passports were
returned, and they were waved through., which to
American eyes would look like a capital B. Customs most likely ran a check on
Andreas STRABMEIR and didn’t come up with anything. Their passports were
returned, and they were waved through.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eyes would look like a capital B. Customs most likely ran a check on
Andreas STRABMEIR and didn’t come up with anything. Their passports were
returned, and they were waved through.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In Nuevo Laredo, they lingered just long enough to eat cabrito, the local
goat specialty, then jumped on a bus to Monterrey, which was in turmoil,
because the local drug lord’s lawyer had just been shot dead over lunch with the
state police chief. The distraction was perfect for Hollaway and Strassmeir, who
took two taxis to a fleapit hotel on the edge of town. Hollaway checked in
regularly with Kirk Lyons, using an untraceable AT&T card. “We used the same
codes that the French Resistance used in World War II,” Hollaway said. “If Kirk
had said, ‘John has a long mustache,’ I would have hung up the phone and gone
underground. If he said, ‘The chair is against the wall,’ it would have been really
ugly. As it was, he just said, no developments.”
From Monterrey, Hollaway and Strassmeir flew to Mexico City, and
Hollaway picked another fleapit. When Strassmeir protested—he called it “the
crappiest hotel I’ve ever been in”—Hollaway spun the story that it was a former
CIA safe house he frequented in the 1980s when he worked as a pilot making
secret runs to Central America for the Nicaraguan contras. It is unclear if that
story was true.
After two days, they flew to Cancun, then took an Air France flight to Paris,
and from there the night train to Frankfurt. This was the most nerve-racking part
of the trip, because the conductor collected their passports and did not return
them until they were close to their destination. If Strassmeir’s name was on a
watch list, he could be arrested on arrival. It was unlikely that Germany would
apprehend one of its own citizens so quickly for crimes committed in the United
States, even with an international warrant out for his arrest. But Hollaway and
Strassmeir were too panicked to think this through clearly.
In Frankfurt, they were met by Strassmeir’s mother, who fed them at one
family house and put them on a train to the principal Strassmeir residence in
Berlin. Hollaway stayed for several more days, most of them in bed with the flu,
before buying himself a plane ticket home. Strassmeir suspected Hollaway was
just along for the ride, enjoying Berlin as the capper after Cancun and Paris. But
Hollaway was also out of money for the return journey, and had to wait for
Lyons to wire him more.
They never spoke again. Hollaway called Strassmeir an “ungrateful yahoo”
who never appreciated how much time and money had gone into bailing him out
of trouble. Strassmeir felt deeply nostalgic for Elohim City, but hardly gave Kirk
and Dave another thought. “When I got back to Germany,” he said, “I dreamed
of the hills of Oklahoma.” Knowing he would never go back, he reflected, was
the greatest devastation of his life.gave Kirk
and Dave another thought. “When I got back to Germany,” he said, “I dreamed
of the hills of Oklahoma.” Knowing he would never go back, he reflected, was
the greatest devastation of his life.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nother thought. “When I got back to Germany,” he said, “I dreamed
of the hills of Oklahoma.” Knowing he would never go back, he reflected, was
the greatest devastation of his life.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BY THE BEGINNING OF 1996, THE ARYAN REPUBLICAN ARMY WASN’T generating enough income
from its robberies to justify the risk of being arrested or shot. The gang’s
ambition to hold up an armored truck—where, in Richard Guthrie’s words, “the
big bolitas were at”—had gone nowhere. They tried to expand, but their newest
member, Michael Brescia (who had been Strassmeir’s Elohim City roommate),
was thought to be a liability for mishandling a smoke grenade, and he was
dropped almost as soon as he was recruited. Intriguingly, Brescia went by the
alias “Tim,” which could have been a nod to McVeigh, if not also an
acknowledgment that another “Tim” had helped the gang in the past.
The rest of the gang quickly turned on each other. Guthrie was marginalized
because of his drinking and volatile behavior. McCarthy and Stedeford lost the
will to carry on without Brescia, their friend and Nazi punk bandmate. Langan
was torn between waging a revolutionary war and exploring his gender identity.
The final unraveling came when Guthrie tried to recruit an old friend from
Cincinnati, Shawn Kenny, without realizing he was a government informant. As
Guthrie drove to meet Kenny at a suburban Italian restaurant, he noticed a
“secret admirer” on his tail and tried to get away. After a short chase, he
slammed his Ford van, the Blitzenvagon, into a snowdrift and soon had a clutch
of federal agents “piled on top of my back like they were tackling Joe Montana
while he was throwing the winning touchdown in Super Bowl XXII.”
Within three days, Guthrie had led the feds to Langan. A posse of federal
agents moved in on an ARA safe house in Columbus, Ohio, and pumped dozens
of rounds of semiautomatic weapons fire into Langan’s white van. Amazingly,
Langan survived; he had dived into a wooden toolbox in the back of the van and
took no direct hits—although he had a shotgun shell pad lodged in his left cheek,
and other injuries. When paramedics cut off his clothes to look for bullet
wounds, they noticed his chest, legs, and pubic hair were shaved, his fingernails
were two inches long, and his toenails bore traces of pink polish.
The Oklahoma bombing investigation showed little interest in Guthrie and
Langan, which was surprising, given their earlier inquiries into McVeigh’s
possible involvement in bank robberies. But they were also not properly briefed.
They were not told, for example, about a batch of electric blasting caps wrapped
in Christmas paper, which were recovered from the Columbus safe house. These
would have triggered an immediate association with the Christmas-wrapped caps
McVeigh had in his Spectrum when he was rear-ended in Michigan. But, as an
FBI explosives expert later disclosed in court, the caps were destroyed by the
Columbus Fire Department. Danny Defenbaugh did not learn this until eight
years after the fact, and then only because a journalist told him. “I was definitely
lied to,” he told Leslie Blade of Cincinnati CityBeat.Department. Danny Defenbaugh did not learn this until eight
years after the fact, and then only because a journalist told him. “I was definitely
lied to,” he told Leslie Blade of Cincinnati CityBeat.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Other things Defenbaugh never saw from Columbus included a driver’s
license for Bob Miller, Roger Moore’s gun-show alias, and video footage of
several properties, which, according to Langan, included Moore’s and
Anderson’s ranch. These things did not make a rock-solid case for the ARA’s
association with McVeigh, but they cried out for further investigation. The
bombing task force was never given the chance.d
Anderson’s ranch. These things did not make a rock-solid case for the ARA’s
association with McVeigh, but they cried out for further investigation. The
bombing task force was never given the chance.

DEFENBAUGH WAS DETERMINED TO INTERROGATE STRASSMEIR, AND contacted the U.S. legal
attaché in Germany about sending an FBI team to Berlin. But before he could
obtain clearance, the FBI needed to alert Strassmeir about another issue—a death
threat from Dennis Mahon—which slowed everything down and ultimately
worked in Strassmeir’s favor.
Mahon had threatened to have Strassmeir kneecapped and executed, after
being told by the amateur investigative reporter J. D. Cash that Strassmeir was a
government informant. Cash’s assertion was little more than guesswork, a
deliberate provocation intended primarily to elicit an unguarded reaction from
Mahon. And he certainly got one. “Sweet Jesus I’m fucked!” Mahon exclaimed
on hearing the news. He jumped on the phone, first to Mark Thomas and Mike
Brescia to warn them, then to a neo-Nazi contact of his in Germany. Through his
German-speaking twin brother, he said Strassmeir should be hunted down and
forced to confess before being killed.
It is doubtful whether the Mahons’ interlocutor took this seriously. But Cash
shared his interview notes with McVeigh’s defense team, and they notified the
FBI. A day or two later, Strassmeir was summoned by the Bundeskriminalamt,
the German equivalent of the FBI, who briefed him on the threat and indicated
that the FBI wanted to talk to him about the bombing. Back in the United States,
Kirk Lyons and Dave Hollaway decided the best way to ward off a full
interrogation was to release a lengthy statement in Strassmeir’s defense. It
worked. Somewhere between FBI headquarters and the Berlin embassy,
Defenbaugh’s request for a sit-down interview was turned down.
Defenbaugh next heard about Strassmeir three months later, when he walked
in on two federal prosecutors and an FBI agent on the phone to him in Germany.
Defenbaugh had not been informed in advance, let alone asked for approval. He
also understood this was not the full interrogation he intended, just a perfunctory
walk-through of Strassmeir’s earlier written statement. Strassmeir later
dismissed the interview as a “joke.” “They didn’t want to know anything,” he
said.
There were other signs that some of Strassmeir’s official history in theearlier written statement. Strassmeir later
dismissed the interview as a “joke.” “They didn’t want to know anything,” he
said.
There were other signs that some of Strassmeir’s official history in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

United States was being rewritten. Two weeks before the prosecutors’ call, the
State Department reissued a list it kept of his entries into the United States. The
document incorrectly said he had come in on two separate tourist visas—in
reality, he had a multiple-entry visa. And this version of the document also
excised the intriguing code letters “A O,” which had previously appeared under
the rubric “special status.” These had generated speculation that Strassmeir was
under some sort of official protection; now they were gone.
The Justice Department never publicly acknowledged Defenbaugh’s
suspicions about Strassmeir’s involvement in the bombing, and, shortly before
McVeigh’s trial, flat-out denied their existence. “At no time,” prosecutor Beth
Wilkinson wrote to Stephen Jones, “did the FBI consider Andreas Strassmeir…a
subject of the Oklahoma City bombing investigation.”trial, flat-out denied their existence. “At no time,” prosecutor Beth
Wilkinson wrote to Stephen Jones, “did the FBI consider Andreas Strassmeir…a
subject of the Oklahoma City bombing investigation.”

AFTER MONTHS OF AGONIZING OVER A STRANGE DISCREPANCY IN ITS tally of severed body parts
found in the rubble of the Murrah Building, the Oklahoma state medical
examiner’s office realized it might have stumbled on evidence of a possible
coconspirator among the dead. Early on, the office was at a loss to match a lower
left leg, with a military boot attached, to any of the known victims. Extensive
DNA testing revealed that the leg belonged to Lakesha Levy, a twenty-one-year-
old air force recruit now buried in New Orleans. Levy had previously been
matched with an entirely different left leg, whose provenance was now in
question.
This was a professional embarrassment, but also an investigative
conundrum. The authorities had one more left leg than they had right legs. Who
could it belong to? Stephen Jones brought this problem to Dr. T. K. Marshall, the
chief state pathologist for Northern Ireland, and Marshall told him that, in the
Western world, there was no such thing as an unclaimed innocent victim.
Marshall had seen dozens of cases of IRA “mules” who died when bombs
exploded in their laps. This looked similar to him—a conspirator so close to the
source of the blast that the rest of his body simply vaporized.
Lakesha Levy’s body was exhumed in February 1996, and the leg
mistakenly associated with her analyzed by one of the country’s leading
forensics experts, Dr. Clyde Snow. Snow concluded it probably belonged to a
dark-skinned white man measuring five foot six, or a slightly shorter woman.
The chief medical examiner later testified that his office never found a match,
but two people closely involved in the investigation said this was not exactly
right. The FBI was confident the leg belonged to a Secret Service agent named
Cynthia Campbell Brown, but did not want her remains tested. Doing so couldin the investigation said this was not exactly
right. The FBI was confident the leg belonged to a Secret Service agent named
Cynthia Campbell Brown, but did not want her remains tested. Doing so could

--- PAGE BREAK ---

raise the question of whose leg she was buried with—and perhaps set off an
uncontrollable chain reaction of exhumations and mistaken body-part
reidentifications.
Dr. Snow said he was not told about Brown. He blamed the original mistake
on the evidence recovery team, saying they disregarded instructions to bag every
body part separately and just assumed that the leg found next to Lakesha Levy’s
body must belong to her. A senior FBI source said this was far from the only
such mistake. The FBI liaison to the medical examiner’s office was dismissed
from the task force, because, the source said, it became impossible to present
detailed body-part evidence at trial. If the extra leg did belong to a coconspirator,
he was never investigated, much less identified.force, because, the source said, it became impossible to present
detailed body-part evidence at trial. If the extra leg did belong to a coconspirator,
he was never investigated, much less identified.

AT THE END OF MARCH 1996, ANGIE FINLEY TOLD CAROL HOWE her identity had been
compromised. An FBI agent forgot to redact her name in a debriefing document
before releasing it to the McVeigh and Nichols defense teams, and now her life
was in danger from the white supremacists whose confidences she had betrayed.
Finley offered to put Howe up for the weekend, but she declined. She was far
from sure the federal government had her best interests at heart.
Ever since her removal from the Elohim City beat in March 1995, the
paperwork on Howe had been a study in contradictions. At first, the ATF
declared her mentally incompetent, but two months later, when they needed her
to go back to Elohim City to investigate the bombing, they said she was “stable
and capable of working in this investigation.” In January 1996, Finley and her
supervisor, Dave Roberts, wanted to remove Howe a second time, because they
found her unreliable. But when her name leaked out, they switched gears again.
“This informant,” Finley wrote, “has not been overly paranoid or fearful during
undercover operations.”
Finley acknowledged in court that the reason she had said nice things about
Howe in May 1995 was that she needed to write whatever it took to get her
reinstated. Journalists and lawyers who championed Howe were equally
suspicious that the negative assessment just two months earlier was prompted by
a political decision to get her out of Elohim City as fast as possible.
With her name in the open, Howe started complaining about strange phone
calls and people following her. Rather than trust the FBI or ATF, she associated
herself ever more closely with the radical right—in an effort, she said, to rebuild
her credibility. It was a highly dangerous game.ple following her. Rather than trust the FBI or ATF, she associated
herself ever more closely with the radical right—in an effort, she said, to rebuild
her credibility. It was a highly dangerous game.

THE EVIDENCE RECOVERED FROM THE ARA SAFE HOUSE IN COLUMBUS revealed an interest in

--- PAGE BREAK ---adical right—in an effort, she said, to rebuild
her credibility. It was a highly dangerous game.

THE EVIDENCE RECOVERED FROM THE ARA SAFE HOUSE IN COLUMBUS revealed an interest in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

bomb-making going far beyond the hoax devices the gang liked to leave behind
at bank robberies. It included pipe bombs, blasting caps, timers, switches,
Semtex, nitromethane and Kinestik packs. But the FBI did not see this as
evidence of a possible link with the Oklahoma City bombing until Pete Langan
suggested it to them.
By the summer of 1996, Kevin McCarthy and Scott Stedeford were also in
custody—they were traced through McCarthy’s uncle, a Philadelphia city
policeman—and Langan was concerned about McCarthy testifying against him
as part of a plea deal he had been offered. So Langan decided to throw a wrench
into the government’s plans. He told Agent Ed Woods: “You’re going to have
problems with your witnesses, because they have the blood of Oklahoma City on
their hands.” Woods responded: “You certainly have my attention now.”
Langan was told that if he spilled everything he knew about the bombing, he
could qualify for a plea deal, too. Langan, though, was suspicious; the
negotiations broke down and the offer was withdrawn. In the end, the
government chose not to question McCarthy’s credibility by looking into his
alibi for April 19, 1995, or any of the other bombing-related “liabilities” Langan
accused him of having. The immediate priority was to send Langan away for
life, and they knew McCarthy could help them do that with his testimony. A
fishing expedition to explore whether he played a role in the bombing conspiracy
seemed too uncertain to be worth the risk.
The strategy for prosecuting the bank robberies became clear after Guthrie—
the other key witness the government was grooming to testify against Langan—
hanged himself in his jail cell in mid-July. Guthrie had described his crimes in
extraordinary detail and given up his best friend, only to be told the U.S.
Attorney’s Office in Cincinnati would still insist on him serving thirty years
behind bars. Even the FBI agents who had questioned him found this a
“draconian” decision. But the prosecutors were adamant. Guthrie reluctantly
signed the plea deal, and immediately drafted suicide notes to his brother and his
lawyer. He even went on a crash diet to minimize the risk of his noose snapping.
According to Matthew Moning of the Cincinnati Police Department, the FBI
also questioned Guthrie about the bombing and threatened him with the death
penalty if money from the robberies was ever tied to the financing of McVeigh’s
plot. If the questioning was intended to shock Guthrie into making revelations,
though, it did not work. Guthrie’s lawyer, Kelly Johnson, said his suicide had
nothing to do with threats from the FBI. It was a “final tweak of the nose” at the
government he despised. If he harbored any secrets, they died with him.s lawyer, Kelly Johnson, said his suicide had
nothing to do with threats from the FBI. It was a “final tweak of the nose” at the
government he despised. If he harbored any secrets, they died with him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IN SEPTEMBER 1996, THE THREE WARD BROTHERS AND A FOURTH man were arrested in
Oregon. A state trooper caught them filching gas from a service station, and soon
established that they had stolen their car in northern Canada two days earlier.
Too broke to make bail, they stewed in jail for four days, until an FBI agent
turned up and interviewed Pete Ward—just Pete—about the Oklahoma City
bombing. Within hours, all four were released.
The FBI agent, Kerry Larsen, did not explicitly deny paying the $60,000 in
bail money, saying in an interview: “I don’t know anything about it.” (This was
moments after his wife, who answered the phone, could be overheard saying:
“Just tell him you don’t remember anything.”) Larsen was similarly cagey when
asked if Pete Ward might have been recruited as an informant. “That would
generate a lot of paperwork,” he said. Asked if that was a yes or a no, he
responded: “I don’t want to get into who’s an informant and who’s not an
informant.”
The FBI had grounds to be suspicious of all three Ward brothers. Carol
Howe had named Pete and Tony as possible matches for John Does One and
Two. Pete was a tobacco chewer, and Tom Kessinger, the mechanic at Eldon
Elliott’s, said he remembered John Doe One chewing tobacco in an unusual way.
Sonny had been brought to the attention of the Oklahoma Highway Patrol as a
possible bombing suspect.
Pete Ward’s interview with Agent Larsen offered further leverage for the
FBI, because it contained obvious contradictions with the known factual record
—about the timing of his departure from Elohim City, about the number of
weapons in the community, and about his grandfather, who he said was a retired
FBI agent. But there is no evidence that the bureau challenged him on any of
these things.ohim City, about the number of
weapons in the community, and about his grandfather, who he said was a retired
FBI agent. But there is no evidence that the bureau challenged him on any of
these things.

FOR MUCH OF 1996, STEPHEN JONES TRAVELED EXTENSIVELY, SEARCHING for expert witnesses
and alternate explanations of who was behind the bombing. Some of these trips,
like his visit to T. K. Marshall in Northern Ireland, led to witness appearances at
trial. Jones argued that it was almost impossible to find qualified pathologists or
bomb analysts in the United States willing to take the stand, because they either
worked for federal law enforcement or would not help defend the country’s most
notorious criminal.
Jones traveled to London (four times); to Northern Ireland, Wales, and
Scotland; to Israel and Syria, Hong Kong and the Philippines. Sometimes he
talked to obvious experts, like Dr. Jehuda Yinon, an Israeli bomb-trace analyst,
who gave an authoritative critique of the FBI crime lab. Other choices were

--- PAGE BREAK ---ilippines. Sometimes he
talked to obvious experts, like Dr. Jehuda Yinon, an Israeli bomb-trace analyst,
who gave an authoritative critique of the FBI crime lab. Other choices were

--- PAGE BREAK ---

more difficult to understand, like the side trip he made to the Polish ambassador
in Damascus, Stanislaw Pawlak, to ask about Terry Nichols’s contacts in the
Philippines and the likelihood that he had met Ramzi Yousef. Pawlak was an odd
man in an odd location for this, and none of the material about the Filipino terror
connection—from him or anyone else—made it to open court. Jones himself
likened the Filipino connection to the Virgin Mary’s “unrevealed third secret” in
her apparition at Fatima, prompting his legal team to nickname his Far Eastern
trips the “Fatima Project.”
Despite some complaints that he was globe-trotting at government expense,
these trips did not cost a lot—around half a million dollars, out of $15 million in
total defense expenditures—and were all approved by Judge Matsch. But it was
not exactly clear what they achieved. One of Jones’s lawyers, Ann Bradley, flew
to Amsterdam to chase a report that John Doe Two was in the custody of Dutch
police. He was not. Jones acknowledged that a lot of what he learned was about
global terrorism, not leads related to the Oklahoma bombing. He described
Yitzhak Rabin’s former chief of staff, Amos Eilan, as being on the “must-see
list,” without saying why. He described a contact at Israel’s National Police
Headquarters as “someone who might have been of assistance to us.” In Hong
Kong, he said he visited retired CIA operatives “who assisted.”
On the eve of McVeigh’s trial, Jones distilled much of what he had learned
into a lengthy brief, called a writ of mandamus, in which he said a foreign
power, probably Iraq, brought down the Murrah Building. This power, he went
on, hired a Middle Eastern engineer with the skills to make a bomb that could be
transported and detonated safely, and then contracted the job out to the American
neo-Nazi movement. He also suggested the FBI was looking into a possible
bombing suspect in the Philippines, whom it had not named but who had links to
Ramzi Yousef. Jones wanted the government to produce more discovery material
—on subjects including Elohim City, Carol Howe, Dennis Mahon, and Andreas
Strassmeir—and the writ was no doubt written broadly to obtain the broadest
possible results. It failed to do so.
The government’s chief prosecutor, Joseph Hartzler, had already spent
months attacking people who peddled “wacky theories”—a line widely
interpreted as an attack on Jones. Certainly, Hartzler was as anxious to bury
some of the legitimate questions about the government’s role as he was to poke
fun at the criticisms and alternate theories that clearly departed from plausible
reality. But the more Jones chased seemingly incredible connections to the
Middle East and other parts of the world, the easier Hartzler’s job became. The
Nichols team, after all, did not travel the world in search of expert witnesses, or
engage in learned conversations with ambassadors and far-flung universityrld, the easier Hartzler’s job became. The
Nichols team, after all, did not travel the world in search of expert witnesses, or
engage in learned conversations with ambassadors and far-flung university

--- PAGE BREAK ---

professors.
McVeigh made no secret of his disapproval, describing his attorney’s trips as
“a waste of time, defense resources, and taxpayer money.”sadors and far-flung university

--- PAGE BREAK ---

professors.
McVeigh made no secret of his disapproval, describing his attorney’s trips as
“a waste of time, defense resources, and taxpayer money.”

THE PROSECUTION TEAM HAD ITS OWN DISAGREEMENTS AND STRONG personalities to contend
with. Its members had fundamentally different views of the case—from the
hawks, who wanted to paint McVeigh and Nichols every shade of black, to more
subtle minds, who questioned the degree of Nichols’s guilt and wondered who
else might be involved. They had one “knock-down, drag-out fight” over the fuel
meter found in Terry Nichols’s garage, with one lawyer wanting to introduce it
as evidence on the grounds that it could have been used to mix the bomb, and
everyone else arguing that it was broken and proved nothing. And they fought
again, in the fall of 1996, over the question of whether to hold separate trials for
McVeigh and Nichols. “It was not a merry trial team,” one prosecutor said. “I
was very proud of the job we did. We were very efficient. But it’s not like we
had fun doing it.”
Instinctively, the prosecution preferred a single trial in which the guilt of one
defendant could more easily spill over and taint the other. But Judge Matsch
refused to admit Terry Nichols’s eight hours of voluntary questioning at the
Herington police station as evidence unless the trials were separated. It would be
wrong in a joint proceeding, the judge argued, not to give McVeigh’s lawyers the
opportunity to question Nichols about what he said. But if Nichols did not take
the stand, that would not be possible. Matsch offered the prosecution a choice:
hold a single trial but omit the Herington testimony, or fall in line with the
defense teams and agree to separation.
In the end they agreed to two trials. But it was a bitter argument, and years
later Larry Mackey said they—and he personally—made the wrong decision. “If
they had been tried together,” Mackey acknowledged, “Nichols would have been
convicted by the first jury and executed.”ears
later Larry Mackey said they—and he personally—made the wrong decision. “If
they had been tried together,” Mackey acknowledged, “Nichols would have been
convicted by the first jury and executed.”

ON DECEMBER 13, 1996, THE FBI ARRESTED CAROL HOWE WITH her new boyfriend,
James Viefhaus, and accused them of fomenting bomb plots at their Tulsa home.
The agents did not appear to know that Howe had worked as a government
informant, even though one of them was Angie Finley’s husband. They were
responding to a telephone hotline message delivered by Viefhaus, which warned
of bombs hitting fifteen American cities on December 15. When the FBI agents
searched the house, they found bomb-making paraphernalia, including black
powder, cannon fuse, and sections of pipe fitted with “nipples,” or connector

--- PAGE BREAK ---

pieces common in bomb assembly.
The arrests were understandable: Bill Morlin, an investigative reporter
specializing in the radical right, alerted the FBI as soon as he heard the hotline
message, which referred to the Oklahoma City bombing and said innocent
civilians should be considered “expendable if necessary.” But the evidence was
problematic, because the most sensitive materials were either given to Howe by
Finley to help with her undercover investigations, or had been gathered by Howe
as evidence for the ATF.
Viefhaus was indicted almost immediately on charges of making threats and
possessing an unregistered explosive. Howe’s fate remained uncertain until
March 1997, two weeks before the start of McVeigh’s trial. The decision to
indict her, too, dealt a huge blow to her credibility as a would-be defense witness
for McVeigh, and raised the question of whether the government had pressed
charges expressly to keep her out of the bombing trial. The jury hearing her case
could never shake this suspicion.e witness
for McVeigh, and raised the question of whether the government had pressed
charges expressly to keep her out of the bombing trial. The jury hearing her case
could never shake this suspicion.

IN LATE 1996, DAVE HOLLAWAY FOUND AN AGITATED MICHAEL BRESCIA and his girlfriend
holed up at his house, saying the feds were after him for a string of bank jobs.
Hollaway wanted to know how many bank jobs he was talking about.
“I think the boys committed about twenty-six.”
“Twenty-six! How much did you make?”
“About nineteen hundred bucks.”
Hollaway was incredulous. “You could have worked at the CAUSE
Foundation and made more money.”
The FBI had been sniffing around Brescia for months, asking questions
about McVeigh’s April 5 phone call to Elohim City as well as the bank
robberies. He had fled Elohim City after getting into a fistfight with one of the
elders and was living back in Philadelphia, where he enrolled in night school and
worked as a bookkeeper for a computer company in a bid for normality. But
supporters of a militia leader from Alabama were waging a publicity campaign
against him, based on his supposed resemblance to John Doe Two, and affixing
UNWANTED BY THE FBI posters on telephone poles around Philadelphia.
Hollaway suggested he give himself up. Brescia understood, and did not
resist when he was arrested in Philadelphia—on robbery charges only—on
January 30, 1997. He later agreed to a plea deal under which he admitted
participating in one bank robbery in Madison, Wisconsin, and helping to plan six
others.
Also on January 30, Mark Thomas was arrested at his farmhouse near

--- PAGE BREAK ---under which he admitted
participating in one bank robbery in Madison, Wisconsin, and helping to plan six
others.
Also on January 30, Mark Thomas was arrested at his farmhouse near

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Allentown. He, too, seemed to be expecting the feds, and made sure the house
was full of television cameras and journalists. “I was afraid,” he said, “if they
didn’t know the cat was out of the bag, they might try to kill the cat.”
The FBI spent five hours searching Thomas’s farmhouse for weapons or
explosives, but didn’t find anything. Thomas had an old blue bus concealed on
the farm, where he stashed his explosives, weapons, and ammunition, but the
FBI did not unearth it for another three months. They also failed to follow up on
Thomas’s ex-girlfriend, Donna Marazoff, who had reported him boasting about
blowing up a federal building during the day, or on Thomas’s allegation that
Kevin McCarthy had “taken out the Murrah Building”—a line he said he heard
from Richard Guthrie.
Michael Schwartz, one of the U.S. attorneys who prosecuted the ARA, said
in an interview that he was sure the bank robbers and McVeigh had “at least
crossed paths.” Why wasn’t this link investigated? Schwartz did not answer
directly, saying only that if evidence had emerged of the ARA’s involvement in
the bombing, they would surely have been prosecuted for it. His focus, though,
had been elsewhere. “We went to bat for McCarthy at his sentencing,” he said,
“because he had cooperated with the government in the investigation. He was
instrumental in his cooperation, and he received a significant sentence reduction.
Had he been involved in the Oklahoma City bombing, we would not have done
any of that.”
The prosecutors felt no pressure, either, to explore Brescia’s resemblance to
John Doe Two. One day before Brescia’s arrest, the Justice Department unsealed
a brief laying out the Todd Bunting mistaken-identity theory and declaring, as a
matter of public record, that John Doe Two did not exist.day before Brescia’s arrest, the Justice Department unsealed
a brief laying out the Todd Bunting mistaken-identity theory and declaring, as a
matter of public record, that John Doe Two did not exist.

MCVEIGH’S PROSECUTORS WERE NERVOUS ABOUT RELYING TOO HEAVILY on testimony from
Jennifer McVeigh and the Fortiers, but many of the other witnesses either could
not identify McVeigh or had seen things—extra conspirators, or more than one
Ryder truck—that the government did not want mentioned on the stand. So the
prosecutors, along with a handful of trusted FBI agents, set about making the
problems go away.
They interviewed and reinterviewed witnesses, looking for weaknesses in
their stories or ways to get them to change their minds. Lea McGown would not
back down from her story that she had seen a second Ryder truck at the
Dreamland Motel, but her son Eric conceded that his memory might not have
been reliable. He took the stand; she did not. They could not sway Jeff Davis, the
delivery boy who brought Chinese food to room 25 at the Dreamland on April

--- PAGE BREAK ---memory might not have
been reliable. He took the stand; she did not. They could not sway Jeff Davis, the
delivery boy who brought Chinese food to room 25 at the Dreamland on April

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15 and was adamant someone other than McVeigh opened the door. The FBI
thought Davis was being obstinate and grilled him for twelve hours over two
days when he arrived in Denver for trial. But Davis insisted he saw a shorter,
fuller-built man than McVeigh, with tousled hair and rounder facial features. He
never testified.
Daina Bradley, the young woman who endured the most harrowing of
rescues and lost her mother and two children, was a little easier to work with.
She threatened to be a powerful defense witness because of her vivid physical
description of a second man stepping out of the passenger side of the Ryder truck
moments before the explosion. But she also remembered the truck being parked
backward, against the one-way system, which had to be wrong—if only because
it would have put the passenger side of the truck on the far side, as she looked
out. This was a new observation; in her first two interviews right after the
bombing, she made no mention of the incorrectly parked truck. But the
prosecution ran with it, blaming her confusion on memory-loss problems
associated with her medication.
They relied on similar inconsistencies to neutralize Bill Maloney, the
Cassville real estate agent, who had been so precise about McVeigh’s discolored
tooth and might conceivably persuade a jury that the mysterious Robert Jacques,
with his take-charge demeanor, was the real bombing mastermind. Jon Hersley,
the FBI case agent who worked most closely with the prosecution to prepare the
case for trial, undermined Maloney by arguing that the vehicle Maloney said he
spotted in November 1994 was “eerily similar” to the yellow Mercury McVeigh
was arrested in—a vehicle McVeigh did not buy until five days before the
bombing. Maloney even said the vehicle was a Mercury in his later interviews,
reinforcing the impression that media coverage had scrambled his memory.
Earlier, though, he had been sure it was a Chevy Monte Carlo.
Hersley was the prosecution’s go-to person to resolve many of the holes in
the case. Notably, he and Scott Mendeloff made extensive efforts to convince
Tom Kessinger that John Doe Two was a phantom. For close to two years,
Kessinger would not budge from his contention that two people rented the Ryder
truck on April 17. He could not have mistaken John Doe Two for Todd Bunting,
he said, because Bunting’s face was wrong, and so was his Carolina Panthers
hat. But Mendeloff and Hersley won him over—or wore him down. First, they
convinced him the arms and the tattoo poking out from his left arm sleeve were
the same as Bunting’s. Then they presented him with evidence that his recall in
1997 was inconsistent with what he told the FBI sketch artist on April 20, 1995.
The face was Kessinger’s last line of resistance. “That’s him [Bunting]. I must
have made a mistake,” Mendeloff remembered him saying.istent with what he told the FBI sketch artist on April 20, 1995.
The face was Kessinger’s last line of resistance. “That’s him [Bunting]. I must
have made a mistake,” Mendeloff remembered him saying.

--- PAGE BREAK ---told the FBI sketch artist on April 20, 1995.
The face was Kessinger’s last line of resistance. “That’s him [Bunting]. I must
have made a mistake,” Mendeloff remembered him saying.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Such methods were not universally condoned by the prosecution team. “My
rule of thumb is, never trust an identification that got better over time,” Larry
Mackey said. “I was far more ready to rely upon other evidence, without trying
to hammer people.” Ironically, the government never called Tom Kessinger,
because they knew he had a dubious past that could cloud his credibility, and
they were also worried about how solid his identification of McVeigh as John
Doe One really was. The main purpose of the Mendeloff-Hersley effort was to
neutralize him as a potential witness for the defense, all the better to keep the
John Doe Two issue out of the trial. When asked about this, Mackey would not
criticize a colleague. But he did say: “I think it’s fair to say there was a lot of
hammering. But I wasn’t the one on the other end of the hammer.”
Mackey was not the only one who felt uncomfortable. Danny Defenbaugh
was appalled at Hersley, not least because, he said, Hersley often acted without
his authority or approval. “We had to watch over Jon,” Defenbaugh said. “If the
prosecution said, we want that leak covered, he’d do it. He’d go around trying to
stop viable investigations, especially if they involved other people in the
conspiracy. Every time we caught him, I had to bring him in the woodshed to
paddle him. Then he’d go right back at it.”
Defenbaugh was not against going back over the evidence and plugging
holes. He had a whole team he left behind in Oklahoma to take care of exactly
that—making sure the FBI had an answer for any question that might come up in
court, or in the media. But it was one thing to find answers, and another to
distort the evidence, which he thought Hersley was doing. He was particularly
exercised by Hersley’s characterization of the Cassville material. “It wouldn’t be
the first time Mr. Hersley was inaccurate,” Defenbaugh thundered. “He wasn’t
there, he didn’t investigate it, but he’s going to try to tell you that he did.”
Defenbaugh even accused one prosecutor, whom he would not name, of
“trying to undermine the investigation.” Scott Mendeloff, speaking for all his
colleagues, took vigorous issue with this. “What he is saying is categorically
false,” Mendeloff said. “Nobody tried to shut down anything. We had every
incentive to explore wherever the leads took us, and we did. And he wouldn’t
know, because he was not involved in the day-to-day investigations I conducted
with the case agents.”
No one on the prosecution team would say more on the record. Off the
record, though, one of them pointed to a lack of respect for the FBI’s top
investigator. “None of us did anything to undermine him,” he said of
Defenbaugh. “We just didn’t want to work with him.”the
record, though, one of them pointed to a lack of respect for the FBI’s top
investigator. “None of us did anything to undermine him,” he said of
Defenbaugh. “We just didn’t want to work with him.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---one of them pointed to a lack of respect for the FBI’s top
investigator. “None of us did anything to undermine him,” he said of
Defenbaugh. “We just didn’t want to work with him.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ON FEBRUARY 28, 1997, THE DALLAS MORNING NEWS RAN A FRONT-PAGE story saying McVeigh
had admitted responsibility for the bombing and took pride in the “body count”
he had inflicted. Even more damaging, the source was a trove of documents the
paper said had emanated from the defense team.
Stephen Jones learned about the piece shortly before it appeared on the
newspaper’s Web site. He tried to scare the reporter, Pete Slover, into holding it,
without success. He knew this story could render his client indefensible and he
briefly contemplated filing a lawsuit against the paper. But he contented himself
with a waiver from Judge Matsch allowing him to disregard a court-imposed gag
order and defend himself in public.
It was not easy. First, Jones told the media that the Dallas Morning News
had been the victim of a hoax. Then he changed tack and accused the newspaper
of stealing documents—legitimate documents—thereby breaking numerous
federal laws. In a third iteration, he announced that the Dallas Morning News
had perpetrated both a hoax and a theft. The supposed confession, written up by
one of Jones’s investigators, was a concocted document drawn up to secure some
unspecified advantage with the radical far right and not, as he put it, a
“legitimate defense memorandum.” The media’s response was unforgiving: the
Rocky Mountain News accused Jones of weaving a “tangled web” that pushed
against the limits of legal ethics.
The real story is not easy to discern. According to members of Jones’s team,
Slover had swiped tens of thousands of documents off a defense investigator’s
laptop. Either the investigator was careless, as one account had it, or he
deliberately left a document on his computer for Slover to read while he left the
room, never suspecting that Slover would download everything. It is also
conceivable that the investigator or another member of the defense team gave
Slover the files, inadvertently or otherwise. Jones later filed a bar complaint
against Slover, who was a fully qualified lawyer in Texas as well as a news
reporter, to press his contention that the documents were essentially stolen. But it
was Slover who prevailed in the closed-door disciplinary hearing, suggesting he
had done nothing seriously wrong.
It was also unclear to what extent the headline-grabbing McVeigh material
was bogus. The most damning items in the Dallas Morning News piece came
from write-ups of interviews McVeigh purportedly gave to Richard Reyna. But
Reyna—according to both Jones and his number two, Rob Nigh—never spent
time alone with McVeigh. The lawyers had no idea Reyna had written up these
interviews until the leak fiasco broke.
Still, the defense had a secret it didn’t want revealed. McVeigh might not
have told Reyna the killer line: “We needed a body count to make our point.”up these
interviews until the leak fiasco broke.
Still, the defense had a secret it didn’t want revealed. McVeigh might not
have told Reyna the killer line: “We needed a body count to make our point.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

But he said something similar to Stuart Wright, a Waco expert from Lamar
University in Texas, whom Jones had invited to talk to McVeigh on numerous
occasions. When Wright asked why he blew up the building during the day,
McVeigh answered: “Because in order to really get the attention of the
government there has to be a body count.” Beyond its frankness, this was an
almost exact echo of Jim Ellison’s rationale for attacking the Murrah Building in
1983.
Most likely, the rest of Reyna’s memos were based on real material, too,
including an admission by McVeigh that he had purchased Kinestik from Roger
Moore. McVeigh himself confirmed the veracity of the material in his interviews
with Michel and Herbeck. “Behind the scenes, the thinking in the defense team
was that these documents did have credibility, that this was real stuff,” Wright
recalled. “Everything in that [Dallas Morning News] report looked spot-on to
me.”
A few days later, with jury selection looming, the Playboy magazine Web
site posted a detailed defense chronology of McVeigh’s movements, deepening
the gloom in the McVeigh camp. The authenticity of the document was never
questioned, although Jones argued it was out of date and far from definitive.
Clearly, the defense had lost control of its confidential materials, and Judge
Matsch indicated he was willing to give McVeigh a new legal team and a new
trial. But McVeigh preferred to proceed, requesting only that the jury pool be
expanded to lessen the potential impact of the leaks.
The McVeigh defense team would make further serious mistakes before the
trial was over. But, to Jones, this was the moment the enterprise slipped “beyond
redemption by even the most skilled of our craft.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---would make further serious mistakes before the
trial was over. But, to Jones, this was the moment the enterprise slipped “beyond
redemption by even the most skilled of our craft.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

{ 10 }
TRIAL AND PUNISHMENT
Stephen Jones’s best hope for salvaging the case from the Dallas Morning News
disaster was to construct an entirely new narrative in the courtroom from the
moment he began interviewing prospective jurors. Jury selection, which can
often seem dry and tedious to the casual observer, is always regarded as an
important opportunity to shape perceptions, sound out initial reactions to the
evidence, and, in a capital case, eliminate jurors disinclined to settle for a lesser
punishment than death. Under the circumstances leading into this trial, it became
crucial.
Jones and his colleagues were still optimistic about poking significant holes
in the government’s evidence and sowing real doubt that McVeigh had
conceived and carried out the bombing alone; enough, anyway, to take the death
penalty off the table. But jury selection caused some of the most experienced
members of the team to change their mind.
Jones asked so many questions about the Dallas Morning News leak and the
political views of the potential jurors that he antagonized as many as he won
over. The American Bar Association Journal described his questioning as
“inept” and needlessly hostile; even Judge Matsch felt compelled to comment.
Jones cracked jokes and flashed his learning and tried to find common
ground, but one of his fellow defense-team members said he was ultimately
“ineffective at accomplishing anything.” The colleague added: “If you read
through the transcript looking for evidence of a systematic process, you’re not
going to find one.”
Jones’s approach, his colleagues said, was to think that jurors with a military
background and a fondness for guns would find an affinity with McVeigh. He
picked a navy veteran who managed real estate, a Mormon woman from a
military family, and a former liquor-store attendant who was once held up at
gunpoint. He also picked an air-force-veteran-turned-business-owner, who
attended gun shows and believed firearm ownership should be mandatory. He
had written in his questionnaire: “Penalty of death is justified in all cases in
which someone has been killed by a criminal act.”
Unless Jones could somehow convince this juror that McVeigh was not in
Oklahoma City on April 19, he was a surefire vote for execution. A Nicholss in
which someone has been killed by a criminal act.”
Unless Jones could somehow convince this juror that McVeigh was not in
Oklahoma City on April 19, he was a surefire vote for execution. A Nichols

--- PAGE BREAK ---

defense lawyer whispered to Richard Burr, Jones’s designated point man on
arguing against the death penalty: “Dick, your penalty phase is fucked right
here.”
Burr chalked a lot of the problems in jury selection up to his side’s
inexperience. The team never challenged a ruling from Judge Matsch barring
them from asking prospective jurors whether they could consider a sentence
lesser than death; it made some of them feel they could only shoot for acquittal,
a daunting prospect. “We knew nothing about voir dire,” Burr acknowledged.
“We didn’t have a real death-penalty trial lawyer on the team, and we suffered
from that…. It’s a delicate matter, and it takes some real skill that none of us
had.”
The government’s lawyers did much better at assessing the jury pool and
testing out parts of the case that made them nervous. Revealingly, prosecutor Pat
Ryan asked juror candidate number 947 how he would feel if he suspected other
people were responsible for the bombing, besides McVeigh. Outside the
courtroom, the prosecution was insisting that McVeigh acted alone and that
nobody else was involved. But the team realized this would not go unchallenged
and, privately, they had doubts, too. “Sometimes, perhaps, the investigation
simply hasn’t uncovered every last detail,” Ryan said. “My question to you is, is
it going to cause you any pause in returning a guilty verdict?”
Number 947 responded: “I don’t think it would be a problem.” His selection
went unopposed.etail,” Ryan said. “My question to you is, is
it going to cause you any pause in returning a guilty verdict?”
Number 947 responded: “I don’t think it would be a problem.” His selection
went unopposed.

IN THE MIDST OF JURY SELECTION, THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT RELEASED a much-delayed report
lambasting the work of the FBI crime lab, including a comprehensive takedown
of just about every aspect of its work in Oklahoma City. The focus was on Dave
Williams, the FBI’s top explosives analyst, who was accused of failing to base
his conclusions on the forensics of the bomb scene, working instead from
evidence gathered by other investigators and passing off the findings as his own.
Williams concluded, for example, that the bomb was an ANFO device, but
he based this solely on the ammonium nitrate receipt found in Terry Nichols’s
house, not on actual ammonium nitrate traces from the crime scene. He also said
the bomb components were contained in fifty-gallon barrels, just like the ones
found in Nichols’s garage, but the Justice Department inspector general said it
was impossible to estimate the size, because no measurements had been made of
the curvature of the barrel fragments at the bomb site. Williams suggested
Primadet was used as a detonator, but the I.G. said the only indications of this
were the Primadet boosters found in Nichols’s house. Williams was also accused

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Williams suggested
Primadet was used as a detonator, but the I.G. said the only indications of this
were the Primadet boosters found in Nichols’s house. Williams was also accused

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of mishandling tests on McVeigh’s knife and clothing, making it impossible to
determine if they bore traces of pentaerythritol tetranitrate, a telltale sign of
contact with Tovex.
The Justice Department report was a 530-page declaration of no confidence
in almost every aspect of the FBI’s work, in this and six other major cases. John
Lloyd, a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry in Britain who examined the
bombing lab reports on behalf of the defense, said: “It is impossible to determine
from them the chain of custody, or precisely what work has been done on each
item, or the reliability of the reported results.”b reports on behalf of the defense, said: “It is impossible to determine
from them the chain of custody, or precisely what work has been done on each
item, or the reliability of the reported results.”

JOE HARTZLER, THE GOVERNMENT’S CHIEF PROSECUTOR, HAD BEEN diagnosed six years earlier
with multiple sclerosis, and delivered his opening statement from a motorized
wheelchair. The handicap, and its visible manifestation, resonated immediately
with bombing survivors. He began with the anguish of a mother, Helena Garrett,
who had dropped off her sixteen-month-old son, Tevin, at the day-care center as
she would on any other morning. Hartzler’s rhetoric was restrained; he didn’t
bandy words like “callous,” or “evil,” or “monstrous.” To elicit revulsion, he
highlighted little details—notably, the earplugs McVeigh popped into his ears as
he was walking away from the Ryder truck, a luxury his victims were not
afforded. He promised the jury: “We will make your job easy.”
Hartzler built a simple and straightforward narrative, touching on McVeigh’s
ideological fervor, his purchase of books on explosives, the Daryl Bridges card,
the evidence tying him to Junction City and the Ryder truck, and, finally, the
many indications that he personally detonated the bomb. Hartzler, like Pat Ryan,
anticipated the jurors’ consideration of “others unknown” and sought to detach it
from McVeigh’s guilt. “We don’t bear the burden in this trial of proving whether
there is or is not another person with McVeigh,” he said.
Hartzler demonstrated his knowledge of the jury by drawing a clear
distinction between people who espoused the right to speak their minds and
purchase firearms unhindered, and those, like McVeigh, who used the ideals of
the American Revolution to justify criminal violence. “Our forefathers didn’t
fight British women and children,” he said. “They didn’t plant bombs and run
away wearing earplugs.”ho used the ideals of
the American Revolution to justify criminal violence. “Our forefathers didn’t
fight British women and children,” he said. “They didn’t plant bombs and run
away wearing earplugs.”

WITH HIS OPENING SENTENCE, STEPHEN JONES PROMISED HE WOULD not just raise reasonable
doubt but would demonstrate “that my client is innocent of the crime that Mr.
Hartzler has outlined to you.” The statement was bold enough to elicit gasps.
Minutes later, Jones was reading out the names of all 168 people who died in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

bombing. Jones thought this would communicate his appreciation of the crime’s
enormity, but to many it came across as rank opportunism. The head of an
Oklahoma City survivors’ support group called it “dishonorable.” A bereaved
stepfather was disgusted.
For the next two and a half hours, Jones delved deep into the minutiae, with
little of Hartzler’s smoothness or narrative vision. The ABA Journal said his
presentation was rambling and disjointed. He never plainly stated his strongest
argument: that the government could not prove McVeigh was John Doe One, let
alone say for sure that John Doe Two did not exist. Instead, he walked through
every statement Tom Kessinger had made to the FBI over the previous two years
at a level of detail the jury found confusing and dull.
Jones did better when he mentioned the crime-lab disaster and highlighted
the prosecution’s questionable reliance on the Fortiers, saying the case stood or
fell on their credibility. By then, though, many of the jurors were no longer
following.-lab disaster and highlighted
the prosecution’s questionable reliance on the Fortiers, saying the case stood or
fell on their credibility. By then, though, many of the jurors were no longer
following.

THE PROSECUTION MOVED SWIFTLY THROUGH THE EVIDENCE, INTERSPERSING the drier, more
technical parts with carefully paced eyewitness accounts of the bombing’s
horrors. The Jones team had expected the trial to be a slog lasting several
months, but it turned into a sprint and many of the witnesses they were hoping to
grill were not called at all. “We underestimated, and underestimated grossly, the
extent to which the government would rely on emotional testimony about the
bombing, and the impact it would have,” Rob Nigh said years later.
Pointing out that the government had no witness to place McVeigh in
Oklahoma City on April 19 could not compete with distraught parents describing
how they said good-bye to their toddlers for the last time. In retrospect, Nigh felt
his team should have seen this coming, because the emotional material was the
prosecution’s “best evidence.”

BEHIND THE SCENES, THE PROSECUTION WAS TRYING TO DECIDE whether to call Roger Moore.
Some believed that Moore had an important story to tell; others didn’t want to
expose the jury to a witness with so little credibility.
The issue exposed a fault line between the hardliners on the team, who never
doubted the official story that McVeigh robbed Moore and wanted the evidence
aired, and pragmatists like Larry Mackey, who had their doubts about the
robbery and did not believe it had financed the bombing.
The argument grew heated, drawing in Danny Defenbaugh, who thought the
only place in a courtroom Moore belonged was in the dock. He felt so bruised by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the argument that, years later, he would not discuss the details. Still, his side
won, and Moore was not called to the stand.Moore belonged was in the dock. He felt so bruised by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the argument that, years later, he would not discuss the details. Still, his side
won, and Moore was not called to the stand.

THE FEDS’ ONLY PHYSICAL EVIDENCE POINTING TO AN AMMONIUM nitrate bomb was a book-size
chunk of the Ryder truck with painted fiberglass on one side and partially burned
plywood on the other. An FBI scientist, Steven Burmeister, claimed to have
found ammonium nitrate crystals embedded in the plywood side about a month
after the bombing. The discovery was initially hailed as brilliant, but McVeigh’s
team referred derisively to “magic crystals” and asked how they had survived the
heavy rainstorms in Oklahoma City on the night of the bombing. Fred
Whitehurst, a whistle-blowing chemist at the FBI lab who triggered the Justice
Department investigation, testified for the defense and told the court he did not
believe they could have survived, because ammonium nitrate liquefies on
contact with moisture.
The FBI argued that the plywood side of the piece was facing down and so
protected the crystals from the rain. Burmeister said that chemicals coating the
ammonium nitrate prills—aluminum, silicon, and sulfur—helped with the
preservation. Whitehurst said this made no scientific sense.
The defense won a rare victory here, sowing genuine doubt about the FBI’s
credibility beyond the Justice Department’s findings. But it made little
difference, because jurors never doubted that an ammonium nitrate bomb
destroyed the Murrah Building, regardless of the chemical evidence.
So it was with much of the rest of the case. Jones hammered away at the
Fortiers, doing a passable job of demonstrating that they continued to lie long
after they promised the FBI to tell only the truth. But the jury believed enough of
their testimony, particularly the parts about McVeigh’s bomb plans, to make the
rest seem secondary.ued to lie long
after they promised the FBI to tell only the truth. But the jury believed enough of
their testimony, particularly the parts about McVeigh’s bomb plans, to make the
rest seem secondary.

THE JONES TEAM PLACED ITS HOPES, INSTEAD, ON A DRAMATIC courtroom appearance by Carol
Howe. Not only did Howe’s defense attorney, Clark Brewster, convince her to
take the stand; he also passed on information from Howe’s criminal case, which
the government had withheld from discovery in the bombing trial.
The trial judge in Tulsa, Michael Burrage, was deeply worried that evidence
from his courtroom could affect the McVeigh case, but he allowed Howe to fly
to Denver as long as she was transported on a government plane and held in
shackles. He also forbade Jones and Nigh to talk to her directly, obliging them to
sit down with Brewster instead to prepare a proffer—a rundown of her testimony
explaining how Mahon, Strassmeir, and Millar had talked about blowing up

--- PAGE BREAK ---

federal buildings and waging war.
Judge Matsch was also skeptical about taking her evidence on Elohim City
in isolation, and ruled that the proffer was “not sufficiently relevant to be
admissible”—a controversial decision that provoked some criticism in the legal
profession.
Howe was put back on her Learjet and returned to Tulsa; Jones, who had
hoped to broaden the case into the sort of terrain he had been exploring for two
years, could only face the inevitable.ofession.
Howe was put back on her Learjet and returned to Tulsa; Jones, who had
hoped to broaden the case into the sort of terrain he had been exploring for two
years, could only face the inevitable.

SITTING SILENTLY AT THE CENTER OF THE TRIAL, MCVEIGH WAS fully engaged, taking notes and
exchanging comments and jokes with his attorneys. The world might have
remembered his steely stare outside the Noble County courthouse, but the jurors
and witnesses saw a more relaxed man, who cracked an occasional smile.
In the run-up to trial, McVeigh had some second thoughts about the
bombing. He told Michel and Herbeck he was so impressed by the novel
Unintended Consequences, a potboiler about violent revolution, in which the
protagonist chooses assassinations over bombings, that he now regarded it as a
better book than The Turner Diaries. “It might have changed my whole plan of
operation if I’d read that one first,” he said.
But McVeigh felt no remorse. “To these people in Oklahoma who lost a
loved one,” he told his biographers, “I’m sorry, but it happens every day. You’re
not the first mother to lose a kid, or the first grandparent to lose a grandson or
granddaughter…. I’m not going to go into that courtroom, curl into a fetal ball,
and cry just because the victims want me to do that.”
Often, during the trial, he felt prickly and defensive. He hated Joe Hartzler
calling him a coward and dismissing his political beliefs as a “manifesto.” He
winced at Jones’s performance, particularly his cross-examination of the
Fortiers, which departed from the script he and Rob Nigh had worked on. He had
to fight off his fury when one witness, the nitromethane salesman Tim
Chambers, said he had the face of a possum.
John R. Smith, the psychiatrist who examined McVeigh most extensively,
said McVeigh had created a vivid fantasy life in which he saw himself as the
cartoon superhero, righting all wrongs and taking up arms on behalf of an
oppressed world. In court, he took solace in the role of lone warrior, defiantly
confronting his uncomprehending enemies.the
cartoon superhero, righting all wrongs and taking up arms on behalf of an
oppressed world. In court, he took solace in the role of lone warrior, defiantly
confronting his uncomprehending enemies.

THE PROSECUTION HAD ONE MORE SURPRISE, WHICH THEY SLIPPED into Larry Mackey’s closing
statement, leaving the defense no time to respond. The subject was Robert

--- PAGE BREAK ---prehending enemies.

THE PROSECUTION HAD ONE MORE SURPRISE, WHICH THEY SLIPPED into Larry Mackey’s closing
statement, leaving the defense no time to respond. The subject was Robert

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kling’s handwriting, which Judge Matsch had disallowed as a subject for
witness examination. The defense, having successfully argued against the
scientific validity of handwriting analysis, assumed it was a dead issue. But the
prosecution was anxious to address arguably the biggest hole in its case and
provide some physical evidence, however tentative, that McVeigh was at Eldon
Elliott’s to pick up the Ryder truck.
Mackey showed the jury examples of McVeigh’s cursive script, pulled them
together letter by letter, and declared that they were a match for the Kling
signature. Mackey did not cite a single authority for his assertions, which
professional document-examiners found questionable, but that no longer
mattered. Jones told the jury: “I can’t cross-examine his closing argument.” It
was the lawyerly equivalent of a white flag.
In his summation, Jones was unable to counter Mackey’s central assertion
that he had failed to prove his client’s innocence. Other than a last-ditch attempt
to discredit the Fortiers—he likened them to Tarzan and Jane, swinging from one
disconnected clump of government evidence to another—he steered clear of the
evidentiary
nitty-gritty.
He
quoted
old-fashioned
authors—Edmond
Marjoribanks, George Bernard Shaw, James Gould Cozzens—unlikely to
resonate with the jury. And he all but conceded that his client would be found
guilty. “McVeigh,” he said, “was convicted in the court of public opinion…
before the first witness had testified, before the first piece of evidence had been
introduced, even before his lawyer was appointed.” The jury deliberated for only
three and a half days before convicting McVeigh on all counts.
The penalty phase was equally one-sided. This was when the defense team
stood the best chance of reaping any rewards from the holes they had poked in
the government’s case, but they were divided in their approach and had little to
work with. The character witnesses for McVeigh could do little more than echo a
gloriously tone-deaf line of Michael Fortier’s from the evidence phase of the
trial: “If you don’t consider what happened in Oklahoma, Tim is a good person.”
Dick Burr, an experienced Texas jurist who had helped pioneer the art of
giving jurors reasons to spare the life of convicted criminals in death-penalty
cases, said he could have done more—even at this stage—to talk about
McVeigh’s traumatic experiences in the Gulf War, his post-combat depression,
and the influence of others on his fragile sense of self. But he was instructed not
to delve too deeply into McVeigh’s psychology and family background, or into
the aberrant behavior of adherents of the radical far right. “At almost every
turn,” Burr said, “when we started getting to that sort of information, we got
pulled back…. [It was] because of an ideological notion that it was somehow
dishonorable to Tim to portray him as someone vulnerable and shaped by thingsed getting to that sort of information, we got
pulled back…. [It was] because of an ideological notion that it was somehow
dishonorable to Tim to portray him as someone vulnerable and shaped by things

--- PAGE BREAK ---

beyond his control.” It was no secret on the defense team that Burr and Jones did
not get along; other members of Burr’s mitigation team said—and Burr did not
deny—that he came very close to quitting.
In the end, Jones conceded that his client was guilty, a stunning reversal
from his earlier position. McVeigh, he now said, had “killed more people in
Oklahoma City than all of the American dead in the Persian Gulf War.” The jury
deliberated for just three hours before voting unanimously for death.
Rob Nigh agreed with Burr that this had not been inevitable. Ramzi Yousef,
after all, did not receive the death penalty for the 1993 attack on the World Trade
Center, and neither did the Unabomber; no prisoner had been executed in the
federal system since 1963. “Of course it would have been possible for
[McVeigh] not to get the death penalty,” Nigh argued, years later. “It was a very
realistic possibility. It was difficult—but doable.”
Everyone on the team knew this meant that McVeigh would go to his grave
without divulging the identities of any others involved in his bomb plot. He had
no motive to talk now. The trial had validated him as the bombing’s lone
mastermind, and he was happy to take full credit.hout divulging the identities of any others involved in his bomb plot. He had
no motive to talk now. The trial had validated him as the bombing’s lone
mastermind, and he was happy to take full credit.

THE TRIALS OF CAROL HOWE AND JAMES VIEFHAUS, WHICH TOOK place back-to-back at the
end of July and the beginning of August, were a disaster for the government.
Viefhaus was convicted of making threats and possessing an unregistered
explosive, principally because Howe testified against him. And that put Neal
Kirkpatrick, the prosecuting attorney, in an impossible position. How could he
portray Howe as hostile to the government when she had just turned in her own
boyfriend? Did this not show she was still interested in helping out, as she had
when she worked as an informant and gathered up the very bomb components
now being used as evidence against her?
The jury acquitted Howe on all charges. Afterward, Kirkpatrick was
frustrated that the court never saw her swastika tattoo, which was always artfully
covered by her courtroom dresses. “She looked pretty in pink,” he said. “I got
outlawyered on that case.”
The defeat had a devastating effect on Howe’s former handlers at the ATF.
Even before the verdict, Dave Roberts and Angie Finley felt they were being set
up, because the U.S. Attorney’s Office refused to grant Finley access to her full
files ahead of her testimony. They saw themselves as scapegoats for running a
promising, potentially game-changing operation at Elohim City that their
superiors were not anxious to advertise—or apologize for closing. “If it weren’t
for me,” Roberts said of his protégée, “she’d be totally flapping in the wind.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roberts was soon targeted and transferred out of his job as resident agent in
Tulsa. He retired from the ATF, against his will, in April 1998.’d be totally flapping in the wind.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roberts was soon targeted and transferred out of his job as resident agent in
Tulsa. He retired from the ATF, against his will, in April 1998.

MCVEIGH WANTED NOTHING MORE TO DO WITH STEPHEN JONES, but getting rid of him was not
so easy. Jones was on vacation for several weeks after the trial. McVeigh grew
impatient and called Lou Michel of the Buffalo News to dump all over his
defense attorney. Jones had screwed up and “screwed up badly,” he charged.
“You would not believe some of the things that have occurred in this case. The
man has repeatedly lied to me in the past.” He wanted Congress to investigate.
Some of McVeigh’s allegations were demonstrably false, for example a
charge that Jones had lied to the judge so he could stay on the case after the
Dallas Morning News leak. (Court records showed McVeigh had indicated his
consent to proceed independently.) But that made no difference, and an outraged
Jones immediately announced his intention to withdraw.
First, though, they had to endure the formal sentencing hearing. As Jones
and McVeigh entered court together for the last time on August 14, 1997, they
avoided eye contact and did not shake hands, as they had every day during trial.
Jones said nothing on his client’s behalf, and McVeigh offered only a line from
Justice Brandeis: “Our government is the potent, omnipotent teacher. For good
or ill, it teaches the whole people by its example.” The passage goes on to say
more about government law-breaking, but McVeigh stopped and said: “That’s all
I have.” Having never spoken in court before, he now withdrew into silence as
Judge Matsch condemned him to die.
Within two weeks, Jones was out of McVeigh’s life. Rob Nigh took over as
lead counsel, and Dick Burr became cocounsel. Jones, though, could not resist
letting McVeigh know exactly what he thought of him. In a formal
communication to the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals, he said his client “has
raised the definition of the term ‘ingratitude’ to new meanings,” with an outburst
that was “small, graceless, and petty.” He said he hoped his withdrawal would
cause McVeigh to “come to his senses.”raised the definition of the term ‘ingratitude’ to new meanings,” with an outburst
that was “small, graceless, and petty.” He said he hoped his withdrawal would
cause McVeigh to “come to his senses.”

THE PROSECUTION TEAM PLANNED TO LEAVE THE NICHOLS TRIAL TO Scott Mendeloff, but his
unapologetically belligerent manner had made him a deeply polarizing figure,
and some of his fellow prosecutors could no longer work under him. That
alarmed the top echelon of the Justice Department—especially now that
Mendeloff’s main champion in Washington, the Criminal Division chief,
Merrick Garland, had left to take up a federal judgeship.
Garland’s replacement, Bob Litt, flew to Denver one weekend when

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mendeloff was away, so he could assess the situation firsthand. Mendeloff was
not fired, but was told on his return that his appointment to head the Nichols
team was now in question. Mendeloff quit to take a long-promised position in
the private sector. He felt deeply aggrieved to have worked so hard on the case,
and on a modest government salary, only to be abandoned by his colleagues.
Larry Mackey, meanwhile, received a phone call from Janet Reno, asking if
he would consider taking on Nichols. Mackey said he had a family to get back
to, but Reno flew to Denver to convince Mackey and his wife, Ann, at a secret
meeting at the airport. By the time of the first pretrial hearing on Nichols, on
August 6, 1997, Mackey was ready for another long round in Judge Matsch’s
courtroom.key and his wife, Ann, at a secret
meeting at the airport. By the time of the first pretrial hearing on Nichols, on
August 6, 1997, Mackey was ready for another long round in Judge Matsch’s
courtroom.

FROM THE FIRST PROSPECTIVE JUROR, IT WAS CLEAR THE NICHOLS trial would be very different
than McVeigh’s. Her name was Niki Deutchman, and she was a forty-seven-
year-old nurse and midwife interested in energetic healing and world travel. She
appealed to the prosecution, because she was a dues-paying supporter of the
Southern Poverty Law Center and a convert to Judaism. But a childbirth
practitioner seemed an unlikely advocate for the death penalty, and Michael
Tigar, Nichols’s chief counsel, could not imagine a more ideal juror.
Tigar won her over almost immediately with a learned discussion of the
Lamaze method. He was already thinking ahead to evidence Deutchman knew
nothing about, a book on Lamaze that had been recovered from Nichols’s house.
As he asked his questions and flattered her intelligence, their voir dire gave way
to something akin to a Spencer Tracy–Katharine Hepburn movie.
Deutchman’s questionnaire said she distrusted lawyers, so Tigar asked for an
example of an attorney manipulating the system. “It’s okay,” he said playfully. “I
can take it.”
“I haven’t seen you manipulating the system,” Deutchman responded.
“We hardly know each other.”
“Right. No.”
This was the courtroom equivalent of love at first sight, the formation of a
special bond between lawyer and juror that the prosecution would not detect
until too late. Not only did Niki Deutchman end up on the jury; she became the
foreman.

TIGAR AND HIS COLLEAGUES HAD THE ADVANTAGE OF WATCHING THE prosecution work in the
McVeigh trial. They also had an easier client to defend, and significantly less
public scrutiny. But Michael Tigar and his cocounsel Ron Woods also put on a

--- PAGE BREAK ---prosecution work in the
McVeigh trial. They also had an easier client to defend, and significantly less
public scrutiny. But Michael Tigar and his cocounsel Ron Woods also put on a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

masterful performance full of energy, purpose, and wit that embarrassed the
government time and again.
Tigar was not shy about challenging Judge Matsch and argued, successfully,
that jurors overtly itching for the death penalty should be thrown out by the
judge (a provision that would have got rid of that obvious death juror in the
McVeigh trial). He persuaded Judge Matsch to set strict limits on the use of
emotional victim-testimony—which had been so effective against McVeigh. And
he even extracted a rare apology from the judge for losing his temper with a jury
candidate.
“All that,” Tigar explained many years later, “was a way of saying to the
judge: ‘Everyone’s looking. There’s an enormous premium to do this right.’”
Some on the prosecution side felt Judge Matsch was tipping his hand and
deliberately sparing Nichols the death penalty. But Tigar said Matsch could not
be accused of leaning. “We argued for everything by going toe-to-toe with the
other side,” he said. “We earned it.”and
deliberately sparing Nichols the death penalty. But Tigar said Matsch could not
be accused of leaning. “We argued for everything by going toe-to-toe with the
other side,” he said. “We earned it.”

WHEN LARRY MACKEY AGREED TO RUN THE NICHOLS TRIAL, HE told Janet Reno he wanted to
resolve the case on whatever terms he thought best. Although the official line
remained that all the bombing perpetrators had been caught, he went to Nichols
in late summer 1997 and offered him a deal in exchange for naming other
coconspirators. Nothing came of it. “He was not realistic,” Mackey recalled,
“about accepting his own responsibility.”
Privately, Mackey never stopped wondering if others were involved, and he
said many of his colleagues felt the same way. “If you had said to us, ‘Anybody
in the room 100 percent confident that McVeigh was alone, raise your hand,’ we
would have all kept our hands in our laps,” he said.
Mackey also wondered if Nichols really deserved the death penalty. “There’s
an interpretation one can make that, by the end, Nichols was withdrawing from
the conspiracy,” he said. “He was clearly not as committed by April 19.”
In some ways, the prosecution of Nichols was more straightforward than
McVeigh’s, because he was tied directly to the two tons of ammonium nitrate,
the loot from Roger Moore, and other physical evidence. But the government’s
challenge was that Nichols was being tried for murders he did not directly
commit. At times, the government was tentative; at other times it came across as
overconfident. The defense exploited both weaknesses to withering effect.
In his opening, Mackey told the jury Nichols “was there at the beginning,
and he was there at the end.” But Mackey knew Nichols was probably not there
at the beginning—waging war on the government had been McVeigh’s idea—

--- PAGE BREAK ---ols “was there at the beginning,
and he was there at the end.” But Mackey knew Nichols was probably not there
at the beginning—waging war on the government had been McVeigh’s idea—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and he was not there at the end, when the bomb actually went off.
Michael Tigar addressed this right away. The only evidence that Nichols was
in on the plot early on, he said, came from the Fortiers. “Here is the prosecutors’
problem,” he went on. “Neither Michael Fortier nor Lori Fortier ever heard Terry
Nichols say he was going to bomb anything, wanted to bomb anything, planned
to bomb anythin…. All they know is what Tim McVeigh told them. And the
evidence will be that what Tim McVeigh told them was a series of lies, provable
lies.”anything, wanted to bomb anything, planned
to bomb anythin…. All they know is what Tim McVeigh told them. And the
evidence will be that what Tim McVeigh told them was a series of lies, provable
lies.”

TIGAR AND WOODS SCORED AT LEAST FIVE SIGNIFICANT COURTROOM victories, and each one
eroded more of the jury’s confidence in the FBI’s evidence-gathering, and in the
government’s commitment to the truth. In contrast to the Jones team, which
repeatedly hinted that the real story lay outside the parameters of the prosecution
case, they engaged the government entirely on its own terrain and pulled the
evidence apart, piece by piece.
While questioning Louis Hupp, the FBI’s top fingerprint specialist, they got
him to admit that 1,034 latent prints collected from McVeigh’s car, his room at
the Dreamland Motel, and the Ryder rental agency had never been checked
against the FBI’s computer databases. Hupp said the task force leadership made
sure the prints did not match a list of known potential suspects, but decided that
a broader computer analysis “would not be necessary.” The FBI did not even do
an intercomparison—and figure out how many of the 1,034 fingerprints
belonged to the same people.
The prosecution was so surprised that it could not come up with an
explanation. So, Tigar provided one, which went unchallenged: “They didn’t
care.”
Next, the defense wrong-footed Karen Anderson. The government knew it
would be uncomfortable to have her and Roger Moore on the stand, but felt there
was no choice this time, because of the many guns of theirs that ended up in
Nichols’s possession. Anderson testified that, after the robbery, she found an old
list of Moore’s firearms that she provided to the FBI. But defense researchers,
checking each firearm against ATF records, discovered that one of them was a
Ruger mini-30 legally registered to Nichols since 1993. Tigar moved in for the
kill.
“Isn’t it a fact,” he asked Anderson, “that this list that you prepared is a
fraud?”
“No, sir, it is not,” she responded weakly.
Anderson was not Tigar’s main target here, so he left it there, but in hisn’t it a fact,” he asked Anderson, “that this list that you prepared is a
fraud?”
“No, sir, it is not,” she responded weakly.
Anderson was not Tigar’s main target here, so he left it there, but in his

--- PAGE BREAK ---sked Anderson, “that this list that you prepared is a
fraud?”
“No, sir, it is not,” she responded weakly.
Anderson was not Tigar’s main target here, so he left it there, but in his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

summation, he said: “There is only one place in the world she could get [the
list], and that’s because the Federal Bureau of Investigation showed her a bunch
of guns that had been recovered from Terry Nichols’s house, told her what the
serial numbers were so that they could make up this phony document and then
pretend to find it and bring it in to you.” The government could only fold.
Wilkinson told the jury: “We are not asking you to rely on that list in any way.”
Defense triumph number three involved embarrassing FBI agent Stephen
Smith about the notes taken during the nine-hour interrogation of Nichols in the
Herington police station. Ron Woods knew from his own experience as an FBI
agent that any discrepancies between the notes and the official 302 write-ups
could be fertile ground, and he asked Smith to read his twenty-two handwritten
pages, critiquing him line by line and in particular noting their relative
skimpiness. “This is a disgrace,” Tigar thundered later in the trial. “The top law
enforcement agency in the world, the large criminal case, and this is their
evidence of what they obtained from the suspect?” This was highly influential
with the jury.
Victory number four concerned the prosecution’s attempt to tie some plastic
fragments found at the bombing scene to empty barrels found at Nichols’s house.
Its key witness, an employee of the Smurfit plastics company named Theodore
Udell, was such a disaster the defense recalled him later and forced him to
acknowledge that much of his previous testimony had been incorrect. Judge
Matsch threw out almost everything he said.
The government claimed that at least one fragment found at the bomb scene
was made by Smurfit, and had been made according to a proprietary formula that
clearly identified its origin and created a link to the barrels belonging to Nichols.
The premise was dubious to begin with, since between 1992 and 1995 Smurfit
made about 2.5 million barrels just like the ones at Nichols’s house. Then Tigar
got Udell to admit that the formula was no longer proprietary but was freely
available to Smurfit’s competitors.
Then came the biggest bombshell: the FBI agent working with Udell
disclosed that the whole plastic-fragment theory had come from Scott
Mendeloff, who circumvented the FBI chain of command and instructed him not
to file any 302 reports—a violation of bureau protocol. Had Mendeloff still been
on the case, this might have crippled the prosecution team.
Tigar used this moment to accuse the government of working backward from
Nichols’s Smurfit barrels with the intent of incriminating him. “Why didn’t they
test the barrels in Michael Fortier’s house?” Tigar asked. “Why didn’t they test
any of the other hundreds of pieces of plastic? Well, it’s just like Agent Hupp’s
1,034 fingerprints: because they didn’t care.”barrels in Michael Fortier’s house?” Tigar asked. “Why didn’t they test
any of the other hundreds of pieces of plastic? Well, it’s just like Agent Hupp’s
1,034 fingerprints: because they didn’t care.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---ortier’s house?” Tigar asked. “Why didn’t they test
any of the other hundreds of pieces of plastic? Well, it’s just like Agent Hupp’s
1,034 fingerprints: because they didn’t care.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE JURY BEGAN TO LOOK FORWARD TO THESE PERRY MASON MOMENTS. Tigar used students
from the University of Texas as his research assistants, and put his former
student Jane Blanksteen, the fourth Mrs. Tigar, in charge of whittling down
information and putting it on index cards, which she placed in a box on his desk.
One juror was overheard observing: “Have you noticed, whenever Mrs. Tigar
puts a purple card in the box, that means Mr. Tigar is going to beat up on the
witness some more?”
For all the fun they appeared to be having, Tigar and Woods knew the trial
was a high-wire act. Woods would turn to his colleague as they walked in each
morning and say: “Time to go throw up.” Tigar was appalled by what he saw as
the prosecution’s desire to get the death sentence at any cost, and later accused
the government of “some of the most unprofessional conduct I have witnessed.”
One example—and their fifth significant victory—occurred during Tigar’s
cross-examination of FBI agent Christopher Budke, who bumped into Sergeant
Rick Wahl and discovered he had seen the Ryder truck at Geary Lake the day
before the bombing. Tigar and his team had looked for an FBI 302 from Budke’s
encounter with Wahl in the Fort Riley cafeteria, but never found one. Tigar
asked Budke directly if he had written a 302.
“No, I did not,” Budke replied.
“Did you ever memorialize—that is to say, write down—‘Sergeant Wahl told
me about a Ryder truck and a pickup truck’?” Tigar asked.
“Yes I did.”
This admission meant that Tigar had caught the government withholding a
document, so he approached the bench, persuaded Judge Matsch to halt
proceedings, and asked the prosecution to produce it immediately.
The document turned out to be a handwritten lead sheet, and Larry Mackey
had a copy of it in his briefcase. This sheet showed that Sergeant Wahl had
initially described the second vehicle as a gray Chevy pickup. Only later, once it
became known that Nichols owned a dark blue GMC, did Wahl say his memory
was of a dark-colored vehicle. When the cross-examination resumed, Budke
tried to save himself by suggesting Wahl had told him the pickup was “dark-
colored…possibly gray”—in other words: both things at once.
“Sir, do you see the words ‘dark-colored’ anywhere on this document that
you wrote?” Tigar asked.
Budke said it might not have been what he wrote down, but it was what
Sergeant Wahl had said. Tigar retorted: “Is it your habit, sir, to write down
something different from what witnesses tell you when you’re conductingnot have been what he wrote down, but it was what
Sergeant Wahl had said. Tigar retorted: “Is it your habit, sir, to write down
something different from what witnesses tell you when you’re conducting

--- PAGE BREAK ---

investigations?”
The broader significance of this was not the evidence—Wahl had seen
Nichols’s truck. But it showed that the government had never handed over a
large library of handwritten lead sheets, later estimated to number forty
thousand, despite promising to do so in its discovery agreement with the defense.
Matsch ordered the release of about twelve thousand lead sheets after Nichols
was convicted, and the rest were contested all the way to the end of his
Oklahoma state trial in 2004. They included McVeigh’s and Nichols’s old army
buddies offering ideas on the identity of John Doe Two, which both federal
defense teams could have found useful.
Mackey argued that withholding lead sheets was not as serious as Tigar
made out, because the differences in Wahl’s testimony were insignificant. But
Tigar was not satisfied. The whole point of the discovery agreement, he said,
was to go beyond the federal rules of evidence established by the Supreme
Court’s 1963 Brady v. Maryland decision. “What the government agreed to hand
over was independent of Brady,” Tigar argued. “If we had just wanted Brady, we
would not have made an agreement.”e Supreme
Court’s 1963 Brady v. Maryland decision. “What the government agreed to hand
over was independent of Brady,” Tigar argued. “If we had just wanted Brady, we
would not have made an agreement.”

TIGAR AND WOODS ENDURED ONLY TWO REAL SETBACKS. They talked Judge Matsch into
allowing Carol Howe to testify this time, but her appearance was a net gain for
the prosecution. Howe, her swastika tattoo now lasered off her shoulder, said she
had seen McVeigh at Elohim City in 1994, something she had not claimed
before. Beth Wilkinson did an adept job of casting doubt on her truthfulness, the
judge precluded any mention of her work as an informant, and she was not
brought up by either trial team again.
Even more damaging was Marife Nichols, who was called to cast her
husband in a positive light but never looked at him, could not remember their
wedding date, and provided details of a coded letter from McVeigh to her
husband indicating not only that they were in touch before Easter Sunday 1995,
but that they were getting ready to “shake and bake”—a line that seemed to refer
to the bombing.
Wilkinson gave as red-blooded a closing argument as she could muster, but
she had to acknowledge problem areas. Tigar, in his closing, played directly to
Niki Deutchman’s suspicions about the legal profession. “Ask yourself,” he
instructed the jury, “was that lawyer guessing, does that lawyer have evidence…,
or is that just a guess, is that a leap, is that speculation?”
As the jury retired, they were given something the McVeigh jury did not
have—instructions on considering a guilty verdict on lesser charges. When the

--- PAGE BREAK ---a leap, is that speculation?”
As the jury retired, they were given something the McVeigh jury did not
have—instructions on considering a guilty verdict on lesser charges. When the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

jurors returned after five days, they upheld just one of the listed charges,
conspiracy to use a weapon of mass destruction. They found him not guilty of
carrying out the bombing, and reduced each of the eight murder charges (one for
every federal employee) to involuntary manslaughter.
The death penalty was not yet off the table, because of the guilty verdict on
the conspiracy charge, but the prosecutors now faced a much bigger challenge to
talk the jury into it. Tigar, in his final appeal, did something utterly unexpected:
he physically embraced Nichols and called him his brother, evoking the way
Joseph, in the Old Testament, had revealed himself to his brother Benjamin
when he stood in judgment over him. The point, Tigar explained, was not to
negate the loss of all the brothers, mothers, fathers, and sisters in the bombing,
but rather to understand something fundamental about Western civilization. “He
reached out,” Tigar said of Joseph, “because even in that moment of judgment he
could understand that this is a human process and that what we all share looks to
the future and not to the past. My brother is in your hands.”
Beyond the rhetorical power of this closing—perhaps the crowning moment
of his career—Tigar was also addressing a particular audience, an audience as
small as one. He knew Niki Deutchman would appreciate his appeal, because
she was a student of Judaism. Hence the reference to Joseph, and also to the old
Israelite court, the Sanhedrin, which Tigar described moving out of the Temple
in Jerusalem specifically to avoid passing death sentences. Many people later
complained that the entire case swung on the connection Tigar forged with
Deutchman. But it takes just one jury member to vote down a death sentence, so
why not court just one?
Ultimately, five jurors were against death, more than enough to bounce
sentencing back to Judge Matsch. Some jurors who had advocated execution
were in tears. In Oklahoma, “Hangin’ Bob” Macy, the district attorney of
Oklahoma County, vowed to retry Nichols on capital charges for the 160 dead
not covered by the federal indictment. A lot of people were angry with
Deutchman, especially after she held an impromptu news conference on the
courthouse steps. “The government didn’t do a good job of proving that Terry
Nichols was greatly involved in all of this,” Deutchman told the media scrum
around her. She found the FBI “arrogant” for thinking it did not need to record
its interviews; the evidence-gathering had been “sloppy.” Deutchman denied that
Tigar had singled her out, or that she had smiled at him every morning as he
walked into court. But when a reporter asked what she thought of the defense
team, she couldn’t help herself. “Michael Tigar,” she said, “is one heck of an
attorney.”
Within hours, she and her family were receiving death threats.reporter asked what she thought of the defense
team, she couldn’t help herself. “Michael Tigar,” she said, “is one heck of an
attorney.”
Within hours, she and her family were receiving death threats.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JUDGE MATSCH AND THE PROSECUTION GAVE TERRY NICHOLS ONE final chance to name the
“others unknown” cited in the indictment. “If the defendant in this case comes
forward with answers or information leading to answers to some of these
questions,” Matsch said in a post-conviction hearing in March 1998, “it would
be something that the court can consider in imposing the final sentence.”
Nichols would not play ball. “My attorney,” he later wrote, “recommended
to me to keep my mouth shut because Bob Macy…was on the warpath to get me
to Oklahoma and get me executed.” And so Judge Matsch sent Nichols away for
life without possibility of parole. Matsch urged the government to keep
investigating the bombing but was pessimistic this would actually happen. “I
don’t know that there is an ongoing federal investigation,” he said from the
bench. “If the government can provide us with any information about whether
there is, we will gratefully receive it.”
Officially, the government was still investigating, but had little to show for
it. Kathy Wilburn, the grandmother of two of the youngest bombing victims,
remembered telling Jon Hersley, the FBI agent who liaised most closely with the
prosecutors, that she was upset about the 1,034 uninvestigated fingerprints.
“Kathy,” she remembered Hersley saying as they both attended one of the
Nichols hearings, “don’t worry about that. We’re not going to give Michael
Tigar any more ammunition to point the finger at someone else. When this is
over we’re going to run those prints.” It didn’t happen. Hersley later told
Wilburn she had misunderstood him, but she was adamant. “I’d be happy to take
a polygraph test,” she said.lse. When this is
over we’re going to run those prints.” It didn’t happen. Hersley later told
Wilburn she had misunderstood him, but she was adamant. “I’d be happy to take
a polygraph test,” she said.

MCVEIGH WAS MOVED TO THE SUPERMAX PRISON IN COLORADO after his sentencing and
housed in the same wing as Ted Kaczynski (the Unabomber), Ramzi Yousef, and
Luis Felipe, a Cuban gang leader from New York. The guards nicknamed the
wing Celebrity Row. When Michael Fortier and Terry Nichols showed up, they
were kept in another part of the prison. Nichols wanted nothing to do with the
friend who, he felt, had ruined his life. Fortier spoke to him just once.
McVeigh had not given up on embarrassing the government. His new legal
team filed an appeal, raising everything, from the government’s failure to hand
over documents to Judge Matsch’s decision not to call Carol Howe at his trial.
One filing was so long Rob Nigh and Dick Burr were fined $10,000 for
excessive wordiness. The appeal failed anyway.
McVeigh, meanwhile, did his best to blend in with prison life, forming
perhaps the most surprising friendship with Kaczynski. They may have been

--- PAGE BREAK ---ordiness. The appeal failed anyway.
McVeigh, meanwhile, did his best to blend in with prison life, forming
perhaps the most surprising friendship with Kaczynski. They may have been

--- PAGE BREAK ---

from different places on the political spectrum, but they were both ideologues
who believed in violence. Kaczynski was intrigued to learn about McVeigh’s
Gulf War service. McVeigh commented: “Yes, sir. Ironic, isn’t it? In Desert
Storm I got medals for killing people.”
Kaczynski thought the Oklahoma City bombing had been “unnecessarily
inhumane.” But he found McVeigh more intelligent than he imagined, and more
open to other people and other cultures. “I suspect that he is an adventurer by
nature,” Kaczynski later wrote, “and America since the closing of the frontier
has had little room for adventurers.”
In July 1999, their association came to abrupt end when McVeigh was
handcuffed, chained, and flown, with nineteen other prisoners, to a new federal
death row facility in Terre Haute, Indiana. This was the real-life version of the
popcorn Hollywood movie Con Air, with heavily armed federal marshals
watching nervously over the likes of Anthony Battle, a mentally disturbed serial
offender from Georgia, and David Paul Hammer, a brilliantly devious con man
and murderer who inspired both Cyrus the Virus, the John Malkovich character
in Con Air, and Thomas Harris’s man-eating evil genius, Hannibal Lecter.
The first time McVeigh spoke to Hammer, who was feared by almost all his
fellow inmates, he bragged about the destruction in Oklahoma City, saying: “The
official score is 168 to 1. I’m up.” To which an unimpressed Hammer replied:
“Well, I guess they can’t kill you more than once.”
Gradually, McVeigh, Hammer, and a third inmate, Jeffery Paul, began
holding meetings they nicknamed “Klan rallies,” because they were the only
whites on death row. They were not friends, exactly, but they looked to each
other for companionship and protection. McVeigh was called “baby killer” by
his fellow inmates, and teased for his dearth of sexual experience, but Hammer
was his insurance policy against enduring anything worse.
Hammer also helped McVeigh move up the date of his execution by waiving
all final appeals on his own death sentence. Hammer did not want to die,
although he vacillated about that for years; his principal goal was to set a legal
precedent McVeigh could follow. “I’ll be glad to leave this fucked-up world,”
McVeigh told Michel and Herbeck. If his last habeas corpus petition was turned
down, as he was almost sure it would be, he wanted to close down the legal
process. The problem was, he knew of nobody on federal death row who had
done this before. So Hammer put in his own request. It was accepted, and
McVeigh had his precedent. Later, Judge Matsch quizzed McVeigh to make sure
he understood the consequences of his decision. Once Matsch was satisfied, he
set the execution for May 16, 2001, and McVeigh began saying his good-byes.
Everything was thrown into doubt again eight days before the executionuences of his decision. Once Matsch was satisfied, he
set the execution for May 16, 2001, and McVeigh began saying his good-byes.
Everything was thrown into doubt again eight days before the execution

--- PAGE BREAK ---on. Once Matsch was satisfied, he
set the execution for May 16, 2001, and McVeigh began saying his good-byes.
Everything was thrown into doubt again eight days before the execution

--- PAGE BREAK ---

date, when McVeigh’s lawyers were suddenly told that the FBI had found
several hundred new 302s, inserts, and other documents that should have been
handed over in discovery. The media, which was about to descend on Terre
Haute en masse, sniffed a major scandal. The families of the bombing victims
were appalled, and McVeigh let it be known he was considering a legal
challenge to his execution after all. On May 11, Attorney General John Ashcroft
announced he was postponing the execution for a month to give the attorneys
time to conduct a “careful study” of the new material.
Rob Nigh and his colleagues raced through the new documents in search of
exculpatory material they could use in an appeal. Then, two weeks later, seven
hundred documents became more than a thousand, raising questions about what
else might still be out there. The final inventory and analysis presented by the
defense has never been unsealed by Judge Matsch, but the discovery files
themselves have become available, and they make it possible to reconstruct a list
of the most troubling items. These included some significant Steve Colbern
material—a videotape of him brandishing a machine gun, and the letter he wrote
to his girlfriend in November 1994, saying he wanted to join a movement to
avenge Waco.
Other items included testimony from a previously undiscovered Dreamland
guest, who never saw a Ryder truck or a Mercury Marquis. They included an
entire file on Dave Shafer, an Indiana seed salesman who claimed to have heard
James Nichols talking about a plot to attack the Murrah Building as far back as
1989. And they established possible links between Terry Nichols and members
of the radical Posse Comitatus movement in western Kansas, most notably the
entourage of a Wichita militia leader named Brad Glover. One of the 302s
described a person fitting Glover’s physical characteristics, who said that in
February or March 1995 “someone was going to smoke some Okies…wait until
Timmy V. does his job.”
Most of the rest of the material was entirely useless, and a defense team
would have had a hard time extracting much from it at trial. Nonetheless, the
failure to disclose the documents earlier was taken very seriously. The
government was forced to acknowledge it had failed to meet its legal
obligations. Louis Freeh, the FBI director, had to explain himself before
Congress. And the Justice Department launched an investigation.
The issue, as the Justice Department inspector general later wrote, went
beyond complying with the rules of discovery, touching on the FBI’s “troubled”
information-management
systems
and
their
likely
impact
on
future
investigations. In December 2000, the FBI archivist had suggested a way of
consolidating the bombing records and preparing them for long-term storage. Toystems
and
their
likely
impact
on
future
investigations. In December 2000, the FBI archivist had suggested a way of
consolidating the bombing records and preparing them for long-term storage. To

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that end, he asked the FBI’s field offices to eliminate duplicate files and send the
rest to Oklahoma. When they did, agents started noticing things they had never
seen before. Danny Defenbaugh, by then the FBI’s special agent in charge in
Dallas, became aware of the new documents at the end of January but did not
raise the alarm for three more months—a delay the inspector general said was
due to his “lack of attention,” “lack of direction” to his review team, and “lack of
follow-up” until the last possible moment.
It is not clear if Defenbaugh was as negligent as the report made out, or if he
was being directed by his superiors in Washington to take responsibility. The
experience clearly embittered him, especially after he was faced with getting
disciplined and kicked back to Washington or retiring. He chose retirement. He
also said: “Whenever they issue an I.G. report, even if it is politically charged,
they always allow for the person being accused…[to respond] and include the
response in the final report. Mine was not. I did respond. They failed to put in
my response.”
In his autobiography, Louis Freeh spun the episode as a triumph for his
organization. “The FBI did exactly what the public should expect,” he wrote. “It
gave full disclosure.” But Rob Nigh and his colleagues argued the exact opposite
in their last-ditch petition to Judge Matsch. They itemized sixteen separate
occasions when government lawyers told the court that they had handed over
everything, only to be upbraided by the court for some oversight or omission or
delay. On November 14, 1996, a government lawyer stated: “We have disclosed
our entire investigation in this case.” Nigh’s brief showed that wasn’t true.by the court for some oversight or omission or
delay. On November 14, 1996, a government lawyer stated: “We have disclosed
our entire investigation in this case.” Nigh’s brief showed that wasn’t true.

MCVEIGH’S FINAL DAYS SAW ANOTHER DISPUTE WITH STEPHEN JONES. The catalyst, this time,
was the publication of American Terrorist by Lou Michel and Dan Herbeck.
Several reporters had courted McVeigh for in-depth interviews, and initially he
refused them all. He said his mind was changed by the publication of Jones’s
book Others Unknown, in 1998, which “enraged him to the point of action.”
American Terrorist hit the bookshelves on April 3, 2001, weeks before his
scheduled execution.
The first edition of Jones’s book had included nothing of his interactions
with his client, as he was bound by a professional obligation of confidentiality.
But once he knew McVeigh was planning a tell-all book, Jones decided the
attorney-client privilege no longer applied. The second edition of Others
Unknown appeared on April 27, 2001, three weeks after American Terrorist, and
included an open letter “to my colleagues at the bar” justifying his position.
Jones said he had found as many as forty precedents to support the view that

--- PAGE BREAK ---American Terrorist, and
included an open letter “to my colleagues at the bar” justifying his position.
Jones said he had found as many as forty precedents to support the view that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh had ended the attorney-client privilege before he did. The decision to
break his silence about his client was “unquestionably among the most
difficult…I have ever had to make,” but the upshot was clear. “It was critically
important,” he wrote, “that the record be set straight, and who really in the final
analysis could set it straight more fully than I?” Jones even called his decision an
act of bravery. “To remain silent,” he suggested, “would have been cowardice.
How could I live with myself?”
Many lawyers were stunned by Jones’s actions and by how few critical
statements McVeigh actually made about Jones in American Terrorist. In his
open letter, Jones objected to descriptions of himself as “befuddled” and
“craving notoriety and the spotlight,” along with McVeigh’s complaint that he
had failed to provide the “necessity” defense McVeigh wanted. McVeigh had
said much worse in his habeas appeal, where he accused Jones of defending him
for the sole purpose of writing a book.
Michael Tigar was appalled by Jones’s “ratting out his client” and wrote to
Judge Matsch arguing that McVeigh’s execution should be stayed on the grounds
of ineffective assistance. The letter has never been made public, but Tigar
described it as saying: “You have a chance here not to kill this guy. Here are the
reasons you ought to think about it.” Jones said he was never told about Tigar’s
attack. “I was not aware of any such letter,” he said, “and frankly doubt it was
written.”
Judge Matsch saw nothing in the late discovery materials to shake the
validity of McVeigh’s conviction, and rejected the argument, made by Rob Nigh,
that a delay would create the opportunity to investigate people who helped
McVeigh bomb the Murrah Building. The pressure on Matsch was, of course,
enormous, and the decision he made was both legally and politically a lot safer
than denying the execution that the government and McVeigh both desired. Did
he have any room, really, to rule differently? “He could have,” Rob Nigh opined.
“I don’t think he was happy about it, by any stretch.”the execution that the government and McVeigh both desired. Did
he have any room, really, to rule differently? “He could have,” Rob Nigh opined.
“I don’t think he was happy about it, by any stretch.”

MCVEIGH WAS NOT HANGED FROM THE GALLOWS IN THE TOWN square, but his death by lethal
injection on June 11, 2001, broadcast via closed-circuit television to the media
and relatives of the victims, was the closest thing to a public execution in
modern American history. McVeigh called it “Bloodstock.”
Inside the prison, and especially in the death row wing known as Dog Unit,
the first federal execution in thirty-eight years was met with a sense of
unshakable gloom. McVeigh had a knack for making himself popular, and found
a way of laughing and joking even about his own death. “Still breathin’,” he

--- PAGE BREAK ---ars was met with a sense of
unshakable gloom. McVeigh had a knack for making himself popular, and found
a way of laughing and joking even about his own death. “Still breathin’,” he

--- PAGE BREAK ---

signed off his last letter to Jeralyn Merritt, a Denver-based lawyer on his trial
team with whom he had formed a close bond. David Hammer remembered
McVeigh forming his hand into a noose and making a yanking gesture whenever
anyone asked how he was. “I will grieve for what Tim once was, and for who he
is now, because no man ceases to be a human being, no matter his actions or how
horrid those actions were,” Hammer wrote in his journal three days before the
execution.
Many of the inmates had difficulties eating and sleeping. They were put on
lockdown, and the prison authorities replaced the usual menu of cable television
programs with comedy films to alleviate the tension. Hammer, a diabetic, gave
himself an insulin overdose the night before McVeigh’s death. “I did so hoping
to die,” he later wrote.
McVeigh was wheeled into the execution chamber looking significantly
thinner than he had at trial. Hammer said he deliberately undernourished himself
so he would look like a concentration camp victim. He stared the same hard stare
the country remembered from his perp walk outside the Noble County
courthouse six years earlier, and held it as the poisonous chemicals pumped into
his leg. He left behind the poem “Invictus,” by William Ernest Henley, to speak
for him. “I am the master of my fate; I am the captain of my soul,” the last lines
ran—an echo of McVeigh’s belief that his execution was something he was
inflicting on the government, not the other way around. He died, unflinching,
with his eyes open.
The bereaved in Oklahoma City expressed satisfaction that he was gone.
President George W. Bush, who had approved a record number of executions as
governor of Texas, said the bombing victims had been given “not vengeance, but
justice.” He then uttered a line that indeed credited McVeigh with being captain
of his soul. “One young man,” Bush said, “met the fate he chose for himself.”
Rob Nigh was given the excruciatingly difficult task of paying homage to
the moment, and to the devastation that the bombing wrought, while at the same
time finding appropriate expression for the many misgivings he felt about the
way the story had ended. “To the victims in Oklahoma City, I say that I am sorry
that I could not successfully help Tim to express words of reconciliation that he
did not perceive to be dishonest,” he said. “I do not fault them at all for looking
forward to this day or for taking some sense of relief from it.” But he also
questioned what kind of justice had been done exactly. “We have made killing a
part of the healing process,” he said. “In order to do that, we use such terms as
‘reasoned moral response.’ But I submit there’s nothing reasonable or moral
about what we have done today.”
This was not his client’s perspective, but it was an eloquent plea that wente such terms as
‘reasoned moral response.’ But I submit there’s nothing reasonable or moral
about what we have done today.”
This was not his client’s perspective, but it was an eloquent plea that went

--- PAGE BREAK ---

beyond simple opposition to the death penalty. Nigh’s words were an appeal to
light over darkness, to truth over obfuscation and lies, to the importance of
seeking a fuller understanding of the bombing in all its complexity, not just
settling for a distorted account and hoping for closure from one more cold-
blooded killing. Nigh knew the story of the bomb plot better than anyone,
because McVeigh had told him things he hadn’t shared with anybody else. He
knew much more than what had come out in court, or in books, or in the wilder
speculations in cyberspace. Nigh’s knowledge, though, could not be passed on.
McVeigh was his client, and this time, attorney-client privilege would extend
beyond the grave.
McVeigh’s secrets died with him. The rest of us can only seek to reconstitute
them from the broken pieces that he and his terrible act left behind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e would extend
beyond the grave.
McVeigh’s secrets died with him. The rest of us can only seek to reconstitute
them from the broken pieces that he and his terrible act left behind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AFTERWORD
VENGEANCE AND TRUTH
“I want him dead! I want his family dead! I want his house burned to the
ground! I wanna go there in the middle of the night and I wanna piss on
his ashes!”
—ROBERT DE NIRO AS AL CAPONE IN THE UNTOUCHABLES (1988)
Almost four years after McVeigh’s execution, and close to ten years after the
bombing, Terry Nichols revealed the secret of the missing explosives under his
house in Kansas. He did not tell a lawyer, or the FBI; rather, he confided in his
two closest cell mates in the Supermax prison.
Gregory Scarpa Jr. was a member of New York’s Colombo crime family,
forever on the lookout for information to trade. Nichols saw him as someone to
whom you give a scrap of truth and “he will twist it, weave in lies, and fabricate
a story that sounds very convincing.” Tito Bravo was a man of equally low
scruples, whom Nichols trusted more but whom Scarpa described as “an almost
pathological rat, a double-crosser who would say anything to anyone for a ham-
and-cheese sandwich.” The three of them were locked down in individual
soundproof cells for twenty-three hours a day, but they managed to communicate
through the plumbing.
Nichols told Scarpa he could produce evidence that might get Roger Moore
arrested for involvement in the bombing, but he was concerned the feds might
destroy it if they got to it first. Then he hinted he knew the whereabouts of
explosives left over from the Oklahoma City plot. Scarpa promised Nichols
$450,000 for his information. An overtrusting Nichols believed him and made
arrangements for Scarpa to send the money to his church minister. Soon, he told
Scarpa the full story of the boxes beneath his old crawl space in Herington.
Scarpa contacted Stephen Dresch, an investigator he knew in Michigan, and
said he had a tip about an imminent bomb threat. Dresch guessed that Scarpa
must be talking about Terry Nichols and, suspecting that a tenth-anniversary plot
might be in the works, notified the FBI and the office of William Delahunt, a
Massachusetts congressman on the Homeland Security subcommittee.
That was on March 1, 2005. On March 3, an FBI polygraph expert flew to
Colorado and talked to Scarpa, and determined that he was not credible. Next,congressman on the Homeland Security subcommittee.
That was on March 1, 2005. On March 3, an FBI polygraph expert flew to
Colorado and talked to Scarpa, and determined that he was not credible. Next,

--- PAGE BREAK ---Homeland Security subcommittee.
That was on March 1, 2005. On March 3, an FBI polygraph expert flew to
Colorado and talked to Scarpa, and determined that he was not credible. Next,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Scarpa turned to a forensics expert named Angela Clemente. She and Dresch
came to the Supermax and were given astonishing detail on the Herington cache
—the boxes’ exact dimensions, a description of the contents, even specifics on
the insulating wrap. According to Scarpa, Nichols was talking because he, too,
was worried about an anniversary attack and did not want any more blood on his
hands. Nichols later said he was worried about no such thing.
The only thing Scarpa wouldn’t disclose was the address where the materials
could be recovered; he wanted a deal first. Dresch, however, found the address
on his own, using his Homeland Security contacts. They agreed on a plan:
Homeland Security would recover the materials, and Scarpa would be
appropriately credited. But when Dresch traveled to Herington, he found no sign
of government or law enforcement presence. The deal had gone sour.
Dresch’s next move was to cajole the FBI into looking under the crawlspace,
the exact outcome Nichols did not want. The feds did nothing until two big news
stories—Pope John Paul II receiving the last rites and Terri Schiavo, the brain-
dead Florida woman being taken off life support—broke on the same day, giving
them the cover they wanted from the media. After digging deep enough to see
that the tip was valid, the FBI called in a bomb squad from Topeka and worked
all night to recover everything.
Nichols ended up with nothing for his disclosure. The Roger Moore
fingerprints never materialized, and neither did the $450,000. Still, the episode
was significant, because it marked the first time Nichols admitted his role in the
bomb plot. By scrambling the information Nichols was interested in pushing,
Scarpa did everyone a grave disservice.
The one public official who took significant action was Dana Rohrabacher, a
conservative Republican congressman from southern California, who visited
Nichols in June 1995 and wrote a report for the House International Relations
Committee. Rohrabacher’s focus, though, was on establishing a foreign
connection to the Oklahoma City bombing, which did not interest Nichols. “I
don’t believe Congressman Rohrabacher will be much help,” Nichols wrote
afterward. In 2006, Rohrabacher offered to see Nichols again. “If he’s only
interested in a Philippine connection,” Nichols recounted, “tell him not to waste
his time, because there is none.”
Nichols had many other valuable things to say about the Oklahoma City
bomb plot. His writings, to the authors of this book and to others, went into great
detail about his relationship with McVeigh, how they built the bomb, and other
matters. Rohrabacher missed the chance to glean that information, as did the
FBI, which wanted to know if he was willing to name names of possible
coconspirators other than Roger Moore, in whom they continued to show nor missed the chance to glean that information, as did the
FBI, which wanted to know if he was willing to name names of possible
coconspirators other than Roger Moore, in whom they continued to show no

--- PAGE BREAK ---to glean that information, as did the
FBI, which wanted to know if he was willing to name names of possible
coconspirators other than Roger Moore, in whom they continued to show no

--- PAGE BREAK ---

interest.
Nichols might have spoken out a lot sooner if it had not been for the
determination of the Oklahoma authorities to retry him after he was spared the
death penalty in federal court. Bob Macy, Oklahoma County’s gung-ho district
attorney, wanted to see him executed at all costs and, in late 1998, indicted him
on 160 counts of first-degree murder, plus one count of manslaughter of an
unborn fetus, later upgraded to a 161st murder charge.
In May 1999, Macy had his funding for the prosecution pulled and
redirected to tornado victims. Eighteen months later, Macy was ordered off the
case altogether after a judge blasted him for “blatant violation of the rules of
professional conduct,” including breaking a gag order and showing unseemly
enthusiasm for killing Nichols.
Just when prosecution seemed to be off the table, Macy’s successor, Wes
Lane, surprised everyone by announcing that he wanted to go ahead. Nichols’s
talented state defense team strove to carry on where Michael Tigar and Ron
Woods had left off, accusing the government of withholding documents and
failing to conduct an adequate investigation into other suspects. One of the new
lawyers, Mark Earnest, did some remarkable legwork to establish that the FBI
had researched phone calling cards used by Pete Langan and the other bank
robbers and checked for possible connections to the bombing. The ARA had
made a striking number of calls from a rest area on I-35, just north of the spot
where Charlie Hanger arrested McVeigh, suggesting—at least to Earnest, and
perhaps also to the FBI—that the robbers might have been waiting to pick him
up there.
Judge Steven Taylor dismissed the ARA connection as “melodrama and
hyperbole” and would not allow Langan, Mark Thomas, and other ARA
witnesses to testify. The jury in rural McAlester, ninety miles south of Tulsa,
took just five hours to conclude that Nichols was guilty of first-degree murder on
all counts. When it came to the penalty phase, however, they deadlocked. No
more than eight jurors voted for the death penalty. Some were impressed that
Nichols had embraced Christianity in prison and, as they heard it, prayed so hard
during the trial he wore out four Bibles. Others thought a life sentence was
worse punishment than death for a man who now believed he was going to
heaven. The effort to “correct” the outcome of the federal trial proved futile, and
cost Oklahoma taxpayers—who had consistently expressed their misgivings—
more than $10 million.
Even before it was over, Terry Nichols wrote to Attorney General John
Ashcroft, offering to tell everything he knew if the Justice Department would
take his allegations against Roger Moore seriously. The letter was moreover, Terry Nichols wrote to Attorney General John
Ashcroft, offering to tell everything he knew if the Justice Department would
take his allegations against Roger Moore seriously. The letter was more

--- PAGE BREAK ---

threatening than respectful. “If you want this to work in a positive way,” Nichols
wrote, “then I strongly suggest that you contact me as soon as possible.”
Ashcroft never responded. That’s when Nichols wondered whom else he could
tell about the whereabouts of the explosives boxes.
For ten years, Nichols did not tell his family that he helped McVeigh build
the bomb. It was cathartic when he finally confessed to the crime, but also a
shock to those he loved the most. Josh, whose young adult life was already
marked by alcohol and addiction, was deeply affected. Josh had always defended
his father, and now his worst fears about him were confirmed. For Terry, the
knowledge that he had betrayed his family weighed almost as heavily as the 168
people who died as a consequence of his actions.father, and now his worst fears about him were confirmed. For Terry, the
knowledge that he had betrayed his family weighed almost as heavily as the 168
people who died as a consequence of his actions.

THE VETERAN ATF INVESTIGATOR JIM CAVANAUGH HAD A SAYING HE would share whenever he
worked high-profile cases: “We’ve got to run this lead De Niro–dead.” It was a
reference to The Untouchables, and expressed the idea that law enforcement
agents should keep digging until they are quite sure there is nothing left to
check, second-guess, or look at from another angle. “It’s a failure not to do that,”
Cavanaugh said. “People will always be tempted to say about one piece of
information or another: ‘We don’t need it for the prosecution.’ The way it
worked on a lot of these cases, we would have to run all these leads out, even if
we thought we’d come to a dead end. And that’s how it should be.”
The “De Niro–dead” principle operated at many levels in the Oklahoma City
investigation. At Danny Defenbaugh’s behest, agents took copies of more than
13 million hotel and motel records to track McVeigh’s movements. The bureau
impounded more than 6 million rental records from Ryder, covering every
vehicle rented nationwide between January 1, 1994, and the day of the bombing.
They ran 160,000 license plates. The FBI crime lab shipped the entire counter
from Eldon Elliott’s body shop to headquarters. A pay phone outside a
McDonald’s in Junction City was shrink-wrapped, uprooted, and opened so
forensics experts could check every coin inside for fingerprints.
But they may also have lost sight of the big picture. Investigators never
made more than a token effort to investigate Elohim City—much less follow
through until every lead was De Niro–dead. They did not touch Louis Beam,
despite indications he had knowledge of a bomb plot and of the young man who
would carry it out. They did not properly investigate the historical connection
between Jim Ellison, Wayne Snell, the 1983 plot to blow up the Murrah
Building, and Grandpa Millar. Snell wound up dead, but far from De Niro–dead.
The feds talked to Andreas Strassmeir, eventually, but challenged him onWayne Snell, the 1983 plot to blow up the Murrah
Building, and Grandpa Millar. Snell wound up dead, but far from De Niro–dead.
The feds talked to Andreas Strassmeir, eventually, but challenged him on

--- PAGE BREAK ---83 plot to blow up the Murrah
Building, and Grandpa Millar. Snell wound up dead, but far from De Niro–dead.
The feds talked to Andreas Strassmeir, eventually, but challenged him on

--- PAGE BREAK ---

nothing of significance. The same was true of Grandpa Millar. They did not
question Dennis Mahon, even though they had material for an indictment against
him. They gave a free pass to the Ward brothers, even though their movements
around the time of the bombing were suspect, and Pete and Tony Ward were
identified as possible John Does One and Two.
The feds showed little interest in running down the Aryan Republican Army
bank robbers, because they were more interested in Kevin McCarthy’s testimony
against his fellow gang members than they were in investigating his two bogus
alibis for April 19. The investigators who pursued the robberies did not share
crucial evidence with the bombing task force, sabotaging any chance of making
a meaningful link between the two cases.
The prosecution could never prove that McVeigh rented the Ryder truck in
person, or that he—or his surrogate—had done so alone. Whatever one thinks of
Todd Bunting and the theory of eyewitness mis-association presented at trial, the
story left room for objections; it was not De Niro–dead. Prosecutors could not
explain why two dozen witnesses had seen McVeigh in Oklahoma City on the
morning of the bombing with at least one other person. They could not explain
the brown Chevy pickup sightings, or the second Ryder truck seen at the
Dreamland Motel on Easter Sunday, or the voices heard in McVeigh’s room
while he was in Oklahoma City dropping off the Mercury, or the identity of the
man who took the Chinese food delivery the night before. The multiple
suspicions about Roger Moore were simply left hanging, making him perhaps
the luckiest man in the entire investigation.
One of the prickliest problems with the government’s case was its failure to
explain how McVeigh and Nichols could build a huge destructive device without
advanced explosives training and be confident it would go off. The government
claimed the pair learned from books, fooled around on James Nichols’s farm in
Michigan, and conducted experiments in Arizona once they had begun to
assemble their bomb components. But the narrative was still missing huge
chunks. The government had McVeigh detonating a pipe bomb—nothing to do
with ammonium nitrate—in the desert outside Kingman in the summer of 1994,
with modest results. Then, a few months later, they had him mixing ammonium
nitrate and nitromethane in a gallon-size plastic jug and setting that off, too.
According to Terry Nichols, the experiment was a failure. How did the bombers
go from amateur hour in October 1994 to mass murder on a horrific scale six
months later? The official record is silent.
The missing explosives were never properly run down, either. Since the FBI
crime lab could not figure out the composition of the bomb, it was difficult to
know which of the known components assembled by McVeigh and Nichols werenever properly run down, either. Since the FBI
crime lab could not figure out the composition of the bomb, it was difficult to
know which of the known components assembled by McVeigh and Nichols were

--- PAGE BREAK ---down, either. Since the FBI
crime lab could not figure out the composition of the bomb, it was difficult to
know which of the known components assembled by McVeigh and Nichols were

--- PAGE BREAK ---

used to destroy the Murrah Building and which were left over. The topic was
certainly a cause for concern: Defenbaugh pushed unsuccessfully for an
eleventh-hour FBI interview with McVeigh to ask him about it. According to
Terry Nichols, he and McVeigh exhausted the supply of ammonium nitrate and
nitromethane, but not the Tovex or the blasting caps. Nichols said they used just
one case of Tovex to mix the bomb, leaving another seven and a half cases
unaccounted for, along with about 60 Primadet nonelectric blasting cap systems
and 340 electric blasting caps. Where did this material end up?
This book has examined how institutional failure, lack of nerve, turf wars,
and a political imperative to prosecute the Oklahoma City bomb plot swiftly and
cleanly all impeded the FBI and the other investigative agencies from meeting
the standards expected of them. Ironically, by the time McVeigh and Nichols
went on trial, the leaders of each prosecution team, Joseph Hartzler and Larry
Mackey, were more willing to acknowledge the possibility of other
coconspirators than the FBI. This wasn’t just about serving justice; it was about
the FBI’s need to defend its reputation, at the expense of the truth.
“Two evil men did this and two evil men paid,” Frank Keating, the FBI
agent who became governor of Oklahoma, declared in 2004. That’s the story the
bureau has told itself for fifteen years.
McVeigh certainly helped the FBI make this argument. His desire to be
recognized as the lone mastermind of the bombing converged with the FBI’s
desire to say that nobody else was involved. In 2002, Louis Freeh wrote in his
autobiography: “It was Timothy McVeigh himself…who persuaded me that the
conspiracy didn’t go beyond what we had uncovered.” Freeh was too smart not
to see this as an argument of convenience as much as investigative fact. But he
was not the only one who made it. “Reading the interviews with McVeigh [in
American Terrorist], I was astounded how close to the truth we were,” said
Weldon Kennedy, the FBI’s first on-scene commander who later served as
Freeh’s deputy. How astounding was it, though, that McVeigh dovetailed his
account with the government’s? He was familiar with the official narrative of the
bombing, having read all the discovery materials and sat through more than a
month of court testimony. Was it not more astounding to think that the
perpetrator of the worst domestic bombing in American history—a man who lied
to his friends, made sexual advances to their wives, was prone to self-
aggrandizement, and thought the bereaved of Oklahoma City should stop
whining and just get over themselves—would give a book-length account of his
crimes and tell nothing but the truth?
There is, as both Rob Nigh and Michael Tigar intimated, a fundamentally
antithetical relationship between vengeance and truth. One has a tendency tocount of his
crimes and tell nothing but the truth?
There is, as both Rob Nigh and Michael Tigar intimated, a fundamentally
antithetical relationship between vengeance and truth. One has a tendency to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

block out the other. Nobody can fault the bombing victims for the desire to pin
their grief and rage and loss on readily identifiable culprits, and to see those
culprits punished swiftly and severely. But when law enforcement agencies and
higher government institutions allow that same emotional response to guide their
actions—or, worse, allow themselves to exploit the victims’ raw emotions to
cover up mistakes and lash out dishonestly at their critics—then the truth suffers,
and with it the most salient qualities of a civilized society.

--- PAGE BREAK ---loit the victims’ raw emotions to
cover up mistakes and lash out dishonestly at their critics—then the truth suffers,
and with it the most salient qualities of a civilized society.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SOURCES
Prologue
Matsch quote from a March 25, 1998, post-conviction hearing in the Nichols
federal trial; quote from Kerry Noble, Jim Ellison’s sidekick in the 1980s
paramilitary sect the Covenant, the Sword, and the Arm of the Lord (CSA), from
a never-released documentary made by a production company named MGA
(Made for General Audiences); transcript of interview, dated March 22, 1999,
obtained by authors. Ashcroft turned down FBI requests for $50 million in new
counterterrorism funds the day before 9/11; see Richard Clarke, Against All
Enemies, p. 254, and Dan Eggen, “Ashcroft’s Pre–9/11 Priorities Scrutinized,”
Washington Post, April 13, 2004. He faced at least two high-profile lawsuits,
Raich v. Ashcroft and Santa Cruz v. Ashcroft, because of his opposition to
California’s medical marijuana laws. Infamously, Ashcroft paid $8,000 to cover
up a nude female statue, the Spirit of Justice, in the Great Hall of the Main
Justice building in Washington. “Curtains for Semi-Nude Justice Statue,” BBC
News, January 29, 2002. Janet Reno on deadbeat dads, see Justice Department
news release of December 22, 1994, “Attorney General Reno Announces Plan to
Crack Down on Dead-Beat Parents Who Fail to Pay Child Support”; Danny
Defenbaugh said in an April 5, 2011, interview (Gumbel) that this priority was
met with consternation at the FBI, because it tied up resources the offices wanted
to expend on serious crime. Reno did not respond to interview requests. The
Department of Homeland Security study, prepared in coordination with the FBI,
is Rightwing Extremism: Current Economic and Political Climate Fueling
Resurgence in Radicalization and Recruitment, published April 7, 2009. Most
controversial was its finding that neo-Nazis, skinheads, and other white
supremacists were learning combat skills in the army and that “rightwing
extremists will attempt to recruit and radicalize returning veterans in order to
exploit their skills and knowledge derived from military training and combat….
The willingness of a small percentage of military personnel to join extremist
groups during the 1990s because they were disgruntled, disillusioned, or
suffering from the psychological effects of war is being replicated today.”
Jonathan Franzen, Freedom, p. 445; James William Gibson, Warrior Dreams, p.
12. Sign on prosecutors’ door related by Larry Mackey, interview (Gumbel),
April 28, 2011; Joe Hartzler remembered the sign reading: “Don’t hide the crime
in the clutter,” interview (Gumbel), June 2, 2011. Keating quoted in Jon Hersley,d by Larry Mackey, interview (Gumbel),
April 28, 2011; Joe Hartzler remembered the sign reading: “Don’t hide the crime
in the clutter,” interview (Gumbel), June 2, 2011. Keating quoted in Jon Hersley,

--- PAGE BREAK ---nterview (Gumbel),
April 28, 2011; Joe Hartzler remembered the sign reading: “Don’t hide the crime
in the clutter,” interview (Gumbel), June 2, 2011. Keating quoted in Jon Hersley,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Larry Tongate, and Bob Burke, Simple Truths, p. 10; Michael E. Tigar, Nine
Principles of Litigation and Life, p. 161; the last two sentences take their
inspiration from a similar sentiment expressed by Michael Tigar in his opening
argument in the Nichols trial on November 3, 1997. Tigar said: “To the living,
we owe respect. To the dead, we owe the truth.”
Chapter 1
EOD team:
Interview (Gumbel and Charles) with confidential source familiar with Mogg
and Humphries, May 13, 2010; Mogg partial travel records released by Defense
Finance and Accounting Service, letter to Roger Charles, February 10, 1998;
Mogg phone interviews with Don Devereux, June 6, 2001, and Mary Mapes,
June 17, 2001, graciously shared with authors. Mogg’s words to Devereux, when
asked what he was doing in Oklahoma City, were: “You’ll have to ask the FBI
about that.” A number of senior FBI agents responsible for domestic security or
for Oklahoma said they knew nothing about the EOD team or its mission.
McVeigh and Nichols meet to build the bomb:
Terry Nichols handwritten account, “Morning of April 18, 1995,” November 29,
2007; Nichols’s written answers to author questions, March 20, 2010; McVeigh’s
version in Lou Michel and Dan Herbeck, American Terrorist, pp. 214–20.
Wayne Snell predicting a bomb:
Prison official Alan Ables’s interview with Canadian Broadcasting Service Fifth
Estate program, broadcast October 22, 1996. Also quoted in Howard Pankratz,
“Blast blamed on revenge attack linked to militant’s execution,” Denver Post,
May 12, 1996, and in John Solomon, “Government had information suggesting
Oklahoma City attack weeks before McVeigh struck,” Associated Press,
February 12, 2003; Ellison quoted in Kerry Noble, Tabernacle of Hate: Why
They Bombed Oklahoma City, pp. 134–35.
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research:
Interviews (Charles) with Karyn Armstrong and Adolph Januszkiewicz,
February 6, 1998. Dennis Dutsch, Governor Frank Keating’s chief of security,
said he was sure the query did not originate with his office. The governor’s
office would never go through the Pentagon for a request of this nature.
(Interview with Gumbel, June 22, 2011.)
Steam-generating plant incident:
Trigen log quoted in Richard Sherrow, “Aftershocks and Subterfuge: Cloud of
Doubt Lingers Over Government Cover-Up,” Soldier of Fortune, April 1996;
Glenn Wilburn’s conversations with Charles Gaines and Harvey Weathersin Richard Sherrow, “Aftershocks and Subterfuge: Cloud of
Doubt Lingers Over Government Cover-Up,” Soldier of Fortune, April 1996;
Glenn Wilburn’s conversations with Charles Gaines and Harvey Weathers

--- PAGE BREAK ---“Aftershocks and Subterfuge: Cloud of
Doubt Lingers Over Government Cover-Up,” Soldier of Fortune, April 1996;
Glenn Wilburn’s conversations with Charles Gaines and Harvey Weathers

--- PAGE BREAK ---

quoted in Kathy Sanders, After Oklahoma: A Grieving Grandmother Uncovers
Shocking Truths About the Bombing…and Herself, pp. 89–90; Wilburn also
interviewed by Tom Jarriel of ABC’s 20/20, November 18, 1996. His account is
corroborated by Harvey Weathers in his FBI FD-302 interview of May 15, 1996,
file no. 14935, and by Oklahoma City fire chief Gary Marrs in his FBI FD-302,
May 21, 1996, file no. 15006. The sarin gas alert story is also from Marrs. See
also Judy Keen, “An Army of Agents, Experts Following Hundreds of Leads,”
USA Today, April 20, 1995.
McVeigh and Nichols at Geary Lake:
Terry Nichols’s handwritten account, “Morning of April 18, 1995,” op. cit.
McVeigh’s line about sacrificing himself if necessary, from Nichols’s answers to
author questions, February 21, 2011. McVeigh’s account, from Michel and
Herbeck, American Terrorist, pp. 216–20; expert opinion on explosives:
interviews with, among others, Special Agent Tristan Moreland of ATF,
November 5, 2009, and February 4, 2010 (Gumbel), and noted explosives expert
and government consultant Pharis E. Williams, September 21, 2010 (Gumbel
and Charles, by e-mail); Andrew Macdonald [William Pierce alias], Hunter, pp.
176–79.
Links between Snell, Beam, and others, etc.:
Jack Knox interview (Gumbel), May 10, 2010; Bruce Campbell interview
(Gumbel), October 21, 2009; Cheri Seymour interview (Gumbel), July 22, 2009;
confidential informant reporting Beam meeting Mary Snell in April 1995,
contained in January 29, 1996, FBI insert, file no. E 7453; Mary Snell,
interviewed by the FBI on August 12, 1995, FD-302, file no. 9384, said her
husband had no advance knowledge of the bombing; FBI interview with Roy L.
Byrd, Florence, Arizona, January 25, 1996, FD-302, file no. 13856; Bill Buford
interview (Gumbel), May 11, 2010; Mary Snell letter to Michigan militia, quoted
in Daniel Levitas, The Terrorist Next Door: The Militia Movement and the
Radical Right, p. 5.
Odd departures from Elohim City:
Millar quoted in interview with MGA documentary crew, May 23, 2000;
Andreas Strassmeir, interviews (Gumbel), June 30–July 3, 2010; “Field marshal
of Elohim City” line from Dave Hollaway interview (Gumbel), July 10, 2010;
information on Aryan Republican Army robberies/meeting to disband from FBI
FD-302 interview with Richard Lee Guthrie, case no. 91A-CI-63809 (MC-124),
dated March 4–15, 1996, esp. p. 17 for this time frame; and also Guthrie’s
unpublished handwritten prison memoir, The Taunting Bandits, aka Banks for
the Memories, esp. p. 155; on Thomas getting money from the Des Moines
robbery and giving Stedeford a fake driver’s license, see Mark S. Hamm, In Badprison memoir, The Taunting Bandits, aka Banks for
the Memories, esp. p. 155; on Thomas getting money from the Des Moines
robbery and giving Stedeford a fake driver’s license, see Mark S. Hamm, In Bad

--- PAGE BREAK ---aunting Bandits, aka Banks for
the Memories, esp. p. 155; on Thomas getting money from the Des Moines
robbery and giving Stedeford a fake driver’s license, see Mark S. Hamm, In Bad

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Company: America’s Terrorist Underground, p. 221; Stedeford’s and McCarthy’s
movements, see McCarthy’s FBI FD-302 interviews, June 17, 1996 (not in the
bombing case file), and September 20, 1996; Mark and Nathan Thomases’
movements, per FD-302 interview with Mark Thomas, April 17, 1997 (not in the
bombing case file). Information on Nathan Thomas at Elohim City from Carol
Howe, see ATF report of investigation for November 1994, op. cit.; Sonny Ward
leaving Elohim City for elsewhere in Oklahoma, then Valdosta, Georgia, see FBI
FD-302 interview with Oklahoma Highway Patrol trooper John Haynie, April
28, 1995, file no. 389; Priscilla Ward’s Sunday-school teacher Kennilee Mooney,
see her FBI FD-302, file no. 14818, April 27, 1996; on Pete Ward and the Ward
parents, see FBI FD-302 with Pete Ward, September 23, 1996, file no. 16069.
Ken Stern report:
Militias: A Growing Danger, published in Issues in National Affairs, vol. 5, no. 1
(New York, American Jewish Committee, 1995); cover memo provided to
Gumbel by e-mail, December 23, 2009, along with information on researcher
group pooling information; LaPierre and Liddy quoted in Kenneth S. Stern, A
Force Upon the Plain, p. 222.
Dave Hollaway’s strange phone call:
Dave Hollaway interview (Gumbel), May 6, 2010, FBI FD-302; interview with
Hollaway, August 12, 1996, file no. 15886; Kirk Lyons interviews (Gumbel),
March 23, 2010 and May 27, 2010.
McVeigh traveling from Kansas to Oklahoma:
McVeigh’s account told to defense lawyer Jim Hankins in May 1995 and quoted
in a confidential defense memo dated January 22, 1996, written by Amber
McLaughlin and Bob Wyatt. The memo was first obtained by freelance reporter
Ben Fenwick and subsequently released by producer Martin Smith of PBS’s
Frontline. See http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/documents/mcveigh/; J.
W. Odom, interviewed by the FBI, April 28, 1995, file no. 17075; Ingrid Mae
Willmurth, interviewed April 24, 1995, by Agent Mario Reyes of ATF, see FBI
FD-302, file no. 207; Cattle Baron’s Steakhouse sighting and Jackie’s Farmers
Store sighting cited in Arnold Hamilton, “Ryder Truck, Trail of Food Take
Bomb Inquiry Along Back Road; Reported Sightings of Suspects Studied Up
and Down U.S. 77,” Dallas Morning News, November 27, 1995.
Wilburn household breakfast:
Glenn and Kathy Wilburn, interviewed by Tom Jarriel of ABC’s 20/20,
November 18, 1996. Quotes taken from ABC internal transcript.
Bill Grimsley and the bomb squad truck:
Grimsley FBI FD-302, file no. 15426, dated July 8, 1996; FBI interviews, file
nos. 11607 and 11735, with bomb squad captain Bob Heady and his squad, datedript.
Bill Grimsley and the bomb squad truck:
Grimsley FBI FD-302, file no. 15426, dated July 8, 1996; FBI interviews, file
nos. 11607 and 11735, with bomb squad captain Bob Heady and his squad, dated

--- PAGE BREAK ---and the bomb squad truck:
Grimsley FBI FD-302, file no. 15426, dated July 8, 1996; FBI interviews, file
nos. 11607 and 11735, with bomb squad captain Bob Heady and his squad, dated

--- PAGE BREAK ---

November 7, 1995; Heady reinterviewed May 20, 1996, file no. 15002;
witnesses include Dan Adomitis, interviewed by Tom Jarriel of ABC News,
November 19, 1996 (information taken from raw ABC transcript); J. D. Reed,
who wrote an account titled “Wednesday, April 19, 1995, A Black Day for Us
All,” in Workin’ Interest, a company newsletter of Parker & Parsley Petroleum
USA Inc., vol. 96, issue 3; and Norma Joslin, quoted in Laura Vozella, “Pair See
Conspiracy in Blast; Government Tipped Off, Couple Say,” Fort Worth Star-
Telegram, March 31, 1996. Joslin’s insistence on being driven into underground
garage for grand jury hearing taken from notes (Charles) from her meeting with
Oklahoma State Representative Charles Key, October 3, 1997; Sheriff J. D.
Sharp denying presence of bomb squad downtown to local Oklahoma media
cited in Petition for Writ of Mandamus of Petitioner-Defendant, Timothy James
McVeigh and Brief in Support, filed in the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals on
March 25, 1997; bomb squad in blue jeans, quoted in NBC Extra, March 19,
1997; interviews (Gumbel) with bomb squad members Kyle Kilgore and Stanley
D. Brown, September 21, 2010.
Bomb squad/sniffer dogs:
Renee Cooper FBI FD-302, file no. 11474, November 22, 1995; see also
Sanders, op. cit., pp. 66–67; private investigator Claude Criss interviewed by
Tom Jarriel of ABC News, November 19, 1996; interview (Gumbel), August 18,
2010; Debbie Nakanashi told congressional investigator John Culbertson that her
bosses and the U.S. Attorney’s Office had put limits on what she, as a federal
employee, could say in court. In her exact words: “They also said that if I had
seen, like, for instance…if I had noticed bomb dogs on the outside of the
building as I was coming to work on the day of the bombing, that was something
that I could not testify as to that I had seen that.” The interview was recorded
and entered into the congressional record July 27, 2000, at a hearing of the
House Subcommittee on Commercial and
Administrative Law.
See
http://commdocs.house.gov/committees/judiciary/hju67342.000/hju67342_0.htm;
Randall Yount interview (Gumbel), September 30, 2010; John Haynie, FBI FD-
302, dated May 20, 1996, file no. 15004. Surveillance training explanation from
his testimony before the Oklahoma County grand jury, January 28, 1998,
obtained by authors; Haynie quotes from interview (Gumbel), December 17,
2010, the culmination of three months of phone calls and e-mail correspondence;
OHP time logs obtained through an open records request; Rick Stephens
interviews (Gumbel), October 12, 2010, February 1 and February 14, 2011.
Ryder truck/other vehicle sightings after 8 A.M.:
McVeigh arriving in Oklahoma City at 8:50 A.M., see Michel and Herbeck, op.
cit., pp. 223, 229. Leonard Long, interviewed by J. D. Cash, November 14, 1995,truck/other vehicle sightings after 8 A.M.:
McVeigh arriving in Oklahoma City at 8:50 A.M., see Michel and Herbeck, op.
cit., pp. 223, 229. Leonard Long, interviewed by J. D. Cash, November 14, 1995,

--- PAGE BREAK ---sightings after 8 A.M.:
McVeigh arriving in Oklahoma City at 8:50 A.M., see Michel and Herbeck, op.
cit., pp. 223, 229. Leonard Long, interviewed by J. D. Cash, November 14, 1995,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tape obtained by authors. See also J. D. Cash and Jeff Holladay, “Startling New
Evidence: At Least 4 People Directly Involved in Bombing,” McCurtain Daily
Gazette, January 23, 1996; Morris John Kuper, FBI FD-302, interviews on
October 24 and November 1, 1995 file nos. 10935 and 11356; Kyle Hunt, quoted
in Sanders, op. cit., pp. 87–88; Mike Moroz, FBI FD-302, file no. 68, dated
April 21, 1995, also quoted in Peter Gelzinis, “FBI Turns Tragedy into
‘Nightmare,’” Boston Globe, May 13, 2001; Dave Snider, interviewed by MGA
documentary crew, March 27, 1999. Transcript obtained by authors; James
Linehan, FBI FD-302, file no. 1645, dated April 25, 1995, also interviewed by
MGA documentary crew, April 13, 1999, transcript obtained by authors. Danny
Wilkerson’s story told by Jannie Coverdale, interview April 2001, see Andrew
Gumbel, “Timothy McVeigh: A Deadly Silence,” The Independent (UK), April
17, 2001; Danny Coulson, quoted on BBC television program The Conspiracy
Files, March 2, 2007. Also, interview (Gumbel), May 19, 2010; the “innocent”
Ryder truck, see Billy Holdson’s FBI FD-302, file no. 17699, April 16, 1997.
The Turner Diaries passage describing FBI headquarters bombing, see
Macdonald, op. cit., pp. 36–42; Jane Graham, public statement, “Murrah
Building Bombing/Information and MisInformation,” November 15, 1996; Dave
Hollaway, interview (Gumbel), May 6, 2010. Underground parking lot story also
related by Andreas Strassmeir, interview (Gumbel), July 3, 2010; Kirk Lyons,
interview (Gumbel), May 27, 2010; sighting of Ryder truck attempting to enter
alley behind federal courthouse, interview (Charles) with former Oklahoma
Highway Patrol trooper Steve Newby, citing fellow OHP trooper Mike Stroud,
September 12, 1997; interview with the head of Federal Protective Service, Tom
Hunt (Gumbel), December 16, 2010, and with John Magaw (Gumbel), June 22,
2010.
Prank call to Justice Department:
Jones and Israel, Others Unknown, pp. 3–4, 242–50; in The Turner Diaries, a
character called Henry uses a public phone booth to call the Washington Post
one minute before a truck bomb destroys FBI headquarters. See Macdonald, op.
cit., p. 40.
Fax to Steve Stockman’s office:
Statement, with text of fax, put out by Stockman’s staff, April 24, 1995. More
information in Richard Whittle, “Fax to Congressman on Day of Blast Explained
by Sender; Woman Says She’d Hoped to Limit Disinformation,” Christian
Science Monitor, April 26, 1995; and in Bennett Roth, “Oklahoma City Tragedy:
Threat or a Promise? Stockman Reveals Fax Author’s Taped Vow to ‘Go
Ballistic,’” Houston Chronicle, April 27, 1995.
Final minutes before the explosion:95; and in Bennett Roth, “Oklahoma City Tragedy:
Threat or a Promise? Stockman Reveals Fax Author’s Taped Vow to ‘Go
Ballistic,’” Houston Chronicle, April 27, 1995.
Final minutes before the explosion:

--- PAGE BREAK ---oth, “Oklahoma City Tragedy:
Threat or a Promise? Stockman Reveals Fax Author’s Taped Vow to ‘Go
Ballistic,’” Houston Chronicle, April 27, 1995.
Final minutes before the explosion:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Gary Lewis, quoted in J. D. Cash, “Eyewitness to Bombing Saw McVeigh,
Smiling Mideasterner,” McCurtain Daily Gazette, August 11, 1995; Glenn
Grossman FBI FD-302, file no. 198, dated April 23, 1995; second FBI FD-302,
file no. 14843, dated April 30, 1996; Daina Bradley, see McVeigh trial transcript,
May 23, 1997; Rodney Johnson, from MGA documentary transcript, interviewed
March 18, 1999. Leah Moore, see J. D. Cash, “The Final Moments Before the
Oklahoma City Bombing,” McCurtain Daily Gazette, January 24, 1996. (Leah
Moore misspelled Lea Mohr.) Levoid Jack Gage, FBI FD-302, file no. 7221,
July 27, 1995; McVeigh’s description of putting in earplugs and walking away,
Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., pp. 229–31; Secret Service timeline obtained by
authors, timeline entry on Grossman at 1930 on April 24, 1995; Richard A.
Serrano and Ronald J. Ostrow, “FBI Re-Creates Events Leading to Bomb Blast,”
Los Angeles Times, October 25, 1995.
Chapter 2
Oklahoma Military Academy:
Stanley Brown, contemporaneous notes, written April 19, 1995, and revised
April 20, 1995, made available to authors. Also, interview (Gumbel), September
21, 2010.
Federal courthouse:
Gary Knight, interview (Gumbel), September 1, 2010; more details in John
Perry, “A Day of Terror,” Daily Oklahoman, April 23, 1995.
Rear axle hits Richard Nichols’s car:
Nichols testified in the McVeigh trial, May 14, 1997. Nichols is no relation of
Terry or James Nichols.
Glenn Wilburn on scene:
From transcript of interview with ABC’s 20/20, November 18, 1996.
Murrah Building:
Some details of America’s Kids day-care center taken from Rick Bragg, “Tender
Memories of Day-Care Center Are All That Remain After the Bomb,” New York
Times, May 3, 1995; on the mini-scandal concerning Danielle Hunt’s work as
operator, see notes to chapter 3. According to inspection reports from the
Oklahoma Department of Human Services, obtained by Gumbel, attendance at
9:00 A.M. was consistent at about thirty kids in the first three months of the year,
nine or ten more than were present on April 19. On Dana Cooper’s educational
qualifications, see “Those Who Were Killed” section of the Oklahoma City
National Memorial Web site, http://www.oklahomacitynationalmemorial.org;
story of Brandon and Jessica Denny from Tom and Danielle Hunt, interviews“Those Who Were Killed” section of the Oklahoma City
National Memorial Web site, http://www.oklahomacitynationalmemorial.org;
story of Brandon and Jessica Denny from Tom and Danielle Hunt, interviews

--- PAGE BREAK ---led” section of the Oklahoma City
National Memorial Web site, http://www.oklahomacitynationalmemorial.org;
story of Brandon and Jessica Denny from Tom and Danielle Hunt, interviews

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(Gumbel), December 16 and 17, 2010. On Brandon Denny’s medical travails,
see Arnold Hamilton, “Life Goes on for Young Survivors of Oklahoma City
Bombing,” Dallas Morning News, April 19, 2005; on Daina Bradley and her
family, see Marc Peyser with Peter Annin, “Survivor: ‘All I Saw Were Bright
Lights,’” Newsweek, June 5, 1995; particulars of victim trauma from a detailed,
body part by body part, inventory compiled by the military, titled “Body
Locations,” dated May 2, 1995, and obtained by Gumbel; account of OCFD
rescue operations chief, see Mike Shannon, “Rescue Operations: Doing Battle
with the Building,” Fire Engineering, October 1995, pp. 64–93, Priscilla Salyers
story: Daniel LeDuc, Jeffrey Fleishman, Terence Samuel, Larry Copeland, Dan
Meyers, et al,. “Just Another Day, Then Disaster in Federal Building,”
Philadelphia Inquirer, April 30, 1995; breakdown of fatalities: “Victims of the
Oklahoma City Bombing,” Associated Press, June 11, 2001.
Fragility of Murrah Building:
FEMA report on the building damage: W. Gene Corley, Mete A. Sozen, Charles
H. Thornton, and Paul F. Mlakar, “The Oklahoma City Bombing: Improving
Building Performance Through Multi-Hazard Mitigation,” FEMA, U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., August 1996; a useful summary
and further conclusions can be found in W. Gene Corley, “Applicability of
Seismic Design in Mitigating Progressive Collapse,” CTL Group, Skokie,
Illinois, 2004. National Research Council report: Committee on the Protection of
Federal Facilities Against Terrorism, “Protection of Federal Office Buildings
Against Terrorism,” National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1988, line
about explosive-laden vehicle, p. 30; NRC author John Pignato and other experts
interviewed in Mike McGraw and Joe Stephens, “88 Warnings on Terrorism Left
Unheeded; Study Advised Ways to Prevent Attacks on Federal Buildings,”
Kansas City Star, April 29, 1995; Ronald L. Howland, interview (Gumbel),
January 3, 2011; Tom Hunt, interviews (Gumbel), December 16 and 17, 2010;
five-hour gap in daily security-guard coverage and other arrangements detailed
in GSA Federal Protective Service Physical Security Survey, dated February 21,
1995, obtained by Gumbel.
Bomb detonation:
Raymon Brown’s initial findings are in a brief report, “Seismograms Possibly
Associated with the OKC Explosion,” May 9, 1995. This and more is included in
rogue former FBI agent Ted Gunderson’s report on the bombing, with its
conclusion that the blast was the result of a super bomb. See Ted L. Gunderson
and Associates, “The Gunderson Report on the Bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah
Federal Building, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. April 19, 1995,” Las Vegas,
November 1, 1996, amended October 26, 2000. Viewed online atciates, “The Gunderson Report on the Bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah
Federal Building, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. April 19, 1995,” Las Vegas,
November 1, 1996, amended October 26, 2000. Viewed online at

--- PAGE BREAK ---on Report on the Bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah
Federal Building, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. April 19, 1995,” Las Vegas,
November 1, 1996, amended October 26, 2000. Viewed online at

--- PAGE BREAK ---

http://www.tedgunderson.net, October 20, 2010; Brown told an Oklahoma
County grand jury in September 1997 he now regarded the results as
inconclusive and they could not, on their own, support the two-bomb theory. His
boss, OGS director Charles Mankin, told the grand jury the two-bomb theory
had been a mistake. See Ed Godfrey, Diana Baldwin, and Judy Kuhlman, “Grand
Jury Told Seismic Readings Unclear in Bombing,” Daily Oklahoman, September
19, 1997, and Diana Baldwin, “Expert Rejects 2-Bomb Idea, Grand Jury Told
Seismic Report a Mistake,” Daily Oklahoman, October 7, 1997; for a scientific
explanation of why the seismograms are consistent with a single bomb, see
Thomas L. Holzer, Joe B. Fletcher, Gary S. Fuis, Trond Ryberg, Thomas M.
Brocher, and Christopher M. Dietel, “Seismograms Offer Insight into Oklahoma
City Bombing,” Eos (a publication of the American Geophysical Union), vol.
77, no. 41, October 8, 1996; Brigadier General Partin’s report, “Bomb Damage
Analysis of Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma,” is
dated July 30, 1995, and was sent to Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, then the
Senate Majority Whip. For a take-down of his arguments, and a cogent
explanation of the bomb blast and its effects, see Richard Sherrow, “Bombast,
Bomb Blasts & Baloney,” Soldier of Fortune, January 1996, pp. 41–43 and 72–
77; others supporting Sherrow’s contentions about the negative blast-pressure
wave include Bill Buford, another veteran bomb expert for the ATF turned
commander of the Arkansas State Police Bomb Squad, interview (Gumbel), May
11, 2010. See also, Globalsecurity.org’s online article on munitions damage at
http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/systems/munitions/damage.htm (accessed
October 20, 2010); Dave Hollaway interview (Gumbel), May 6, 2010.
Scenes from the bowels of hell:
Franklin Alexander, account in official written statement, FBI FD-302, file no.
15498, dictated July 7, 1996; John Avera, interviewed by his police department
colleagues. Report included in undated FBI document F-9442, April 20, 1995
(not in bombing case file); some details also from Mike Shannon’s piece in Fire
Engineering, op. cit.
Suspicions of Middle East connection, smart suspicions of a Waco
connection:
Jim Kamen quoted in Jim Naureckas, “The Oklahoma City Bombing: The Jihad
that Wasn’t,” Extra! (a publication of FAIR, or Fairness and Accuracy in
Reporting), Washington, D.C., July/August 1995; warning issued to federal
courthouses, see John Solomon, “Weeks Before 1995 Oklahoma Bombing,
Government Warned of Possible Terror Bombings of Federal Buildings,”
Associated Press, June 20, 2002, and Robert Rudolph, “Lawmen Get Warning of
Plot on U.S. Targets,” Newark Star-Ledger, March 22, 1995. Also Judge WaynePossible Terror Bombings of Federal Buildings,”
Associated Press, June 20, 2002, and Robert Rudolph, “Lawmen Get Warning of
Plot on U.S. Targets,” Newark Star-Ledger, March 22, 1995. Also Judge Wayne

--- PAGE BREAK ---bings of Federal Buildings,”
Associated Press, June 20, 2002, and Robert Rudolph, “Lawmen Get Warning of
Plot on U.S. Targets,” Newark Star-Ledger, March 22, 1995. Also Judge Wayne

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Alley interview (Gumbel), August 18, 2010; Abraham Ahmad story detailed in
his FBI FD-302s, file numbers 3939 (April 19, 1995, in Chicago), 3354 (April
20–21, from his FBI interrogation in northern Virginia), and 230 (April 20,
itemizing the contents of his luggage recovered in Rome). Pentagon sends Arab
translators: Pentagon Department of Military Support memo, obtained by
authors, titled “Linguist Support for Federal Bureau of Investigation” and dated
April 19, 1995, and e-mail, obtained by authors, from Lieutenant Colonel
Frederick S. Gisler of Forces Command headquarters at Fort McPherson,
Georgia; Ricks telling police and fire chiefs the significance of April 19,
interview (Gumbel) with Assistant City Manager Joe Van Bullard, August 25,
2010. Ricks wondering if he was a target, interview (Gumbel), August 17, 2010;
Danny Coulson–Rita Braver phone call, see Danny O. Coulson, with Elaine
Shannon, No Heroes: Inside the FBI’s Secret Counter-Terror Force, p. 3.
McVeigh and the missing license plate:
McVeigh’s version of purchasing the Mercury, stashing it in Oklahoma City, and
driving away after the bombing: see Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., pp. 206–207,
211–13, and 230–32; theories of why no license plate: Bob Ricks, the FBI
special agent in charge in Oklahoma City (interview by Gumbel, August 9,
2010), thought McVeigh simply forgot to reattach it in the heat of the moment;
Scott Mendeloff, a member of the government prosecution team (interview by
Gumbel, July 16, 2010), thought it fell off; Weldon Kennedy, the FBI’s first on-
scene commander (interview by Gumbel, August 26, 2010), thought the license
plate was stolen; Terry Nichols, echoing some of the crazier theories floating
around the Internet, has suggested that McVeigh was programmed by a
government “handler” to (a) remove the license plate and (b) make sure he was
caught and take the fall for the bombing (Nichols’s handwritten answers to
questions posed by Salt Lake City lawyer Jesse Trentadue, dated January 27,
2010); McVeigh said (Michel and Herbeck, p. 226) he expected to be captured or
killed, though he didn’t say this in connection with the missing license plate.
Two witnesses who saw plate dangling by a single bolt: Lea McGown, owner of
the Dreamland Motel in Junction City, Kansas, where McVeigh checked in hours
after purchasing the Mercury (McGown interview with MGA documentary crew,
March 13, 1999, transcript obtained by authors; and Gary Lewis, the Journal
Record employee, who saw what he believed was an Oklahoma license plate
dangling by a single bolt—see notes to chapter 1); “Nice and solid, two screws
right on top” quote reported by defense lawyer Jim Hankins (see notes to chapter
1) based on interview with McVeigh in May 1995. “Network of friends” letter to
Jennifer, which is undated, is quoted in Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., p. 197. In
her grand jury testimony on August 2, 1995, Jennifer told prosecuting attorneyay 1995. “Network of friends” letter to
Jennifer, which is undated, is quoted in Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., p. 197. In
her grand jury testimony on August 2, 1995, Jennifer told prosecuting attorney

--- PAGE BREAK ---friends” letter to
Jennifer, which is undated, is quoted in Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., p. 197. In
her grand jury testimony on August 2, 1995, Jennifer told prosecuting attorney

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Vicki Behenna she thought the letter was written sometime after October 1993.
(Summary of her testimony in Alliance Services investigative memo to the
Nichols federal defense team, memo written by H. C. Bodley, July 10, 1997.)
Items in McVeigh’s car, exhibits at his trial including nos. 447 (“abandoned do
not tow” note under windshield), 448A (copy of Declaration of Independence
with message on the back), 451 (quote from John Locke, hand-copied by
McVeigh), 453 (photocopied excerpt from The Turner Diaries), and 458 (article
on Lexington and Concord); Terry Nichols corroborating story about removing
license plate, from Nichols’s handwritten answers to author questions, March 20,
2010.
The getaway from Oklahoma City:
McVeigh’s version reported by Hankins as well as Michel and Herbeck;
Germaine Johnston account based on her testimony at the Terry Nichols trial
(December 5, 1997). Johnston estimated she saw McVeigh 20–25 minutes after
the bombing, which would not leave him enough time to drive the Mercury to
the point on I-35 where he was arrested just before 10:20 A.M. The FBI never
seriously considered the possibility that Johnston was mistaken about how much
time had elapsed (as opposed to mistaken about absolutely everything else); the
other witness who saw McVeigh in the alley was Morris John Kuper (see notes
to chapter 1).
Chevie Kehoe at the Shadows Motel in Spokane:
Details in Bill Morlin, “McVeigh in Spokane Before Bombing? Innkeeper Links
Kehoe, McVeigh in Months Before Oklahoma City Blast,” Spokane Spokesman
Review, January 16, 1998; Morlin, “Kehoe Implicates Brother in Bombing;
Cheyne Kehoe Says He Has Knowledge of Chevie’s Role in Attack on a Federal
Building,” Spokane Spokesman Review, January 21, 1998; and in Kim Murphy,
“Savage Saga of Radical Right Told in Trial,” Los Angeles Times, April 18,
1999. Kehoe at Elohim City, interview (Gumbel) with Andreas Strassmeir, June
30, 2010; talk of “delivery,” see FBI FD-302 interview with Montana prison
inmate John Shults, file no. 17735, dated April 2, 1997. For a more detailed
report of the first interview see ATF Report of Investigation, Helena Field
Office, dated April 3, 1997.
Wayne Snell’s final day:
Details from death row prison guard log, as reported in Howard Pankratz’s May
12, 1996, piece for the Denver Post, cited in chapter 1; in Associated Press’s
“Chronology of an Execution,” published April 20, 1995; in “Snell Executed at
Cummins; Last Words Lash at Governor,” Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, April
20, 1995; and in Michael Daly, “His Hatred Survives,” New York Daily News,
April 23, 1995; Jeff Rosenzweig’s account of Snell denouncing the bombing ash at Governor,” Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, April
20, 1995; and in Michael Daly, “His Hatred Survives,” New York Daily News,
April 23, 1995; Jeff Rosenzweig’s account of Snell denouncing the bombing as

--- PAGE BREAK ---nsas Democrat-Gazette, April
20, 1995; and in Michael Daly, “His Hatred Survives,” New York Daily News,
April 23, 1995; Jeff Rosenzweig’s account of Snell denouncing the bombing as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

unprofessional because it targeted children is echoed in an FBI FD-302 interview
with Mary Snell, file no. 9384, August 12, 1995.
Radical anger at McVeigh/time of attack changed:
Kale Kelly, prison interview with FBI agent Tym Burkey, quoted in Dave Hall
and Tym Burkey, with Katherine Ramsland, Into the Devil’s Den, p. 78;
Strassmeir quotes, interview (Gumbel), July 3, 2010; Oliphant talking about
“something big,” see FBI FD-302 interviews with Dyane Partridge, file no.
1215, May 10, 1995; Oliphant saying McVeigh would have been a hero if he had
blown up the building at night, quoted in, e.g., Tony Perry, “Godfather of
Arizona’s Militiamen; Oklahoma City Bombing Puts Jack Oliphant, an Ex-Con
and Survivalist, Back in Limelight,” Los Angeles Times, May 21, 1995; Bobby
Joe Farrington, FBI FD-302, file no. 13458, April 29, 1995. Terry Nichols also
alluded to a series of attacks on federal courthouses, according to an FBI
Synopsis of Investigation dated March 3, 2005 (when the feds were trying to
establish the veracity of claims that more explosives were concealed under
Nichols’s old house in Herington). “Nichols advised that the aforementioned
bomb components were to be used by the group to bomb other federal
courthouses after the Oklahoma City bombing,” the synopsis said. The word
“other” implies, of course, that one had already been targeted if not actually hit.
Nichols did not repeat this line in his correspondence with the authors, saying
instead that he had no idea what McVeigh’s target might have been; in The
Turner Diaries, the FBI building bomb goes off at 9:15 A.M. on October 13, 1991,
see Macdonald, op. cit., p. 38.
Fishy stories from the ATF:
Franey’s story, from his testimony in the McVeigh trial, May 6, 1997. Also,
interviews (Gumbel) March 1 and March 19, 2010; sheriff’s office video shot by
Sergeant Melvin Sumter, obtained by authors; Magaw interview (Gumbel),
January 18, 2010; Harry Eberhardt, FBI FD-302, file no. 13012 (written by
Eberhardt), February 3, 1996. Franey squirmed around considerably when
challenged on his story. First, after he was shown a still picture from the sheriff’s
office video with his hands unbandaged, he said he “had a good chuckle,”
because the figure in the picture clearly was not him. Then, given the
opportunity to review the video as a whole, he backed down, acknowledged the
figure was him, after all, and suggested that he and a colleague from across the
country jump on a plane to explain in person. Soon after that, he dropped the in-
person visit idea, and said he stood by his original story. DEA agent who went
up to ninth floor, see FBI interview with customs office chief Terry Don Wilson,
November 16, 1995, file no. 11457; Wilson describes Dave Schickedanz going
up shortly after getting out of the stalled elevator. McCauley story, see ATF newsith customs office chief Terry Don Wilson,
November 16, 1995, file no. 11457; Wilson describes Dave Schickedanz going
up shortly after getting out of the stalled elevator. McCauley story, see ATF news

--- PAGE BREAK ---hief Terry Don Wilson,
November 16, 1995, file no. 11457; Wilson describes Dave Schickedanz going
up shortly after getting out of the stalled elevator. McCauley story, see ATF news

--- PAGE BREAK ---

release dated May 23, 1995. Also pleading in McVeigh case, November 7, 1996,
in which Joe Harztler repeats the story; Duane James and Oscar Johnson,
interviewed by Tom Jarriel of ABC, November 19, 1996, transcript obtained by
authors; Dave Schickedanz, interview (Gumbel), August 13, 2010. For other
versions of his account, see, e.g., Pam Proctor, “A Portrait in Bravery,” Parade
magazine, October 27, 1996; the elevator story being a factor in McCauley’s
transfer, from interview (Gumbel) with Tommy Wittman, at the time an assistant
special agent in charge in Dallas, with oversight responsibility for Oklahoma
City, interview date September 27, 2010.
McVeigh arrested by Charlie Hanger:
McVeigh’s version, see Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., pp. 238–43; Hanger’s
version taken from transcripts of testimony in the McVeigh trial, April 28, 1997,
and Terry Nichols’s federal trial, November 5, 1997. Speculation on McVeigh’s
destination: Wichita suggested in interview (Gumbel) with Randy Yount,
September 30, 2010, based on his law enforcement contacts. Fortier telling FBI
McVeigh was headed to Arizona via the Kansas City airport, interview (Gumbel)
with Weldon Kennedy, August 26, 2010. The possibility he was heading to
Pittsburg was apparently investigated by FBI, which subpoenaed pay phone
records along the most likely route from the location of McVeigh’s arrest to the
safe house.
10:30 bomb scare and evacuation:
Stanley Brown interview (Gumbel), September 21, 2010; also his
contemporaneous notes. Second bomb bigger than the first: see John Avera’s
interview with the FBI, cited above. Leaving Daina Bradley: Mike Shannon’s
article in Fire Engineering, op. cit., especially pp. 69, 71; Don Browning,
interviewed by MGA documentary crew, March 18, 1999. Possible causes of
evacuation: Shannon interviewed by FBI, see FD-302, file no. 17238, August 22,
1996; Danny Defenbaugh interview (Gumbel), September 22, 2010. Evidence of
ordinance and government weaponry in Murrah Building: assault rifles seen
taken out of the rubble in a sheriff’s department video shot by Sumter; see also
discussion later in this chapter of TOW missile, whose presence has been
confirmed; Virgil Steele, sworn statement dated June 22, 1998, obtained by
authors. Such storage issues were relatively common. The Tulsa ATF office was
later the subject of internal scrutiny, because of problems with its weapons
inventory, as revealed by ATF supervisor Tommy Wittman, interview (Gumbel),
September 27, 2010. FBI headquarters was damaged by a fire in 1987 caused by
explosive materials accidentally ripping through the crime lab. The incident was
investigated internally as well as by the ATF, but kept largely out of the public
eye. Shane Slovacek interviewed by the FBI November 16, 1995, insert no.pping through the crime lab. The incident was
investigated internally as well as by the ATF, but kept largely out of the public
eye. Shane Slovacek interviewed by the FBI November 16, 1995, insert no.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ime lab. The incident was
investigated internally as well as by the ATF, but kept largely out of the public
eye. Shane Slovacek interviewed by the FBI November 16, 1995, insert no.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13569; Randy Yount interview (Gumbel), September 30, 2010; John Magaw
interview (Gumbel), January 18, 2010; John Haynie, FBI FD-302 interview, file
no. 11699, October 25, 1995.
McVeigh booked at the Noble County courthouse: Hanger’s account taken
from testimony in the Nichols federal trial, November 5, 1997. See also Michel
and Herbeck, op. cit., p. 244. McVeigh throwing the Nichols brothers to the
wolves: McVeigh also used the Decker address when checking into the
Dreamland Motel in Junction City, Kansas, on April 14. Many years later, Terry
Nichols expressed fury against McVeigh. “It’s clear McVeigh holds some grudge
or animosity of some type against me,” he wrote on March 20, 2010. The use of
the present tense, almost nine years after McVeigh’s execution, underlines how
keenly he still felt the betrayal.
FBI gets an early jump on McVeigh, which it ignores:
Interview (Gumbel) with Dennis Dutsch, June 22, 2011.
Doctors get to work rescuing Daina Bradley:
Material taken from Andy Sullivan’s testimony in the McVeigh trial, June 5,
1997, and from Roy Wenzl, “In Search of an Ending; Timothy McVeigh’s
Deadly Act Turned Two Doctors into Reluctant Heroes,” Wichita Eagle, May 16,
2001.
TOW missile episode:
Account from Stanley Brown’s handwritten journal; FBI interviews with OHP
officers Fred Horn (November 8, 1995) and John Haynie (October 25, 1995),
both under insert file no. 6853; Bill Grimsley’s testimony to the Oklahoma
County grand jury, February 25, 1998, transcript obtained by authors; Oklahoma
County Sheriff’s Evidence/Ordnance Acceptance Form dated April 19, 1995,
and completed by Bob Heady, the head of the sheriff’s office bomb squad. That
form says the missile was checked by an army explosives and ordnance disposal
technician from Fort Sill; the army’s own paperwork (per an e-mail, obtained by
the authors, from Lieutenant Colonel Frederick S. Gisler of Forces Command
headquarters, time-stamped 12:10 P.M.) shows that the 61st EOD from Fort Sill
was not yet in Oklahoma City at that time. Even at 12:10 P.M., the EOD team was
only on standby. The missile was shown to the county grand jury on September
15, 1998, according to an article three days later in the Daily Oklahoman. Bob
Sanders quote taken from transcript of interview with MGA documentary crew,
March 13, 1998; technical details of TOW missile, both in fully operational and
inert mode, from FBI FD-302 interview with Bill Stewart of Army CID at the
Anniston Army Depot, file no. 15530, June 22, 1996. Lack of paperwork on
TOW missile detailed in a letter to the FBI from Bruce F. Murray, acting
assistant director (operations) of Strategic Investigations Division of the U.S.no. 15530, June 22, 1996. Lack of paperwork on
TOW missile detailed in a letter to the FBI from Bruce F. Murray, acting
assistant director (operations) of Strategic Investigations Division of the U.S.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1996. Lack of paperwork on
TOW missile detailed in a letter to the FBI from Bruce F. Murray, acting
assistant director (operations) of Strategic Investigations Division of the U.S.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Customs. The letter, dated January 13, 1997, includes this observation: “A
member of my staff…personally searched all available headquarters files for any
documentation relating to the inert TOW, with negative results.” Murray
speculates any records may have been purged. Stanley Brown quote about Bob
Heady taken from interview (Gumbel), October 18, 2010. Wrong story
circulated about timing of TOW missile discovery: see, e.g., Diana Baldwin,
Judy Kuhlman, “Jury Shown Missile from Bomb Site Weapon Triggered Post-
Explosion Bomb Scare,” Daily Oklahoman, September 18, 1998. In this version,
the missile triggered the first evacuation; the second was triggered by the
discovery of a desk clock that looked like an explosive. Such a clock was on the
desk of ATF agent Harry Eberhardt, but there is no evidence it was connected to
either alert.
Chapter 3
Louis Freeh passes over Bob Ricks:
Ronald Kessler, The Bureau; I. C. Smith’s review of Freeh’s book Sins of
Omission in American Spectator, vol. 38, issue 10 (December 1, 2005), pp. 24–
29; Weldon L. Kennedy, On-Scene Commander; Oliver “Buck” Revell and
Dwight Williams, A G-Man’s Journal; Freeh praising field agents for doing “the
real work,” see Freeh, p. 200; Ricks recommended for FBI director, see Revell
and Williams, pp. 448–49; Kennedy interview (Gumbel), August 26, 2010;
Ricks interview (Gumbel), August 9, 2010.
Bragging rights over rear axle discovery:
McPherson version told, e.g., in Harry Levins, “The Pieces of the Puzzle; Bent
Truck Axle Spotted by Alert Detective Provided Key Clue in Finding Oklahoma
Bombing Suspect,” St. Louis Post-Dispatch, May 28, 1995; traffic cops Earl
Faubion and Fred Moon variation told in Arnold Hamilton, “Puzzling Pieces Tell
a Story; Officers’ Efforts Yield Bomb Truck’s Axles,” Dallas Morning News,
May 15, 1995; for FBI version, see Kessler, op. cit., p. 392, and also Jon Hersley,
Larry Tongate, and Bob Burke, Simple Truths, pp. 35–39; Sumter interviewed by
the FBI, FD-302, file no. 3705, May 3, 1995; Agent Jim Norman written
declaration, FBI FD-302, file no. 392, April 19, 1995; Agent James F. Elliott Jr.
written declarations, FBI FD-302, file nos. 12 and 1360, April 19, 1995.
Investigators lose control of the crime scene:
Joe Van Bullard interview (Gumbel), August 25, 2010; some information about
perimeter also in Mike Shannon, “Rescue Operations: Doing Battle with the
Building,” Fire Engineering magazine, October 1995, p. 71; Powell, Kelso, and
Gadson testimony to Department of Justice inspector general, quoted in John F., “Rescue Operations: Doing Battle with the
Building,” Fire Engineering magazine, October 1995, p. 71; Powell, Kelso, and
Gadson testimony to Department of Justice inspector general, quoted in John F.

--- PAGE BREAK ---: Doing Battle with the
Building,” Fire Engineering magazine, October 1995, p. 71; Powell, Kelso, and
Gadson testimony to Department of Justice inspector general, quoted in John F.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kelly and Philip K. Wearne, Tainting Evidence, pp. 199–200. The interviews did
not make it into the final report, titled “The FBI Laboratory: An Investigation
into Laboratory Practices and Alleged Misconduct in Explosives-Related and
Other Cases” (USDOJ Office of Inspector General Special Report, April 1997);
John Magaw interview (Gumbel), January 18, 2010; Magaw estimates bomb at
1,000–1,200 lbs., CNN, April 19, 1995 (transcript headlined “One ATF Agent
Vows Intensive Investigation into Bomb”). The same figure is later found in
Forscom (U.S. Army Forces Command) logs.
Pete Langan and Richard Guthrie on the morning of the bombing: List of
ARA hardware including explosives taken from: Guthrie’s FBI FD-302, dated
March 4–15, 1996; from an FBI inventory of items recovered from a second safe
house in Columbus, Ohio, after Langan’s arrest on January 18, 1996—see Mark
S. Hamm, In Bad Company, pp. 10–12; and from MGA documentary interview
with Langan, April 7, 2000, transcript obtained by authors. ARA plans to stage
multipronged attacks on the government, see Guthrie’s memoir The Taunting
Bandits, p. 74; recruitment video, The Aryan Republican Army Presents: The
Armed Struggle Underground, obtained by authors; biographical information on
Langan taken from Hamm, op. cit.; “small person you didn’t wanna fuck with”
quote, Hamm, p. 80; biographical information on Guthrie taken from his FBI
FD-302 and from his memoir; his threat to blow up the White House taken from
Secret Service memorandum, dated December 29, 1995. Evidence of McVeigh’s
possible involvement with ARA: Terry Nichols said in a letter to Salt Lake City
lawyer Jesse Trentadue, dated October 18, 2006, that McVeigh talked “a couple
of times” about robbing a bank; on the car ride from Oklahoma City back to
Kansas on April 16, 1995, McVeigh alluded to big plans and Nichols asked him:
“What are you going to do, rob a bank?” (from Nichols’s letter to reporter John
Solomon, dated September 30, 2007). Nichols’s ex-wife Lana Padilla said she
wondered about Nichols and McVeigh both being involved in a bank robbery
after finding wigs, masks, and pantyhose, as well as $20,000 in cash, at her
home and at a storage locker in Las Vegas in November 1994 (Padilla interview
[Gumbel], September 25, 2010). For McVeigh telling his sister of involvement in
a robbery, see Jennifer McVeigh affidavit dated May 2, 1995, admitted into
evidence at her brother’s trial. Guthrie account of April 19 taken from his
memoir, p. 156; Langan’s account taken from MGA documentary interview, op.
cit., and also from a legal declaration filed with the U.S. District Court in Salt
Lake City, April 9, 2007, case no.: 2:04 CV 00772 DAK. Detail about 1979
Chevy van, see Hamm, op. cit., p. 225, and also Guthrie’s FD-302 interview,
March 22, 1996, pp. 25–26; details on Langan’s “mysterious,” see Hamm, op.
cit., p. 183. McCarthy’s extreme views on homosexuals and cross-dressers from., p. 225, and also Guthrie’s FD-302 interview,
March 22, 1996, pp. 25–26; details on Langan’s “mysterious,” see Hamm, op.
cit., p. 183. McCarthy’s extreme views on homosexuals and cross-dressers from

--- PAGE BREAK ---Guthrie’s FD-302 interview,
March 22, 1996, pp. 25–26; details on Langan’s “mysterious,” see Hamm, op.
cit., p. 183. McCarthy’s extreme views on homosexuals and cross-dressers from

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a document by Mark Thomas, “Bible Cites Against Sexual Deviancy,” date
unknown. McCarthy, Thomas writes, “was especially disgusted by any moral
departure from the Law of Moses.” Thomas cites Leviticus 20:13: “If a man lieth
with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an
abomination: they shall surely be put to death; and their blood shall be upon
them.” And Deuteronomy 22:5: “The woman shall not wear that which
pertaineth to a man, neither shall a man put on a woman’s garment: for all that
do so are an abomination unto the Lord thy God.” Thomas continues: “The
penalty for ‘abomination’ is universally understood to be death. It is important to
note that Identity is unique from institutional Christianity in that it is considered
to be a terrible sin not to execute the penalty upon the transgressor.” Langan
quote about Guthrie, Hamm, op. cit., p. 22; sketch resembling Langan drawn by
regular FBI sketch artist Jeanne Boylan based on the recall of David Snider, the
warehouse foreman in Bricktown, who saw the Ryder truck. Sketch reproduced
in Hamm, op. cit., opposite p. 119.
McCarthy and Stedeford unable to account for whereabouts:
Biographical information on McCarthy and Stedeford from Hamm, op. cit.
Quote from Stedeford, see Hamm, p. 115; McCarthy’s first statement to FBI,
FD-302, file interview, June 17, 1996 (not in bombing case file), summarized in
FD-302, file no. 15847, August 1, 1996. A follow-up statement is in FD-302, file
no. 16027, September 18, 1996. The information on the Chevy Suburban comes
from an FBI intra-agency memo dated August 22, 1996, which shows that the
car was purchased in Fort Smith on April 17 and registered in Iowa on April 21.
Quote: “The Iowa Certificate of Title was issued on 4/21/1995”; Langan’s
version taken from his legal declaration filed with the U.S. District Court in Salt
Lake City, April 9, 2007; Guthrie’s “young Mr. Wizard line” quoted by Mark
Thomas in an interview with the Allentown Morning Call on the day of his
arrest. See “Thomas Indicted in Bank Robberies,” Allentown Morning Call,
January 31, 1997; Guthrie leaves article about McVeigh at bank robbery scene,
see his big FD-302 interview, March 4–15, 1996, p. 85. Detail about him being
drunk on tequila, see Hamm, op. cit., p. 255; Donna Marazoff quoting Mark
Thomas, see Marazoff’s FBI FD-302 interview, file no. 17777, dated April 2,
1997; Thomas interview with Washington Post reporter Rich Leiby, January 23,
1997. Unpublished. Tape of interview kindly provided to Gumbel by Leiby.
Video surveillance cameras: John Hippard interview (Gumbel), June 15, 2010;
Tom Hunt interviews (Gumbel), December 16 and 17, 2010; Danny Defenbaugh
interview (Gumbel), December 9, 2010. Channel 4 report on surveillance tapes,
exact date unknown, viewed January 4, 2011, on YouTube.com under title
“Oklahoma City Bombing Federal Surveillance Tapes Coverup”; Secret Serviceember 9, 2010. Channel 4 report on surveillance tapes,
exact date unknown, viewed January 4, 2011, on YouTube.com under title
“Oklahoma City Bombing Federal Surveillance Tapes Coverup”; Secret Service

--- PAGE BREAK ---el 4 report on surveillance tapes,
exact date unknown, viewed January 4, 2011, on YouTube.com under title
“Oklahoma City Bombing Federal Surveillance Tapes Coverup”; Secret Service

--- PAGE BREAK ---

timeline references to video tape of the detonation site at 1745 hours for April
25, 1995, and at 1930 hours for April 24, 1995. Stacy Bauerschmidt, the
assistant to the special agent in charge of the Secret Service’s intelligence
division, testified at Terry Nichols’s state trial that the government knew of no
such videotape; according to the Associated Press, she said that reports in the
timeline “may have been based on mere speculation and the agency does not
vouch for its reliability” (John Solomon, “Secret Service Documents Cite
Mystery Video in Oklahoma City Bombing,” Associated Press, April 19, 2004).
Confirmation of no video cameras at from GSA Federal Protective Service
Physical Security Survey, dated February 21, 1995, and obtained by authors; the
same report indicates that there was a video surveillance camera trained on Don
Rogers’s office door and another at the HUD office; Don Rogers interview
(Gumbel), February 14, 2011; Regency Towers tape handover detailed in
handwritten report by Oklahoma City police officer Ritch Willis (see FBI FD-
302, file no. 1818, April 19, 1995) and in an undated written statement, obtained
by authors, from John Hurley, the building’s security chief. See also Hurley’s
testimony in McVeigh trial, May 13, 1997; Journal Record handing over tapes
still in video players, see FBI FD-302 interview with Danny Payne of TMK
Hogan Commercial Real Estate Services, who was in charge of the building’s
security; interview date April 19, 1995, file no. 4553; inventory report by FBI on
video collection on April 19, insert no. E-8981, dated April 19, 1995. A different
report, file no. 3105, dated April 20, 1995, states that Walt Lamar released six
videotapes for transport to FBI headquarters in Washington at 9:00 A.M. on April
20. The tapes correspond to the locations given in the text. Lamar’s “son of a
bitch!” moment, interview (Gumbel) with FBI source speaking on condition of
anonymity, January 27, 2011; FBI tries and fails to enhance Journal Record
video footage, interviews (Gumbel) with John Hippard, June 15, 2010, and
Danny Defenbaugh, December 9, 2010; gaps in post office footage detailed in a
letter dated June 23, 2009, from the FBI records department to Jesse Trentadue,
in response to FOIA request.
Dave Hollaway’s curious memory lapse:
Hollaway’s different versions, from interviews (Gumbel), May 6, May 20, May
24, July 10, and July 13, 2010, and voice-mail message left January 26, 2011.
Among those sure Hollaway was not at the Waco commemoration were Jim Pate
of Soldier of Fortune, who had hosted Hollaway at his Virginia home weeks
earlier, interview (Charles), May 27, 2010, and ceremony organizer Carol
Moore, interview (Charles), June 14, 2010. Video of the event available via the
“Ashes of Waco” collection (the papers and documents of journalist Dick J.
Reavis) at the Texas State University, San Marcos. Dick DeGuerin, interviewne 14, 2010. Video of the event available via the
“Ashes of Waco” collection (the papers and documents of journalist Dick J.
Reavis) at the Texas State University, San Marcos. Dick DeGuerin, interview

--- PAGE BREAK ---f the event available via the
“Ashes of Waco” collection (the papers and documents of journalist Dick J.
Reavis) at the Texas State University, San Marcos. Dick DeGuerin, interview

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(Gumbel, via e-mail and phone), July 13, 2010; Joe Phillips, interview (via e-
mail, Gumbel), July 18, 2010; Rick Sherrow, interview (Gumbel), January 24,
2011; Kirk Lyons, interview (Gumbel), May 27, 2010.
Andreas Strassmeir’s conveniently watertight alibi:
Dave Hollaway, interview (Gumbel), July 9, 2010; Kirk Lyons, interview
(Gumbel), January 26, 2011; Strassmeir alibi corroborated, e.g., in FBI FD-302
interview of Otis Phelps, file no. 14948, May 25, 1996. FBI appears to accept
alibi, see FD-302 interview with Strassmeir, file no. 14897, April 30–May 1,
1996.
Strassmeir’s surprising past:
Strassmeir, interviews (Gumbel), June 30–July 3, 2010; a copy of Strassmeir’s
open-ended multiple-entry visa obtained by Gumbel. The Justice Department
would later misrepresent his entries into the United States, saying he traveled
each time on single-entry tourist visas (see also chapter 9). Kirk Lyons disclosed
the Petruskie story about the dead Soviet spy in an e-mail, December 1, 2010.
Lyons also said Petruskie “may very well have worked for the CIA,” interview
(Gumbel), April 22; 2010. On Strassmeir as a possible government agent: a
retired senior CIA official told Charles in 2006 that, in 1995 or 1996, he
reviewed a report by the CIA inspector general in the course of his official duties
and remembered seeing a mention of Strassmeir as a German government asset
whose information was shared with the FBI. He gave no specifics on how this
was sourced in the document or what time period it referred to. Sofameir line,
story about Helmut Kohl, from Lyons interview (Gumbel), March 23, 2010.
“Shameless hobo,” financial arrangement enabling Strassmeir to stay after his
German pay ran out, Hollaway interview (Gumbel), May 6, 2010; “Go nuclear”
line confirmed by Lyons, interview (Gumbel), April 19, 2011.
FEMA makes itself unpopular:
FEMA complaints, from interviews (Gumbel) with Magaw, Bullard, and
Kennedy, August 26, 2010. “Leon” story also told, slightly differently, in Danny
O. Coulson, with Elaine Shannon, No Heroes, pp. 487–88. “Whining” line from
Forscom (U.S. Army Forces Command) log for April 28, 1995, at 0915, log
obtained by authors; Don Browning, interview with MGA documentary crew,
March 18, 1999; Witt seeing himself as in charge, see James Lee Witt and James
Morgan, Stronger in the Broken Places, p. 104. Kennedy accusing Witt of
dragging out the rescue operation, see Witt and Morgan, pp. 112–13; line
confirmed by Kennedy, interview (Gumbel), December 16, 2010. In the book,
Witt characterizes the overextended rescue phase as a good thing and a personal
victory; erroneous information about FEMA carrying out the bodies at the Web
site of the Disaster Assistance and Rescue Team at the NASA Ames Researchended rescue phase as a good thing and a personal
victory; erroneous information about FEMA carrying out the bodies at the Web
site of the Disaster Assistance and Rescue Team at the NASA Ames Research

--- PAGE BREAK ---s a good thing and a personal
victory; erroneous information about FEMA carrying out the bodies at the Web
site of the Disaster Assistance and Rescue Team at the NASA Ames Research

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Center,
as
of
December
14,
2010.
http://dart2.arc.nasa.gov/Deployments/OklahomaCityBombing1995/Oklahoma.ht
FEMA Web site with misleading information, as of December 14, 2010;
http://www.fema.gov/emergency/usr/usrok95.shtm;
Witt’s
failure
to
acknowledge Oklahoma City Fire Department, see Witt and Morgan, p. 104;
Witt was given a full rundown of the accusations in this section, and chose not to
comment.
The FBI reaches Eldon Elliott’s body shop:
FBI FD-302 reports on interviews with Elliott (file nos. 1347 and 1348), Vicki
Beemer (nos. 8570 and 1349), and Tom Kessinger (nos. 1197, 14259, 14803),
April 19 and April 20, 1995; Eldon Elliott, interview with MGA documentary
crew, March 9, 1995, transcript obtained by authors. Prosecutors have low
opinion of body shop employees’ value as witnesses, argue they talked among
themselves and tainted their own reliability: interviews (Gumbel) with
prosecutor Scott Mendeloff, July 16, 2010, and prosecutor Larry Mackey,
October 11, 2010; Kessinger on Ray Rozycki’s picture book, see Jeanne Boylan,
Portraits of Guilt, p. 206.
Tim McVeigh at the Noble County jail:
Herbert Ferguson (mistakenly identified as a guard) quoted in Jonathan Franklin,
“Timothy McVeigh, Soldier,” Playboy, October 1995, p. 78; account of his time
in the jail taken from Richard Serrano, “Clues Sought in Details from McVeigh’s
Arrest,” Los Angeles Times, September 10, 1995, and Paul Queary, “Cellmate
Calls McVeigh Calm at First, Then Anxious,” Associated Press, May 19, 1995;
interview with Brent Goad from David Talbot, “McVeigh Was Desperate for
Freedom,” Boston Herald, May 3, 1995. Detail about need for cosigner on bond,
from Julie Delcour, “Bondsman Tells of McVeigh Call,” Tulsa World, April 24,
1995; call to Goad captured in Noble County jail phone records subpoenaed by
the FBI and obtained by the authors. The call was made at 8:23 A.M. on April 20
and lasted 2 minutes 27 seconds; for clinical details on methamphetamine
withdrawal, see, e.g., C. C. Cruickshank, K. R. Dyer, “A Review of the Clinical
Pharmacology of Methamphetamine,” Addiction, July 2009, pp. 1085–99; T. F.
Newton, A. D. Kalechstein, S. Duran, N. Vansluis, W. Ling, “Methampetamine
Abstinence Syndrome: Preliminary Findings,” American Journal on Addictions,
May–June 2004, pp. 248–55; C. McGregor, M. Srisurapanont, J. Jittiwutikarn, S.
Laobhripatr, T. Wongtan, J. M. White, “The Nature, Time Course and Severity of
Methamphetamine Withdrawal,” Addiction, September 2005, pp. 1320–29; Mark
Gibson quote, interview with Ted Koppel on ABC’s Nightline, April 21, 1995.
Mark Bouton and Garry Berges visit the Dreamland Motel:
Chronology of what Lea McGown said when, taken from FBI FD-302Mark
Gibson quote, interview with Ted Koppel on ABC’s Nightline, April 21, 1995.
Mark Bouton and Garry Berges visit the Dreamland Motel:
Chronology of what Lea McGown said when, taken from FBI FD-302

--- PAGE BREAK ---interview with Ted Koppel on ABC’s Nightline, April 21, 1995.
Mark Bouton and Garry Berges visit the Dreamland Motel:
Chronology of what Lea McGown said when, taken from FBI FD-302

--- PAGE BREAK ---

interviews dated April 20–21, 1995 (single document), April 22, April 23, April
25, April 26, and April 27, 1995; file nos. 2612–2617, sequentially. The
complete roster of FBI 302s, inserts, and lead sheets handed over in discovery to
the defense teams in the McVeigh trial and in the two Nichols trials includes no
document dated April 20 alone from either Lea or Eric McGown. McGown’s
account of Bouton and Berges’s first visit taken from McGown interview with
MGA documentary crew, March 12–13, 1999, transcript obtained by authors;
Bouton’s version taken from interview (Gumbel), July 24, 2010, and follow-up
e-mail correspondence July 27–31, 2010, and January 14–February 12, 2011;
Garry Berges interview (Gumbel), July 26, 2010; Joseph Bross, interview
(Gumbel), December 2, 2011; through his former FBI colleagues, Bross obtained
the text of the teletype he sent from Fort Riley in the middle of the night and
read it out; Michael Fleenor was considered suspicious, in part, because he faced
a disciplinary proceeding over his use of a credit card, see his FBI FD-302, file
no. 8005, May 1, 1995; by coincidence, Terry Nichols had bought a bedroom set
from his wife Donna a few days before the bombing, see her FD-302, file no.
8004, May 1, 1995, and Nichols’s answers to authors’ questions, dated January 3
and January 27, 2010 (this was not yet known on April 20, however); details on
the criminal division at FBI headquarters being understaffed and overwhelmed,
interview (Gumbel) with I. C. Smith, who took over the night shift a day or two
later, December 5, 2011. The two Dreamland guests who also saw the Ryder
truck on Easter Sunday were Herta King and Renda Truong (see their testimony
in McVeigh trial; both appeared on May 22, 1997). Criminal complaint against
McVeigh filed in U.S. District Court in Oklahoma City, April 21, 2010.
Pat Livingston fingers McVeigh:
Pat Livingston interviews (Gumbel), August 20 and December 21, 2010; record
of McVeigh’s Glock purchase, ATF 4437 form and bounced check, copies
obtained by Gumbel; Livingston account largely corroborated by FBI FD-302
interviews, file nos. 3946 and 3947, dated April 21, 1995; the FBI at Fort Riley
not getting his information right away, per Joseph Bross e-mail correspondence
with Gumbel, December 11, 2011; rapid acquisition of information on Nichols
brothers, from Chancellor interview (Gumbel), see above; Sanilac County,
Michigan, sheriff having information on the Nichols brothers, including Kelli
Langenburg’s November 1994 complaint, see Howard Pankratz and Peter G.
Chronis, “Family Says U.S. Framing Nichols but Some Neighbors Saw Signs of
Trouble,” Denver Post, September 21, 1997; information, including Sheriff
Virgil Strickler pegging the Nicholses as “crazies,” confirmed by senior FBI
source speaking on condition of anonymity; Kelli Langenburg talks to FBI, see
Serrano, One of Ours, p. 200; her information, given without her name, isNicholses as “crazies,” confirmed by senior FBI
source speaking on condition of anonymity; Kelli Langenburg talks to FBI, see
Serrano, One of Ours, p. 200; her information, given without her name, is

--- PAGE BREAK ---es,” confirmed by senior FBI
source speaking on condition of anonymity; Kelli Langenburg talks to FBI, see
Serrano, One of Ours, p. 200; her information, given without her name, is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

included in the criminal complaint filed against McVeigh on April 21, 2010.
Nichols shipping supplies to the Philippines, seeming flush at Fort Riley
auctions, confirmed by Junction City army surplus salesman David Batsell,
interview (Gumbel), August 24, 2010. Livingston talked about the overspending
in an e-mail dated March 2, 2011. Nichols told the authors (handwritten answers
to questions, dated February 23, 2011) that he sent a small number of military
uniform items as a present for Marife’s younger brother Michael, who was going
through military school in the Philippines, where battle-dress uniforms were
hard to find. Nichols said he spent little at the first couple of auctions he attended
at Fort Riley in early 1995, because he was still getting a feel for how they
worked. At the auction that raised Livingston and Batsell’s eyebrows, in late
March, he spent about $3,000, he said, because he saw lots of items he felt
confident he could sell at shows and because it was an open auction, which he
preferred to the closed type.
List of names of extreme interest posted at Oklahoma City command post,
interview (Gumbel) with FBI source who did not wish to be named, August 30,
2010.
“Dust storm” postcard sent to Liberty Lobby:
Mark Lane, MGA documentary interview, June 23, 1999, transcript obtained by
authors.
Nichols clears McVeigh’s stuff from storage locker:
Nichols’s account taken from handwritten document, “Events Leading Up to the
Oklahoma City Bombing, a Condensed Narrative,” dated November 9, 2006,
and from his written answers to author questions, dated January 22, 2010. Some
details about the electric blasting caps from handwritten document “OKC
Bombing Materials and the Missing Explosives,” December 1, 2007, from
handwritten document “Morning of April 18, 1995,” November 29, 2007, and
from Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., p. 218.
Louis Freeh breathes down necks of field office SACs:
Account of Freeh’s approach taken from Buck Revell’s book, A G-Man’s
Journal; from Ronald Kessler’s book, The Bureau, and from interview (Gumbel
and Charles) with I. C. Smith, June 18, 2010; senior FBI manager quote, from
interview on condition of anonymity, January 5, 2011. Walt Lamar initiates
NCIC offline search, see Hersley, Tongate, and Burke, op. cit., pp. 53–54.
Account confirmed by FBI source speaking on background.
FBI hits the jackpot with Lana Padilla:
Padilla’s account laid out in her testimony at the Nichols trial, November 19,
1997; see also her book, By Blood Betrayed; some material from interviews,
August 14 (Charles) and September 25, 2010 (Gumbel).a’s account laid out in her testimony at the Nichols trial, November 19,
1997; see also her book, By Blood Betrayed; some material from interviews,
August 14 (Charles) and September 25, 2010 (Gumbel).

--- PAGE BREAK ---in her testimony at the Nichols trial, November 19,
1997; see also her book, By Blood Betrayed; some material from interviews,
August 14 (Charles) and September 25, 2010 (Gumbel).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Carl LeBron’s providential phone call to the FBI:
Bare bones of his call laid out in the criminal complaint against McVeigh filed in
U.S. District Court, April 21, 2010. For more details, see Richard A. Serrano,
“Friend of McVeigh Proved Key for FBI, Papers Reveal,” Los Angeles Times,
January 4, 1997. Also Serrano, One of Ours, p. 194.
Nichols gets rid of incriminating evidence:
Account from Nichols’s written answers to author questions, January 22, 2010,
and March 30, 2010. Details on disposing of the fertilizer come from his initial
FBI interview, see FD-302 of Nichols, file no. 9954, interview date April 21–22,
1995; also trial testimony of Gladys Wendt, November 20, 1997. Details of 50-
caliber rifle and grenade included in a memo from the FBI Kansas City office,
case ID no. 11117, May 16, 2005; “dumbass” quote from Mike Batsell interview
(Gumbel), August 24, 2010; nitromethane tubes and other items recovered from
beneath the crawl space detailed in an FBI crime lab analysis and inventory
obtained by authors, dated April 8, 2005.
Feds find McVeigh:
Account taken from Coulson, No Heroes, pp. 495–96, Hersley, Tongate, and
Burke, op. cit., p. 54, interview (Gumbel) with Steve Chancellor (who was
sitting next to Michalic), August 12, 2010, and interview (Gumbel) with FBI
source who did not want to be named, August 30, 2010. Michalic’s own version,
in various media interviews, is more or less consistent with the others, see, e.g.,
Peter Annin, Evan Thomas, and Randy Collier, “Judgment Day,” Newsweek,
March 24, 1997.
Chapter 4
FBI questions McVeigh:
Bare bones of the account taken from Serrano, One of Ours, pp. 3–7, Michel and
Herbeck, op. cit., pp. 253–55, and Coulson and Shannon, op. cit., pp. 500–503;
Mark Gibson ironed out some of the contradictions and conflicting versions,
interview (Gumbel), January 10, 2011; detail of three phone calls to Royce
Hobbs from Hobbs’s FBI FD-302, file no. 4692, May 4, 1995; some of the Walt
Lamar material and other insights provided by Hank Gibbons, interview
(Gumbel), January 7, 2011; Gibbons, an FBI agent in Oklahoma City, wrote the
criminal complaint against McVeigh that day, as well as the warrants to search
his car and personal effects; details on news crew that got wise to events in
Perry, interview (Gumbel) with former FBI agent who did not wish to be named,
January 27, 2011; Jerry Cook, interview (Gumbel), February 4, 2011; “I think
they think it’s me” line, quoted by cell mate Cecil Brown in Paul Queary,th former FBI agent who did not wish to be named,
January 27, 2011; Jerry Cook, interview (Gumbel), February 4, 2011; “I think
they think it’s me” line, quoted by cell mate Cecil Brown in Paul Queary,

--- PAGE BREAK ---who did not wish to be named,
January 27, 2011; Jerry Cook, interview (Gumbel), February 4, 2011; “I think
they think it’s me” line, quoted by cell mate Cecil Brown in Paul Queary,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Cellmate Calls McVeigh Calm at First, Then Anxious,” Associated Press, May
19, 1995.
Feds swoop on James Nichols:
Details of FBI deployment from source who was present but did not wish to be
named, interview (Gumbel), January 6, 2011; details of evidence-gathering,
witnesses, from the criminal complaint filed against James Nichols in the
Eastern District of Michigan, April 25, 1995; James Nichols’s account of the
start of the raid, see James D. Nichols, as told to Robert S. Papovich, Freedom’s
End, pp. 15–20.
Agent Smith tails Terry Nichols:
See Smith’s testimony in Nichols’s federal trial, November 20, 1997.
Josh Nichols makes telling revelations:
Lana Padilla, By Blood Betrayed, pp. 41–42; Padilla interviews (Gumbel),
September 25, 2010, and January 17, 2011.
Terry Nichols panics, goes to the Herington police station:
Nichols gives his own account in a handwritten document, “Events Leading Up
to the Oklahoma City Bombing,” dated November 9, 2006, obtained by authors;
see Nichols federal trial testimony from Dale Kuhn (December 9, 1997), Barry
Thacker (December 9, 1997), Marife Nichols (December 10–11, 1997), and
Stephen Smith (November 20–21, 1997); details about Marife getting mad,
wanting to go home to the Philippines, from Agent Smith’s testimony on cross-
examination (November 21, 1997) and from Nichols’s handwritten answers to
author questions, January 3, 2010; phone calls to James and Lana, and the call
from CNN, from phone records on Nichols’s home line obtained by authors.
Michael Fortier sweats:
Account from FBI FD-302 interview with Jim Rosencrans, July 5–6, 1995, file
no. 9178, and from FD-302 interview with Rosencrans’s girlfriend Patty
Edwards, July 1, 1995, file no. 6696. “Our boy’s been busy” quote from
Rosencrans interview in Richard A. Serrano and Ronald J. Ostrow, “McVeigh
Viewed as ‘A Driving Force’ in Six-Month Plot,” Los Angeles Times, May 4,
1995.
FBI takes McVeigh into federal custody:
Richard A. Serrano and Ronald Ostrow, “Legal Issues May Jeopardize Evidence
Against McVeigh,” Los Angeles Times, September 14, 1995; Mark Gibson
interview (Gumbel), January 10, 2011; Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., pp. 255–59;
Coulson and Shannon, op. cit., p. 504.
Day-care center operator recognizes McVeigh:
Danielle Hunt interview (Gumbel), February 14, 2011; Tom Hunt interview
(Gumbel), December 16, 2010; FBI FD-302 interview with Danielle Hunt, filep. 504.
Day-care center operator recognizes McVeigh:
Danielle Hunt interview (Gumbel), February 14, 2011; Tom Hunt interview
(Gumbel), December 16, 2010; FBI FD-302 interview with Danielle Hunt, file

--- PAGE BREAK ---nter operator recognizes McVeigh:
Danielle Hunt interview (Gumbel), February 14, 2011; Tom Hunt interview
(Gumbel), December 16, 2010; FBI FD-302 interview with Danielle Hunt, file

--- PAGE BREAK ---

no. 466, April 29, 1995.
McVeigh not a match for John Doe One:
Eldon Elliott not asked to match McVeigh to John Doe One until June 8, from
his testimony in the McVeigh trial, May 9, 1997. See also FBI FD-302, file no.
6107, dated June 8, 1995; no McVeigh fingerprints found at body shop,
testimony of FBI fingerprint expert Louis Hupp at the McVeigh trial, May 15,
1997; official doubts also reflected in Secret Service timeline entry for 1440 on
April 21: “SA [Special Agent] Stephenson, OKC/CP [Oklahoma City Command
Post], reports that McVeigh does not physically match the composite of the two
featured suspects.”
Carol Howe hands the feds a monster lead, which they disregard:
Detail on swastika tattoo, other biographical details from Carol Howe’s
testimony in the trial of James Viefhaus in federal court in Tulsa, July 24, 1997,
transcript viewed by Gumbel; Mahon appeared on Oprah sometime in the late
1980s, confirmed by ATF agent Tristan Moreland, who arrested him in 2009,
Moreland interview (Gumbel), October 14, 2009; drug buy to test her loyalty,
see Finley’s testimony in pretrial hearing in federal court in Tulsa, April 24,
1997; ATF Report of Investigation on Carol Howe, May 22, 1995; also, FBI
insert on Howe (named only as “Carol”), lead control no. E427, April 21, 1995;
Millar’s inconsequential son-in-law was Larry Duncan, who offered no
information of consequence, interviewed April 22, 1995, file no. 3952; Bob
Ricks interview (Gumbel), August 17, 2010; Danny Defenbaugh interview
(Gumbel), May 17, 2010; Andreas Strassmeir interview (Gumbel), June 30,
2010.
Nichols sits down with the FBI:
FBI FD-302 interview with Nichols, dated April 21–22, 1995, file no. 9954;
many details corroborated by Agent Stephen Smith’s testimony in Nichols’
federal trial, November 20–21, 1997. Application and affidavit for search
warrant, signed by Scott Crabtree, April 22, 1995; Nichols’s later comments on
his initial interview from handwritten answers to author questions, March 20,
2010, and July 22, 2010; McVeigh thought Nichols “hosed” him, see Michel and
Herbeck, op. cit., p. 297. The timing of the material witness arrest warrant is
detailed in an order issued by Judge Matsch on August 14, 1996, following a
pretrial hearing on the admissibility of evidence from Nichols’s nine-hour
interrogation in the Herington police station; the efforts of federal public
defender Dave Phillips to reach Nichols on April 21 were detailed by defense
attorney Ron Woods in his opening statement in the Nichols trial, November 3,
1997.
Jennifer McVeigh tracked down in Florida:fender Dave Phillips to reach Nichols on April 21 were detailed by defense
attorney Ron Woods in his opening statement in the Nichols trial, November 3,
1997.
Jennifer McVeigh tracked down in Florida:

--- PAGE BREAK ---to reach Nichols on April 21 were detailed by defense
attorney Ron Woods in his opening statement in the Nichols trial, November 3,
1997.
Jennifer McVeigh tracked down in Florida:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Account taken largely from Jennifer’s testimony in the McVeigh trial, May 5–6,
1997; see also Joseph B. Treaster, “The Sister’s Story: For Figure in Oklahoma
Inquiry, Ties of Blood and Something More,” New York Times, August 4, 1995.
McVeigh fingered in the lineup:
Steve Chancellor interview (Gumbel), August 12, 2010; Moroz lineup outcome
described in FBI FD-302, file no. 69, dated April 22, 1995.
Jimboy fiasco:
Some details on Jimboy from interview (Gumbel) with Dave Dilly, December
13, 2010. On knife scars and knife play, FBI FD-302 interview with Larry
Frame, file no. 3118, May 4, 1995; Bob Ricks interview (Gumbel), August 9,
2010; N. R. Kleinfeld, “For Bombing ‘Suspects,’ Looks Aren’t Everything,”
New York Times, April 30, 1995; investigation tracked in FBI FD-302s, file nos.
234 and 832 (April 21, 1995) and 1094 (April 22), and also in Secret Service
timeline (“Jimboy has legitimate alibi”—0058, April 22—“Jimboy polygraphed
through the night, eliminated as suspect—0724).
Nichols digs himself in deeper, gets arrested:
Details taken from the FBI FD-302 interview with Nichols, dated April 21–22,
1995, and from Agent Smith’s testimony of November 20, 1997; the two
warrants for Nichols’s arrest obtained by authors. The issue arose in pretrial
proceedings and is discussed in Judge Matsch’s August 14, 1996, ruling, in
which he broadly accepts the government’s explanation that the first warrant was
a mistake, but makes clear Judge Russell was not informed that Nichols was in
the Herington police station and already cooperating; FBI agents look through
Nichols’s garage window, FBI insert, number illegible, April 24, 1995; the link
between the blue plastic shards and the barrels at Nichols’s home was included
in the criminal complaint filed on May 9, 1995; the recycling bins, kept next to
the first-floor restrooms on the south side of the building, were described to the
FBI by Richard Williams, the deputy building manager, FD-302, file no. 12707,
January 26, 1996.
Manic hunt for coconspirators:
Freeh picking out lineup photos, Oliver “Buck” Revell and Dwight Williams, A
G-Man’s Journal, p. 474. Story confirmed by I. C. Smith, who worked the
bombing case as a senior manager at headquarters, interview (Gumbel and
Charles), June 18, 2010; quote on micromanaging from Louis Freeh, My FBI, p.
210; Steve Chancellor interview (Gumbel), August 12, 2010.
McVeigh screws Dave Paulsen:
Charlie Hanger, testimony in Nichols trial, November 5, 1997. Details of
Paulsen interrogation in FBI FD-302, file no. 727 (April 23), in which he
describes his interest in AR-15 parts, his purchases, McVeigh offering blastingin Nichols trial, November 5, 1997. Details of
Paulsen interrogation in FBI FD-302, file no. 727 (April 23), in which he
describes his interest in AR-15 parts, his purchases, McVeigh offering blasting

--- PAGE BREAK ---vember 5, 1997. Details of
Paulsen interrogation in FBI FD-302, file no. 727 (April 23), in which he
describes his interest in AR-15 parts, his purchases, McVeigh offering blasting

--- PAGE BREAK ---

caps, and his explanation that he was “stringing McVeigh along”; file no. 719
(April 24, 1995), in which he admits lying about the number of phone calls he
had received from McVeigh; and file no. 724, which details his polygraph test
and gives his “cocksucker” line as a direct quote. The Daryl Bridges phone
records entered into evidence at trial show 37 calls to Paulsen either at home or
at the Paulsen’s Military Supply shop; not all were completed calls. McVeigh
admitting he dropped the business card as a “dirty trick,” Michel and Herbeck,
op. cit., p. 243; Nichols’s version from answers to author questions, January 3,
2010.
The feds botch their search of Nichols’s house:
Testimony of Mary Jasnowski, an evidence recovery specialist sent in from
Omaha, in the McVeigh trial (May 5, 1997) and in the Nichols federal trial
(November 6, 1997); consent forms signed by Terry and Marife Nichols on April
21 obtained by authors. Agent Stephen Smith erroneously testified at the Nichols
federal trial (November 20, 1997) that Nichols’s consent to search the house was
conditional on Marife being present. The paperwork reflects no such stipulation.
Nichols’s home phone records, admitted into evidence and obtained by authors,
show a phone call from the Herington house to James Nichols’s number in
Decker beginning at 8:40:45 P.M. and continuing for 19 minutes and 18 seconds;
account of FBI agents’ activities, from insert, number illegible, dated April 24,
1995; Marife Nichols describing how she could not return home on the night of
April 21–22, see transcript of her testimony in the Nichols federal trial,
December 10, 1997. She repeated the story at a pretrial hearing in state court in
Oklahoma on May 9, 2003; list of items found by evidence recovery team
corroborated by official inventories obtained by authors.
Nichols on discovery of ammonium nitrate receipt, answers to author
questions, January 3, 2010; incredulous U.S. attorney from Danny Defenbaugh,
interview (Gumbel), January 25, 2011; Bear Bryant story told by I. C. Smith,
interview (Gumbel and Charles), June 18, 2010; recovery of cash, gold coins,
confirmed by FBI property receipt dated April 23 and signed by agents Larry
Tongate and Eugene Thomeczek. Marife alerted agents at 4:55 P.M.; the valuables
were reported to be safely retrieved at 6:59 P.M; recovery of food mixer detailed
in FBI FD-302, file no. 4223, dated May 8, 1995; affidavit supporting federal
charges against Terry Nichols, filed May 9, 1995, with Magistrate Judge Ronald
Howland of the western district of Oklahoma, case no. M-95-105-H; no lids on
barrels confirmed in Jasnowski’s court testimony, among other places; FBI
inventory based on search through the garbage, FBI FD-302, file no. 8588, April
23, 1995. The agents who searched the garbage were C. Allen Maxwell and
Everett F. Barger.mony, among other places; FBI
inventory based on search through the garbage, FBI FD-302, file no. 8588, April
23, 1995. The agents who searched the garbage were C. Allen Maxwell and
Everett F. Barger.

--- PAGE BREAK ---aces; FBI
inventory based on search through the garbage, FBI FD-302, file no. 8588, April
23, 1995. The agents who searched the garbage were C. Allen Maxwell and
Everett F. Barger.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The secret history of the Daryl Bridges phone records:
Accounts that either imply or state that the reconstruction of the phone records
began with the discovery of the Daryl Bridges card at Terry Nichols’s house
include Coulson and Shannon, No Heroes, pp. 514–15, and Julie DelCour and
Barbara Hoberock, “Bit by Bit, the Government Makes Its Case,” Tulsa World,
May 18, 1997. In the book Simple Truths (pp. 133–34), former FBI agent Jon
Hersley finesses the issue when he mentions the Daryl Bridges phone calls,
“evidence of which had been found in Terry Nichols’s house when it was
searched by the FBI…. The FBI had already discovered that the Daryl Bridges
calling card was obtained from the Spotlight company in November 1993….”
[Italics ours. Note that Hersley ascribes the discovery to the FBI, when, in fact,
this discovery was secondhand and originated with Mary Riley’s investigation.]
Airbrushing Mary Riley from the record: In his testimony in the McVeigh trial
(May 6, 1997), John Kane makes constant generic references to “investigators”
and “they” without mentioning Riley’s name. At one point he refers to “Secret
Service investigators” in the plural, and is immediately interrupted by a
government lawyer asking another question. One FBI FD-302 naming Riley (file
no. 186, dated April 22, 1995) made it into discovery. But she was never
mentioned in court. Fax copies of Mary Riley’s field notes for April 20–26,
1995, titled “Information from Miami Field Office (Telephone Records),”
obtained unredacted and mostly complete by the authors.
The April 14 phone call to Eldon Elliott was important to the prosecution,
but it also offered an opening to the defense, because a technological glitch in
the routing systems made it impossible to say conclusively that Daryl Bridges
was the Spotlight subscriber who made this call, and because the car dealer who
sold McVeigh the Mercury was interviewed eight times by the FBI, and twice
more by the defense, without mentioning McVeigh leaving in the middle. At trial
(May 6–8, 1997), the prosecution argued around both problems, and the defense
could not get traction on its contention that the call was made by someone else.
Riley faxing her findings to Bucella and Stephenson mentioned in her notes,
also substantiated by fax headers obtained by authors. Weldon Kennedy
interview (Gumbel), August 26, 2010; Kennedy said in his interview that Riley
had messed up the time stamps on the calls because she did not realize the West
Coast Telephone records were all on Pacific time. But Riley did realize this and
recorded in her notes repeated conversations with John Kane and others about
both the time zone question and inaccuracies associated with the recent switch to
Daylight Savings Time (mentioned in her field notes for April 22 and April 23,
1995). Danny Defenbaugh interview (Gumbel), December 9, 2010; internal
investigation of Riley mentioned in John Solomon, “Secret Service Documentsntioned in her field notes for April 22 and April 23,
1995). Danny Defenbaugh interview (Gumbel), December 9, 2010; internal
investigation of Riley mentioned in John Solomon, “Secret Service Documents

--- PAGE BREAK ---notes for April 22 and April 23,
1995). Danny Defenbaugh interview (Gumbel), December 9, 2010; internal
investigation of Riley mentioned in John Solomon, “Secret Service Documents

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cite Mystery Video in Oklahoma City Bombing,” Associated Press, April 19,
2004, and confirmed by senior task force member cited here; John Kane
interview (Gumbel), January 25, 2011.
Feds come up mostly empty at James Nichols’s farm:
The most incriminating findings are detailed in the affidavit supporting James
Nichols’s arrest on firearms charges, May 11, 1995. Other details are in the FBI’s
FD-302 interview report on Nichols, April 21, 1995, file no. 6384; see also
Serrano, One of Ours, pp. 234–35; Nichols’s perspective from Nichols and
Papovic, Freedom’s End, pp. 21, 58; law enforcement official involved in search,
speaking on condition of anonymity, interview (Gumbel), January 5, 2011;
Martinolich-Freeh confrontation reported by Kessler, The Bureau, pp. 349–50;
corroborated by Revell, A G-Man’s Journal, p. 474, by I. C. Smith, interview
(Gumbel and Charles), June 18, 2010, and by confidential FBI source. Story of
resignation offer/Bear Bryant phone call from confidential source.
The shortcomings of the FBI’s sledgehammer approach:
Bob Ricks interview (Gumbel), August 9, 2010; Weldon Kennedy quotes
information on the leaks, interview (Gumbel), August 26, 2010; James Nichols
complaining that his arrest was part of a dark conspiracy to protect the “real”
bombers, Freedom’s End, op. cit., pp. 57–58.
Chapter 5
McVeigh’s combat experience:
The work of Jonathan Franklin stands head and shoulders above the rest in
assessing McVeigh’s military career. See his pieces “Timothy McVeigh,
Soldier,” Playboy, October 1995, vol. 42, issue 10, p. 78, and “The Good
Soldier,” Spin, April 1997, p. 133; Franklin very kindly provided the raw notes
from his McVeigh interview, via e-mail (Gumbel), July 29, 2010; quadrupling
nightmare quote provided by Greg Henry, interview (Gumbel), February 9,
2011; James Rockwell interview (Gumbel), January 4, 2011; Dave Dilly
interview (Gumbel), December 13, 2010; McVeigh’s version of events from
Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., pp. 66–88; medal and award citations, see
McVeigh’s trial exhibit nos. AA2X-AA10X; these include the Bronze Star,
Army Commendation Medal, and a Certificate of Commendation from the Gulf
War, plus another Army Commendation Medal and one other award for target
shooting; McVeigh’s marksmanship also merited a glowing write-up in the
official history of the 16th Infantry, written well after his conviction and
sentencing for the bombing: Steven E. Clay, Blood and Sacrifice: The History of
the 16th Infantry Regiment from the Civil War Through the Gulf War (Cantignyntry, written well after his conviction and
sentencing for the bombing: Steven E. Clay, Blood and Sacrifice: The History of
the 16th Infantry Regiment from the Civil War Through the Gulf War (Cantigny

--- PAGE BREAK ---fter his conviction and
sentencing for the bombing: Steven E. Clay, Blood and Sacrifice: The History of
the 16th Infantry Regiment from the Civil War Through the Gulf War (Cantigny

--- PAGE BREAK ---

First Divison Foundation, Wheaton, Illinois, 2001), p. 364.
Possible involvement in war crimes, and McVeigh’s disillusionment:
The relevant sections of the Geneva Conventions are the First Convention,
Articles 16 and 17 (on treatment of the dead and wounded), and the Third
Convention,
Article
3
(on
treatment
of
surrendering
soldiers
and
noncombatants). Frame’s FBI FD-302, file no. 3118, May 4, 1995; Cerney’s FBI
FD-302, file no. 488, April 28, 1995. Frame and Regier were interviewed by
Jonathan Franklin, per e-mail to Gumbel dated August 21, 2010. Frame was
interviewed by Franklin on May 17, 1995, and Regier on May 22, 1995; Scott
Rutter interviews (Gumbel), December 6 and December 31, 2009; James
Rockwell interview (Gumbel), January 4, 2011.
Jennifer McVeigh gets the third degree:
FBI FD-302 interview of Jennifer, April 24–May 2, 1995, file no. 2298. Many
other details from her testimony in the McVeigh trial, May 5–6, 1997, and from
Weldon Kennedy interview (Gumbel), August 26, 2011. FBI agents showing her
photographs of dead children corroborated by FBI FD-302, file no. 2024, April
29, 1995.
Brief history of the Nichols family:
Details from Lana Padilla and Ron Delpit, op. cit., pp. 36–37, and 163–68, from
James Nichols and Robert Papovich, op. cit., pp. 154–57, and from Stephen
Braun and Judy Pasternak, “Nichols Brothers Swept Up in Dark Maelstrom of
Fury,” Los Angeles Times, May 28, 1995; also, Padilla, interview (Gumbel),
September 25, 2010, and Padilla’s statements to the FBI, see her FD-302
interview reports for April 21, 1995 (file no. 9330) and April 28, 1995 (file no.
5827); Nichols’s Asperger syndrome in an FBI memo of July 12, 2005, from the
Oklahoma City office to the Denver office, case ID no. 11120, and confirmed
both by Lana Padilla—interview (Gumbel), February 1, 2011—and by Nichols
himself, written answers to author questions, February 23, 2011; “complicating
matters some,” from Nichols’s handwritten answers to author questions, January
3, 2010.
McVeigh and Nichols in the army:
Lana Padilla interview (Gumbel), September 25, 2010; Scott Rutter interview
(Gumbel), December 6, 2009; Dave Dilly interview (Gumbel), December 13,
2010; James Rockwell interview (Gumbel), January 4, 2011; McVeigh’s racism
and Klan membership, Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., pp. 87–88.
Jeanne Boylan corrects John Doe Two sketch, told to forget about John Doe
One:
Jeanne Boylan, op. cit., pp. 201–209. Also Boylan interview by MGA
documentary crew, June 1, 2000, transcript obtained by authors.ylan corrects John Doe Two sketch, told to forget about John Doe
One:
Jeanne Boylan, op. cit., pp. 201–209. Also Boylan interview by MGA
documentary crew, June 1, 2000, transcript obtained by authors.

--- PAGE BREAK ---oe Two sketch, told to forget about John Doe
One:
Jeanne Boylan, op. cit., pp. 201–209. Also Boylan interview by MGA
documentary crew, June 1, 2000, transcript obtained by authors.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Terry Nichols maxes out his credit cards:
Nichols’s written answers to author questions, January 22, 2010; Wickstrom
quotes taken from Daniel Levitas, The Terrorist Next Door, p. 179, and from
Susy Buchanan, “Return of the Pastor,” Southern Poverty Law Center
Intelligence Report, Winter 2004; Sanilac County court records on both the First
Deposit National Bank and Chase Manhattan claims, including filings by
Nichols and by the plaintiffs, exhibits, and hearing transcripts, obtained by
authors.
McVeigh comes unstuck, hits the gun-show circuit:
McVeigh calling VA hospital for mental health counseling disclosed by Dr. John
R. Smith, his prison psychiatrist, in an interview with NPR’s Wayne Goodwin,
All Things Considered, June 8, 2001; for McVeigh’s version of the year between
his discharge from the army and his departure from New York State, see Michel
and Herbeck, op. cit., pp. 95–116; his letter to the Lockport Union Sun &
Journal was published February 11, 1992; William Pierce on gun shows, quoted
in Morris Dees with James Corcoran, Gathering Storm: America’s Militia
Threat, p. 79; Kristen Rand, Gun Shows in America: Tupperware Parties for
Criminals; McVeigh selling smoke grenades and blast simulators, Richard A.
Serrano, One of Ours, p. 56; the best account of the Ruby Ridge fiasco is Jess
Walter, Ruby Ridge: The Truth and Tragedy of the Randy Weaver Family;
emergency meeting in Estes Park, Colorado—the Rocky Mountain Rendezvous
—described at length in Dees and Corcoran, op. cit., pp. 1–2, 46–66; video of
Louis Beam speech obtained by authors; Louis Beam, Leaderless Resistance,
Seditionist, issue 12, February 1992, available at Beam’s Web site
www.louisbeam.com; McVeigh’s grievance list detailed in Stuart A. Wright,
Patriots, Politics and the Oklahoma City Bombing, pp. 129–38; Wright was
given access to McVeigh through his defense team and interviewed him at
length; McVeigh quitting security guard job on January 26, from defense memo
obtained by authors; Roger Moore meeting in Fort Lauderdale and plan to share
a table at upcoming Miami gun show detailed in FBI FD-302 interview with
Moore on April 28, 1995, file no. 810, and also in FBI FD-302 interview with
Moore’s wife, Carol, on November 7, 1995, file no. 12689.
Jennifer McVeigh and the bank robbery letter:
McVeigh’s letter of December 24, 1993, entered into evidence at trial; the call to
the FBI crime lab is documented in a May 4 memo from the lab to Bob Ricks,
Lab no. E-3427. The subject line says, “Telephone call April 26, 1995.” The
tests on five latent prints from a Cleveland-area robbery and one latent
impression from the St. Louis area came back negative.
FBI almost misses key evidence from Geary Lake witness:l 26, 1995.” The
tests on five latent prints from a Cleveland-area robbery and one latent
impression from the St. Louis area came back negative.
FBI almost misses key evidence from Geary Lake witness:

--- PAGE BREAK ---ts on five latent prints from a Cleveland-area robbery and one latent
impression from the St. Louis area came back negative.
FBI almost misses key evidence from Geary Lake witness:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Account from Budke’s testimony in the Nichols federal trial, December 11,
1997. A handwritten lead sheet about his encounter with Wahl, timed 12:45 P.M.
on April 26, 1995, was (belatedly) entered into evidence at trial.
McVeigh meets Roger Moore, goes to Waco:
Fort Lauderdale meeting detailed in FBI FD-302 interviews with Roger and
Carol Moore, cited above; details about the Confederate flag and the camo pants
come from an FBI FD-302 interview with Karen Anderson, May 19, 1995, file
no. 5435; Floyd Hays interview (Gumbel), July 14, 2010; for McVeigh’s account
of this period, see Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., pp. 117–20. The Waco disaster
has spawned an entire literature. See for example: Dick J. Reavis, The Ashes of
Waco; Danny O. Coulson and Elaine Shannon, No Heroes, pp. 429–48; Gary
Noesner, Stalling for Time, pp. 94–132; also, Department of Justice “Report to
the Deputy Attorney General on the Events at Waco, Texas,” October 8, 1993.
Louis Beam gave his own account of the “forbidden question” in an interview
with The Spotlight magazine, July 12, 1993. The confrontations were covered in
the local media and in Mark Potok, “Siege in Texas Attracts a Crew from the
Fringes,” USA Today, March 19, 1993. Likelihood that Beam and McVeigh met:
Beam was thrown out of the news briefing on March 14 and handcuffed at the
news briefing on March 17. Student journalist Michelle Rauch drove to Waco on
her spring break from Southern Methodist University and later testified (on June
10, 1997) about interviewing McVeigh. She did not specify the date of her
interview, but SMU’s spring break that year ran from March 13 to March 21 (per
Veronica Decena of the SMU Registrar’s office, e-mail sent February 10, 2011).
So Beam and McVeigh were almost certainly at Waco at the same time. Jim
Cavanaugh interview (Gumbel), August 2, 2010.
The FBI grills Michael Fortier:
Much of this material is from Fortier’s testimony in McVeigh’s trial, May 12,
1997; typewriter ribbon story from Lori Fortier’s testimony in the McVeigh trial,
April 29, 1997; “I’m a dead man” quote cited in U.S. Secret Service timeline for
April 24, 1995, at 1930. Details of evidence the Fortiers ditched are only partly
covered by their trial testimony; the Hornet rifle and galvanized tubing, which
Fortier did not discuss, are detailed in an FD-302 interview report on
Rosencrans, July 1, 1995, file no. 6700; and in an FD-302 on Rosencrans’s
girlfriend, Patty Edwards (Patricia Ann Edwards, July 1, 1995, file no. 6696).
The detail about Rosencrans’s half-brother being married to his mother comes
from Edwards’s 302, quote: “EDWARDS explained CHUCK and JIM have the
same father, but different mothers. EDWARDS also advised CHUCK is JIM’s
priest”; Coulson’s part of the story recounted in Coulson and Elaine Shannon,
No Heroes, pp. 521–26; Rosencrans arrest story detailed in Mohave Countyrent mothers. EDWARDS also advised CHUCK is JIM’s
priest”; Coulson’s part of the story recounted in Coulson and Elaine Shannon,
No Heroes, pp. 521–26; Rosencrans arrest story detailed in Mohave County

--- PAGE BREAK ---S also advised CHUCK is JIM’s
priest”; Coulson’s part of the story recounted in Coulson and Elaine Shannon,
No Heroes, pp. 521–26; Rosencrans arrest story detailed in Mohave County

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sheriff’s Department arrest report, dated May 1, 1995, obtained by authors.
McVeigh meets Karen Anderson and Andreas Strassmeir at Tulsa gun
show:
Quick trip to Kingman detailed in McVeigh defense team memo, obtained by
authors; encounter with Anderson from Anderson’s testimony in the Nichols
trial, November 17–18, 1997. Encounter with Strassmeir, see FD-302 interview
with Strassmeir, conducted by phone with two Justice Department lawyers, April
30–May 1, 1996, file no. 14897; Strassmeir interview (Gumbel), July 3, 2010;
and a confidential defense memo, obtained by authors, in which McVeigh says
he and Strassmeir are “brothers in arms.” McVeigh variously told investigators
he swapped the knife for several pairs of long johns, not the battle uniform and
gloves, or that he wanted to swap the knife for the long johns but Strassmeir
insisted on having the cash. Strassmeir’s memory seems more reliable, since his
account is more consistent and since he was the one who ended up with the
items.
Offer of undercover agent to sniff out Strassmeir rebuffed:
Steve Chancellor interview (Gumbel), August 12, 2010; State Department
diplomatic security memo of April 28, 1995, obtained by authors.
McVeigh visits Roger Moore’s ranch, witnesses end of the Waco siege:
Account of visit to the Arkansas ranch mostly from Moore and Anderson
testimony in the Nichols trial; McVeigh’s account of seeing the end of the siege
on television, see Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., p. 135; episode also recounted by
Michael Fortier at McVeigh trial, May 12, 1997.
Roger Moore’s coded letter to McVeigh:
Letter entered into evidence at the Nichols trial. For federal law enforcement
considering that Moore and McVeigh were in cahoots over the robbery, see
Secret Service timeline entry for April 29, 1995, at 1034: “McVeigh and Terry
Nichols may have been involved in an insurance fraud scam with a subject
identified as Bob Moore AKA Roger Miller and Roger Moore…. An initial
analysis of the letter indicates that Moore and McVeigh set up the robbery.”
Details of interrogation of Moore and Anderson from their FD-302s of April 28,
1995, full citation above.
McVeigh orders a significant book, discovers Waco: The Big Lie:
Extracts from Homemade C-4 cited in Hersley, Tongate, and Burke, Simple
Truths: The Real Story of the Oklahoma City Bombing Investigation, pp. 124–
25; specifics of McVeigh’s purchases from Paladin Press detailed by the
company’s Dana Rogers in the McVeigh trial, May 1, 1997; an updated version
of Linda Thompson’s Waco: The Big Lie is available online (viewed February
17, 2011, at Google Videos); promotional teaser quoted in Serrano, op. cit., p.cVeigh trial, May 1, 1997; an updated version
of Linda Thompson’s Waco: The Big Lie is available online (viewed February
17, 2011, at Google Videos); promotional teaser quoted in Serrano, op. cit., p.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1997; an updated version
of Linda Thompson’s Waco: The Big Lie is available online (viewed February
17, 2011, at Google Videos); promotional teaser quoted in Serrano, op. cit., p.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

77.
Jennifer McVeigh comes clean:
Jennifer McVeigh affidavit, dated May 2, 1995, obtained by authors; McVeigh’s
mother flown in from Florida, Stephen Jones and Peter Israel, Others Unknown,
p. 89; “Tim is fried anyways” line from her FD-302, April 24–May 2, 1995;
details of FBI wanting her to testify against her brother from her testimony in
McVeigh’s trial, May 5, 1997; Fortier speculating on motive for Roger Moore
robbery, from his testimony in McVeigh trial, May 12, 1997.
Chapter 6
McVeigh draws attention of law enforcement, FBI and ATF yawn:
Al Shearer, FBI FD-302, file no. 1974, April 28, 1995; this story was broken by
Mark Flatten of the Cox News Service—see Flatten, “FBI and ATF Were
Warned About McVeigh in 1993,” Seattle Post-Intelligencer, June 2, 1995.
Coulson gets shafted, Potts gets promoted, Freeh gets distracted:
Danny Coulson interview (Gumbel), May 19, 2010; Reno announcement of
Potts as deputy director contained in transcript of her news briefing, May 3,
1995, distributed by the U.S. News Service; Potts and Freeh working the Judge
Vance mail-bombing case, Kessler, The FBI, p. 522; unreleased Department of
Justice report is “Report of the Ruby Ridge Task Force to the Office of
Professional Responsibility of Investigation of Allegations of Improper
Governmental Conduct in the Investigation, Apprehension and Prosecution of
Randall C. Weaver and Kevin L. Harris,” June 10, 1994. Parts of this report were
eventually released and were, as of November 2011, available at the DOJ Web
site at http://www.justice.gov/opr/readingroom/rubyreportcover_39.pdf. Glenn
letter covered in David Johnston, “FBI Leader at 1992 Standoff in Idaho Says
Review Shielded Top Officials,” New York Times, May 10, 1995; on Freeh’s
clash with Gorelick, see James Rowley, “FBI-Justice Clashes Are Nothing
New,” Associated Press, December 3, 1997; Office of Professional
Responsibility investigation into Glenn allegations detailed in a Department of
Justice news release, “Evidence from Investigation of 1992 Ruby Ridge Matter
Only Sufficient to Charge One Official with Criminal Conduct,” August 15,
1997.
Government disregards own evidence of second Ryder truck:
Rick Wahl initially identifying the pickup as gray, from lead sheet drawn up by
FBI Agent Budke on April 26, 1995; Bob Nelson testified in the Nichols trial,
November 20, 1997; Rucker and Sargent both testified in the Nichols trial on
December 4, 1997. Rucker quote from MGA documentary interview, March 6,6, 1995; Bob Nelson testified in the Nichols trial,
November 20, 1997; Rucker and Sargent both testified in the Nichols trial on
December 4, 1997. Rucker quote from MGA documentary interview, March 6,

--- PAGE BREAK ---testified in the Nichols trial,
November 20, 1997; Rucker and Sargent both testified in the Nichols trial on
December 4, 1997. Rucker quote from MGA documentary interview, March 6,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1999; Sargent quote from MGA documentary interview, March 25, 1999
(transcripts obtained by authors); Bob Ricks interview (Gumbel), August 9,
2010. The government’s initial interest in the second Ryder truck theory is
documented, e.g., in attorney notes on a witness named Barbara Whittenberg,
who claimed to have served breakfast to three men who drove up to her diner in
Herington in a Ryder truck. The attorney review is dated October 22, 1996, and
initialed ALM, an apparent reference to Larry Mackey, whose initials were, in
fact, LAM but were accidentally transposed.
McVeigh creates a “network of friends”:
McVeigh and Guthrie meeting: in Mark Hamm’s book In Bad Company, p. 145,
Pete Langan is quoted as saying: “Guthrie knew McVeigh. Guthrie met him
through the gun shows”; McVeigh and Nichols stayed at a Motel 6 in
Fayetteville on October 11–12, 1993, and the booking was in Nichols’s name;
copy of McVeigh’s October 12 traffic citation near Elohim City obtained by
authors; Guthrie gives an account of the planned (but never attempted) armored
car heist in the Fayetteville area in his unpublished handwritten memoir, The
Taunting Bandits, pp. 13–16. He says the participants were himself, Langan, and
Shawn Kenny, whom he calls Dan Kenny; Guthrie meeting Robb in 1992
included in his FBI FD-302, March 4–15, 1996; Nichols’s account from a letter
to Jesse Trentadue, October 18, 2006, obtained by authors.
The hunt for Steve Colbern:
Colbern is first mentioned in the Secret Service timeline at 1937 on May 5:
“Steve Colburn [sic], a federal fugitive being pursued by the U.S. Marshal
Service, shared a P.O. Box with McVeigh at one time. Colbern fits description of
John Doe #2.” Colbern said in his first FBI interview (FD-302, file no. 2178,
May 12, 1995) that he did once have a mailbox in Kingman but not in the last
ten years. A U.S. Marshals’ Report of Investigation into Colbern, May 6, 1995,
details the letter postmarked from Texarkana and confirms the mailbox link. The
report was shared with the ATF, and eventually handed over to defense lawyers
in the bombing case in 2001. McVeigh’s note to “S.C.” entered into evidence at
the federal trials; court documents on the search of Colbern’s pickup were
unsealed in September 1995 and published, e.g., in Michelle Boorstein, “Judge
Unseals Documents on Searches Involving McVeigh, Colbern,” Associated
Press, September 14, 1995; Colbern’s neighbor Maybelle Hertig quoted in David
Johnston, “Bomb Inquiry Leads to Arrest of Biochemist,” New York Times, May
13, 1995; details on snakes, ex-wife, from FBI interview with Colbern’s uncle,
Dr. Edwin Colbern, FD-302, file no. 3223, May 12, 1995.
The brief, disturbing life of Jason Nichols:
McVeigh sends Nichols to Pendleton, Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., p. 138; thewith Colbern’s uncle,
Dr. Edwin Colbern, FD-302, file no. 3223, May 12, 1995.
The brief, disturbing life of Jason Nichols:
McVeigh sends Nichols to Pendleton, Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., p. 138; the

--- PAGE BREAK ---,
Dr. Edwin Colbern, FD-302, file no. 3223, May 12, 1995.
The brief, disturbing life of Jason Nichols:
McVeigh sends Nichols to Pendleton, Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., p. 138; the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

account of McVeigh’s 1993 stay in Decker and Jason’s death is taken from a
Nichols defense team memorandum amalgamating all of Marife Nichols’s
interview statements about her son, dated July 15, 1997; from Marife’s FBI FD-
302 interview report, file no. 4944, dated May 1, 1995; from Nichols’s
handwritten answers to author questions, dated January 3, 2010; and, regarding
McVeigh’s CPR efforts, from Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., pp. 147–50.
Evidence teams grapple with the “red pyramid”:
Weldon Kennedy interview (Gumbel), December 15, 2010; a FEMA Situation
Report for April 25, 1995, 1:30 P.M. EDT, reads: “On April 24, President Clinton
directed the General Services Administration to rebuild the Murrah Building
after the recovery effort”; people who saw sinister intent in the decision to
demolish the building were largely fans of General Partin’s multiple-explosive
theory of the bombing (debunked in chapter 2), see, e.g., William F. Jasper,
“Explosive Evidence of a Cover-Up,” New American, August 7, 1995; Oscar
Johnson, interview with a defense investigator for McVeigh, dated February 16,
1996. Defenbaugh-Eberhardt spat: interviews (Gumbel) with Defenbaugh, May
18, June 13, and September 22, 2010; interviews (Gumbel) with Eberhardt, May
26 and July 9, 2010. More than nine months after the bombing, Eberhardt wrote
up an FBI FD-302 describing how he returned to his ninth-floor office sometime
in early May, removed a dummy bomb device, threw it in a bag, and later
disposed of it (file no. 13012, February 3, 1996). The existence and delayed
timing of this 302 lend some credence to Defenbaugh’s memory that Eberhardt’s
handling of the device was subject to FBI investigation. If there is further
documentation on the matter, the FBI and ATF have not disclosed it.
Stephen Jones’s inauspicious beginning as McVeigh’s defense counsel:
Jones’s biographical details, approach by Judge Russell, from Others Unknown,
op. cit., pp. 11–12; Michel and Herbeck (op. cit., p. 281) have Gerry Spence
turning down McVeigh’s defense. But Spence said in an e-mail (to Gumbel,
March 12, 2011) that, while he couldn’t remember for sure, he didn’t think he
was ever asked. Dick DeGuerin turning it down, interview (Gumbel), July 14,
2010; Jones’s first meeting with McVeigh recounted in a confidential memo by
ABC producer Don Thrasher to his bosses, dated March 26, 1996, and obtained
by authors; Jones’s brief on halting the demolition of the Murrah Building:
“Defendant’s Motion to Preserve Evidence Scheduled to Be Destroyed by the
Government, and Brief in Support,” filed around May 10, 1995 (no date on
author copy); on delay in demolition of Murrah Building, see from the Daily
Oklahoman, Chris Casteel, “Agency Plans to Raze Building, GSA Weighs
Effects of Using Explosives,” May 9, 1995; Casteel, “Explosives to Demolish
Building Work May Begin by This Weekend,” May 10, 1995; and Nolan Clay,Casteel, “Agency Plans to Raze Building, GSA Weighs
Effects of Using Explosives,” May 9, 1995; Casteel, “Explosives to Demolish
Building Work May Begin by This Weekend,” May 10, 1995; and Nolan Clay,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ans to Raze Building, GSA Weighs
Effects of Using Explosives,” May 9, 1995; Casteel, “Explosives to Demolish
Building Work May Begin by This Weekend,” May 10, 1995; and Nolan Clay,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Defense Experts Study Ruins, Team Disappointed to Find Crater Filled,” May
21, 1995; quote from Coyle’s clerk from Serrano, op. cit., p. 350.
The FBI’s brief bout of insanity over Josh Nichols:
The Oklahoma City command post holding all John Doe Two leads “in
abeyance,” from insert E-4153, dated May 3, 1995, written by Special Agent
Thomas P. Ravenelle of the San Francisco office, explaining why he was no
longer pursuing a John Doe Two lead he had taken up on May 3. Josh calling
Agent Calhoun after hours, see Lana Padilla and Ron Delpit, op. cit., pp. 142–
43. Account of Josh being accused, op. cit., pp. 98–106, and the following FBI
FD-302s: Josh Nichols, file no. 5098, May 6, 1995; Lana Padilla, file no. 5834,
May 6, 1995. Nichols (handwritten answers to author questions, March 30,
2010) said he regarded the naming of Josh as John Doe Two “a form of threat
and coercion.” He wrote: “I took it as a sign that it would be best if I just shut
my mouth and ‘take the fall,’ which is pretty much what I did in my federal
trial.” Lana and Josh in Las Vegas, handing over clothes and baseball caps, By
Blood Betrayed, pp. 112–32; the Secret Service timeline entry for May 11
discussing the resumption of investigation into John Doe Two leads is at 1810
hours.
McVeigh spends the night with Karen Anderson:
Karen Anderson, FBI FD-302 interview, file no. 5435, May 19, 1995; Anderson
“very fond” of McVeigh, from FBI FD-302 interview with Steve Colbern, file
no. 5344, dated May 20, 1995; McVeigh dropping in on Lori Fortier, see
testimony of Deborah Brown, Fortier’s colleague at The Beach Club tanning
salon, at McVeigh’s trial, May 28, 1997; Jim Rosencrans, FBI FD-302, file no.
6700, July 1, 1995; Patty Edwards, FBI FD-302, file no. 6696, July 1, 1995;
“Virgin McVeigh” taunt, from a self-published memoir by McVeigh’s fellow
federal death row inmate David Paul Hammer, with input from Jeffery Paul,
Secrets Worth Dying For: Timothy James McVeigh and the Oklahoma City
Bombing (2003).
Bill Maloney raises prospect of John Doe Three:
FBI FD-302 interview with Maloney, file no. 3576, May 10, 1995; Maloney
interview (Gumbel), April 30, 2010. Terry Nichols denied being in Cassville in
November 1994 (but did not say he had never been there) or knowing a Robert
Jacques. When Marife was asked why the name Jacks or Jacques appeared in her
address book, she said she was trying to write the word “yuk” or “yucky” but
didn’t know how to spell it and tried a number of different ways, to see what
looked right. (Terry Nichols, handwritten answers to author questions, January 3,
2010; Marife Nichols, interview with defense investigator H. C. Bodley, August
17, 1995, and also FBI FD-302, file no. 14297, dated August 4–8, 1995.) Theitten answers to author questions, January 3,
2010; Marife Nichols, interview with defense investigator H. C. Bodley, August
17, 1995, and also FBI FD-302, file no. 14297, dated August 4–8, 1995.) The

--- PAGE BREAK ---hor questions, January 3,
2010; Marife Nichols, interview with defense investigator H. C. Bodley, August
17, 1995, and also FBI FD-302, file no. 14297, dated August 4–8, 1995.) The

--- PAGE BREAK ---

U.S. embassy official in the Philippines who interviewed Marife on this question
did not find her answer wholly convincing (detailed in Teater’s Robert Jacques
report, see below). Bill Teater interview (Gumbel), August 11, 2010; Jeanne
Boylan, op. cit., pp. 210–11 (about her interview of postal worker Debbie
Nakanashi) and p. 228 (her quote about Maloney); confirmation of McVeigh’s
discolored tooth, from an FBI report written by Teater, “Comprehensive
summary of investigation concerning Robert Jacques, possible associate of
Timothy James McVeigh and Terry Lynn Nichols,” April 19, 2000, obtained by
Gumbel (Teater’s name redacted, but his initials in lowercase, “wet,” left
visible); details of Defenbaugh’s biography, taken from his Web site
www.dannydefenbaugh.com; he formally took over the investigation on May 11,
the day after Terry Nichols’s indictment on bombing charges. I. C. Smith
interviews, June 18 (Gumbel and Charles) and October 4, 2010 (Gumbel). The
only other senior FBI veteran willing to address the issue of Defenbaugh’s
leadership on the record was Bob Ricks, who contrasted Weldon Kennedy’s
ability to set an agenda and exercise judgment on what mattered with “other
people,” who “may have a limited investigative background”; “It’s about
different capabilities people had, and putting people in the right spots,” he said;
interview (Gumbel), August 9, 2010. Teater quote from interview (Gumbel),
August 13, 2010; Defenbaugh characterizing his role, interviews (Gumbel), May
17, 2010, and April 4, 2011.
Colbern gets arrested, the FBI loses interest almost immediately:
Account of arrest from David Johnston, “Bomb Inquiry Leads to Arrest of
Biochemist,” New York Times, May 13, 1995; Colbern’s first FBI interview
detailed in FD-302, file no. 2178, May 12, 1995; Preston Haney, interviewed by
the ATF, see FBI FD-302, file no. 1879, May 15, 1995; letter to Barbara Harris,
from FBI interview with Harris, FD-302, file no. 1294, May 11, 1995; the Mail
Room manager recognizing Colbern’s picture, from Lynda Willoughby’s FBI
FD-302, file no. 4461, May 12, 1995 (interview conducted by the ATF). Details
on the Browning video from ATF and U.S. Marshals Service files handed over in
discovery to Nichols’s state trial lawyers in 2001, confirmed also by Richard
Hanawalt, interview (Gumbel), March 18, 2011; Edwin Colbern, FBI FD-302,
file no. 3223, dated May 12, 1995; government’s belief that Colbern was too
weird to be involved based on subsequent documentation on Colbern (detailed in
later section in this chapter) and on interview (Gumbel) with Danny
Defenbaugh, May 19, 2010; Michael Tigar interview (Gumbel), March 1, 2011:
Edwin Colbern’s 302 described Colbern smelling like a “billy goat.”
Fortier reaches out to the FBI:
FBI FD-302, file no. 4477, May 12, 1995, was written by Agent David Beiter,(Gumbel), March 1, 2011:
Edwin Colbern’s 302 described Colbern smelling like a “billy goat.”
Fortier reaches out to the FBI:
FBI FD-302, file no. 4477, May 12, 1995, was written by Agent David Beiter,

--- PAGE BREAK ---011:
Edwin Colbern’s 302 described Colbern smelling like a “billy goat.”
Fortier reaches out to the FBI:
FBI FD-302, file no. 4477, May 12, 1995, was written by Agent David Beiter,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

who received the Kit Kat wrapper from Fortier.
Stephen Jones leaks own client’s guilt to the New York Times:
Pam Belluck, “McVeigh Is Reported to Claim Responsibility for the Bombing,”
New York Times, May 17, 1995; account of Jones’s attempt to negotiate with
Reno for his client’s life, interview with Jones (Gumbel and Charles), September
17, 2010; leak justification in Jones and Israel, op. cit., pp. xv, 60–62. Jones
never explicitly writes that he obtained authorization before talking to Belluck.
The closest he comes is this line: “He gave me the authorization to proceed, and
I called Pam Belluck at the New York Times.” Jones could have been clearer
about the time sequence in this sentence considering the importance of the issue.
Jones was made aware of the allegations in this section. In an initial response (an
e-mail dated March 16, 2011), he wrote: “These questions and the incident I
discussed at length in the second edition of my book. I do not know I can add
anything to them at this time. My memory would probably have been better ten
years ago.” In a second e-mail, on March 22, 2011, he raised the issue again,
unprompted, and explicitly denied leaking the story before obtaining McVeigh’s
authorization. “I had met Pam Belluck,” he wrote, “and may have talked with
her briefly on the telephone, but we had no such discussion until after Mr.
McVeigh and I discussed it at length and I had his authority to discuss it with
her.” Rob Nigh interview (Gumbel), April 5, 2011; McVeigh’s version in Michel
and Herbeck, op. cit., pp. 283–84.
Michael and Lori Fortier come clean…ish:
Account of May 17 FBI questioning taken from FD-302, file no. 3495, May 17,
1995, and from Michael Fortier’s testimony in McVeigh’s trial, May 12–13,
1997.
McVeigh’s misadventures in Arizona:
Jim Rosencrans, FBI FD-302, July 1, 1995, file no. 6700; Michael Fortier
testimony in McVeigh’s trial, May 12, 1997; McCarty quoted in Serge F.
Koveleski and Pierre Thomas “3rd Man’s Fate Dangles in Okla. Bombing Case;
Prosecutors Divided Over Strategy on Fortier,” Washington Post, August 7,
1995; background on the Arizona Patriots, see Brent L. Smith, Terrorism in
America, pp. 79–84, and Tony Perry, “Godfather of Arizona’s Militiamen;
Oklahoma City Bombing Puts Jack Oliphant, an Ex-Con and Survivalist, Back
in Limelight,” Los Angeles Times, May 21, 1995; on Oliphant and McVeigh, see
Dyane Partridge’s FBI FD-302 interviews, file no. 1215, dated May 10, 1995,
and file no. 14486, dated March 28, 1996; also, interview (Gumbel) with the FBI
agent who talked to her, Lee Fabrizio, December 11, 2009; McVeigh shooting
near Oliphant’s ranch, from a letter to Kingman radio journalist Dave Hawkins,
postmarked April 13, 2001, provided to the authors by Hawkins; Tom Hoovere Fabrizio, December 11, 2009; McVeigh shooting
near Oliphant’s ranch, from a letter to Kingman radio journalist Dave Hawkins,
postmarked April 13, 2001, provided to the authors by Hawkins; Tom Hoover

--- PAGE BREAK ---11, 2009; McVeigh shooting
near Oliphant’s ranch, from a letter to Kingman radio journalist Dave Hawkins,
postmarked April 13, 2001, provided to the authors by Hawkins; Tom Hoover

--- PAGE BREAK ---

interview (Gumbel), February 23, 2010, and follow-up e-mail chat, February 25,
2010.
Colbern talks to the feds, the feds drop him as a suspect:
Meeting with prosecutors detailed in Colbern FBI FD-302, file no. 5344, May
20, 1995; Moore and Anderson discuss selling .50-caliber ammunition to
Colbern in their interviews of May 19, 1995, the day before Colbern’s big
interview; Dennis Malzac, interviewed by the ATF, FBI FD-302, file no. 3791,
May 13, 1995; Malzac’s 2000 revelations taken from motion filed by Terry
Nichols’s lawyers in state court in Oklahoma, February 9, 2004, requesting more
government documents on Colbern (obtained by authors); Colbern, prisoner no.
41130-008, was released on February 24, 1999, according to Bureau of Prisons
records; Richard Hanawalt interview (Gumbel), March 18, 2011; Bob Sanders
interview (Charles), March 18, 2011.
Carol Howe’s Elohim City investigation falls apart:
ATF Report of Investigation on Carol Howe (informant no. 53270-183), May 31,
1995; ATF Report of Investigation, May 18, 1995 (reactivating Howe); ATF
Request for Advance of Funds, May 18, 1995; $250 received on May 22.
Michael Tigar goes to bat for Terry and Marife Nichols:
Tigar’s filing and subsequent hearing reported in John Kifner, “Release Without
Bail Is Sought for Bombing Suspect,” New York Times, May 26, 1995, and
Richard A. Serrano, “Nichols Bail Hearing Judge Faults Interrogators’ Tactics,”
Los Angeles Times, June 3, 1995; Marife’s visit to Nichols memorialized in FBI
FD-302, file no. 5618, May 25, 1995; return of money, being told she has to pay
her own way, see FBI FD-302, file nos. 3231–3, dated May 25, 26, 27, 1995
(one per day); voice mail memorialized in FBI FD-302, file no. 5748, May 31,
1995.
FBI finds a reason not to believe in John Doe Two:
Michael Hertig, FBI FD-302, file no. 5532, May 23, 1995; Todd Bunting, FBI
FD-302, file nos. 5682 and 5690, May 28 and 29, 1995; Hertig acknowledged
his mustache at the time of the Ryder rental in the McVeigh trial, May 23, 1997;
Eldon Elliott talked about not being in the office on May 18 in the McVeigh trial,
May 9, 1997; Vicki Beemer explaining how she knew Hertig, was sure two men
came in on April 17, see her testimony in the McVeigh trial, May 22–23, 1997;
Danny Coulson interview (Gumbel), May 19, 2010; I. C. Smith interview
(Gumbel), October 4, 2010.
Fortier leads the FBI on a wild-goose chase in the desert:
Fortier FBI FD-302, file nos. 9161 and 9162, May 30, 1995; Weldon Kennedy
interview (Gumbel), August 26, 2010.
FBI and prosecutors skirt holes in evidence at Eldon Elliott’s body shop:in the desert:
Fortier FBI FD-302, file nos. 9161 and 9162, May 30, 1995; Weldon Kennedy
interview (Gumbel), August 26, 2010.
FBI and prosecutors skirt holes in evidence at Eldon Elliott’s body shop:

--- PAGE BREAK ---ier FBI FD-302, file nos. 9161 and 9162, May 30, 1995; Weldon Kennedy
interview (Gumbel), August 26, 2010.
FBI and prosecutors skirt holes in evidence at Eldon Elliott’s body shop:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

McDonald’s video and timing of McVeigh’s supposed walk to Eldon Elliott’s
body shop discussed, e.g., in Jon Hersley, Larry Tongate, and Bob Burke, Simple
Truths, pp. 217–19. Agent Gary Witt retracing McVeigh’s steps also recounted
here; “light mist” line from Eldon Elliott’s testimony in the McVeigh trial, May
9, 1997; Scott Mendeloff interviews (Gumbel), July 16, 2010, and October 4,
2010; McVeigh’s version, Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., p. 213; Linda James
interview (Gumbel), August 3, 2010, and e-mails, December 7, 2010. She saw
only two indications that there might be a resemblance to McVeigh’s
handwriting—the “li” in “Kling” and the backward slant. But James said the
slant could be misleading. Weldon L. Kennedy, On-Scene Commander, p. 219;
Kennedy interview (Gumbel), August 26, 2010. In his FBI FD-302 interview of
May 19, 1995, file no. 9256, Roger Moore described how, after spring 1994, his
“only means of contact with McVeigh was when McVeigh would call, or by
letter”; Karen Anderson mentioned the phone call in January or February 1994
in her testimony in the Nichols trial, November 17–18, 1997. Nichols described
seeing McVeigh with a non-Bridges calling card on two occasions. He says in
his handwritten document “Timeline: From April 1994 thru September 1994,
Tracking McVeigh’s Travels” (November 11, 2006), the card was a Fone
America prepaid debit card similar to those reported to be used by the Aryan
Republican Army. In answers to author questions, dated January 3, 2010, he said
he didn’t know what kind of card it was.
Chapter 7
Moore, McVeigh, and the Kinestik mystery:
Moore and Karen Anderson’s initial stories are contained in their FBI FD-302s
for April 28 and May 19, 1995. Moore did not mention meeting McVeigh at a
gun show in Knob Creek, Kentucky, in 1993 in his first interview. Karen
Anderson made no mention of meeting McVeigh in Kentucky, or at the Soldier
of Fortune Convention in Las Vegas, in any of her FBI interviews or court
appearances. Anderson said in her May 19 FBI interview that McVeigh’s first
visit to the Arkansas ranch, in April 1993, lasted two and a half days; Moore
testified at McVeigh trial on November 18, 1997, that it lasted ten days. “Top
sergeant” line from Moore’s trial testimony; account of McVeigh’s April 1994
visit from Moore and Anderson’s FBI FD-302s of May 19, 1995, and their
testimony in the Nichols trial (November 17–18, 1997).
The defense information on the Kinestik comes from a purported interview
with McVeigh conducted by defense investigator Richard Reyna on December
12, 1995, write-up by Reyna obtained by authors. It was later alleged that noon the Kinestik comes from a purported interview
with McVeigh conducted by defense investigator Richard Reyna on December
12, 1995, write-up by Reyna obtained by authors. It was later alleged that no

--- PAGE BREAK ---es from a purported interview
with McVeigh conducted by defense investigator Richard Reyna on December
12, 1995, write-up by Reyna obtained by authors. It was later alleged that no

--- PAGE BREAK ---

such interview took place (Stephen Jones, e-mail to Gumbel, March 22, 2011,
and Rob Nigh, interview with Gumbel, April 5, 2011). Still, the understanding
among the defense team members was that the underlying facts were accurate
(Stuart Wright, interview with Gumbel, April 28, 2011). McVeigh himself also
confirmed that the material was genuine (Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., p. 301).
See also chapter 9.
Nichols’s allegations concerning the Kinestik he said McVeigh obtained
from Roger Moore are in two of his prison writings, one titled “Timeline: From
April 1994 thru September 1994 Tracking McVeigh’s Travels” (November 11,
2006) and the other “OKC Bombing Materials and the Missing Explosives”
(December 1, 2007); more details in his answers to author questions, one batch
dated April 27, 2010, and the other February 21, 2011; McVeigh’s allusions to
Kinestik appear on pp. 163–64 of Michel and Herbeck; Roger Moore responds
to allegations in Richard A. Serrano, “Man Says He Had No Role in Oklahoma
Plot,” Los Angeles Times, May 5, 2005.
No fingerprints on nitromethane tubes or box: in a preliminary finding on
May 4, 2005 (included in summary report dated June 24, 2005), the FBI crime
lab reported that 16 of the 68 nitromethane tubes bore fingerprints but could not
yet say if they were recoverable; almost three years later (February 21, 2008),
the lab concluded that they were not—a time delay that has raised suspicions in
some quarters; documents obtained by authors. Attempts to contact Moore for
this book were unsuccessful. On May 4, 2010, a woman—presumably his wife,
Carol, or Karen Anderson—answered the phone at his Florida residence,
acknowledged receipt of a letter outlining Nichols’s allegations, and said curtly:
“We’re not interested.”
Terry Nichols teeters on the brink:
Nichols input mostly from his “Timeline” document of November 11, 2006, and
his answers to author questions, January 3, 2010, and March 20, 2010;
McVeigh’s version from Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., p. 158; Marion County
Clerk Marquetta Eilerts, FBI FD-302, file no. 15830, August 6, 1996; Nichols’s
employer, Timothy Donahue, testified in the Nichols federal trial, November 5,
1997; Marife Nichols testified about her affair with McVeigh at the Nichols state
trial, from Tim Talley, “Nichols’s second wife says she had affair with
McVeigh,” Associated Press, April 8, 2004; McVeigh shooting at Nichols, told
by Lana Padilla, interview (Gumbel), September 25, 2010.
Moore’s quirky, murky past:
Moore biographical details from Carol Moore’s FBI FD-302, file no. 12689,
November 7, 1995, from Moore’s interview with Roland Leeds, November 11,
1996, and from Moore’s FBI FD-302 interview of May 19, 1995, file no. 9256;ails from Carol Moore’s FBI FD-302, file no. 12689,
November 7, 1995, from Moore’s interview with Roland Leeds, November 11,
1996, and from Moore’s FBI FD-302 interview of May 19, 1995, file no. 9256;

--- PAGE BREAK ---e’s FBI FD-302, file no. 12689,
November 7, 1995, from Moore’s interview with Roland Leeds, November 11,
1996, and from Moore’s FBI FD-302 interview of May 19, 1995, file no. 9256;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

he described building boats for the navy in Vietnam in his first big FBI
interview, FD-302, file no. 810, April 28, 1995; Bill Stoneman interviewed by
defense investigator John Hough, December 16, 1996, report obtained by
authors; Rodney Bowers, interviews (Gumbel), March 10 and May 6, 2010;
smoke bomb incident, from Lance Powell interview with defense investigator
Roland Leeds, December 10, 1996; more details from Martin “Walt” Powell
interview with Leeds, November 12, 1996 (reports obtained by authors). The
housekeeper was Patricia Cicatello, and details of her cash robbery are from a
Garland County sheriff’s report, August 11, 1986; she committed suicide in 1994
(documents obtained by authors); suicide of Moore’s friend Layton Noel detailed
in Garland County sheriff’s report, October 20, 1986. Unverified stories about
Moore: Camp Peary instructor lead from former intelligence operative, interview
(Charles), April 9, 1997. Bowers had a source who suggested Moore had played
a role in the U.S. government’s support of the Nicaraguan contras; see also, Al
Martin, The Conspirators, pp. 56–58; Moore’s credit history investigated by
Charles Sullivan for Nichols defense team, his report dated December 16, 1996,
obtained by authors; Rodney Bowers and Michael Whiteley, “‘Cover’ Blown,
Victim Details Royal Robbery,” Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, June 22, 1995.
Moore wriggles out of FBI, ATF investigations:
On Operation Punchout, see FBI FD-302, file no. 16800, March 13–14, 1996 (on
the videotapes), and FD-302, file no. 13675, February 27, 1996, on Assistant
U.S. Attorney Bruce Lubeck’s decision not to prosecute Moore; defense
investigator Roland Leeds’s review of the surveillance tapes is dated December
31, 1996, obtained by authors; the ATF investigations of 1989 and 1993 are
detailed in an FBI insert written by Special Agent Steven Crutchfield, file no. E-
7052, January 11 and January 18, 1996; Birdsong interview with defense
investigator John Hough, November 20, 1996; Bill Buford, interviews (Gumbel),
May 11 and June 16, 2010.
McVeigh and Nichols buy ammonium nitrate, steal explosives:
Nichols narrative from the following handwritten documents: “Events Leading
Up to the Oklahoma City Bombing: A Condensed Narrative,” November 9,
2006; written answers to questions from investigative reporter John Solomon,
September 30, 2007; “OKC Bombing Materials and the Missing Explosives,”
December 1, 2007; answers to authors’ questions, March 20, 2010. Rick
Schlender did not testify at trial, but his observations—minus his memory of two
men making the purchase—were reported by FBI agent Christopher Budke at
the McVeigh trial, May 19, 1997; Schledner’s FBI FD-302 interviews of April
30, 1995 (file no. 7748), and May 2, 1995 (file no. 7772), refer to the second
man as a “white male, approximately the same age [as Nichols], mid-30s or a7; Schledner’s FBI FD-302 interviews of April
30, 1995 (file no. 7748), and May 2, 1995 (file no. 7772), refer to the second
man as a “white male, approximately the same age [as Nichols], mid-30s or a

--- PAGE BREAK ---D-302 interviews of April
30, 1995 (file no. 7748), and May 2, 1995 (file no. 7772), refer to the second
man as a “white male, approximately the same age [as Nichols], mid-30s or a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

little older, with ‘clean-cut’ hair” and as having “dark-colored hair, which was
slightly longer than the purchaser’s hair”; for McVeigh’s account of quarry
robbery, see Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., pp. 163–64; inventory of stolen items
and sheriff’s account of investigation from FBI FD-302 interview of Ed Davis,
file no. 7936, April 25–26, 1995. Davis testified at a preliminary hearing in
Nichols’ state trial, May 7, 2003, that he notified the ATF about the robbery, but
the ATF did not investigate.
Moore arrested for road rage, drops strange hints to lawyer, bail bond
agent:
Richard McLaughlin, FBI FD-302, file no. 12655, December 18, 1995; Dianna
Sanders Burk, FBI FD-302, file no. 11941, December 8, 1995; story of the
$50,000 dug up from the ranch from Bill Stoneman interview with Nichols
defense investigator John Hough, December 16, 1996; detail about McLaughlin
pulling a gun to run Moore out of his office from interview (Gumbel) with his
brother Marty McLaughlin, April 20, 2010; Richard McLaughlin died in 1996.
McVeigh and Nichols complete their shopping spree:
Nichols account from same documents as in last section, plus “Facts Regarding
Roger Moore’s Home Robbery,” November 21, 2006, and his answers to author
questions, January 22, 2010; McVeigh’s version of the jug bomb, Michel and
Herbeck, op. cit., p. 165; Wichita coin dealer Robert Dunlap testified in the
Nichols trial, November 25, 1997; he confirmed Nichols came in on October 19,
1994, and exchanged gold coins for cash but could not recall how big the
transaction was; VP Racing Fuels salesman Tim Chambers, McVeigh trial
testimony, May 5, 1997; McVeigh’s Star Wars speech, as rendered by Fortier,
much quoted, example during Fortier’s testimony in the Nichols federal trial,
November 13, 1997.
The bizarre Roger Moore robbery from Moore’s and Nichols’s perspective:
Moore’s account is taken largely from his testimony in the Nichols trial,
November 18, 1997. The detail about the serge on the ski mask is from Moore’s
grand jury testimony of June 1, 1995, as reported in a defense investigator’s
report by John Hough, February 7, 1997, obtained by authors; Terry Nichols
documents on the robbery include “Facts Regarding Roger Moore’s Home
Robbery,” November 21, 2006, and his answers to author questions, January 22,
2010, and March 20, 2010; insurance adjuster Rick Spivey interviewed by
Hough, November 25, 1996; the flyer featuring the picture of the law
enforcement agent in a black ski mask was entered into evidence at the Nichols
trial as exhibit no. D1549; in her FBI FD-302 interview of May 19, 1995,
Anderson said the only person who knew she was going to a gun show in
Shreveport was the owner of a gun shop in Hot Springs; the defense team inno. D1549; in her FBI FD-302 interview of May 19, 1995,
Anderson said the only person who knew she was going to a gun show in
Shreveport was the owner of a gun shop in Hot Springs; the defense team in

--- PAGE BREAK ---I FD-302 interview of May 19, 1995,
Anderson said the only person who knew she was going to a gun show in
Shreveport was the owner of a gun shop in Hot Springs; the defense team in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nichols’s state trial found evidence that Guthrie possessed the shotgun and
garrote wire, plus Israeli combat boots, plastic ties, and a ski mask like the ones
Moore described (see defense motion in the Nichols state trial, dated April 12,
2004, and titled “Terry Lynn Nichols’ Motion to Dismiss Based on the State’s
Failure to Comply with Brady v. Maryland”); Robert Miller ID found among
ARA’s things, task force not told, see John Solomon, “FBI Suspected McVeigh
Link to Robbers,” Associated Press, February 25, 2004.
Moore seeks help, underwhelms neighbors, police, insurance agents:
Material on the Powells from testimony in the Nichols trial (Walt on December
3, Verta and Lance on December 4, 1997) and from interviews with defense
investigator Roland Leeds (Walt on November 12, Verta—misspelled Verda—on
November 13, and Lance on December 10, 1996); Moore’s version from his
testimony in the Nichols trial, November 18, 1997, and from his FBI FD-302,
dated May 19, 1995; Hough interviewed Spivey on November 25, 1996, Dies on
November 12, 1996, and Priddy on November 11, 1996.
Who told McVeigh about the robbery?
Nichols walks through this argument in his document “Facts Regarding Roger
Moore’s Home Robbery,” November 21, 2006, and his facts check out; Michael
Fortier, testimony in the Nichols federal trial, November 13, 1997; the Daryl
Bridges records (trial exhibit no. 554) show that at 8:09 P.M. Eastern (7:09 P.M. in
Kansas), a call was placed to the Fortiers’ residence from a BP gas station pay
phone in Kent, Ohio, and lasted 11 minutes and 12 seconds; Fortier testified at
trial that the call came in mid-morning, but either he or the reconstructed phone
records are wrong; Fortier also testified that McVeigh asked him to call back
from a pay phone, but the length of the call as documented in the Bridges
records casts doubt on his story.
Nichols flees the country:
Nichols’s narrative from document “Facts Regarding Roger Moore’s Home
Robbery,” November 21, 2006; explanation of reason to be afraid for his life in
the Philippines, details on stun guns, from Nichols’s answers to author questions,
April 27, 2010; more on stun guns from FBI FD-302, file no. 4261, May 2,
1995, including the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department report on the
incident; Lana Padilla narrative from December 8, 1995, interview with defense
investigator H. C. Bodley, obtained by authors, and from By Blood Betrayed, op.
cit., p. 162.
McVeigh tries to recruit Fortier, crashes his car:
Fortier acknowledged under cross-examination in the Nichols federal trial that
Lori had never told him the soup-can story, testimony on November 13, 1997;
McVeigh’s account of accident from his January 10, 1995, letter to Rogercross-examination in the Nichols federal trial that
Lori had never told him the soup-can story, testimony on November 13, 1997;
McVeigh’s account of accident from his January 10, 1995, letter to Roger

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Nichols federal trial that
Lori had never told him the soup-can story, testimony on November 13, 1997;
McVeigh’s account of accident from his January 10, 1995, letter to Roger

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Moore, obtained by authors; Roger Moore interview with Nichols defense
investigator Roland Leeds, November 11, 1996.
The FBI babysits Roger Moore:
Floyd Hays interview (Gumbel), July 13, 2010; Jon Hersley, Larry Tongate, and
Bob Burke, Simple Truths, p. 173.
McVeigh and Nichols get indicted:
On Magaw, see Joyce Peterson and Nolan Clay, “ATF Chief Sees 3–4
Indictments in City Bombing; Director Says All Participants Known,” Daily
Oklahoman, August 5, 1995; Magaw interview (Gumbel), January 18, 2010;
Larry Mackey interview (Gumbel), October 11, 2010.
Chapter 8
Carol Howe goes undercover at Elohim City:
Howe’s assessment of Strassmeir, descriptions of Mahon and grenades, from her
handwritten informant notes, dated October 9 and October 19, 1994, obtained by
authors; these and subsequent findings are memorialized in Angela Finley’s
Reports of Investigation for the ATF, dated October, November, and December
1994 and January 1995; Millar’s sermon recounted in an ATF Report of
Investigation, dated January 11, 1995; Howe’s report on Mahon and the 500-
pound bomb, from her handwritten notes, obtained by authors; Strassmeir
interview (Gumbel), June 30, 2010; Kirk Lyons interview (Gumbel), March 23,
2010; Bob Sanders’s review and analysis of the Carol Howe file, performed for
her criminal defense lawyer Clark Brewster, dated June 20, 1997, and obtained
by authors; Dave Roberts, testimony before a county grand jury in Oklahoma
City, March 23, 1998, transcript obtained by authors.
The FBI’s uncomfortable history with Elohim City and the radical right:
Jack Knox, interview (Gumbel), May 10, 2010; Sarah Wallington sleeping on
banknotes, story from Dave Hollaway, interview (Gumbel), May 20, 2010; a
useful account of the sedition trial is in Leonard Zeskind, Blood and Politics, pp.
158–69; other details here taken from Bruce Campbell’s essay “Louis and
Sheila” (available at Beam’s Web site www.louisbeam.com), from Howard
Pankratz, “Blast Blamed on Revenge Attack Linked to Militant’s Execution,”
Denver Post, May 12, 1996, and “A Defiant and Victorious Beam Meets a
Throng of Reporters After He Is Found Innocent,” Arkansas Democrat-Gazette,
April 8, 1988; Horace Mewborn, interviews (Gumbel), May 26 and July 29,
2010; for the history of various attorney general guidelines on intelligence-
gathering versus investigation, including the CISPES issue, see DOJ inspector
general’s report, “The Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Compliance with theattorney general guidelines on intelligence-
gathering versus investigation, including the CISPES issue, see DOJ inspector
general’s report, “The Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Compliance with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---idelines on intelligence-
gathering versus investigation, including the CISPES issue, see DOJ inspector
general’s report, “The Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Compliance with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Attorney General’s Investigative Guidelines (Redacted), Special Report,”
Washington, D.C., September 2005; Bob Ricks interview (Gumbel), August 9,
2010.
Strassmeir’s Elohim City idyll:
Strassmeir interviews (Gumbel), June 30–July 3, 2010; the ATF issued its ban on
steel-core ammunition on February 2, 1994, see, e.g., Carolyn Skorneck,
“Government Bans Armor-Piercing Bullets,” Associated Press, February 5,
1994; Kirk Lyons interviews (Gumbel), March 23, April 22, July 15, 2010, April
19, 2011; Dave Hollaway interviews (Gumbel), May 6, May 10, July 9, July 10,
2010; Bob Sisente’s relationship with Louis Beam detailed in the final judgment
handed down by the U.S. District Court in Houston in a suit brought by the
Vietnamese Fishermen’s Association against the Ku Klux Klan, June 9, 1982;
Kenny Pence’s account from an interview with McVeigh defense investigators
Marty Reed and Wilma Sparks, September 7, 1996, report obtained by authors.
The feds’ struggles to figure out Robert Millar:
Horace Mewborn, interview (Gumbel), May 26, 2010; Bill Buford, interview
(Gumbel), September 8, 2010; Buck Revell’s comments from his book A G-
Man’s Journal, p. 446; early history of Millar from Somer Shook, Wesley
Delano, Robert W. Balch, “Elohim City: A Participant-Observer Study of a
Christian Identity Community,” Nova Religio, vol. 2, April 1999, and from
Kerry Noble, Tabernacle of Hate, pp. 111–12; description of Millar at the CSA
siege from Coulson’s book No Heroes, p. 305; Millar business-card wording
reported in his FBI FD-302 interview, file no. 6416, dated June 21, 1995; Bethel
Christian School brochure with photo of Millar doing Hitler salute, obtained by
authors; Millar’s child out of wedlock and other details included in a ruling by
Judge D. K. Kirkland of the Hastings County family court in Belleville, Ontario,
in which he awards full custody to Dan Irwin; ruling dated August 31, 1983,
obtained by authors; unsuccessful police raid to reclaim Irwin’s children in
“Millar Expresses City’s Beliefs, Connection to CSA Community,” Sequoia
County Times, July 18, 1985; Elohim City neighbors Carl Wright and Paul
Powers described their feelings of intimidation in court proceedings in Adair
County, Oklahoma, in the Irwin custody case; Wright (testifying on December
13, 1985) said Powers was passing information to the FBI; Powers (testifying on
February 21, 1985) refused to answer a question about passing information to
law enforcement. Early law enforcement interest in Elohim City: Oklahoma
Department of Public safety memo, dated April 21, 1985, and ATF Report of
Investigation on Elohim City, July 9, 1985; Tim Arney, interview (Gumbel),
August 26, 2010; Coulson on Ricks and Miller, from his book No Heroes, p.
539; Bob Ricks, interview (Gumbel), August 9, 2010.Investigation on Elohim City, July 9, 1985; Tim Arney, interview (Gumbel),
August 26, 2010; Coulson on Ricks and Miller, from his book No Heroes, p.
539; Bob Ricks, interview (Gumbel), August 9, 2010.

--- PAGE BREAK ---him City, July 9, 1985; Tim Arney, interview (Gumbel),
August 26, 2010; Coulson on Ricks and Miller, from his book No Heroes, p.
539; Bob Ricks, interview (Gumbel), August 9, 2010.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Carol Howe operation starts unraveling:
Reasons why Mahon was not pursued, Tristan Moreland, interview (Gumbel),
October 14 and 15, 2009. The FBI’s opinion of Mahon in the early-to-mid-1990s
is laid out in a series of teletypes from the Oklahoma City division office, dated
February 14, 1992; February 18, 1992; January 24, 1994; and March 29, 1994.
The first two were in response to inquiries from the U.S. legal attaché in Bonn in
the wake of Mahon being banned from Germany. The second two were in
response to a preliminary inquiry into Mahon, opened on January 14, 1994. The
March 29 teletype, which formally closed that inquiry, echoes the findings of all
the previous documents. “Local and federal law enforcement sources familiar
with Mahon,” it read, “are in general agreement that while MAHON’s rhetoric
continues to be the usual, and constitutionally permitted, inflammatory
‘supremacist’ speech directed against Jews and minorities, his actions, at this
time, are considerably less and do not rise to a criminal threshold.” Clearly, those
law enforcement sources did not include the ATF. Tommy Wittman, interview
(Gumbel), September 27, 2010; “crap” line from interview (Gumbel) with Neal
Kirkpatrick, then an assistant U.S. attorney in Tulsa, who ended up prosecuting
Carol Howe, May 24, 2010; Lester Martz quotes from his testimony before the
Oklahoma County grand jury, April 23, 1998, transcript obtained by authors;
“shit sandwich” line from Tim Arney, interview (Gumbel), August 26, 2010;
Dave Roberts material from his testimony before the same grand jury, March 23,
1998; limited role/response from U.S. Attorney’s Offices, taken from interviews
(Gumbel) with Steve Lewis, then the U.S. attorney in Tulsa (May 18 and August
10, 2010) and Sheldon Sperling, then the U.S. attorney in Muskogee (August 10,
2010); Finley’s correspondence with the INS, including the certificate on
Strassmeir issued February 16, 1995, obtained by authors; Howe’s trip to
Oklahoma City, the fixed-wing aircraft flight and the two weeks of inactivity all
recorded in the ATF’s Report of Investigation on her for February 1995, dated
February 28, 1995; Ken Stafford’s “trooper safety” BOLO notice obtained by
authors; Bob Ricks, interviews (Gumbel), August 9 and August 17, 2010; in his
grand jury testimony, Lester Martz denied having met Ricks to discuss Elohim
City, but this is contradicted both by Ricks and by the ATF’s February 1995
Report of Investigation on Howe, which describes plans being made in the last
week of February for Ricks and Martz to meet.
McVeigh recalibrates his plans:
Nichols’s account of reconnecting with McVeigh on his return from the
Philippines is from his handwritten document “McVeigh and Potts/Govt.
Connection,” November 23, 2007; the shadowy government operative Nichols
refers to as Potts in this document appears to be similar or the same as a man hehandwritten document “McVeigh and Potts/Govt.
Connection,” November 23, 2007; the shadowy government operative Nichols
refers to as Potts in this document appears to be similar or the same as a man he

--- PAGE BREAK ---“McVeigh and Potts/Govt.
Connection,” November 23, 2007; the shadowy government operative Nichols
refers to as Potts in this document appears to be similar or the same as a man he

--- PAGE BREAK ---

described to the FBI in April 2005 as “Top Dog #2,” see FD-302 on Nichols,
dated April 1, 2005, file no. 18253. Fortier’s interactions with McVeigh, see his
FD-302 of June 21–22, 1995, file no. 9171, and his testimony in the Nichols
trial, November 13, 1997. McVeigh reaches out to Coffman, Bangerter:
Bangerter and Bangerter’s mother were interviewed by defense investigator
Richard Reyna in February 1996 and they described meeting McVeigh at the St.
George gun show a year earlier. Reyna’s research is contained in a memo dated
September 2–4, 1996, and titled “Michael Joseph Fortier’s Involvement in the
Bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.”
If McVeigh made phone contact with either, it was not, at this stage, with the
Daryl Bridges card. Coffman, interviewed on five separate occasions by the FBI,
acknowledged receiving phone messages from a Tim Tuttle in April 1995—they
were part of the Daryl Bridges phone record—but denied meeting him and
denied talking about him with Bangerter. (See, e.g., his FBI FD-302, file no.
16229, of September 23–24, 1996.) However, Coffman was asked at least twice
to take a polygraph test and refused (FD-302, file no. 6350, of June 12, 1995,
and file no. 15876 of June 14, 1995). No FBI interview of Bangerter appears in
the files handed over to the defense teams at trial. Rosencrans described
McVeigh’s offer in his FD-302, file no. 6700, dated July 1, 1995; Patty Edwards
corroborated the story in her own FD-302 interview of the same date, file no.
6696.
The ATF closes its Elohim City operation at the worst possible moment:
Finley gave her version of Howe’s association with the Tulsa skinheads in an
April 24, 1997, preliminary hearing ahead of Howe’s trial. Her line about not
documenting every meeting with Howe comes from the same day’s court
proceedings. Transcript viewed by Gumbel at the National Archives repository
in Fort Worth, April 4, 2011. Howe’s version taken from her testimony in the
trial of James Viefhaus, July 24, 1997; the emergency confidential informant
removal application made by Finley on March 20, 1995, was read into the record
at Viefhaus’s trial during Finley’s testimony, July 25, 1997; the ATF’s official
line on Howe—that her information was useless, and that the informant
operation at Elohim City was shut down by Bob Ricks—was echoed in both
particulars by the federal prosecutor, Neal Kirkpatrick, in his interview with
Gumbel, see above; John Magaw, interviews (Gumbel), January 18, June 22, and
October 12, 2010; among those making the case that Carol Howe warned feds in
advance is William F. Jasper, “Undercover: The Howe Revelations,” New
American, September 15, 1997; Finley talked about threats “in general” and the
fact that such talk was commonplace in her April 24, 1997, preliminary hearing;
anecdote about DOJ spokesperson Leesa Brown told by Don Thrasher in a; Finley talked about threats “in general” and the
fact that such talk was commonplace in her April 24, 1997, preliminary hearing;
anecdote about DOJ spokesperson Leesa Brown told by Don Thrasher in a

--- PAGE BREAK ---t threats “in general” and the
fact that such talk was commonplace in her April 24, 1997, preliminary hearing;
anecdote about DOJ spokesperson Leesa Brown told by Don Thrasher in a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

phone call with McVeigh’s lawyer Stephen Jones, February 11, 1997; transcript
of call obtained by authors. Danny Defenbaugh, interview (Gumbel), May 17,
2010; Danny Coulson, interview (Gumbel), September 27, 2010.
McVeigh’s “penis party” with Richard Rogers:
Rogers was interviewed by the ATF on May 9, 1995 (later categorized as FBI
FD-302, file no. 1251, dated May 10, 1995), and then by the FBI, most
extensively on July 4, 1995 (FD-302, file no. 6721). The interviewing agent was
Kenneth Williams, later the author of the “Phoenix Memo,” which alerted the
FBI two months before 9/11 to al-Qaida followers attending flight schools and
planning attacks on civil aviation targets.
The ghost of McVeigh flits over Elohim City:
Joan Millar described the call from McVeigh to defense investigator Richard
Reyna on October 28, 1995 (report, dated October 30, 1995, obtained by
authors), and, six months later, to the FBI, FD-302, file no. 15826, May 2, 1996;
the April 5 phone call is included in the Daryl Bridges records entered into
evidence in the bombing trials; it was made from the Imperial Motel at 1:46 P.M.
Arizona time, 3:46 in Oklahoma. The April 17 phone call to Elohim City is
described in an FBI teletype from headquarters dated January 4, 1996; the same
teletype also talks about April 5 as “a day that he [McVeigh] was believed to
have been attempting to recruit a second conspirator to assist in the OKBOMB
attack”; Richard Cohen, interview (Gumbel), June 3, 2010; Dees quoted saying
McVeigh had been to Elohim City “several times” in Howard Pankratz,
“Records Hint at Link with Elohim City, Blast Followed Commune Calls,”
Denver Post, May 12, 1996 (the event took place on May 3), and also in Hamm,
In Bad Company, p. 191; Dees’s appearance at Southeastern Oklahoma State
College was recorded by J. D. Cash of the McCurtain Daily Gazette; Mark
Potok, interview (Gumbel), June 1, 2010; Bill Buford, interview (Gumbel), June
16, 2010. One possible candidate for the document Buford saw, or saw referred
to, was a teletype from the FBI’s Mobile, Alabama, office dated December 21,
1995, reporting on Southern Poverty Law Center intelligence concerning
McVeigh and Elohim City. This document, available to the authors only in
heavily redacted form, is discussed further in chapter 9. Bob Ricks, interview
(Gumbel), August 17, 2010; Danny Defenbaugh, interview (Gumbel), April 4,
2011; Scott Mendeloff, interview (Gumbel), September 29, 2010. FBI agent Jim
Carlile, who conducted several interviews in and around Elohim City in 1996,
came out with this intriguing line in an October 18, 2010, interview with
Gumbel. “Other than the fact that McVeigh had been in there and had probably
tried to recruit somebody,” Carlile said, “it did not appear that any of the people
who remained at Elohim City were people with a positive connection to theMcVeigh had been in there and had probably
tried to recruit somebody,” Carlile said, “it did not appear that any of the people
who remained at Elohim City were people with a positive connection to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---there and had probably
tried to recruit somebody,” Carlile said, “it did not appear that any of the people
who remained at Elohim City were people with a positive connection to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

bombing investigation. They had met McVeigh, he had been there, but of the
people that remained, there was no-one with a connection.” McVeigh’s “pretty
fucking hardcore” line reported by defense attorney Randy Coyne on December
14, 1995, and included in a defense memo obtained by authors; Tom Metzger,
interview (Gumbel), December 24, 2009; McVeigh’s motel records from the
Imperial Motel and the Dreamland, as well as a receipt from the Arkansas City
Walmart, were entered into evidence at his trial; the owner of the Imperial,
Helmut Hofer, talked about the undisturbed bed in an interview with the MGA
documentary crew, April 21, 1999, transcript obtained by authors; Kirk Lyons,
interview (Gumbel), November 30, 2010; Millar told Richard Reyna about
McVeigh possibly having visited Elohim City on December 13, 1995, memo
dated December 15 and December 23–26, 1995; Millar also quoted in Jonathan
Franklin, “God City,” Vibe, November 1997; Kerry Noble quote from interview
with MGA documentary team, March 22, 1999.
Chapter 9
The FBI’s Night of the Long Knives:
Danny Coulson, interview (Gumbel), May 19, 2010; Revell quotes from his
book, A G-Man’s Journal, pp. 467, 469; Horace Mewborn, interview (Gumbel),
May 26, 2010.
Lawyers for McVeigh and Nichols fall out:
“Sanctuary in the jungle” line from Tigar’s argument before Judge Matsch for a
change of venue, February 3, 1996, and quoted in Tigar’s book, Nine Principles
of Litigation and Life, pp. 73–77; Judge Alley gave an account of the damage to
his offices, interview (Gumbel), August 18, 2010; Alley’s September 14, 1995,
refusal to recuse himself reported in John Parker, “Judge Alley Taken Off Bomb
Case, 10th Circuit Cites Doubts of Impartiality,” Daily Oklahoman, December 2,
1995; Jones’s reluctance to rock the boat with Judge Alley documented in Diana
Baldwin and John Parker “Jones May Accept Lawton Venue; McVeigh’s
Attorney Polling Area Residents,” Daily Oklahoman, September 27, 1995, and
Lee Hancock and David Jackson, “Bomb-case Judge’s Recusal Sought,” Dallas
Morning News, September 28, 1995; Michael Tigar, interviews (Gumbel), March
1 and May 7, 2011; Jones mentioned his decision to stay out of the appeal in the
1998 edition of his book Others Unknown, but not in the account he gave of the
change of venue issue in the 2001 edition (pp. 138–39). He took issue with
Tigar’s claim that they had fallen out at all. (“Mike’s memory fails him about
Judge Alley,” he wrote in an e-mail to Gumbel, March 22, 2011.) Jones on the
frustrations of his assignment, from his article “Representing Timothyd fallen out at all. (“Mike’s memory fails him about
Judge Alley,” he wrote in an e-mail to Gumbel, March 22, 2011.) Jones on the
frustrations of his assignment, from his article “Representing Timothy

--- PAGE BREAK ---(“Mike’s memory fails him about
Judge Alley,” he wrote in an e-mail to Gumbel, March 22, 2011.) Jones on the
frustrations of his assignment, from his article “Representing Timothy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh,” Litigation, vol. 28, no. 3, Spring 2002; polygraph test described in
Jones and Israel, Others Unknown, pp. 118–25; rebuke from Judge Matsch
quoted in Arnold Hamilton and Lee Hancock, “McVeigh, Nichols Appear Before
New Judge in Bomb Case,” Dallas Morning News, December 14, 1995; the
hearing took place on December 12, 1995.
Strassmeir booted out of Elohim City:
Andreas Strassmeir, interviews (Gumbel), June 30 and July 1, 2010; Lyons,
interview (Gumbel), July 15, 2010.
Strassmeir gets sucked into the case, prepares to flee the country:
The first news story to reference Elohim City was a Newsweek brief headlined
“More Arrests to Come,” which appeared in the May 29, 1995, print edition of
the magazine; Millar’s first recorded post-bombing conversation with the FBI
was written up as FD-302, file no. 6146, dated June 21, 1995; Richard Reyna
interviewed Grandpa Millar on October 16, October 28, and December 13, 1995.
His alert about law enforcement being interested in Strassmeir was dated
December 8, 1995 (all his reports obtained by authors); Kirk Lyons, interviews
(Gumbel), March 23, April 22, and July 15, 2010. Evidence of media interest in
Strassmeir: New York Times correspondent Jo Thomas filed a Freedom of
Information Act request on Strassmeir with the Immigration and Naturalization
Service, receipt stamp with the date December 13, 1995, obtained by authors;
Dave Hollaway, interviews (Gumbel), May 24 and July 15, 2010; Andreas
Strassmeir, interview (Gumbel), July 1, 2010; copies of Strassmeir’s old
passport, which expired June 12, 1993, and his new one, valid from October 4,
1995, obtained by authors.
Defense teams push to squeeze discovery material out of government:
Early discovery disputes summarized in a ruling by Judge Matsch, dated January
28, 1997, in which he lays the burden for proper disclosure on the prosecution,
not the court; Jones’s “check in the mail” remark quoted in Arnold Hamilton,
“Bombing Prosecutors Criticized; McVeigh’s Attorney Says U.S. Dragging Feet
on Evidence,” Dallas Morning News, November 5, 1995; details of deal on
discovery described by Michael Tigar, interview (Gumbel), March 1, 2011, and
confirmed, in parts, by Ron Woods, interview (Gumbel), June 1, 2011, Rob
Nigh, interview (Gumbel), April 5, 2011, and Joe Hartzler, interview (Gumbel),
June 2, 2011. It appears the reciprocal agreement was never enshrined in a
written document. If it was, it was sealed by Judge Matsch, but Matsch said (in a
letter to Gumbel, May 27, 2011) that he had “no independent recollection” of
such an agreement, suggesting it never went through him. The lack of a written
document almost certainly helped the prosecution pick and choose the
disclosures it made beyond its legal obligations under Brady v. Maryland. Jonesng it never went through him. The lack of a written
document almost certainly helped the prosecution pick and choose the
disclosures it made beyond its legal obligations under Brady v. Maryland. Jones

--- PAGE BREAK ---ough him. The lack of a written
document almost certainly helped the prosecution pick and choose the
disclosures it made beyond its legal obligations under Brady v. Maryland. Jones

--- PAGE BREAK ---

describes government stonewalling on body shop witnesses, et al. in Others
Unknown, pp. 191–93; Scott Mendeloff interview (Gumbel), July 16, 2010.
The FBI gets serious about Strassmeir, just too late:
Danny Defenbaugh, interview (Gumbel), June 13, 2010; teletype from the FBI’s
Mobile, Alabama, field office, dated December 21, 1995, obtained by authors.
The most tantalizing line reads: “Sources have told [redacted] that [redacted
redacted] Elohim City anywhere from two days before the Oklahoma City
bombing to two weeks before the bombing.” Since this is separate from a
discussion of McVeigh’s phone call to Elohim City (it comes in the next
paragraph), the most plausible interpolation would be: “Sources have told
[unknown] that McVeigh visited Elohim City…” Richard Cohen of the Southern
Poverty Law Center, in an interview (Gumbel) on May 5, 2011, said he could not
remember seeing the document before but guessed this paragraph referred not to
McVeigh but Strassmeir. A senior FBI official with the investigation, however,
said his best memory was that it did indeed refer to a visit by McVeigh between
April 5 and April 17, although without seeing the unredacted document he could
not be sure. Second teletype indicating Strassmeir was about to leave the country
dated January 4, 1996, and obtained by authors; Agent John Hippard’s January
11, 1996, alert to the INS obtained by authors.
Strassmeir’s Great Escape:
Dave Hollaway, interviews (Gumbel), May 6, May 10, May 20, May 24, July 15,
and July 18, 2010. Kirk Lyons, interview (Gumbel), May 27, 2010; Andreas
Strassmeir, interviews (Gumbel), June 30 and July 2, 2010; the French resistance
codes were also used in the 1984 Cold War warrior-fantasy movie Red Dawn,
which is where Hollaway probably learned them.
The feds arrest Guthrie and Langan:
“Big bolitas” line from Guthrie’s memoir, The Taunting Bandits, p. 48; collapse
of ARA, ibid., pp. 204–19, 239–50, 269–71; see also his FD-302 of March 4–15,
1996. Guthrie’s arrest from pp. 274–75 and from Mark S. Hamm, In Bad
Company, pp. 266–67; account of Langan’s arrest from Hamm, pp. 4–20, and
from Langan’s interview with the MGA documentary crew, April 7, 2000,
transcript obtained by authors; FBI explosives expert William Davitch and
Danny Defenbaugh quoted in Leslie Blade and Gregory Flannery, “Queen City
Terror,” Cincinnati CityBeat, September 8, 2004. On the unexamined evidence,
see also John Solomon, “FBI Suspected McVeigh Link to Robbers,” Associated
Press, February 25, 2004. Defenbaugh, interview (Gumbel), January 25, 2011.
He said the Christmas wrappings were not the same, but saw plenty of other
reasons to examine the caps for possible links to McVeigh.
The FBI chases, then loses interest in Strassmeir:nuary 25, 2011.
He said the Christmas wrappings were not the same, but saw plenty of other
reasons to examine the caps for possible links to McVeigh.
The FBI chases, then loses interest in Strassmeir:

--- PAGE BREAK ---aid the Christmas wrappings were not the same, but saw plenty of other
reasons to examine the caps for possible links to McVeigh.
The FBI chases, then loses interest in Strassmeir:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Defenbaugh’s January 18 teletype to the legal attaché in Germany is
memorialized in a later teletype from the Oklahoma City command post, dated
January 29, 1996, obtained by authors; Defenbaugh, interview (Gumbel), June
13, 2010; Cash’s January 1996 interview with Mahon written up in his article
“Mahon: McVeigh Planned Bank Heists, Wanted to Be ‘Patriot Hero,’”
McCurtain Daily Gazette, April 1, 1997. He also described it in a sworn
deposition given to the McVeigh defense team, March 26, 1996, obtained by
authors, and in an FBI FD-302 interview conducted on April 14, 1997, but given
a case and file number unrelated to the bombing (266A-OC-57917-82). Cash
subsequently drew up a three-page letter, obtained by authors, pointing out
mistakes in the FD-302. Jones passes on death threat to FBI, see FD-302, file no.
12701, dated January 27, 1996, written up by Defenbaugh; Dave Hollaway,
interview (Gumbel), May 6, 2010. He was at the Bundeskriminalamt with
Strassmeir. Kirk Lyons, interview (Gumbel), April 29, 2011; Strassmeir’s
statement dated February 1996 (exact date not specified), obtained by authors;
Strassmeir’s FBI FD-302, dated April 30–May 1, 1996, is file no. 14897. The
prosecutors on the call were Beth Wilkinson and Aitan Goelman; the FBI agent
was LouAnn Sandstrom, who had taken over the Strassmeir beat from John
Hippard. Kirk Lyons was also on the call from Black Mountain; Strassmeir,
interview (Gumbel), June 30, 2010; letter from Wilkinson quoted in Jones and
Israel, Others Unknown, p. 179; the printout from the State Department was
accompanied by an explanatory note from Paul Brown, the liaison to the task
force from the department’s diplomatic security section, dated March 18, 1996.
A previous printout on December 13, 1994—generated, presumably, as a result
of the ATF’s investigation at Elohim City—included the “A O” status. In a
pretrial hearing on March 10, 1997, prosecutor Beth Wilkinson said she had been
told by the State Department that the A stood for “admitted” and the O for
“overstay.” There are grounds, however, to doubt this: the “A O” designation
also applied to trips he took in 1988–90, when he was not an overstay. Wilkinson
stated, at the same hearing, that Strassmeir came into the United States on
separate single-entry visas—contradicted by the evidence of Strassmeir’s own
passport, obtained by the authors.
The extra leg:
Much of the previously known history of the extra leg is summarized in a
prosecution court filing from February 1996, titled “Brief of the United States in
Opposition to Defendant McVeigh’s Motion to Allow Representatives to Attend
Exhumation and Examination of Lakesha Levy”; Marshall quoted in Jones and
Israel, Others Unknown, p. 206; Marshall gave very similar testimony at the
McVeigh trial on May 22, 1997; Fred Jordan testified at the McVeigh trial, Mayf Lakesha Levy”; Marshall quoted in Jones and
Israel, Others Unknown, p. 206; Marshall gave very similar testimony at the
McVeigh trial on May 22, 1997; Fred Jordan testified at the McVeigh trial, May

--- PAGE BREAK ---shall quoted in Jones and
Israel, Others Unknown, p. 206; Marshall gave very similar testimony at the
McVeigh trial on May 22, 1997; Fred Jordan testified at the McVeigh trial, May

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22, 1997; the unnamed sources cited here include one from the FBI and one
forensics expert, both of whom were directly involved in the investigation;
Clyde Snow, interview (Gumbel), September 15, 2011.
Carol Howe outed:
Finley informing Howe of the security breach, written up in an ATF Report of
Investigation, April 1, 1996, obtained by authors; the March 20, 1995,
emergency request to remove Howe as an informant was read into the record at
James Viefhaus’s trial in Tulsa, July 25, 1997; the May 18, 1995, request to
reinstate her is in an ATF Report of Investigation of the same date, obtained by
authors; further ROIs, for January 9 and January 31, 1996, first urge her removal
and then accept her continuation on the ATF books; Finley’s letter endorsing
Howe and stating that her life was in danger, obtained by authors, is dated April
22, 1996; Howe’s account is from her testimony in James Viefhaus trial, July 24,
1997.
The ARA’s links to the bombing considered and then rejected:
List of items recovered from the ARA taken, in part, from Hamm, In Bad
Company, pp. 12–13; arrest of McCarthy and Stedeford detailed ibid., pp. 269–
76; Langan’s story about grabbing Agent Woods’s attention, from a declaration
he filed in federal court in Utah on April 9, 2007; Langan discussed the
government’s offer of a deal in exchange for information about the Oklahoma
City bombing in his interview with the MGA documentary crew, April 7, 2000;
the story was corroborated by his lawyer, Kevin Durkin, in an affidavit filed at
the request of the Nichols state trial defense team on April 12, 2004; Matthew
Moning material from his sworn affidavit signed in Cincinnati on June 13, 2004;
Guthrie’s July 1 plea agreement, suicide notes, and death certificate all obtained
by authors; Kelly Johnson, interview (Gumbel), April 22, 2011.
Efforts to get former FBI agent Ed Woods to talk about Guthrie, Langan, and
ways in which the Oklahoma City bombing came up in his dealings with them
were unsuccessful. Woods responded positively at first to an interview request
(Gumbel). But he backed off in a hurry as soon as the subject of the bombing
came up. “It’s been a long time (15 years) so I’m not going to speculate or guess
what may have been asked or answered,” he wrote on April 8, 2011. On April
10, he said he would not answer questions that betrayed the author’s “bias and
agenda”—questions that were mostly to do with how much contact, if any, the
robbery investigators had with the Oklahoma bombing investigators. When
asked to comment, finally, on Moning’s affidavit, he claimed not to have
received the e-mail, sending it back with the words “Auto Response…Returned
Unopened…” in the subject line (April 11).
Ward brother weirdness in Oregon:, on Moning’s affidavit, he claimed not to have
received the e-mail, sending it back with the words “Auto Response…Returned
Unopened…” in the subject line (April 11).
Ward brother weirdness in Oregon:

--- PAGE BREAK ---vit, he claimed not to have
received the e-mail, sending it back with the words “Auto Response…Returned
Unopened…” in the subject line (April 11).
Ward brother weirdness in Oregon:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Details of the Wards’ arrest and detention come from the Jackson County district
attorney’s files, obtained by the authors; Kerry Larsen, interview (Gumbel),
September 3, 2010; Pete Ward’s FBI interview was on September 23, 1996, on
his fifth day in custody, see FBI FD-302, file no. 16069; Ward’s grandfather
Richard Kirby confirmed in an interview (Gumbel, August 20, 2010) he had
never been an FBI agent, although there was once an agent of the same name.
Stephen Jones travels the world, annoys his client:
Jones addressed this issue at great length in an e-mail to Gumbel, March 14,
2011; Jones criticized for foreign travel, see David Jackson, “Oklahoma City
Bombing Case Cost Justice Department $82.5 Million,” Knight Ridder,
November 2, 1998; Jones’s writ of mandamus filed March 25, 1997; Hartzler’s
“wacky theories” controversy, see Jo Thomas, “Starting Date Set for Trial on
Oklahoma Bombing,” New York Times, November 16, 1996.
Prosecution team fights over evidence, separation of trials:
Larry Mackey, interviews (Gumbel), October 11 and December 3, 2011; Judge
Matsch’s arguments summarized in his ruling in favor of severance, October 25,
1996. Beth Wilkinson, a former military lawyer, and Scott Mendeloff, a bulldog
litigator from Chicago, were generally regarded as the hawks on the team.
Joseph Hartzler, also from Chicago, was somewhere in the middle. Pat Ryan,
Arlene Joplin, and Vicki Behenna, who were from Oklahoma, were anxious to
meet the demands of the bombing victims and their families. Mackey was seen
almost universally as a gentleman, regardless of people’s opinions of his
positions, while Aitan Goelman, a young Justice Department attorney, was seen
as a high-flier in the making, with a temperament not too far from Mackey’s.
Other team members had less influence.
Carol Howe is indicted on the eve of the McVeigh trial:
Details from the case file on the federal prosecution of Viefhaus and Howe;
Morlin listening to the message, alerting the FBI’s Ken Pernick, from Neal
Kirkpatrick’s opening in the Viefhaus trial, July 22, 1997, and confirmed on the
stand by FBI agent Peter Rickel the same day; Angie Finley described the
physical evidence in a pretrial hearing on April 24, 1997; text of the hotline
message entered into evidence.
Brescia and Thomas are arrested, the ARA connection is closed down for
good:
Dave Hollaway, interview (Gumbel), May 24, 2010; “Unwanted by the FBI”
posters, see Hamm, In Bad Company, p. 295. The campaign was orchestrated by
an Alabama militia leader whose online publication, the John Doe Times, was
obsessed with Brescia for a while. The John Doe Times archives could still be
accessed, as of April 2011, at http://www.constitution.org/okc/jdt.htm; Thomas’sline publication, the John Doe Times, was
obsessed with Brescia for a while. The John Doe Times archives could still be
accessed, as of April 2011, at http://www.constitution.org/okc/jdt.htm; Thomas’s

--- PAGE BREAK ---e John Doe Times, was
obsessed with Brescia for a while. The John Doe Times archives could still be
accessed, as of April 2011, at http://www.constitution.org/okc/jdt.htm; Thomas’s

--- PAGE BREAK ---

arrest, stories, from “Thomas Indicted in Bank Robberies,” Allentown Morning
Call, January 31, 1997, and from an interview with Washington Post reporter
Richard Leiby; details of search of bus from later Allentown Morning Call
article, May 3, 1997, headline unavailable; Donna Marazoff, FBI FD-302, file
no. 17777, April 2, 1997, and no. 17778, April 5, 1997; Michael A. Schwartz,
interview (Gumbel), June 7, 2010; Justice Department unsealing Todd Bunting
material, declaring that John Doe Two does not exist, see Jo Thomas, “Suspects
Sketch in Oklahoma Case Called an Error,” New York Times, January 30, 1997.
The prosecution requestions inconvenient witnesses:
Eric McGown was challenged on his changed testimony under cross-
examination in the McVeigh trial, May 8, 1997; Jeff Davis spoke to the MGA
documentary crew, March 11, 1999, transcript obtained by authors; ABC News
interviewed him in April 1996. Jeanne Boylan, who worked up a sketch of the
man Davis saw in room 25, described her encounter with him in Portraits in
Guilt, p. 260. Boylan has Davis telling her that he saw a second man inside the
room. But this appears to be contradicted by accounts Davis has given
elsewhere. The dinner he was carrying, a serving of moo goo gai pan, was for
one person only. Daina Bradley appeared at the McVeigh trial as a defense
witness and was challenged on the backward-parked truck on cross-examination,
May 23, 1997; Mendeloff, interviews (Gumbel), July 16 and October 4, 2010;
Larry Mackey, interview (Gumbel), October 11, 2010. Interestingly, there is
nothing illegal about grilling witnesses until they change their stories. Rob Nigh,
the number two on the McVeigh defense team, said in an April 5, 2011,
interview: “The law on eyewitness identification is bad…. Testimony is
admissible even when the evidence suggests they are not making their
identification based on actual memory but are making it based on the power of
suggestion…. In other words, coaching of witnesses is permissible.” Mendeloff
said he and Hersley had asked Kessinger only open questions, not leading ones,
and took issue with the notion that they had applied any undue pressure;
interview (Gumbel), June 2, 2011. “We didn’t have to press him on much of this,
or any of this that I can remember,” he said. “I don’t remember pressing him.”
Defenbaugh, interviews (Gumbel), May 19 and September 22, 2010; Hersley’s
version of the Cassville evidence is in his book Simple Truths, pp. 249–50. One
of the assertions Defenbaugh objected to was: “The FBI was able to substantiate
that one day after the alleged sighting of McVeigh in Missouri, he was in
Pendleton, New York, at his father’s home, a fact proven by McVeigh’s use of
the Bridges calling card.” There are, in fact, no Bridges phone records for
November 3, 1994. Hersley turned down multiple requests to be interviewed for
this book, including a specific invitation to respond to Defenbaugh’s accusations., in fact, no Bridges phone records for
November 3, 1994. Hersley turned down multiple requests to be interviewed for
this book, including a specific invitation to respond to Defenbaugh’s accusations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s phone records for
November 3, 1994. Hersley turned down multiple requests to be interviewed for
this book, including a specific invitation to respond to Defenbaugh’s accusations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Jones team undone by leaks, damaging revelations:
The first damaging piece was Pete Slover, “In Defense Documents, Timothy
McVeigh Describes How He Bombed Oklahoma City Federal Building,” Dallas
Morning News, February 28, 1997; Jones describes the episode at length in Jones
and Israel, Others Unknown, pp. 286–311; the Rocky Mountain News editorial
blast was titled “Stephen Jones’ Tangled Web,” March 5, 1997; Pete Slover’s
December 1997 disciplinary hearing and its outcome from interview (Gumbel)
with Slover, November 28, 2011, and from the docket of the Texas 68th District
Court in Dallas County, obtained by Gumbel; Slover would not comment on the
stories of how he obtained the material, citing his journalistic obligation not to
discuss his sources. Jones reiterated in an e-mail to Gumbel, dated March 22,
2011, that the Reyna memos dated July and December 1995 were not legitimate
defense memoranda; Rob Nigh said Reyna never spent time alone with
McVeigh, interview (Gumbel), April 5, 2011; Wright quotes McVeigh on the
“body count” in his book Patriots, Politics and the Oklahoma City Bombing, p. 6
(Wright interview with Gumbel, April 28, 2011); McVeigh standing by the
contents of the Reyna memos, see Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., p. 301; Ben
Fenwick’s reporting for Playboy culminated in a piece for the magazine, “The
Road to Oklahoma City,” vol. 44, no. 6, June 1997; the lawyers’ dealings with
Judge Matsch in this matter are summarized and, in places, cited verbatim, in
Matsch’s ruling, dated October 12, 2000, denying McVeigh post-conviction
relief under a habeas corpus petition; final Jones quote from Jones and Jennifer
Gideon, “United States v. McVeigh: Defending the ‘Most Hated Man in
America,’” Oklahoma Law Review, Winter 1998.
Chapter 10
Jury selection does not help McVeigh’s cause:
Ryan Ross, “McVeigh’s Trial Lean and Trim,” ABA Journal, July 1997, p. 24;
defense team member who called voir dire “ineffective,” from an interview with
Gumbel; McVeigh was described thinking of the jurors as “a staid, conservative
group with whom he failed to identify in any way,” see Michel and Herbeck, op.
cit., p. 313 (McVeigh blamed this on Jones’s jury consultants); the air force
veteran who believed gun ownership should be mandatory was no. 106 and
appeared on April 18 and 21, 1997; “Penalty phase fucked right here” line from
Gumbel interview with Nichols defense attorney; Dick Burr, interview
(Gumbel), June 13, 2011; some details of voir dire—the jury vetting process—
from Jo Thomas, “McVeigh Jury Is Selected After 3 Weeks,” New York Times,
April 23, 1997; jury candidate no. 947 appeared April 1, 1997.e 13, 2011; some details of voir dire—the jury vetting process—
from Jo Thomas, “McVeigh Jury Is Selected After 3 Weeks,” New York Times,
April 23, 1997; jury candidate no. 947 appeared April 1, 1997.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ails of voir dire—the jury vetting process—
from Jo Thomas, “McVeigh Jury Is Selected After 3 Weeks,” New York Times,
April 23, 1997; jury candidate no. 947 appeared April 1, 1997.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Justice Department inspector general blows the government’s forensics out
of the water:
The report by Department of Justice inspector general Michael R. Bromwich is
“The FBI Laboratory: An Investigation into Laboratory Practices and Alleged
Misconduct in Explosives-Related and Other Cases,” published April 15, 1997;
Lloyd quoted in John F. Kelly and Philip K. Wearne, Tainting Evidence, p. 213.
Hartzler starts the way the prosecution means to go on:
Quotes from transcript of his opening statement, April 24, 1997.
Jones hits the wrong note right away:
Quotes from transcript of his opening statement, April 24, 1997; for evidence
that some people in the courtroom found Jones’s opening either boring or
offensive, see Paul Queary, “Families Weep as Bombing Victims Names Are
Recited,” Associated Press, April 24, 1997; Bill Scanlon, “Reading of Names
Brings Tears,” Rocky Mountain News, April 25, 1997; Sue Lindsay, Bill
Scanlon, Karen Abbott, Lynn Bartels, “Memories Flood Courtroom,” Rocky
Mountain News, April 25, 1997; the stepfather who thought Jones was a
showboat was Tom Kight, quoted in Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., p. 321; ABA
Journal line from Ryan Ross’s July 1997 piece, see above.
Prosecution keeps it emotional, defense wrongfooted:
Rob Nigh, interview (Gumbel), April 5, 2011; Jones’s account of the trial is in
Others Unknown, op. cit., pp. 315–43.
The Roger Moore question divides the government side:
Larry Mackey, interview (Gumbel), October 11, 2010; Danny Defenbaugh,
interviews (Gumbel), May 19 and September 22, 2010.
Defense blasts the forensic evidence:
Fred Whitehurst and Steven Burmeister testified on May 28, 1997; the “magic
crystals” line is from Chris Tritico’s summation, May 29, 1997; see also Kelly
and Wearne, Tainting Evidence, pp. 221–25.
Defense fails to get Carol Howe on the stand:
Jones’s version from Jones and Israel, Others Unknown, pp. 334–38; Burrage
expressing concern about Carol Howe interfering with the McVeigh trial, from a
pretrial hearing in his court on June 11, 1997, from the official transcript; Daniel
Capra, a law professor at Fordham University, thought Howe’s testimony would
have been “highly probative,” see “Questions of Fairness in ‘McVeigh’ Case,”
New York Law Journal, January 8, 1999; see also Kevin Flynn, “Ruling Deals
Blow to Plot Defense,” Rocky Mountain News, May 28, 1997.
McVeigh looks engaged and open, quietly seethes:
John Ross, Unintended Consequences; McVeigh’s account of reading
Unintended Consequences and sitting through the trial is in Michel and Herbeck,1997.
McVeigh looks engaged and open, quietly seethes:
John Ross, Unintended Consequences; McVeigh’s account of reading
Unintended Consequences and sitting through the trial is in Michel and Herbeck,

--- PAGE BREAK ---engaged and open, quietly seethes:
John Ross, Unintended Consequences; McVeigh’s account of reading
Unintended Consequences and sitting through the trial is in Michel and Herbeck,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

op. cit. pp. 304–38; John R. Smith material from his interview on NPR’s All
Things Considered, “Looking into the Psyche of Timothy McVeigh,” June 8,
2001; Chambers testified on May 5, 1997.
McVeigh convicted and sentenced to death:
Larry Mackey’s closing statement was on May 29, 1997; Jones’s closing
statement followed Mackey’s; the Michael Fortier line is from his testimony,
under direct examination, on May 12. The verdict was delivered on June 2,
Jones’s summation in the penalty phase was on June 12, and the death sentence
was delivered on June 13; Dick Burr, interview (Gumbel), June 13, 2011; Rob
Nigh, interview (Gumbel), April 5, 2011. Jones agreed with the premise that a
death sentence would make it much harder to establish the truth behind the
bombing. In his penalty phase summation, on June 12, he said: “Dead men do
not tell tales. I say again the government may not be the only people that want
my client executed.” Joe Hartzler interjected and said he found this assertion
“objectionable.” Matsch overruled him.
Carol Howe is acquitted, her former handlers are left to swing:
Neal Kirkpatrick, interview (Gumbel), May 24, 2010; Finley testified to the
Oklahoma County grand jury on February 17, 1998, Roberts on March 23; Martz
said in his grand jury testimony, on April 23, 1998, that Roberts was removed
because of problems revealed by an audit of his weapons vault in Tulsa; Wittman
said Roberts addressed these problems and argued that the real reason for
removing him was Elohim City. Martz could not be reached for comment;
Tommy Wittman, interview (Gumbel), September 27, 2010.
McVeigh blasts Jones, gets him off his appeal team:
Lou Michel, “McVeigh Rips Lawyer; Convicted Bomber Wants Jones Dismissed
from Case for Allegedly Lying,” Buffalo News, August 13, 1997. McVeigh
communicated his willingness to proceed with the trial after the Dallas Morning
News leak in a conversation with Rob Nigh, whom he trusted. See Judge
Matsch’s October 12, 2000, ruling denying post-conviction habeas relief, cited in
chapter 9. McVeigh statement comes from transcript of sentencing hearing,
August 14, 1997; it is not clear if he realized—or cared—that Brandeis was the
first Jew to be appointed to the U.S. Supreme Court. Jones’s response reported in
Nolan Clay, “Jones, McVeigh Not Meeting Face to Face; Judges Told Attorney
Asks for Removal From Case,” Daily Oklahoman, August 21, 1997; see also
Nolan Clay, “Jones Off Bombing Case; McVeigh Gets New Lawyer,” Daily
Oklahoman, August 28, 1997.
Larry Mackey asked to replace Scott Mendeloff:
Mackey approached by Janet Reno, interview (Gumbel), December 3, 2010;
details of how Mendeloff was removed, and the rest of the prosecution team’s1997.
Larry Mackey asked to replace Scott Mendeloff:
Mackey approached by Janet Reno, interview (Gumbel), December 3, 2010;
details of how Mendeloff was removed, and the rest of the prosecution team’s

--- PAGE BREAK ---sked to replace Scott Mendeloff:
Mackey approached by Janet Reno, interview (Gumbel), December 3, 2010;
details of how Mendeloff was removed, and the rest of the prosecution team’s

--- PAGE BREAK ---

opinions of him, culled from numerous off-the-record accounts by prosecutors
and investigators. Mendeloff (interview with Gumbel, June 2, 2011) would not
comment on the account but also took no issue with the factual record—Litt’s
visit, the way his appointment to head the Nichols team was thrown into doubt,
and his decision to quit rather than fight for the job.
Michael Tigar charms his way into juror no. 215’s heart:
Account from voir dire transcript for September 29, 1997, and from interview
(Gumbel) with Tigar, March 1, 2011.
The Nichols team triumphs in jury selection:
Matsch’s apology to the juror is in the trial transcript for September 30, 1997;
Michael Tigar, interview (Gumbel), March 1, 2011; one prosecutor unconnected
to the Nichols trial who accused Matsch of favoring Nichols was interviewed by
Gumbel. Stephen Jones also thought the judge was deliberately tipping the field
in the Nichols trial—not because he was against the death penalty but because he
believed other coconspirators were still out there. In Others Unknown, op. cit.,
pp. 344–55, Jones concludes: “Could it be that Richard Matsch, persuaded by
evidence he refused to let our jury hear, has himself become a conspiracy
theorist?”
Government’s opening betrays doubts about extent of Nichols’s guilt:
The opening statements were heard on November 3, 1997; Larry Mackey,
interview (Gumbel), December 3, 2010.
The Nichols team’s Perry Mason moments:
Louis Hupp testified on November 14, 1997; Tigar quote on Hupp testimony
from the first part of his closing argument, December 15, 1997. On November
17, 1997, Tigar asked Karen Anderson: “Is it your testimony that you and Mr.
Moore—or Mr. Moore—were the owners of a Ruger Mini-30 with the Serial No.
189-57425?” To which she responded: “To the best of my knowledge, yes.” On
November 18, Tigar produced the ATF documentation proving that the gun, in
fact, belonged to Nichols. Wilkinson quote from her closing argument,
December 15, 1997; Tigar quote from the second part of his closing argument,
December 16, 1997. Agent Smith was cross-examined on his notes on
November 21, 1997; Tigar referred to it in his December 16 summation.
Theodore Udell testified for the government on November 26, 1997, and again,
for the defense, on December 8; Agent Jeff Hayes testified on December 8 and
said: “I asked Mr. Mendeloff how he wanted me to report the information that I
was gleaning from the conversations I had with these manufacturers. He told me
to put it in a chart form, not to provide any FD-302s.” Asked for a response,
Mendeloff dismissed Tigar’s charges that the government didn’t care as a
“defense lawyer argument” to make something out of “not a very big deal”;m, not to provide any FD-302s.” Asked for a response,
Mendeloff dismissed Tigar’s charges that the government didn’t care as a
“defense lawyer argument” to make something out of “not a very big deal”;

--- PAGE BREAK ---y FD-302s.” Asked for a response,
Mendeloff dismissed Tigar’s charges that the government didn’t care as a
“defense lawyer argument” to make something out of “not a very big deal”;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

interview (Gumbel), June 2, 2011. Was it true, though, that Mendeloff had
overreached and instructed an FBI agent to circumvent bureau protocols? “I
can’t answer one way or another,” he said. “I can’t remember.” Judge Matsch
told the jury to disregard a significant portion of the testimony on December 10;
Tigar picked up the story again in his December 15 closing argument.
Budke testimony blows open the problem of the 40,000 missing lead sheets:
Tigar, interviews (Gumbel), March 1 and May 7, 2011; “time to throw up” line
quoted in Michael E. Tigar, Fighting Injustice, p. 3; line about unprofessional
conduct from Tigar, Persuasion: The Litigator’s Art, p. xiv; Christopher Budke
testified on December 11; the discovery of the lead sheet in Mackey’s briefcase
is not included in the trial transcript, but was confirmed by both Tigar and
Mackey; Mackey, interview (Gumbel), April 28, 2011. The lead sheet issue is
addressed at length in a filing in the Nichols state trial, “Defendant’s
Supplemental Brief Regarding Lead Sheets,” dated March 26, 2001, and
obtained by authors.
Nichols acquitted of first-degree murder, dodges death penalty:
Carol Howe testified on December 10, 1997; Marife Nichols testified on
December 10–11. Mackey’s rebuttal was on December 16. The jury then
withdrew, returning their verdict on December 23. The penalty phase began after
Christmas, with closing arguments on January 5, 1998. The jury announced its
deadlock on the death penalty on January 7. On jury voting, see James Brooke,
“Nichols’s Life Was Saved by a Handful of Holdouts,” New York Times, January
11, 1998; transcript of Deutchman’s January 7 news conference viewed through
Washington Transcript Service; Bob Macy quoted in James Brooke, “Nichols
Could Face Death for Role in Blast,” New York Times, December 25, 1997.
Nichols offered a deal, then sentenced:
Mackey, interview (Gumbel), October 11, 2010; Matsch quote from post-
conviction hearing on March 25, 1998; sentencing was on June 4. Nichols quote
from handwritten prison document, “Why Am I Speaking Out Now,” November
24, 2006; Kathy Wilburn left the Hersley story in a voice-mail message (to
Gumbel), October 30, 2009.
McVeigh’s colorful journey toward execution:
On McVeigh’s friendship with Kaczynski and his sudden transfer to Terre Haute,
see Michel and Herbeck, op. cit., pp. 358–73; the fine slapped on Nigh and Burr,
interview (Gumbel) with Jeralyn Merritt, another of McVeigh’s trial lawyers,
April 15, 2011; details of Hammer’s relationship with McVeigh also in a prison
memoir written by Hammer and Paul, Secrets Worth Dying For: Timothy James
McVeigh and the Oklahoma City Bombing, first written in 2003 and obtained by
the authors; the history of McVeigh’s decision to waive his appeals, including his, Secrets Worth Dying For: Timothy James
McVeigh and the Oklahoma City Bombing, first written in 2003 and obtained by
the authors; the history of McVeigh’s decision to waive his appeals, including his

--- PAGE BREAK ---g For: Timothy James
McVeigh and the Oklahoma City Bombing, first written in 2003 and obtained by
the authors; the history of McVeigh’s decision to waive his appeals, including his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

citation of the Hammer precedent, is detailed in the transcript of a December 28,
2000, hearing before Judge Matsch, in which he explained his position and
successfully defended his competence to make the decision. On the late
disclosure of discovery materials, see “An Investigation of the Belated
Production of Documents in the Oklahoma City Bombing Case,” Department of
Justice, Office of the Inspector General, March 19, 2002; also the defense team’s
“Petition for Stay of Execution, Together with Memorandum in Support,” filed
May 31, 2001. On Ashcroft and some of the other reaction, see Ron Fournier,
“Ashcroft Postpones McVeigh Execution,” Associated Press, May 11, 2001.
Ashcroft later blamed the late disclosure on the reciprocal discovery agreement
and rapped prosecutors on the knuckles for ever agreeing to it. “What the law
requires is plenty good in American justice,” he told the Daily Oklahoman in an
interview on October 3, 2006, to promote his memoir Never Again. “When the
Justice Department goes above and beyond what the law requires, we get
ourselves in trouble…. We significantly elevated the risks of disruption, which I
think were unnecessary.” Ashcroft is apparently alone in making this argument.
Details on the most pertinent late documents: three independent sources
either directly or indirectly familiar with the contents of the sealed list compiled
by McVeigh’s defense team offered pointers on the documents mentioned, and
these were then cross-checked against the discovery material in the authors’
possession; the “smoke some Okies” line comes from an FBI FD-302 interview
with John Albert Newland on January 30, 1996, file no. 15040; Dave Shafer was
interviewed ten times between April 24, 1995, and April 11, 1996; the first and
longest 302 on him is file no. 9848; the government’s lack of faith in his
credibility is memorialized in FBI FD-302, file no. 14560, dated April 11, 1996;
Terry Nichols told the authors (July 22, 2010) he considered Shafer a “bozo,”
and the FBI concluded his account lacked credibility; Danny Defenbaugh,
interview (Gumbel), May 17, 2010; Louis Freeh, My Life, p. 213.
McVeigh and Jones fight to the end:
McVeigh motivating Jones to update his book, see Michel and Herbeck, op. cit.,
p. xvii; Jones’s justification, see Jones and Israel, op. cit., pp. xiii, 365–70; Tigar,
interview (Gumbel), March 1, 2011; another critic of Jones’s decision to break
attorney-client privilege was Dick Burr, quoted in Joel Dyer, “Jonesin’ for
Justice: Selling Out McVeigh,” Boulder Weekly, March 29, 2001; Jones, e-mail
to Gumbel, March 22, 2011; Matsch’s final decision reported in David Johnston,
“Judge Refuses McVeigh’s Bid for a Reprieve,” New York Times, June 7, 2001;
Nigh interview (Gumbel), April 5, 2011.
McVeigh goes very publicly to the gallows:
For Hammer’s account of McVeigh’s execution, as seen from Dog Unit, see hisReprieve,” New York Times, June 7, 2001;
Nigh interview (Gumbel), April 5, 2011.
McVeigh goes very publicly to the gallows:
For Hammer’s account of McVeigh’s execution, as seen from Dog Unit, see his

--- PAGE BREAK ---Times, June 7, 2001;
Nigh interview (Gumbel), April 5, 2011.
McVeigh goes very publicly to the gallows:
For Hammer’s account of McVeigh’s execution, as seen from Dog Unit, see his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

memoir Secrets Worth Dying For, op. cit. Also Andrew Gumbel, “McVeigh’s
Friend Tells of ‘Bad Day’ on Death Row,” The Independent (UK), July 4, 2001;
“Still breathin’” line recounted in interview (Gumbel) with Jeralyn Merritt, April
15, 2011; the execution was widely covered in the world’s media, e.g., Rick
Bragg, “McVeigh Dies for Oklahoma City Blast,” New York Times, June 12,
2001; Rob Nigh’s statement on McVeigh’s execution, dated June 11, 2001, was
carried by many news sources and is still available online, e.g., at
ABCNews.com (retrieved May 12, 2011).
Afterword
The post-conviction travails of Terry Nichols:
Account of Gregory Scarpa Jr. extracting the story of the buried explosives
boxes, taken from Sandra Harmon, Mafia Son, pp. 211–18; an affidavit by
Nichols, dated November 8, 2006, obtained by authors; Nichols’s handwritten
answers to authors’ questions, January 3, 2010, and February 21, 2011; and
documents generated by the late Stephen Dresch and still, as of May 2011,
posted at his Web site http://forensic-intelligence.org.
Scarpa’s prison writings presenting his version of issues relating to Nichols
and the Oklahoma City bombing kindly provided to Gumbel by Sandra Harmon,
June 24, 2010; Rohrabacher’s report, “The Oklahoma City Bombing: Was There
a Foreign Connection?” was released by the Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee of the House International Relations Committee on December 26,
2006; Nichols on Rohrabacher, from Nichols letter to the Salt Lake City lawyer
Jesse Trentadue, November 8, 2006, obtained by authors; Rohrabacher’s
interview of Nichols on June 27, 2005, is recounted in detail in a teletype from
the FBI Denver office to headquarters dated June 28, 2005, and obtained by
authors; details on the Nichols state trial from Jay Hughes, “Terry Nichols Faces
State Charges,” Associated Press, March 30, 1999; Tim Talley, “OKC District
Attorney Off Nichols Case,” Associated Press, October 16, 2000; “Nichols’
Defense Challenges State’s Key Witness; Judge Rejects Motion to Toss Murder
Case,” CNN, April 21, 2004; and Tim Talley, “Prison Conversion May Have
Saved Nichols,” Associated Press, June 13, 2004. Mark Earnest’s legwork on the
ARA and many other subjects is in a defense brief titled “Terry Lynn Nichols’
Motion to Dismiss Based on the State’s Failure to Comply With Brady v.
Maryland,” filed April 12, 2004; Nichols’s letter to John Ashcroft, dated
September 3, 2004, obtained by authors; information on Josh Nichols from Lana
Padilla interview (Gumbel), September 25, 2010.
De Niro–dead:led April 12, 2004; Nichols’s letter to John Ashcroft, dated
September 3, 2004, obtained by authors; information on Josh Nichols from Lana
Padilla interview (Gumbel), September 25, 2010.
De Niro–dead:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Jim Cavanaugh, interview (Gumbel), August 2, 2010; Danny Defenbaugh,
interview (Gumbel), January 25, 2011. Defenbaugh said the only time he and his
mentor Bear Bryant fought was over his decision to collect the motel records;
statistics on extent of investigation supplied by Defenbaugh in an e-mail, May
21, 2010; McDonald’s telephone story told by FBI agent Tim Arney, interview
(Gumbel), August 26, 2011; Defenbaugh (interview with Gumbel, May 17,
2010) confirmed he pressed for an eleventh-hour opportunity to question
McVeigh; Nichols wrote about the unaccounted-for bomb components in his
document “OKC Bombing Materials and the Missing Explosives,” December 1,
2007; Keating quote from the foreword to Hersley, Tongate, and Burke, Simple
Truths, p. 10; Louis Freeh, My Life, p. 211; Weldon Kennedy, interview
(Gumbel), August 26, 2010.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
A nonexhaustive list of publications consulted and, in many cases, cited in
the notes:h, My Life, p. 211; Weldon Kennedy, interview
(Gumbel), August 26, 2010.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
A nonexhaustive list of publications consulted and, in many cases, cited in
the notes:

Abanes, Richard. End-Time Visions: The Road to Armageddon (New York:
Four Walls Eight Windows, 1998).
Aho, James. The Politics of Righteousness: Idaho Christian Patriotism
(Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1990).
Barkun, Michael. Religion and the Racist Right (Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1994).
Bouton, Mark. How to Spot Lies Like the FBI (Emmett, Kansas: Cosmic
Wind Press, 2010).
Boylan, Jeanne. Portraits of Guilt: The Woman Who Profiles the Faces of
America’s Deadliest Criminals (New York: Pocket Books, 2000).
Campbell, John Bruce. The New American Man: A Call to Arms (Carmel,
California: The Press, 1983, 1988).
Clarke, Richard. Against All Enemies: Inside America’s War on Terror (New
York: Simon and Schuster, 2004).
Coates, James. Armed and Dangerous: The Rise of the Survivalist Right
(New York: Hill and Wang, 1987).
Copeland, Thomas E. Fool Me Twice: Intelligence Failure and Mass
Casualty Terrorism (Leiden, Netherlands: Brill, 2007).
Corcoran, James. Bitter Harvest: Gordon Kahl and the Posse Comitatus:
Murder in the Heartland (New York: Viking, 1990, later renamed Bitter
Harvest: Gordon Kahl and the Rise of Posse Comitatus in the
Heartland).
Coulson, Danny O., with Elaine Shannon. No Heroes: Inside the FBI’s
Secret Counter-Terror Force (New York: Pocket Books, 1999).
Davis, Jayna. The Third Terrorist: The Middle East Connection to the
Oklahoma City Bombing (Nashville, Tennessee: Thomas Nelson, 2004).
Davis, Mike. Buda’s Wagon: A Brief History of the Car Bomb (New York:
Verso, 2007).
Dees, Morris, with James Corcoran. Gathering Storm: America’s Militia
Threat (New York: HarperCollins, 1996).
Department of Justice Office of the Inspector General (Michael R.

--- PAGE BREAK ---07).
Dees, Morris, with James Corcoran. Gathering Storm: America’s Militia
Threat (New York: HarperCollins, 1996).
Department of Justice Office of the Inspector General (Michael R.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bromwich). The FBI Laboratory: An Investigation into Laboratory
Practices and Alleged Misconduct in Explosives-Related and Other
Cases (Washington, D.C., April 15, 1997).
Department of Justice Office of the Inspector General, The Federal Bureau
of Investigation’s Compliance with the Attorney General’s Investigative
Guidelines (redacted), Special Report (Washington, D.C., September
2005).
Dyer, Joel. Harvest of Rage: Why Oklahoma City Is Only the Beginning
(Boulder, Colorado: WestviewPress, 1997).
Evans-Pritchard, Ambrose. The Secret Life of Bill Clinton: The Unreported
Stories (Washington, D.C.: Regnery, 1997).
Faludi, Susan. Stiffed: The Betrayal of the American Man (New York:
William Morrow, 1999).
Freeh, Louis J. My FBI: Bringing Down the Mafia, Investigating Bill
Clinton, and Fighting the War on Terror (New York: St. Martin’s Press,
2005).
Gibson, James William. Warrior Dreams: Violence and Manhood in Post-
Vietnam America (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1994).
Hamm, Mark S. Apocalypse in Oklahoma: Waco and Ruby Ridge Revenged
(Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1997).
———. In Bad Company: America’s Terrorist Underground (Boston:
Northeastern University Press, 2002).
———. Terrorism as Crime: From Oklahoma City to Al-Qaeda and Beyond
(New York: New York University Press, 2007).
Hersley, Jon, Larry Tongate, and Bob Burke. Simple Truths: The Real Story
of the Oklahoma City Bombing Investigation (Oklahoma City:
Oklahoma Heritage Association, 2004).
Hoffman, David. The Oklahoma City Bombing and the Politics of Terror
(Venice, California: Feral House, 1998).
Hoskins, Richard Kelly. Vigilantes of Christendom: The History of the
Phineas Priesthood (Lynchburg, Virginia: The Virginia Publishing
Company, 1990).
Jakes, Dale and Connie, with Clint Richmond. False Prophets: The
Firsthand Account of a Husband-Wife Team Working for the FBI and
Living in Deepest Cover with the Montana Freemen (Los Angeles: Dove
Books, 1998).
Jones, Stephen, and Peter Israel. Others Unknown: Timothy McVeigh and the
Oklahoma City Bombing Conspiracy (New York: Public Affairs, 1998,
2001).the Montana Freemen (Los Angeles: Dove
Books, 1998).
Jones, Stephen, and Peter Israel. Others Unknown: Timothy McVeigh and the
Oklahoma City Bombing Conspiracy (New York: Public Affairs, 1998,
2001).

--- PAGE BREAK ---(Los Angeles: Dove
Books, 1998).
Jones, Stephen, and Peter Israel. Others Unknown: Timothy McVeigh and the
Oklahoma City Bombing Conspiracy (New York: Public Affairs, 1998,
2001).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kaplan, Jeffrey. Radical Religion in America: Millenarian Movements from
the Far Right to the Children of Noah (Syracuse, New York: Syracuse
University Press, 1997).
Kelly, John F., and Philip K. Wearne. Tainting Evidence: Inside the Scandals
at the FBI Crime Lab (New York: Free Press, 1998).
Kessler, Ronald. The Bureau: The Secret History of the FBI (New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 2002).
Levitas, Daniel. The Terrorist Next Door: The Militia Movement and the
Radical Right (New York: Thomas Dunne Books, 2002).
Linenthal, Edward T. The Unfinished Bombing: Oklahoma City in American
Memory (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001).
Lipset, Seymour Martin, and Earl Rabb, The Politics of Unreason: Right-
Wing Extremism in America (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1970).
Macdonald, Andrew. Hunter (Hillsboro, West Virginia: National Vanguard
Books, 1989).
———. The Turner Diaries (Hillsboro, West Virginia: National Vanguard
Books, 1978).
Michel, Lou, and Dan Herbeck. American Terrorist: Timothy McVeigh and
the Oklahoma City Bombing (New York: Regan Books, 2001).
Nichols, James D., as told to Robert S. Papovich. Freedom’s End:
Conspiracy in Oklahoma (Decker, Michigan: Freedom’s End, 1997).
Noble, Kerry. Tabernacle of Hate: Why They Bombed Oklahoma City
(Prescott, Ontario: Voyageur Publishing, 1998).
Noesner, Gary. Stalling for Time: My Life as an FBI Hostage Negotiator
(New York: Random House, 2010).
Oklahoma Bombing Investigation Committee, Final Report on the Bombing
of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, April 19, 1995 (Oklahoma
City: Oklahoma Bombing Investigation Committee, 2001).
Padilla, Lana, with Ron Delpit. By Blood Betrayed: My Life with Terry
Nichols and Timothy McVeigh (New York: HarperCollins, 1995).
Rand, Kristen. Gun Shows in America: Tupperware Parties for Criminals
(Washington, D.C.: Violence Policy Center, 1996).
Reavis, Dick J. The Ashes of Waco: An Investigation (Syracuse, New York:
Syracuse University Press, 1998).
Revell, Oliver “Buck,” and Dwight Williams. A G-Man’s Journal: A
Legendary Career Inside the FBI—From the Kennedy Assassination to
the Oklahoma City Bombing (New York: Pocket Books, 1998).
Ross, John. Unintended Consequences (St. Louis, Missouri: Accurate Press,A
Legendary Career Inside the FBI—From the Kennedy Assassination to
the Oklahoma City Bombing (New York: Pocket Books, 1998).
Ross, John. Unintended Consequences (St. Louis, Missouri: Accurate Press,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1996).
Sanders, Kathy. After Oklahoma: A Grieving Grandmother Uncovers
Shocking Truths About the Bombing…and Herself (Arlington, Texas:
Master Strategies Publishing, 2005).
Serrano, Richard A. One of Ours: Timothy McVeigh and the Oklahoma City
Bombing (New York: W. W. Norton, 1998).
Seymour, Cheri, Committee of the States: Inside the Radical Right
(Mariposa, California: Camden Place Communications, 1991).
Shook, Somer, Wesley Delano, Robert W. Balch, “Elohim City: A
Participant-Observer Study of a Christian Identity Community,” Nova
Religio, vol. 2, April 1999.
Smith, Brent L. Terrorism in America: Pipe Bombs and Pipe Dreams
(Albany, New York: SUNY Press, 1994).
Stern, Kenneth S. Militias: A Growing Danger (New York: American Jewish
Committee, 1995).
———. A Force Upon the Plain: The American Militia Movement and the
Politics of Hate (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995).
Tigar, Michael E. Examining Witnesses, 2nd ed. (Chicago: ABA Publishing,
2003).
———. Fighting Injustice (Chicago: ABA Books, 2002).
———. Nine Principles of Litigation and Life (Chicago: ABA Publishing,
2009).
———. Persuasion: The Litigator’s Art (Chicago: ABA Publishing, 1998).
Vidal, Gore. Perpetual War for Perpetual Peace: How We Got to Be So
Hated (New York: Nation Books, 2002).
Walter, Jess. Ruby Ridge: The Truth and Tragedy of the Randy Weaver
Family (New York: Regan Books, 2002; previously published in 1995 as
Every Knee Shall Bow).
Witt, James Lee, and James Morgan. Stronger in the Broken Places: Nine
Lessons for Turning Crisis into Triumph (New York: Henry Holt, 2002).
Wright, Stuart A. Patriots, Politics and the Oklahoma City Bombing (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2007).

--- PAGE BREAK ---ssons for Turning Crisis into Triumph (New York: Henry Holt, 2002).
Wright, Stuart A. Patriots, Politics and the Oklahoma City Bombing (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2007).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Photographs
Louis Beam, the far right’s devastatingly eloquent propagandist and advocate of “leaderless
resistance” against the government, being apprehended at Waco in 1993 after asking the
“forbidden question” at a news briefing about America turning into a police state. AP Images

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A typical early 1990s anti-government propaganda image, from Tom Metzger’s group White
Aryan Resistance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Robert Millar, the patriarch of Elohim City, who excused the regular presence of fearsome
violent criminals by saying they came from Jesus. From the collection of J.D. Cash

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Carol Howe, the ATF’s secret informant at Elohim City, sported a large inky swastika tattoo
on her left shoulder (partially visible) and loved to take provocative pictures. Andreas
Strassmeir dismissed her many years later as a “dress Nazi.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A rare photo of Roger Moore, an irascible ammunition dealer who knew Tim McVeigh from
the gun-show circuit. Many senior law enforcement officials were disappointed Moore was
not pursued more aggressively as a bombing suspect. (He’s seen here outside the Oklahoma
courthouse where Terry Nichols was tried on state murder charges.) AP Images

--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh in what he described as his biker disguise. Courtesy of the Oklahoma National
Memorial & Museum

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The white-supremacist bank robber Pete Langan had a secret life as a preoperative
transsexual.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A fake driver’s license made by Langan’s volatile sidekick, Richard Guthrie, who thought the
Oklahoma bombing would trigger a civil war. Evidence entered into trial

--- PAGE BREAK ---PAGE BREAK ---

A fake driver’s license made by Langan’s volatile sidekick, Richard Guthrie, who thought the
Oklahoma bombing would trigger a civil war. Evidence entered into trial

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A bag of ammonium nitrate prills similar to those used to build the bomb. Courtesy of the
Oklahoma National Memorial & Museum

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A locker at the Marion Marietta quarry, which McVeigh and Nichols robbed in October 1994
to obtain blasting caps and Tovex detonators. Courtesy of the Oklahoma National Memorial &
Museum

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hell on earth: the immediate aftermath of the bombing, when the streets of downtown
Oklahoma City were choking in smoke and debris and the cars parked for blocks around
were reduced to mangled wrecks. Courtesy of the Oklahoma National Memorial & Museum

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ATF Agent Luke Franey holds up a sign in the window of the ATF’s top-floor offices; his
account of that morning raises a lot of unanswered questions. J. Pat Carter

--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh’s mug shot following his arrest on gun and traffic charges shortly after the
bombing. Courtesy of the Oklahoma National Memorial & Museum

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The T-shirt worn by McVeigh when he was arrested; the line about refreshing the tree of
liberty with blood echoed a line in an incendiary speech of Louis Beam’s two and a half years
earlier. Courtesy of the Oklahoma National Memorial & Museum

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A sketch developed from the memory of Jeff Davis, a Chinese-food-delivery boy who insisted
the man who opened the door of Room 25 at the Dreamland Motel was someone other than
McVeigh. Courtesy of the Oklahoma National Memorial & Museum

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Weldon Kennedy, the FBI’s first on-scene commander, brandishes an amended sketch of the
mysterious John Doe Two at a news conference. AP Images

--- PAGE BREAK ---morial & Museum

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Weldon Kennedy, the FBI’s first on-scene commander, brandishes an amended sketch of the
mysterious John Doe Two at a news conference. AP Images

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A triptych of images presented in court of McVeigh, the John Doe One sketch and Sergeant
Michael Hertig. The government argued that McVeigh was John Doe One, and that any
inconsistency was due to witnesses at Eldon Elliott’s body shop confusing him with Hertig,
who rented a Ryder truck almost exactly twenty-four hours later. There are grounds to doubt
both of these assertions. Courtesy of the Oklahoma National Memorial & Museum

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Ward brothers, Pete (top left), Tony (top right), and Sonny (bottom), after their arrest in
Oregon in 1996. Carol Howe told the FBI Pete and Tony were a match for John Does One
and Two. The FBI spoke to Pete Ward, but none of the brothers was considered a suspect in
the Oklahoma City bombing. Oregon police files

--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh, captured on video at the Junction City McDonald’s on the day the Ryder truck was
rented. He left McDonald’s no sooner than 3:57 P.M. but managed, according to the
government, to walk more than a mile uphill to Eldon Elliott’s in time for the rental
agreement to be printed at 4:19. It was raining at the time, but the man who rented the truck
was dry. Trial exhibit

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Diagrams drawn by Terry Nichols showing Lori Fortier’s description of how the bomb was
built (supposedly based on what McVeigh told her), his own memory of the construction of
the bomb, and McVeigh’s version as described in American Terrorist. Explosives experts put
most credence in Nichols’s version, raising questions of who was the true bombing
mastermind. From Nichols correspondence

--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh with his lawyers Stephen Jones (right) and Rob Nigh (left). AP Images

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing questions of who was the true bombing
mastermind. From Nichols correspondence

--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh with his lawyers Stephen Jones (right) and Rob Nigh (left). AP Images

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The message Michael Fortier scrawled on the back of a Kit Kat candy wrapper to tell the FBI
he was now willing to cooperate. Courtesy of the Oklahoma National Memorial & Museum

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Andreas Strassmeir in Civil War costume in 1994. Courtesy of Kirk Lyons and Andreas
Strassmeir

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Andreas Strassmeir, Berlin, 2010. Photograph by Andrew Gumbel

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Oklahoma Ku Klux Klan leader Dennis Mahon doing a Nazi salute in front of a Ryder truck,
some time after the bombing. Mahon’s very public statements that associated him with
McVey ended his career as an aircraft mechanic, but did not attract more than token
investigative interest.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The ATF authorized Carol Howe to return to Elohim City after the bombing to look for co-
conspirators, hurriedly reversing their previous determination that she was mentally
unstable. The text, in Angie Finley’s handwriting, says: “It is suspected that members of
Elohim City are involved either directly or indirectly through conspiracy. It is suspected that
suspect #2 may be at the location.”
The beginning of Terry Nichols’s detailed description of building the bomb, written in 2007;
he had not previously confessed it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nichols’s federal trial lawyers, Ron Woods (left) and Michael Tigar, on their way into court.
Every day Woods would turn to Tigar and say: “Time to go throw up.” AP Images

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Joe Hartzler, the government’s chief prosecutor in the McVeigh trial, in the wheelchair he
utilized due to multiple sclerosis. AP images

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Larry Mackey, Hartzler’s number two who went on to run Terry Nichols’s federal trial. AP
Images

--- PAGE BREAK ---the wheelchair he
utilized due to multiple sclerosis. AP images

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Larry Mackey, Hartzler’s number two who went on to run Terry Nichols’s federal trial. AP
Images

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Niki Deutchman, the jury foreman in the Nichols federal trial, gives an impromptu news
conference after finding Nichols not guilty of first-degree murder in January 1998. She
formed a special courtroom bond with Nichols’s lawyer Michael Tigar and described him as
“one heck of an attorney.” Soon after, she was receiving death threats. AP Images

--- PAGE BREAK ---1998. She
formed a special courtroom bond with Nichols’s lawyer Michael Tigar and described him as
“one heck of an attorney.” Soon after, she was receiving death threats. AP Images

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many of those interviewed for this book challenged powerful people and
institutions, including their own, to correct and enrich the historical record.
Some did so knowing their own actions were far from perfect. Others were put
on the spot but talked anyway. That takes guts, and our gratitude goes out
accordingly. It would be impolitic to identify favorites among the 150-plus
interview subjects who spoke on the record. But a handful—they know who they
are—displayed a candor and intellectual honesty all too rare in a story in which
many people have had an angle to push, or something to hide.
One person who needs special mention is Terry Nichols. He shares
responsibility for the horrors of the bombing, but he has also been a unique
resource: cooperative at every stage and often exhaustive in his attention to
detail. He took a risk in consenting to release the full archive of privileged
documents held by his defense lawyers, and he wrote tens of thousands of words
in response to our questions, however pointed. He was obliged to do none of
these things. While we have reserved the right to judge his words and actions
against the broader factual record, we are grateful for his willingness to speak
out, to confess his crimes and other personal failings, and to add texture and
depth to our story.
For on-the-record interview contributions (some of whom are not in the text,
often because they were able to knock down false leads and misconceptions),
many thanks (in alphabetical order) to: Julia Allen, Wayne Alley, David Allred,
Gregory Argyros, Karyn Armstrong, Tim Arney, Paul Baker, David Batsell,
Garry Berges, Mark Bouton, Rodney Bowers, Jeanne Boylan, Joseph Bross,
Stanley Brown, Bill Buford, Joe Van Bullard, Dick Burr, Bruce Campbell,
Vincent Cannistraro, Jim Carlile, Jim Cavanaugh, Steve Chancellor, Richard
Cohen, Jerry Cook, Danny Coulson, Jannie Coverdale, Bill and Sandy Crigler,
Claude Criss, Danny Defenbaugh, Dick DeGuerin, Jim Denny, Dave Dilly,
Dennis Dutsch, Harry Eberhardt, Lee Fabrizio, Ladell Farley, Luke Franey,
Alexis Franklin, Mary Lou Fultz, Hank Gibbons, Mark Gibson, Aitan Goelman,
Marie Louise Hagen, Judy Hamilton Morse, David Paul Hammer, Richard
Hanawalt, Joe Hartzler, John Haynie, Floyd Hays, Greg Henry, John Hippard,
Dave Hollaway, Tom Hoover, Ronald Howland, Greg Hug, Danielle Hunt, Tom
Hunt, Linda James, Suzanne James, Adolph Januszkiewicz, Kelly Johnson, Mike
Johnston, Dean Jones, Stephen Jones, John Kane, Weldon Kennedy, Kyle
Kilgore, Richard Kirby, Neal Kirkpatrick, Gary Knight, Jack Knox, Frank Koch,anne James, Adolph Januszkiewicz, Kelly Johnson, Mike
Johnston, Dean Jones, Stephen Jones, John Kane, Weldon Kennedy, Kyle
Kilgore, Richard Kirby, Neal Kirkpatrick, Gary Knight, Jack Knox, Frank Koch,

--- PAGE BREAK ---anuszkiewicz, Kelly Johnson, Mike
Johnston, Dean Jones, Stephen Jones, John Kane, Weldon Kennedy, Kyle
Kilgore, Richard Kirby, Neal Kirkpatrick, Gary Knight, Jack Knox, Frank Koch,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Eric Kruss, Corey Lamb, Kerry Larsen, Diane Leonard, Steve Lewis, Pat
Livingston, Kirk Lyons, Larry Mackey, John Magaw, Bill Maloney, Chris
Matlock, Linda Matlock, Michael McGovern, Marty McLaughlin, Scott
Mendeloff, Jeralyn Merritt, Tom Metzger, Horace Mewborn, Lou Michel, Dick
Miller, Carol Moore, Tristan Moreland, Reid Mullins, Terry Nichols, Rob Nigh,
Melva Noakes, Kerry Noble, Gary Noesner, Richard O’Carroll, Jim Otte, Lana
Padilla, Jim Pate, Joe Phillips, Mike Reynolds, Bob Ricks, James Rockwell, Don
Rogers, Dana Rohrabacher, Tom Ross, Scott Rutter, Bob Sanders, Kathy
Sanders, Greg Scarpa Jr., David Schickedanz, Michael Schwartz, Jack Schworm,
Cheri Seymour, Rick Sherrow, Pete Slover, I. C. Smith, Clyde Snow, Gerry
Spence, Sheldon Sperling, Karl Stankovic, Rick Stephens, Ken Stern, Andi
Strassmeir, Bill Teater, Michael Tigar, James Tillison, Pharis Williams, Ritch
Willis, Tommy Wittman, Ed Woods, Ron Woods, Carl Worden, Stuart Wright,
Janice Yeary, and Randy Yount.
Thank you also to those who did not speak for attribution but provided
invaluable firsthand information. Some needed to remain anonymous to protect
themselves or others. Two outstanding individuals chose not to put their names
forward because they didn’t want to be accused of grandstanding. While we
would have preferred to print their names, their lack of ego is admirable.
An enterprise of this nature rests on the shoulders of those who have mined
and explored this material in the past. We want to acknowledge the sterling work
done by many law enforcement agents, even in the context of a flawed
investigation, and also by the defense, especially the Nichols team, whose
research and analysis have gone largely unpublicized until now. Some people
provided valuable unpublished documents: Tom Hunt and his archive of
materials from the Federal Protective Service in Oklahoma City; Stanley Brown
and his handwritten journal of the day of the bombing; Kirk Lyons and the
copies he provided of Andreas Strassmeir’s passports and U.S. visa. The late J.
D. Cash, an investigator and journalist from rural Oklahoma, was himself an
indefatigable collector of documents we are lucky to have inherited. Most useful
were Mary Riley’s field notes (see chapter 4), Richard Guthrie’s irresistibly
quotable handwritten prison memoir, and the transcripts of interviews conducted
in 1999–2000 (many by Cash himself) for a never-released documentary on the
bombing.
For the discovery materials, thank you not only to Nichols but to Brian
Hermanson, his chief lawyer in the Oklahoma state trial; Richard Demarest, who
volunteered to convert and send the files; and Jesse Trentadue, a lawyer from
Salt Lake City, who first forged a relationship with Nichols and made access to
him possible. Trentadue’s persistent Freedom of Information Act requests ande files; and Jesse Trentadue, a lawyer from
Salt Lake City, who first forged a relationship with Nichols and made access to
him possible. Trentadue’s persistent Freedom of Information Act requests and

--- PAGE BREAK ---rentadue, a lawyer from
Salt Lake City, who first forged a relationship with Nichols and made access to
him possible. Trentadue’s persistent Freedom of Information Act requests and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lawsuits against the government—all filed in the name of justice for his brother
who died in federal custody in Oklahoma in 1995—have provided a valuable
public service.
Many journalists, academics, lawyers, and investigators have been generous
in sharing materials and offering support. John Solomon, who has done his own
groundbreaking reporting on this subject, was the project’s unofficial godfather.
Mark Hamm of Indiana State University has been a selfless contributor to our
research for a decade. Don Devereux and Bob Arthur tracked down many hard-
to-find interview subjects and acted as unofficial Arizona fixers. Jonathan
Franklin opened doors and offered the raw notes of his face-to-face interview
with McVeigh. Sandra Harmon put Andrew Gumbel in touch with Gregory
Scarpa Jr. and shared Scarpa’s correspondence on Terry Nichols. Mary Mapes, in
Dallas, and Dave Hawkins, in Kingman, offered material and much-appreciated
hospitality. Rich Leiby of the Washington Post shared his taped interview with
Mark Thomas and wins the prize for most gloriously laugh-out-loud question put
to a neo-Nazi. Mark Earnest, one of Nichols’s state trial lawyers, provided court
filings and much valuable analysis. Thanks also to David Shuster and his former
colleagues at KATV, Randy Dixon and Rusty Mizell, to Jerry Bohnen of KTOK
in Oklahoma City, to Jack Cashill and Mike Tharp.
A number of people provided direct research assistance: Eli Smukler (who
outdid himself), Cody Reneau, Ginny Charles, and Beth Bartel. Thanks also to
those who provided logistical help, or facilitated access, or talked through issues,
or delivered pieces of information, or hardened up facts. In alphabetical order:
Skip Baker, MaryAnne Beatty, Pam Bell, John Berger, Leslie Blade, Sherry
Boyce, David Brog, Sheryll Brown, Rico Carisch, Glynda Chu, Steven Clay,
Jimmy Coker, Don Cox, Beverly David, Veronica Decena, Margot Dunne,
Mickey Edwards, Dan Froomkin, Miki Goral, Phil Hall, Dave Hart, Gregg
Hastings, Walt Haussner, Josh Hunsucker, Manny Johnson, Chuck Karfonta,
Dean Kuipers, Angie Lanier, Allan Lengel, Harry Lett, Claudine LoMonaco,
Judge Richard P. Matsch, Robin Mayper, Kevin Moloney, Matt Moning, Jay
Mumford, Wendy Painting, Suzie Paulson, Sheree Powell, Adam Rappaport,
Ron Replogle, Joey Senat, Tara Setmayer, Kathleen Staunton, Helen Stiefmiller,
David Sobonya, Dan Thomasson, Carole Turner, Luke Vislay, Anne Weismann,
Jan White, Fred Whitehurst, Pamela Williams, Evan Wright, and Marge York.
Our apologies to anyone we have forgotten.iefmiller,
David Sobonya, Dan Thomasson, Carole Turner, Luke Vislay, Anne Weismann,
Jan White, Fred Whitehurst, Pamela Williams, Evan Wright, and Marge York.
Our apologies to anyone we have forgotten.

ANDREW GUMBEL WOULD LIKE TO THANK HENRY FERRIS, AN ASSIDUOUS, exceptionally fine
editor who understood just how to tell this huge and gripping story; Trina Hunn,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

whose editorial eye was as keen as her legal prowess; the rest of the William
Morrow team, whose excitement was infectious; the ever-gracious Gail Ross and
the Ross Yoon agency; Dana Newman and Miles Feldman, who went above and
beyond; Charles Noble and Edward Olson; Larry George, generous to a fault;
Max and Raffaella, who followed the story, asked great questions, and put up
with months of me staring into the middle distance; Sammy, who arrived just in
time to put the rest in perspective; and, most of all, my wife, Naomi Seligman,
the ideal partner in this and all things. Your love, intelligence, many
contributions, and wicked humor held everything else together.e rest in perspective; and, most of all, my wife, Naomi Seligman,
the ideal partner in this and all things. Your love, intelligence, many
contributions, and wicked humor held everything else together.

ROGER CHARLES WOULD LIKE TO THANK STEPHEN JONES, FOR UNSTINTING support and
friendship; the late Glenn Wilburn; Kathy Wilburn Sanders; Ken Blood, Clark
Brewster, Pat Briley, Bill Cowan, John Culbertson, David Fechheimer, Mark
Hampton, Ambassador Robert Hennemeyer, Mike Hubbard, Charles Key, Kris
Kolesnik, V. Z. Lawton, Gil Macklin, Rick Ojeda, Dale Phillips, Bill Rhegness,
Bob Sheridan, Michael Turner, Fred Whitehurst, and Mike Vanderboegh. Tom
McCally, Lawrence E. Carr Jr., and Michael Minnis gave indispensable legal
counsel. Bruce Willingham of the McCurtain Daily Gazette deserves special
mention. Also: Robert K. Brown, Rita Cosby, Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, Jeff
Fager, James Giles, Karen Gullo, Patty Hassler, David Hoffman, John F. Kelly,
Tom Jarriel, Bill Jasper, Scott Malone, Gary Matsumoto, Mike McCarville, Don
McLean, Mike McNulty, Victor Newfeld, Ivan O’Mahoney, Dan Rather, Jim
Ridgeway, Ryan Ross, Bob Ruth, Diane Sawyer, John Siceloff, Dwight Swift,
Judy Thomas, Donald K. Thrasher, and Gordon Whitkin.
For my family, it’s very simple. Without the unqualified love and support of
my wife, Mary Lee, and of our daughters, Katie, Ginny, and Ellen, I would not
have been able to sustain my work on this story. They tolerated many absences,
phone calls, and dinner guests, and convinced me to go forward when the easier
path would have been to back off. To the loved ones of those who are not alive
to see the publication of this book: would that we could share the fruits of our
labors with them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INDEX
The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from which
it was created. To locate a specific passage, please use the search feature of your
e-book reader.PAGE BREAK ---

INDEX
The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from which
it was created. To locate a specific passage, please use the search feature of your
e-book reader.

Adams, Samuel, 59
Ahmad, Abraham, 57, 110
Alamo, Tony, 265
Alexander, Franklin, 55
Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, Oklahoma City, see Murrah Building
Allen, Dan G., 135
Alley, Wayne, 285
Almon, Baylee, 55–56
American Assault Company, 183
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), 29
American Jewish Committee (AJC), 27
American Revolution, 317
American Terrorist (Michel and Herbeck), 21, 22, 340–41, 352–53; other
references to the contents of the book listed under Michel, Lou and Herbeck,
Dan
America’s Kids day care, 46–47, 137–38
Anderson, Karen, 188, 192, 193, 211, 225, 226, 233, 235, 239–40, 242, 244,
249, 250, 255, 330
Anniston Army Depot, Alabama, 77
apocalypse theory, 268
Arizona Patriot Movement, 65–66, 223–24
Arkansas Bank & Trust, 191, 193
Armstrong, Karyn, 15
Army, U.S.:
bombing investigation by, 147
and Elohim City, 189–90
and Gulf War (1991), 120, 148, 167–69, 323, 324, 337
and McVeigh, 114, 119–20, 147, 150, 167–71, 178, 214, 323, 337
and Terry Nichols, 173, 174–75
Arney, Tim, 268–69, 272

--- PAGE BREAK ---y, 189–90
and Gulf War (1991), 120, 148, 167–69, 323, 324, 337
and McVeigh, 114, 119–20, 147, 150, 167–71, 178, 214, 323, 337
and Terry Nichols, 173, 174–75
Arney, Tim, 268–69, 272

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Arnold, Morris “Buzz,” 261
Aryan Nations, 20, 63, 65, 86, 179, 261, 265
Aryan Republican Army (ARA), 24–25, 85–88, 90, 182, 202, 203, 249, 255,
267, 295–96, 300, 348, 350–51
Ashcroft, John, 2, 338, 349
ATF (Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms):
and bomb-making materials, 241
and bomb threats, 39, 50
details sought by, 349–50
and foreknowledge of the bombing, 33
and Howe, 139–42, 226, 257–59, 269–72, 274–75, 277, 299–300, 306, 324–
25
hypotheses posited by, 38
inadequate investigation by, 5, 8, 241–42, 259, 269, 274–77
and interagency rivalry, 142, 207–8, 217, 269–72, 277
and James Nichols, 162
media stories about, 68, 84–85, 165
in Murrah Building, 66–69, 73, 207–8
ordnance and weapons of, 73–74
public image of, 68–69
at Ruby Ridge, 179–80, 270, 271
as target, 48–49, 197
and Waco, 68, 92, 124, 184–85, 217, 270, 271
and weapons control, 264
witness statements to, 225, 281
Aum Shinrikyo, 17
Avera, John, 55–56

Bangerter, Johnny, 273
Basic Armed Resistance Tactics, 87
Battle, Anthony, 337
Beam, Louis, 20, 21, 180, 184–85, 260, 261, 265, 267, 350
Beemer, Vicki, 103–6, 131, 139, 157, 228, 229
Benson, Ragnar, Homemade C–4, 194
Berg, Alan, 261
Berges, Garry, 107–11
Birdsong, Don, 241
Blade, Leslie, 296

--- PAGE BREAK ---260, 261, 265, 267, 350
Beemer, Vicki, 103–6, 131, 139, 157, 228, 229
Benson, Ragnar, Homemade C–4, 194
Berg, Alan, 261
Berges, Garry, 107–11
Birdsong, Don, 241
Blade, Leslie, 296

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Blanksteen, Jane (Tigar), 332
Blitzer, Bob, 229
“Bob from Arkansas” (Roger Moore), 222, 248
Booth, John Wilkes, 74
Boston Financial Group, 158, 160
Bouton, Mark, 107–11, 112, 114, 232
Bowers, Rodney, 240
Boylan, Jeanne, 175–77, 214
Bradley, Ann, 303
Bradley, Daina, 40–41, 42, 47, 72, 76–77, 78–80, 92, 103, 308–9
Bradley, Falesha, 47
Brady Bill, 27–28
Brady v. Maryland (1963), 333
Branch Davidians, 3, 57–58, 184–85, 190–91, 194
Brandeis, Louis D., 325
Braver, Rita, 58
Bravo, Tito, 345
Brescia, Mike:
and bank robberies, 306–7
at Elohim City, 25, 203, 263, 282, 287, 295, 306
and John Doe Two sketch, 307, 308
and Strassmeir, 287, 297
and White Power scene, 24
Brewster, Clark, 320
Bridges, Daryl, phone calling card of, 156–62, 165, 190, 233, 251, 279–80, 282,
306, 317
Bross, Joseph, 110, 111, 114
Brown, Claud, 292
Brown, Cynthia Campbell, 299
Brown, Jeff, 63
Brown, Leesa, 276
Brown, Raymon L., 52–53, 54
Brown, Stanley, 43, 45, 52, 71–72, 74, 78
Browning, Don, 72–73, 102
Bryant, Bob “Bear,” 119, 155, 164, 215
Bucella, Donna, 157, 159, 161, 225
Budke, Christopher, 182–83, 332–33
Buffalo News, 21, 325
Buford, Bill, 20, 242, 266–67, 281

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bull Shoals Lake, Arkansas, 267
Bunting, Todd, 228–29, 255, 308, 309, 351
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (BATF), see ATF
Burk, Dianna Sanders, 245
Burmeister, Steven, 319, 320
Burr, Richard, 315, 323, 324, 326, 337
Burrage, Michael, 320
Bush, George H. W., 86, 98–99
Bush, George W., 343
Butler, Richard, 261, 265
Byrd, Roy, 21Dianna Sanders, 245
Burmeister, Steven, 319, 320
Burr, Richard, 315, 323, 324, 326, 337
Burrage, Michael, 320
Bush, George H. W., 86, 98–99
Bush, George W., 343
Butler, Richard, 261, 265
Byrd, Roy, 21

Calhoun, Debbie, 132, 210
Campbell, Bruce, 20
Candy Store, The, 183, 225
Cash, J. D., 296–97
CAUSE Foundation, 28–29, 30, 37, 54, 94–95, 260, 287, 288, 306
Cavanaugh, Jim, 185
Cerney, Richard, 169
Chambers, Tim, 322
Chancellor, Steve, 114, 147, 150, 189–90
Cheryl (transsexual), 88
Chevy pickup, brown, 30, 34, 40, 41, 42, 204, 351
Christian Identity movement, 86
Churchill, Winston, 59
CIA, and Strassmeir, 98–99, 265
Cincinnati Police Department, 301
Circus Circus hotel, Las Vegas, 123
CISPES, 262
Civil War reenactments, 98, 99
Clemente, Angela, 346
Clinton administration:
and death penalty, 133
and FEMA, 101–2
and Freeh, 82
and gun control, 27–28, 48, 242, 256
pressure from, 118–19, 164
and Waco siege, 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---lemente, Angela, 346
Clinton administration:
and death penalty, 133
and FEMA, 101–2
and Freeh, 82
and gun control, 27–28, 48, 242, 256
pressure from, 118–19, 164
and Waco siege, 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Coffman, Dick, 273
Cohen, Richard, 280
Colbern, Edwin, 217
Colbern, Steve, 5, 203–5, 216–17, 225–26, 290, 339
Columbus Fire Department, 296
“common law” movement, 115
Company (white supremacists), 24
Con Air (movie), 337
conspiracy theories, 7–8, 31, 288
and body parts in Murrah Building rubble, 298–99
and death penalty, 324
FBI discounting of, 37, 112, 233, 255–56, 308, 316, 348, 351, 352
international connections, 303–4, 347
and McVeigh/Nichols trials, 209, 304, 317
“others unknown,” 34, 256, 317, 328, 335–36, 341, 342
two voices at motel, 111–12, 308, 351
and witness reports, 212–14, 216
Cook, Jerry, 126, 127–28, 129
Cooper, Dana, 46, 47
Cooper, Renee, 33
Coulson, Danny, 37, 67
called off the case, 198, 284–85
and Elohim City, 142, 269, 277
and Fortier interrogations, 187–88
and Hostage Rescue Team, 58, 198, 267
and John Doe sketches, 175, 229
and McVeigh’s arrest, 136
Covenant, the Sword, and the Arm of the Lord, 58, 261
Coyle, John, 209
Coyne, Randy, 281
Cozzens, James Gould, 323
Crabtree, Scott, 103–4, 143, 149
Criss, Claude, 33
Cyanide (punk band), 24

Daigle, Ralph, 177–78, 182, 205, 238
Dallas Morning News, 165, 311–13, 314, 325
Davis, Ed, 244

--- PAGE BREAK ---ould, 323
Crabtree, Scott, 103–4, 143, 149
Criss, Claude, 33
Cyanide (punk band), 24

Daigle, Ralph, 177–78, 182, 205, 238
Dallas Morning News, 165, 311–13, 314, 325
Davis, Ed, 244

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Davis, Jeff, 112, 308
Declaration of Independence, 59
Dees, Morris, 280
Defenbaugh, Danny, 214–16, 281, 350
and interagency rivalry, 142, 277
and McVeigh trial, 310–11, 319, 340
and Murrah Building, 72, 91, 208, 352
and phone records, 160
retirement of, 340
and Strassmeir, 291, 296–98
DeGuerin, Dick, 95, 208
Delahunt, William, 346
De Niro, Robert, 345, 349–50
Denny, Rebecca and Brandon, 47
Deutchman, Niki, 326–27, 334, 335
Devereux, Don, 11
Dial-A-Racist hotline, 139
Dreamland Motel, 107–12, 114–15, 232, 282, 308, 329, 339, 351
Dresch, Stephen, 346–47
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), 66, 208
Dutsch, Dennis, 76

Earnest, Mark, 348
Eaton, George, 203
Eberhardt, Harry, 67, 208
Edwards, Patty, 273–74
Eilan, Amos, 303
Eitan, Rafael, 97
Elliott, Eldon:
and phone records, 158, 280
and Ryder rental, 103–6, 112, 138–39, 157, 201, 210, 228, 231–32, 280, 322,
350
and witness reports, 104–6, 176, 228, 229, 302
Ellison, Jim, 15, 20, 58, 260, 261, 267, 268, 283, 312, 350
Elohim City, 24–27
antigovernment discussions in, 64, 139–40, 143, 258, 267, 276
barter system in, 265
children in, 25

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fugitives hiding in, 260
and Howe, 139–42, 190, 226, 257–59, 271, 274–75, 277, 299–300, 321, 333
investigations into, 34, 141–42, 216, 233, 259–60, 262, 266–72, 274–75,
277, 283, 287–88, 306, 325, 350
McVeigh connections with, 141, 143, 189, 203, 256, 267, 279–83, 288, 291,
306, 333
and Strassmeir, 25–27, 64, 96–97, 100, 141–43, 189–90, 257, 263–66, 271–
72, 279–80, 287, 295
and trial documents, 290, 304
weapons and weapons training in, 24, 64, 96, 139, 141, 257, 262, 263–64,
268, 271, 287, 302
women’s activities in, 25
El Reno prison, Oklahoma, 136–
72, 279–80, 287, 295
and trial documents, 290, 304
weapons and weapons training in, 24, 64, 96, 139, 141, 257, 262, 263–64,
268, 271, 287, 302
women’s activities in, 25
El Reno prison, Oklahoma, 136

Farrington, Bobby Joe, 66
FBI:
and bank robberies, 182, 306–7
Bombing Task Force, 240–42
and bomb threats, 20, 39, 72
and children’s deaths, 61
CISPES, 262
and coconspirators, 37, 112, 204–5, 233, 255–56, 308, 316, 348, 351, 352
and composite sketches, 106, 107, 109, 113, 129, 138–39, 175–76, 228–29,
230, 309; see also John Doe One sketch; John Doe Two sketch
congressional investigation of, 339
covering up the truth, 8, 91, 160, 353
crime lab in Washington, 94, 120, 126, 139, 182, 303, 316–17, 318, 320, 352
and crime scene, 72, 78, 83–84, 102
detail mania of, 150, 214–15, 216, 350
evidence mishandled by, 41, 84, 114, 140, 152–56, 158–62, 305, 310, 316–
17, 329–31, 332–33, 335
evidence recovered ten years later by, 347
evidence suppressed by, 91, 92, 149, 160, 176–77, 201–2, 210–11, 304, 338–
40
and FEMA, 101–2
fire department alerted by, 16–17, 33
and foreknowledge of the bombing, 21, 33
gaps in investigation by, 108–9, 110, 137–39, 141–42, 154, 159, 216, 219,

--- PAGE BREAK ---04, 338–
40
and FEMA, 101–2
fire department alerted by, 16–17, 33
and foreknowledge of the bombing, 21, 33
gaps in investigation by, 108–9, 110, 137–39, 141–42, 154, 159, 216, 219,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

226, 229, 230–34, 237, 246, 249, 259–62, 267–69, 285, 329, 336, 350–
53
Hostage Rescue Team, 58, 119, 198, 267
and Howe, 140–42, 190, 226, 277, 299–300, 302, 305–6
inadequate investigations by, 5, 6, 7, 76, 154–56, 222, 260, 262, 277, 307,
316–17, 347–48, 350–53
information-management systems of, 339–40
and interagency rivalry, 82, 83, 142, 158–59, 161–62, 199, 202, 208, 210–
11, 217, 269–72, 277, 352
interview records of, 83, 111, 140, 290–91, 330–31
interviews not recorded by, 7, 331, 332–33, 335
investigation narrowed by, 255–56, 262, 275, 285, 304, 306, 310, 330
and McVeigh, see McVeigh, Timothy media stories on, 42, 91, 307, 338
and Middle Eastern extremists, 57, 58, 110, 186
mistakes exposed at trial, 7, 329–33
and Moore, 192–93, 216, 240–42, 254–55, 351
and Nichols, see Nichols, Terry
and Oklahoma County bomb squad, 32
and phone calling cards, 156–62, 251, 279–80, 348
pressure from the top, 118–19, 164, 291
public image of, 81, 262, 291
and rescue workers, 55, 67, 78
and Ruby Ridge, 180, 198, 199, 271, 284
and rules of discovery, 290–91, 338, 339
and Ryder rental, see Ryder truck
and sedition trial, 261–62, 283
showdown near Seattle, 224
and Snell, 20
Strategic Information and Operations Center, 118–19
top-down culture of, 81, 340
and trials, see McVeigh, Timothy, trial of; Nichols, Terry, trial of
and video surveillance tapes, 90–94, 120
and Waco, 57–58, 61, 81, 92, 124, 184–85, 190–91, 199, 268, 271
witness statements discounted by, 37, 105–6, 112, 137–38, 183, 190, 197,
201–2, 217, 225–26, 232, 347
witness statements to, 26, 35, 37, 42, 89, 90, 91, 103–6, 107–12, 122–23,
148–50, 221, 253, 281
witness’s testimony discussed, 105–6, 112, 171–73, 176–77, 187–88, 195–
96, 210, 232, 301, 308–11, 332–33

--- PAGE BREAK ---, 26, 35, 37, 42, 89, 90, 91, 103–6, 107–12, 122–23,
148–50, 221, 253, 281
witness’s testimony discussed, 105–6, 112, 171–73, 176–77, 187–88, 195–
96, 210, 232, 301, 308–11, 332–33

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA):
at disaster site, 100
evidence mishandled by, 84
media stories from, 102–3
post-bombing study by, 49
throwing its weight around, 100–103
Urban Search and Rescue force, 101–3
Federal Employees Credit Union, 48
federal government: antigovernment activists, 20, 25, 27, 28; see also specific
groups
Federal Protective Service, 38, 51, 91, 93
Felipe, Luis, 336
Ferguson, Herbert, 106
Fields, Chris, 56
Finley, Angie, 139, 140, 226, 258, 259, 270, 271, 274, 276, 299–300, 305, 306,
324
First Amendment rights, 29
Fleenor, Michael, 110
Florita, Jojo Angelito, 206
Foley, Jack, 133
Fort Benning, Georgia, 144, 150
Fort Bragg, North Carolina, 169–70
Fortier, Lori:
and Kling alias, 186, 231, 253
and McVeigh, 211, 220, 222, 225
and McVeigh trial, 5, 253, 256, 290, 308, 318, 320, 322
and Nichols trial, 5, 256, 329
Fortier, Michael, 221–23, 224, 336
and bomb-making materials, 186–87, 253–54, 331
government investigation of, 5, 185–88, 217–18, 221–22, 230
and McVeigh, 135, 188, 194, 195, 211, 220, 222–23, 230, 243, 251, 273
and McVeigh trial, 5, 247, 256, 290, 308, 318, 320, 322, 323
and Nichols trial, 5, 256, 329, 331
and phone card, 156
in U.S. Army, 175
Fort Riley, Kansas, 103, 105, 110, 114, 115, 116, 145
Fort Sill, Oklahoma, 114, 147
Fort Smith, sedition trial in, 260–62
Frame, Larry, 169

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Franey, Luke, 66–67, 68, 69, 73
Franklin, Jonathan, 167, 170, 283
Franzen, Jonathan, Freedom, 3
Freedom of Information Act, 92
Freeh, Louis, 81, 102, 198–99, 339
autobiography of, 340, 352
and congressional investigation, 339
involvement in investigations, 81–82, 118, 148, 150, 163–64, 215, 284Freedom of Information Act, 92
Freeh, Louis, 81, 102, 198–99, 339
autobiography of, 340, 352
and congressional investigation, 339
involvement in investigations, 81–82, 118, 148, 150, 163–64, 215, 284

Gadson, LaTonya, 84
Gage, Levoid Jack, 41
Gaines, Charles, 16
Garland, Merrick, 326
Garrett, Helena and Tevin, 317
Geary Lake State Park:
constructing the bomb at, 13–14, 17–19, 183, 236
Ryder truck at, 13–14, 17–19, 183, 200–202, 332
Gibson, Billy, 4
Gibson, Mark, 107, 128, 135
Glenn, Gene, 199
Glover, Brad, 339
Goad, Brent, 107
Gorelick, Jamie, 198–99
Graham, Jane, 37
Green, Charlie (alias), 260
Grimsley, Bill, 32
Grossman, Glenn, 40, 42, 92
Gulf War (1991), 120, 148, 167–69, 288, 323, 324, 337
Guthrie, Richard, 86–88, 89–90, 202, 203, 249, 295, 296, 301, 307

Hamm, Mark, 280
Hammer, David Paul, 337–38, 342–44
Hanawalt, Richard, 226
Haney, Preston, 216
Hanger, Charlie, 69–70, 74–76, 113, 126, 136, 151, 152, 348
Harris, Barbara, 217
Harris, Thomas, 337
Hartzler, Joseph, 68, 290, 291, 304, 317–18, 321

--- PAGE BREAK ---chard, 226
Haney, Preston, 216
Hanger, Charlie, 69–70, 74–76, 113, 126, 136, 151, 152, 348
Harris, Barbara, 217
Harris, Thomas, 337
Hartzler, Joseph, 68, 290, 291, 304, 317–18, 321

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Havens, Mike (alias), 153
Haynie, John, 33–34, 74, 78
Hays, Floyd, 183, 254–55
Heady, Bob, 67, 71–72, 77–78
Henley, William Ernest, “Invictus,” 343
Henry, Patrick, 59
Hephzibah Ranch, 224
Herbeck, Dan, 21, 34, 41, 144, 152, 181, 219, 231, 236, 313, 321, 340–41
Herington police station, Nichols in, 133–34, 143–46, 149–50, 159, 305, 330
Herington storage unit, 117–18, 149, 230, 243, 246, 247, 346
Hersley, Jon, 255, 309–10, 336
Hertig, Michael, 228, 229
Hess, Rudolf, 14
Heydrich, Reinhard, 185
Hill Air Force Base, Salt Lake City, 240
Hippard, John, 93
Hitler, Adolf, 26
Hobbs, Royce, 128, 135
Hollaway, Dave, 94–96, 260
and Brescia, 306–7
and CAUSE, 29, 94–95, 288, 306
on freedom, 29
and Murrah Building, 37, 54
and Strassmeir, 99–100, 264, 265, 288–89, 292–94, 297
and Waco, 95, 288
whereabouts on April 19, 95–96
Hollaway, Sarah, 260–61
Holzer, Tomas, 53
Homeland Security Department, 346–47
Homemade C–4 (Benson), 193–94
Hoover, Tom, 224
House International Relations Committee, 347
Housing and Urban Development, 48, 51, 92
Howe, Carol:
arrest and trial of, 305–6, 320, 324–25
and ATF, 139–42, 226, 257–59, 269–72, 274–75, 277, 299–300, 306, 324–
25
credibility of, 141, 271, 274–75, 299, 306, 333–34
and Elohim City, 139–42, 190, 226, 257–59, 271, 274–75, 277, 299–300,

--- PAGE BREAK ---42, 226, 257–59, 269–72, 274–75, 277, 299–300, 306, 324–
25
credibility of, 141, 271, 274–75, 299, 306, 333–34
and Elohim City, 139–42, 190, 226, 257–59, 271, 274–75, 277, 299–300,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

321, 333
and FBI, 140–42, 190, 226, 277, 299–300, 302, 305–6
and Finley, 139, 140, 258, 259, 274, 276, 299–300, 305, 306, 324
identity compromised, 276, 299–300
and Mahon, 139–40, 142, 257, 258, 259, 269–70, 276, 321
and McVeigh trial, 304, 306, 320–21, 337
and Nichols trial, 333–34
and Strassmeir, 140–42, 190, 257–58, 259, 263, 269, 276, 321
Howland, Ronald, 51, 136
Humphries, Dan, 10–11
Hunt, Danielle, 46, 137–38
Hunt, Kyle, 35
Hunt, Tom, 38, 51–52, 91–93, 137
Hunter (Pierce), 23, 154, 272
Hupp, Louis, 329–30, 331

Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), 271, 291
Interpol, 288
“Invictus” (Henley), 343

Jacks, Robert (Jacques; Jocques), 212–16, 255, 309
James, Duane, 68
James, Linda, 232
Januszkiewicz, Adolph, 15
Jefferson, Thomas, 59, 74
Jessie, Mark, 254
Jimboy, Ray, 148
John Doe One sketch:
and FBI pressure, 106, 119, 176
and Hertig, 229
as Kling, 106, 109, 176, 229, 231
made public, 108, 110, 112–13
and McVeigh, 108, 109, 111, 113, 119, 120, 124, 129, 138, 139, 230–31,
310, 318
and Pete Ward, 140, 302, 350
and Ryder truck rental, 107, 231
suspects eliminated via, 110
unreliability of, 138–39, 310, 318

--- PAGE BREAK ---1, 113, 119, 120, 124, 129, 138, 139, 230–31,
310, 318
and Pete Ward, 140, 302, 350
and Ryder truck rental, 107, 231
suspects eliminated via, 110
unreliability of, 138–39, 310, 318

--- PAGE BREAK ---

John Doe Three sketch, 214
John Doe Two sketch, 109, 193
and “Bob in Arkansas,” 222
and Brescia, 307, 308
and Bunting, 228–29, 255, 308, 309
FBI denial of existence, 308, 318
and FBI interpretations, 175–77, 210, 228–29, 230, 255, 308, 309
and Jimboy, 148
and Josh Nichols, 210
made public, 110
and Ryder truck rental, 176, 231
and Stephen Jones, 218, 303
and Strassmeir, 289, 292
suspects eliminated via, 110
and Terry Nichols, 120
and Tony Ward, 140, 302, 350
witness confusion about, 113, 229, 309–10
Johnny’s Tire Company, 35, 38
John Paul II, Pope, 347
Johnson, Kelly, 301
Johnson, Oscar, 68, 208
Johnson, Rodney, 41
Johnston, Germaine, 62–63
Jones, Stephen:
and attorney-client privilege, 341
and change of venue, 285–86
closing statement by, 322–23
and discovery phase, 289–91, 298, 304
and formal sentencing, 325
gag order on, 311
and jury selection, 314–15
as McVeigh’s defense counsel, 208–9, 313, 321–22, 325–26
and Murrah Building demolition, 208, 209
opening statement of, 318
Others Unknown, 218, 219, 220, 340–41
and statements to media, 218–20, 286, 311–13
and Tigar, 286, 341
travels of, 302–4
withdrawal from case, 325–26

--- PAGE BREAK ---

writ of mandamus, 303–4
Joslin, Norma, 32
Journal Record Building, 93–94
Jubilee, 184
Justice Department, see law enforcement agenciesavels of, 302–4
withdrawal from case, 325–26

--- PAGE BREAK ---

writ of mandamus, 303–4
Joslin, Norma, 32
Journal Record Building, 93–94
Jubilee, 184
Justice Department, see law enforcement agencies

Kaczynski, Ted (Unabomber), 336, 337
Kahl, Gordon, 117
Kamen, Jeff, 56
Kane, John, 157, 158, 160, 161
Kansas City Star, 50
Keating, Frank, 6, 209, 352
Kehoe, Chevie “Bud,” 63–64, 267
Kehoe, Cheyne, 64, 263
Kelly, Kale, 65
Kelso, Ed, 84
Kennedy, Weldon, 81–82, 91, 101–2, 142, 159, 160, 165, 172–73, 187, 198, 207,
208, 215, 230, 353
Kenny, Shawn, 295
Kerr-McGee Oil Company, 35
Kessinger, Tom, 104, 105, 113, 175–76, 228, 302, 309, 310, 318
Kilgore, Kyle, 32
Kinestik, 22, 125, 236–37, 249, 300, 313
Kirkpatrick, Neal, 324
Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico, 10
Kling, Robert D. (alias), 103–6, 109, 111, 112, 115, 138–39, 157, 176, 186, 228–
29, 231–32, 253, 322
Knight, Gary, 44
Knoche, Craig, 243–44
Knox, Jack, 20, 259–60, 261
Koernke, Mark, 39
Kohl, Helmut, 26, 100
Koresh, David, 191, 208, 273
Kuhn, Dale, 134
Ku Klux Klan, 20, 29, 175, 178, 202–3, 261

Lady Godiva strip club, Tulsa, 283
Lamar, Walt, 94, 120, 128

--- PAGE BREAK ---Mark, 39
Kohl, Helmut, 26, 100
Koresh, David, 191, 208, 273
Kuhn, Dale, 134
Ku Klux Klan, 20, 29, 175, 178, 202–3, 261

Lady Godiva strip club, Tulsa, 283
Lamar, Walt, 94, 120, 128

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lampley, Willie Ray, 267
Lane, David, 261
Lane, Mark, 117
Lane, Wes, 348
Langan, Pete (Commander Pedro), 86–88, 89, 202, 249, 279, 295, 296, 300–301,
348
Langenburg, Kelli, 115, 120
LaPierre, Wayne, 28
Larsen, Kerry, 302
law enforcement agencies:
accused of overreaching, 28, 157, 167, 198, 216
biased investigations by, 5, 37, 149, 163–64, 182, 199, 232–34
congressional investigation of, 339
and crime scene investigation, 316–17
evidence gathered for trials, 6–7, 304, 349–50
evidence mishandled by, 84, 117, 153, 157, 308, 329–31, 353
inadequate investigations by, 2, 5, 6, 226, 262, 274–77, 296, 297, 307–8,
350–53
interagency rivalries among, 2, 82–83, 114, 142, 158–59, 161–62, 199, 202,
207–8, 210–11, 217, 269–72, 352
and New World Order, 28
and phone calling card, 157–62
pre-bombing activities of, 32–34
and SPLC, 281, 291
see also ATF; FBI
LeBron, Carl, 124, 139
Leeds, Roland, 240
Lefty (explosives expert), 224
Levy, Lakesha, 298–99
Lexington and Concord, battle of, 14, 59
Liberty Lobby, 116–17, 160
Liddy, G. Gordon, 28
Lincoln, Abraham, 74
Linehan, James, 36, 37, 40
Litt, Bob, 326
Livingston, Pat, 113–14, 115–16, 119, 139
Lloyd, John, 317
Locke, John, 59
Long, Leonard, 34, 35

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Los Angeles Times, 42
Luciferian religion, 20
Lyons, Kirk:
and CAUSE, 29, 95, 287, 288
and Hollaway, 95–96, 99, 288, 293, 294, 297
and Howe, 259
and Strassmeir, 96, 100, 259, 265, 283, 287, 288–89, 292, 297
and white supremacist network, 25, 290
Lyons, Kirk:
and CAUSE, 29, 95, 287, 288
and Hollaway, 95–96, 99, 288, 293, 294, 297
and Howe, 259
and Strassmeir, 96, 100, 259, 265, 283, 287, 288–89, 292, 297
and white supremacist network, 25, 29

Mackey, Ann, 326
Mackey, Larry:
and indictment, 256
and lost evidence, 117
and McVeigh trial, 291, 305, 310, 319, 322
and narrowing investigation, 255
and Nichols trial, 305, 326, 328–29, 332, 333
Macy, “Hangin’ Bob,” 335, 336, 348
Magaw, John, 38, 67, 69, 73, 84–85, 142, 255, 275, 277
Mahon, Dennis:
and antigovernment plans, 140–41, 142, 259, 269–70, 272, 276, 321
and ATF, 140, 350
and Dial-A-Racist, 139
and Elohim City, 267, 282
and Howe, 139–40, 142, 257, 258, 259, 269–70, 276, 321
and McVeigh trial, 304
and Strassmeir, 189, 296–97
Malkovich, John, 337
Maloney, Bill, 212–14, 309
Malzac, Dennis, 225
Marazoff, Donna, 90, 307
Marjoribanks, Edmond, 323
Marshall, T. K., 298, 302
Martinolich, Joe, 129–30, 163–64, 198
Martz, Lester, 270, 271, 272, 275
Matsch, Richard P.:
and McVeigh execution, 341–42
and McVeigh trial, 1, 161, 285, 286, 290, 303, 305, 311, 313, 315, 321, 322,
325, 337, 339, 340

--- PAGE BREAK ---Martz, Lester, 270, 271, 272, 275
Matsch, Richard P.:
and McVeigh execution, 341–42
and McVeigh trial, 1, 161, 285, 286, 290, 303, 305, 311, 313, 315, 321, 322,
325, 337, 339, 340

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and Nichols trial, 326, 327–28, 331, 332, 333–36
Matthews, Bob, 117
McCarthy, Joe, 285
McCarthy, Kevin, 88–90, 95, 282
and Aryan Republican Army, 24–25, 203, 295, 350
and bank robberies, 87, 90, 301
and Elohim City, 203
rumors of connection to bombing, 90, 300, 301, 307
and Strassmeir, 263
McCarty, Walter “Mac,” 223
McCauley, Alex, 67–68
McClure, Donna, 88
McGown, Eric, 109, 112, 201, 282, 308
McGown, Lea, 107–12, 119, 139, 201, 282, 290, 308
McGuire, David, 261
MCI, 158
McLaughlin, Richard, 244–45
McPherson, Mike, 82–83
McVeigh, Jennifer:
brother’s letters to, 60–61, 181–82
FBI interrogations of, 146–47, 171–73, 181–82, 195–96
and her brother’s activities, 87, 146–47, 196, 203
as trial witness, 308
McVeigh, Timothy:
and American Terrorist, 21, 22, 340–41, 352–53
antigovernment views of, 178–79, 180–81, 182, 184, 191, 194, 197, 211,
217, 223, 225, 254, 329
army discharge of, 169–71, 178
army service of, 114, 119–20, 147, 150, 167–69, 214, 323, 337
arraignment of, 136
arrested on bombing charges, 109, 132, 136, 164–65
and Aryan Republican Army, 87
and attorney-client privilege, 341, 344
and bank robberies, 87, 182, 195, 296, 348
and bomb-making materials, 23, 151–52, 156, 163, 186, 193–94, 230, 236–
37, 238, 242–44, 246, 253–54, 313, 316, 320, 351–52
building bombs, 13–14, 17–19, 21–23, 29, 201, 223, 245–46, 347, 351
and coconspirators, see conspiracy theories
and composite sketches, 106, 107, 108, 109, 111, 119, 120, 124, 129, 138–

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing bombs, 13–14, 17–19, 21–23, 29, 201, 223, 245–46, 347, 351
and coconspirators, see conspiracy theories
and composite sketches, 106, 107, 108, 109, 111, 119, 120, 124, 129, 138–

--- PAGE BREAK ---

39, 230–31, 310, 318
crystal meth used by, 12, 106, 174, 224
and death penalty, 315, 324, 325, 343
driver’s licenses of, 75, 103, 115, 224
earplugs used by, 41, 317–18
execution date of, 338, 341–42
execution of, 342–44
and the explosion, 40–42
FBI’s initial questioning of, 127–29
fingerprints of, 329–30, 331, 336
gathering testimony against, 5, 34–38, 127–29
getaway of, 42, 58–63, 69–71
Gulf War uniform of, 183, 188, 288–89
and gun shows/gun shops, 63, 87, 108, 113–14, 121, 151, 178, 179, 181,
183–84, 188, 197, 202–3, 222, 235, 238, 251, 263, 273
habeas appeal of, 341
and Homemade C–4, 193–94
and homosexuality, 174, 277–79
and Hunter, 23, 272
jobs of, 178, 181, 194, 202, 222
legal counsel for, see Jones, Stephen
loading materials onto truck, 11, 13
luck and coincidence, 54, 126
media access to, 135–36, 218–20, 311–13, 325, 340–41
and Moore, 183–84, 192–93, 195, 225, 226, 233, 235–36, 248, 250, 251,
254, 273, 313, 319
motivation of, 2–3, 59–60, 124, 170–71, 181, 194, 238
“network of friends” established by, 202–3, 220, 273
and Nichols, see Nichols, Terry
no remorse felt by, 321, 353
and phone calling card, 158, 162, 233
pre-bombing activities, 29–31, 34–38, 40–41, 50, 91, 137–38, 221, 350, 351
in prison, 336–38, 342–43
prison interviews of, 21, 34, 41
and public opinion, 136, 323
as self-perceived martyr-hero, 8, 19, 23, 60, 218–20, 311, 322, 324, 352, 353
and sexuality, 12, 211–12, 277–79, 338, 353
taken into custody, 69–71, 74–75, 126, 309
and trial, see McVeigh, Timothy, trial of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ero, 8, 19, 23, 60, 218–20, 311, 322, 324, 352, 353
and sexuality, 12, 211–12, 277–79, 338, 353
taken into custody, 69–71, 74–75, 126, 309
and trial, see McVeigh, Timothy, trial of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and Turner Diaries, 21, 23, 60, 124, 170, 175, 179, 242, 321
and Unintended Consequences, 321
weapons of, 69, 70, 71, 113, 115, 118, 128, 186, 197, 221–22, 236, 246
and white supremacy, 175, 179, 182
McVeigh, Timothy, trial of, 2, 6–7, 209
appeal filed in, 337, 338
closing statements in, 322–23
covering up the truth, 8, 161, 306
and death penalty, 315, 324, 325, 328, 334, 343
defense counsel for, 208–9, 313, 321–22, 325–26
defense team access to information, 161, 217, 289–91, 310
defense team disagreements in, 323
defense witnesses selected, 308–10
discovery phase, 289–91, 298, 304, 320, 338, 339, 353
formal sentencing, 325
government documents released for, 299–300
government preparation for, 8, 221, 289–91, 309
jury selection, 314–16
McVeigh’s negative views about, 304, 313, 321–22, 338
media access to documents before, 311–13, 314
necessity defense, 218, 219
opening statements, 317–18
penalty phase, 323–24
prosecution team disagreements in, 304–5, 310–11
prosecution team not handing over documents, 161, 289–91, 320, 337, 338–
40
and rules of evidence, 161
separated from Nichols trial, 305
video surveillance tape shown at, 36
witnesses blocked by FBI, 289
witness testimony in, 7, 41, 187, 195, 253, 302, 318–21, 323, 328
writ of mandamus, 303–4
see also Jones, Stephen
Mendeloff, Scott, 232, 281, 291, 309–11, 326, 331
Mercury Marquis, yellow, 41, 158
documents found in, 59–60, 71, 129
dropped in Oklahoma City, 94, 111, 144, 351
license plates for, 58–59, 60, 108, 118, 125, 154
and McVeigh’s getaway, 42, 58–62

--- PAGE BREAK ---s, yellow, 41, 158
documents found in, 59–60, 71, 129
dropped in Oklahoma City, 94, 111, 144, 351
license plates for, 58–59, 60, 108, 118, 125, 154
and McVeigh’s getaway, 42, 58–62

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and McVeigh taken into custody, 69–70, 309
VIN number, 60, 70
witness statements about, 30, 34–36, 40, 88
Merritt, Jeralyn, 342
Metzger, Tom, 282
Mewborn, Horace, 261, 262, 266, 284
Michalic, Mark, 126
Michel, Lou, 21, 34, 41, 144, 152, 181, 219, 231, 236, 313, 321, 325, 340–41
Michigan Militia, 39, 116
Middle Eastern extremists:
attempts to tie to Murrah Building bombing, 303–4
rumors about, 56–57, 58, 110
and September 11
attacks, 186
Mid-Kansas Co-op, McPherson, 242
Midwest Elevator Company, 68
Miles, Robert, 261
militia movement, 27–28, 57, 65, 115
Militia of Montana, 20
Millar, Joan, 279, 282
Millar, Robert “Grandpa”:
and apocalypse theory, 268
and Ellison, 58, 260, 267, 268, 350
and Elohim City, 24–26, 58, 100, 143, 189, 226, 257, 260, 264, 266–69, 283,
287–88
and federal law enforcement agencies, 143, 258, 260, 266–69, 271–72, 287–
88
and Howe, 226, 271, 276, 321
and McVeigh, 283
and racial theories, 268
and Snell, 24, 260, 350
and Strassmeir, 25, 26, 100, 189, 257, 263, 264, 288
and weapons, 263, 271
Miller, James Howard, 39
Miller, Robert “Bob” (alias), 181, 193, 241, 249, 296
Mogg, Cliff, 10–11
Moning, Matthew, 301
Mooney, Kennilee, 26
Moore, Carol, 184, 239, 241

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns, 263, 271
Miller, James Howard, 39
Miller, Robert “Bob” (alias), 181, 193, 241, 249, 296
Mogg, Cliff, 10–11
Moning, Matthew, 301
Mooney, Kennilee, 26
Moore, Carol, 184, 239, 241

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Moore, Leah, 41
Moore, Roger:
antigovernment views of, 183, 191, 254
as “Bob from Arkansas,” 222, 248
as Bob Miller, 181, 193, 241, 249, 296
and bomb-making materials, 236, 241–42, 313
FBI investigations of, 192–93, 216, 240–42, 254–55, 351
and gun-show business, 181, 188, 255, 296
letter to Tim Tuttle, 191
and McVeigh, 183–84, 192–93, 195, 225, 226, 233, 235–36, 248, 250, 251,
254, 273, 313, 319
media stories about, 240
Nichols’s implication of, 236–37, 346–47, 349
and Nichols trial, 239–40, 330
road-rage incident, 244–45
robbery of, 192–93, 195, 204, 235, 248–49, 250–54, 273, 319, 329
rumors about, 240, 245, 351
as trial witness, 5, 236, 319
Moreland, Tristan, 270, 276
Moritz, Marsha, 74–75
Morlin, Bill, 306
Moroz, Mike, 35, 148
Mossad, 23, 97, 154
Murrah Building:
access to, 49–50, 51
ATF office in, 66–69, 73
bomb scares in, 71–74
as crime scene, unsecured, 83–84
criminal record check on, 126
day-care center in, 31, 46–47, 50, 61, 92, 137–38, 317
dead and wounded in, 4, 65, 103, 275, 298–99, 311, 312, 323–24
demolition of, 207–9
evacuation orders in, 77, 78
evidence recovery at, 207, 299
the explosion, 40–42, 44–80
negative blast-pressure wave in, 53–54
previous plots against, 14–15, 19–20, 312, 350
rescue workers in, 54–56, 67, 72–74, 76–77, 78, 83–84, 102–3
scene as “pure hell,” 45, 55, 103

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Secret Service office in, 74, 208
security in, 50–52, 91, 92–94, 137
Social Security office in, 40, 47, 48, 51
structure of, 49, 53, 54
as target, 50–51, 92, 221, 312
video surveillance footage of, 36, 42, 90–94
weapons and ordnance in, 72–74, 77–78, 207–8, 92–94, 137
Social Security office in, 40, 47, 48, 51
structure of, 49, 53, 54
as target, 50–51, 92, 221, 312
video surveillance footage of, 36, 42, 90–94
weapons and ordnance in, 72–74, 77–78, 207–8

Nakanashi, Debbie, 33, 214
National Association of Document Examiners, 232
National Crime Information Center (NCIC), 120, 126
National Firearms Act, 77
National Insurance Crime Bureau, 83
National Research Council (NRC), 50
National Rifle Association (NRA), 28
Nelson, Bob, 200
neo-Nazis, 139, 180, 268
New World Order, 28, 223
New York Newsday, 56
New York Times, 218–20
Nichols, Bertha, 44–45
Nichols, Chad, 44–45
Nichols, James:
bombing plot discussed by, 339
building bombs, 115, 119, 130, 162, 163, 164
in custody, 153, 164–66
evidence gathered against, 119, 163, 165
FBI investigation of, 129–31, 132, 152–53, 162–64
implicated by McVeigh, 75, 111, 115, 119, 130, 154, 220
marriage and divorce of, 173–74
and McVeigh’s activities, 162–63
and militia movement, 115
and phone calling card, 159
Nichols, Jason, 205–7
Nichols, Josh, 120–22, 131–32, 173, 174, 210–11, 252, 349
Nichols, Joyce, 173, 205
Nichols, Kelli, 173–74
Nichols, Lana (Padilla), 87, 115, 120–23, 131–32, 149, 158, 173, 174, 205, 210,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ls, Josh, 120–22, 131–32, 173, 174, 210–11, 252, 349
Nichols, Joyce, 173, 205
Nichols, Kelli, 173–74
Nichols, Lana (Padilla), 87, 115, 120–23, 131–32, 149, 158, 173, 174, 205, 210,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

252
Nichols, Marife (Torres), 123, 132–34, 174, 233
and FBI investigation, 154, 155, 214, 227
and husband’s trial, 334
and Jason’s death, 205–7, 252
and McVeigh, 12, 212, 238
and Nicole, 122, 133, 227, 228, 237
at police station, 153
in protective custody, 227
trips to Philippines, 121, 153, 227–28, 237, 252
Nichols, Richard, 44–45, 82
Nichols, Terry:
and army surplus auctions, 115–16, 145
arrest of, 164–65, 227
and bomb-making materials, 22–23, 125, 133, 143, 148–49, 153–56, 163,
194, 236, 242–44, 246, 247, 316, 329, 331, 351–52
building bombs, 14, 17–19, 21–23, 115, 117, 130, 132, 148, 201, 245–46,
347, 349, 351
citizenship renounced by, 238
cooperation with law enforcement, 133–34, 143–46, 149–50, 153–54, 155
credit-card scams of, 238
early years of, 173
envelope to ex-wife from, 121–22
FBI gathering evidence against, 5, 119, 131–34, 143–46, 148–50, 152–56,
159, 191, 330
financial problems of, 177–78, 182, 206, 237
following McVeigh’s orders, 13–14, 117–18, 174, 238–39, 247, 250, 272–
73, 286
and gun shows, 121, 125, 149, 153, 155, 272
in Herington police station, 133–34, 143–46, 149–50, 159, 305, 330
information shared by, 345–48
and license plates, 60, 118, 125
and Marife, see Nichols, Marife
and McVeigh’s belongings, 117–18, 124–25, 149, 153–54, 155
and McVeigh’s partnership, 144–45, 163, 174–75, 202–3, 205–7, 220, 233,
238–39, 242–44, 245–48, 250, 252–53, 286, 347
McVeigh’s threats to, 12, 144, 152, 246
military service of, 173, 174–75
and militia movement, 115, 120, 339

--- PAGE BREAK ---, 202–3, 205–7, 220, 233,
238–39, 242–44, 245–48, 250, 252–53, 286, 347
McVeigh’s threats to, 12, 144, 152, 246
military service of, 173, 174–75
and militia movement, 115, 120, 339

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and Moore, 193, 236–37, 248–49, 250, 251, 252–53, 273, 329, 346–47, 349
and phone calling card, 156–60, 162, 233
preparations for bombing, 11–14, 144
in prison, 336, 345, 349
and son Josh, 120, 121, 122, 174, 349
trial of, see Nichols, Terry, trial of
trips to Philippines, 121, 252–53, 303
vehicles used by, 94, 131
weapons of, 115, 125, 132, 253, 330
Nichols, Terry, trial of, 2, 6–7
change of venue, 285
closing arguments, 334–35
and coconspirators, 335–36
and continuing investigation, 336
and death penalty, 328, 332, 334, 349
defense team, 145, 327–35
defense team obstructed in, 161, 217, 289
defense team setbacks in, 333–34
discovery phase, 289–91, 333
evidence gathered for, 239–40, 286
government’s case criticized in, 8, 155, 329–33, 335
government withholding documents for, 289–91, 332–33
jury selection, 326–28
lesser charges in, 334–35
life without parole, 336
media stories on, 335
Oklahoma state trial, 333, 348–49
opening statements, 355
prosecution team, 328–29, 331
prosecution team disagreements in, 304–5, 326
sentencing, 335, 336
separated from McVeigh trial, 305
witnesses blocked by FBI, 289
see also Tigar, Michael
Nigh, Rob:
and appeal, 337, 338, 340, 342
and death penalty, 324, 343, 353
and disclosure, 290, 291, 340
and McVeigh’s execution, 343–44

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and McVeigh trial, 319, 322, 325–26
and media stories, 219, 312
Nixon, Richard M., 208, 292
Noble, Kerry, 1, 283
Noble County courthouse:
locked down by FBI, 128–29
McVeigh in custody in, 74–75, 106–7, 126, 245
McVeigh questioned in, 127–29
Norman, Jim, 83, 12712
Nixon, Richard M., 208, 292
Noble, Kerry, 1, 283
Noble County courthouse:
locked down by FBI, 128–29
McVeigh in custody in, 74–75, 106–7, 126, 245
McVeigh questioned in, 127–29
Norman, Jim, 83, 127

Oklahoma City:
explosion in, 42, 43–80; see also Oklahoma City bombing
federal courthouse in, 44, 92
getaway car in, 11–12, 42, 58–62, 94, 111, 144
steam-generating plant in, 16
Oklahoma City bombing:
attempts to tie Middle Eastern extremists to, 303–4
bomb threats, 39
building the bomb, 17–19
children’s deaths in, 4, 46–47, 61, 64, 137
“collateral damage” in, 4, 49
evidence collectors in, 84
the explosion, 40–42, 43–80
foreknowledge of, 20–21, 33, 34, 66, 185, 226, 339
gaps in investigation of, 84, 114, 296, 316; see also FBI
iconic images of, 56
injuries and trauma in, 47–48, 65, 103, 353
lessons of, 2
media stories about, 165, 213, 218–20, 289, 309
possible coconspirators in, see conspiracy theories
possible follow-up bombing, 119
preparations for, 11–14, 23
rumors about, 16–17, 34, 53, 56–57, 66, 68, 84, 116
scene of, see Murrah Building
vehicles implicated in, 30, 34–38, 204–5; see also Mercury Marquis; Ryder
truck
and vengeance vs. truth, 353
Oklahoma City Children’s Hospital, 76

--- PAGE BREAK ---116
scene of, see Murrah Building
vehicles implicated in, 30, 34–38, 204–5; see also Mercury Marquis; Ryder
truck
and vengeance vs. truth, 353
Oklahoma City Children’s Hospital, 76

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Oklahoma City Fire Department, 16–17, 33, 48, 71–74, 78, 83–84, 101–3
Oklahoma City Police Department, 16, 44
Oklahoma City Post Office, 94
Oklahoma County Sheriff’s Office, bomb squad, 32, 43, 67, 71
Oklahoma Gas & Electric Company, 72
Oklahoma Geological Survey (OGS), 52–54
Oklahoma Highway Patrol (OHP), 33, 38, 73–74, 76, 244, 266, 271–72, 302
Oklahoma Military Academy, 43
Oklahoma National Guard, 43, 52
Oklahoma Public Library, 94
Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation (OSBI), 34
Oliphant, Jack, 65–66, 223–24
Oliphant, Margo, 224
Olympic Games (1996), 164
Operation Desert Storm, 167–69, 183, 188, 337
Operation Nacht und Nebel, 292
Operation Phoenix, 98, 99
Operation Punchout, 240
Order, The, 223–24, 260, 261, 265
Osentowski, Barry, 122–23
Ostrow, Ronald, 42
Oswald, Lee Harvey, 135
Others Unknown (Jones), 218, 219, 220, 340–41

Padilla, Lana (Nichols), 87, 115, 120–23, 131–32, 149, 158, 173, 174, 205, 210,
252
Paladin Press, 193
Panetta, Leon, 101, 102
Partin, Benton K., 53
Partridge, Dyane, 224
Pate, Jim, 96
Patriot Movement, 48, 65–66, 75, 97, 116, 180, 184, 185, 258, 279
Patriot Report, 187, 203
patriots, use of term, 3–4
Patriots’ Day, 14, 63
Pat’s Pawn & Gun Shop, 116
Patterson, Zera, 263
Paul, Jeffery, 338

--- PAGE BREAK ---6, 75, 97, 116, 180, 184, 185, 258, 279
Patriot Report, 187, 203
patriots, use of term, 3–4
Patriots’ Day, 14, 63
Pat’s Pawn & Gun Shop, 116
Patterson, Zera, 263
Paul, Jeffery, 338

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Paulsen, Dave, 151–52, 156, 233
Paulsen’s Military Supply, 151
Pawlak, Stanislaw, 303
Payne, Danny, 93
Payne, Neill, 265
Pence, Kenny, 266
Petruskie, Vince, 98–99, 100
Phillips, Joe, 95
Phillips, Vernon, 266
“Phoenix Memo,” 186
Pierce, William, 21, 23, 154, 179
Pignato, John, 50
Playboy Web site, 313
Point Break (movie), 87
Poisoner’s Handbook, The, 206
Posse Comitatus movement, 339
Potok, Mark, 280
Potts, Larry, 119, 198–200, 273, 284–85
Powell, James, 84
Powell, Verta “Pudge,” 250–51
Prillaman, Randy, 122
Pulice, Michael, 109, 110
Purcell, Gary, 44, 56–57

Rabin, Yitzhak, 303
race warriors, 170, 175, 179, 268
radical far right:
antigovernment views of, 143, 184–85, 276, 301, 323
avenging Waco and Ruby Ridge, 3, 14, 90, 116, 180–81, 184–85, 197, 217,
339
bank robberies by, 24–25, 90, 182, 261, 287, 295, 300, 301, 306, 307, 348,
350–51
bombing activities of, 223–24, 300
displeased with the bombing, 65–66
government prosecution of, 307
at gun shows, 183
inadequate investigations of, 262, 267–69, 276, 284
and media coverage, 185, 311

--- PAGE BREAK ---of, 223–24, 300
displeased with the bombing, 65–66
government prosecution of, 307
at gun shows, 183
inadequate investigations of, 262, 267–69, 276, 284
and media coverage, 185, 311

--- PAGE BREAK ---

militia movement, 27–28
sedition trial of, 260–62
and SPLC, 280
war of “leaderless resistance,” 4, 180–81, 185, 267
Raich v. Ashcroft, 354
Reagan administration, 240, 262
Regency Towers apartments, 93, 94
Regier, Todd, 169
Reno, Janet, 102, 117, 133, 162, 199, 218, 225, 326, 328
Revell, Buck, 118, 267, 284–85
Reyna, Richard, 288, 312
Reynolds, Jim, 149
Ricks, Bob:
and ATF, 272, 275, 277
and Elohim City, 141–42, 262, 269, 272, 275, 277, 281
and FBI politics, 81–82, 148, 198
and FBI procedures, 114, 201–2, 269
and McVeigh, 165, 281
and Waco, 57, 81
Riley, Mary, 156–62, 165
Riniker, Al, 114
Rivers, Shawn (alias), 243, 246
Robb, Thom, 202–3, 261
Roberts, Dave, 259, 270, 271, 274, 300, 324–25
Rockwell, James, 168, 170–71
Rogers, Don, 92–93
Rogers, Richard, 278–79
Rohrabacher, Dana, 347
Rosencrans, Jim, 135, 185, 186–88, 211, 212, 214, 222, 224, 273–74
Rosenzweig, Jeffrey, 64
Rozycki, Ray, 106, 113
Ruby, Jack, 135
Ruby Ridge incident (1992), 28, 124, 179–81, 184
and ATF, 179–80, 270, 271
and FBI, 180, 198, 199, 271, 284
government report on, 199
revenge against government for, 48, 50, 90, 180–81
rules of engagement at, 180, 198, 199, 284
Rucker, Georgia, 200

--- PAGE BREAK ---0, 271
and FBI, 180, 198, 199, 271, 284
government report on, 199
revenge against government for, 48, 50, 90, 180–81
rules of engagement at, 180, 198, 199, 284
Rucker, Georgia, 200

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Russell, David, 149, 208–9
Rutter, Scott, 169
Ryan, Pat, 315–16, 317
Ryder truck:
access to Murrah Building, 49–50
building the bomb in, 17–19, 22
detonation in, 61
at Dreamland Motel, 108–10, 111, 112, 232, 308, 339, 351
and evidence in trial, 317–18, 319–20
at Geary Lake, 13–14, 17–19, 183, 200–202, 332
loading bomb materials onto, 11, 13, 23
more than one, 112, 201–2, 228, 232, 282, 308, 309, 351
rear axle of, 45, 82
rental of, 83, 103–6, 107, 109, 112, 138–39, 157, 201, 210, 228, 231–32,
279, 280, 322, 350, 351
videotape footage of, 91, 93, 94
VIN number of, 82–83
witnesses’ statements about, 30, 34–38, 40–42, 88, 108–10, 111, 112, 147–
48, 200–202

Sadler, Dennis, 147
Salyers, Priscilla, 48
Sanders, Bob, 77, 226, 259, 276
Santa Cruz v. Ashcroft, 354
Sargent, James, 200–201
Scarpa, Gregory Jr., 345–47
Schiavo, Terri, 347
Schickedanz, Dave, 67–68
Schlender, Rick, 243
Schwartz, Michael, 207
Seal, Barry, 240
Secret Service:
informants of, 86
and interagency rivalry, 210–11
investigation by, 42
office in Murrah Building, 74, 208
and phone calling card, 156, 158–59, 160, 161–62
timeline of, 91–92

--- PAGE BREAK ---rvice:
informants of, 86
and interagency rivalry, 210–11
investigation by, 42
office in Murrah Building, 74, 208
and phone calling card, 156, 158–59, 160, 161–62
timeline of, 91–92

--- PAGE BREAK ---

September 11 attacks, 2, 50, 186
Serrano, Rick, 42
Seymour, Cheri, 20
Shannon, Mike, 72, 78
Shapiro, Howard, 199
Shaw, George Bernard, 323
Shearer, Al, 197
Sherrow, Rick, 53, 96, 292
Simpson, O. J., 219
Sisente, Bob, 265
Slovacek, Shane, 73
Slover, Pete, 311–12
Smith, I. C., 119, 215, 216, 229
Smith, John R., 322
Smith, Stephen, 131, 133, 149, 330
Smurfit plastics, 331
Snell, Mary, 20–21
Snell, Richard Wayne, 14–15, 19–21, 25, 260
execution of, 24, 64–65, 350
influence of, 58, 117, 350
Snider, David, 35–36, 38
Snow, Clyde, 299
Soldier of Fortune, 53, 96, 292
Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC), 280–81, 291, 327
Spence, Gerry, 208
Spirit of Justice, 354
Spotlight, The, 116, 156, 160
Spotlight company phone card, 157–58, 160
Stafford, Ken, 271
Stedeford, Scott, 24–25, 87, 88–90, 287, 295
Stephens, Rick, 34
Stephenson, Don, 158, 160
Stern, Ken, 27, 28
Stockman, Steve, 39
Stomber, Daniel, 130
Stoneman, Bill, 239, 249
Strassmeir, Andreas, 96–100, 140–43
and antigovernment activities, 100, 141, 190, 257, 276, 321
bombing criticized by, 65

--- PAGE BREAK ---n, Steve, 39
Stomber, Daniel, 130
Stoneman, Bill, 239, 249
Strassmeir, Andreas, 96–100, 140–43
and antigovernment activities, 100, 141, 190, 257, 276, 321
bombing criticized by, 65

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and CIA, 98–99, 265
death threats to, 296–97
diplomatic immunity claimed by, 266
and Elohim City, 25–27, 64, 96–97, 100, 141–43, 189–90, 257, 263–66,
271–72, 279–80, 287, 295
in Europe, 294, 296–98
as fugitive from U.S., 289, 291, 292–94
and German army, 97–98, 100
and gun shows, 96, 263, 287
and Howe, 140–42, 190, 257–58, 259, 263, 269, 276, 321
investigations of, 65, 97, 142, 259, 271–72, 274, 276, 288–89, 297, 298, 350
Israel as interest of, 97, 264
and McVeigh, 96, 188–89, 203, 279, 281, 282, 283, 288–89, 291, 304
at Mexican border, 289, 291, 292–94
official history rewritten, 297–98
visas of, 98, 190, 264, 271, 272, 289, 293, 297–98
Strassmeir, Günter, 98
Strickler, Virgil, 130
Sullivan, Andy, 76–77, 78–80
Sumter, Melvin, 83
Supreme Court, U.S., 333

Tate, David, 265
Taylor, Steven, 348
Teater, Bill, 214
Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals, 326
Terre Haute, Indiana, prison, 337
Thacker, Barry, 134
Thomas, Mark, 24–25, 87, 89–90, 203, 297, 307, 348
Thomas, Nathan, 24, 25, 203
Thomeczek, Gene, 227
Thrasher, Don, 276
Tigar, Michael:
and Jones, 286, 341
and McVeigh execution, 341–42
and McVeigh trial, 289–90
and Nichols trial, 7, 217, 227, 285–86, 327–28, 329–35, 348
on vengeance vs. truth, 353

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tinker Air Force Base, Oklahoma, 136
Tovex sausages, 21, 22, 23
Trilateral Commission, 223
Tubbs, Dave, 155
Tuggle, David, 76, 78–79
Tulsa Police Department, 140
Turner Diaries, The (Pierce), 21, 23, 60, 124, 147, 154, 170, 175, 179, 194, 242,
321
Tuttle, Terry (alias), 130
Tuttle, Tim (alias), 191, 197, 204, 225

Udell, Theodore, 331
Unabomber, 324, 336
Union Bank of North Carolina, 191
University of Texas, 332
Untouchables, The (movie), 345, 349
U.S. Customs Bureau, 77
U.S. Marshals Service, 56197, 204, 225

Udell, Theodore, 331
Unabomber, 324, 336
Union Bank of North Carolina, 191
University of Texas, 332
Untouchables, The (movie), 345, 349
U.S. Customs Bureau, 77
U.S. Marshals Service, 56

Van Bullard, Joe, 101
Viefhaus, James, 305–6, 324
Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act (1994), 256

Waco, Texas:
aftermath of, 263, 268, 270, 275, 277, 283, 288
anniversary of siege, 14, 21, 57–58, 63, 95, 144
and ATF, 68, 92, 124, 184–85, 217, 270, 271
Branch Davidians at, 3, 57–58, 184–85, 190–91, 194
congressional hearings on, 81
and FBI, 57–58, 61, 81, 92, 124, 184–85, 190–91, 199, 268, 271
lawsuits against government for, 95
McVeigh’s anger about, 124, 144, 147, 191, 194, 217, 273
overreaching by feds in, 28
revenge against government for, 3, 14, 29, 48, 50, 61, 90, 92, 116, 130, 184–
85, 197, 217, 339
Waco: The Big Lie (video), 194
Wahl, Rick, 182–83, 200, 201, 332–33

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Wallington, James, 260, 262
Walsh, Bob, 187
Ward, Pete, 26, 140, 141, 189, 263, 266, 301–2, 350
Ward, Priscilla, 26
Ward, Sonny, 26, 301–2
Ward, Tony, 26, 140, 141, 189, 301–2, 350
Warrior Dreams (Gibson), 4
Watergate, effects of, 262, 292
Weathers, Harvey, 16–17
Weaver, Randy, 179–80, 208, 284
Weaver, Sammy, 180
Weaver, Vicki, 179, 180, 198
West Coast Telephone, 157, 158, 160
Whitehurst, Fred, 320
White Power movement, 24, 28–29
white supremacists, 25, 28–29, 66, 85–88, 175, 179–80, 182, 223–24, 260–62,
299–300
Wickstrom, James, 177
Wilburn family, 31, 46, 336
Wilkerson, Danny, 36
Wilkinson, Beth, 298, 330, 333–34
Williams, Dave, 84, 316
Williams, Kenneth, 186
Williams, Pharis, 22
Willoughby, Lynda, 217
Winfrey, Oprah, 139
Witt, Gary, 231
Witt, James Lee, 101–3
Wittman, Tommy, 269–70, 271
Woods, Ed, 300
Woods, Ron, 290, 291, 327, 329, 330, 332, 348
Woods, Rose, 147
World Trade Center, 1993 attack on, 56, 57, 84, 324
Wright, Stuart, 312, 313

Yinon, Jehuda, 303
Yount, Randy, 33, 73
Yousef, Ramzi, 56, 303, 304, 324, 336

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Zimms, Floyd, 127, 147
World Trade Center, 1993 attack on, 56, 57, 84, 324
Wright, Stuart, 312, 313

Yinon, Jehuda, 303
Yount, Randy, 33, 73
Yousef, Ramzi, 56, 303, 304, 324, 336

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Zimms, Floyd, 127

--- PAGE BREAK ---

About the Authors
Andrew Gumbel has worked for more than twenty years as a foreign
correspondent for British newspapers the Guardian and the Independent,
including assignments in the Balkans, Italy, the Middle East, and, since 1998, the
United States. He has won awards for investigative reporting and political
commentary, and written widely for U.S. publications including the Los Angeles
Times and The Atlantic.
His book Steal This Vote: Dirty Elections and the Rotten History of
Democracy in America was published to great acclaim in 2005. He was born in
England and educated at Oxford University.

Roger G. Charles is a retired lieutenant colonel of the U.S. Marine Corps and
an award-winning investigative journalist who has worked with a wide variety of
media outlets, including Newsweek, Vanity Fair, ABC (Nightline, Primetime
Live), CBS’s 60 Minutes II, and the BBC. In 1996 and 1997 he was a consultant
on the Oklahoma City bombing for ABC’s 20/20. He also worked as an
investigator for Stephen Jones and the legal team defending Timothy McVeigh in
his federal trial. Charles was born in Texas, raised in West Virginia, and
graduated from the U.S. Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland, in 1967.

Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins authors.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ALSO BY ANDREW GUMBEL
Steal This Vote: Dirty Elections and the Rotten History of Democracy in America
London
Berlin

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Credits
Cover design by James Iacobelli
Cover photograph © by AP Photo/The Daily Oklahoman, Jim Argo, File

--- PAGE BREAK ---Rotten History of Democracy in America
London
Berlin

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Credits
Cover design by James Iacobelli
Cover photograph © by AP Photo/The Daily Oklahoman, Jim Argo, File

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Copyright
OKLAHOMA CITY. Copyright © 2012 by Andrew Gumbel and Roger G. Charles. All
rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive,
nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No
part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled,
reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and
retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical,
now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of
HarperCollins e-books.
FIRST EDITION
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gumbel, Andrew.
Oklahoma City / Andrew Gumbel and Roger G. Charles.—1st ed.
p. cm.
ISBN 978-0-06-198644-4
1. Oklahoma City Federal Building Bombing, Oklahoma City, Okla., 1995. 2.
Bombings—Oklahoma—Oklahoma City. 3. Bombing Investigation—Oklahoma
—Oklahoma City. I. Charles, Roger G. II. Title.
HV6432.6.G86   2012
363.32509766'38—dc23
2011044673
EPub Edition © MAY 2012 ISBN: 9780062100924
12 13 14 15 16 OV/RRD 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---oma City. I. Charles, Roger G. II. Title.
HV6432.6.G86   2012
363.32509766'38—dc23
2011044673
EPub Edition © MAY 2012 ISBN: 9780062100924
12 13 14 15 16 OV/RRD 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street
Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia
http://www.harpercollins.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Canada
2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor
Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada
http://www.harpercollins.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollins Publishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollins.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollins.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Published online with the irrevocable permission of the author to republish with attribution on a non-profit basis.
Contents
[Editor: Chapter 10 included below was not included in the printed edition, which renumbered the remaining chapters accordingly. The chapters
below the red bar are still being edited, so content may not match the printed edition, and the endnote numbers will mostly not match the correct
endnotes. They are being put up in advance of completion, but should not be quoted until editorial revisions are complete.]
The Oklahoma City Bombing and the Politics of Terror

--- PAGE BREAK ---ct
endnotes. They are being put up in advance of completion, but should not be quoted until editorial revisions are complete.]
The Oklahoma City Bombing and the Politics of Terror

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Acknowledgements
Forward
Introduction
1. The Mannilicher-Carcanno Bomb
========================
2. The Face of Terror
3. Non-Resident Alien
4. Millar's Rent-A-Nazi
5. Teflon Terrorists
6. No Stone Unturned
7. The Connection
8. Lockerbie — a Parallel
9. The Sting
10. The Octopus
11. The Covert Cowboys
12. The Motive
13. The Politics of Terror
14. A Strategy of Tension
15. Epilogue: Let Them Eat O.J.
Appendix
Endnotes
Index
This book is dedicated to Ace Hayes, my friend and primary mentor, who passed away as this book went to press. As a speaker, and
through his small newspaper, the Portland Free Press, Ace hammered away at the establishment with a loquacious cynicism and wit. Ace
fought the battle with both pen and sword, dodging the law on the front lines of the trenches. He was both inspirational and instrumental in
bringing this book to light. His friendship and counsel will be sorely missed.
Note: The names of certain individuals have been changed and noted in the text. Libel law does not make generous allowances for the use
of real names in the case of a person who has not been officially indicted, or who has not gone public (i.e., been previously interviewed in
print or on TV), or who is not a public figure.

--- PAGE BREAK ---"You shall know the truth and the truth shall make you mad."
— Aldus Huxley
Acknowledgements
The author would like to gratefully acknowledge the help and assistance of the following people, without whose help this story could not have
been told: Melissa Klinzing and Brad Edwards, KFOR-TV, Nolan Clay, Daily Oklahoman, Rodney Bowers, Arkansas Democrat Gazette,
Larry Myers and Rich Azar at Media Bypass, Juval Aviv of Interfor, Don Browning, Jon Rappaport, author of Oklahoma bombing: The
Supressed Truth, Michele Moore, author of Oklahoma City: Day One, former DEA agent Mike Levine, Jesse Clear, Mark Sanford, Paul
Friend, Idaho News Observer, video producer Chuck Allen, Oklahoma City: What Really Happened?, JD Cash and Jeff Holladay of The
McCurtain County Gazette, Britt Anderson and the writers at Mother Jones, The Village Voice, Frances McMorris, The Wall Street Journal,
Mike Whitely, Mike Vanderboegh, Mike Kemp, Ted Gundersen, Steve Wilmsen and Mark Eddy of the Denver Post, Mark Schafer, Arizona
Republic, Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, London Sunday Telegraph, Clayton Douglas, The Free American, Charlie Hatfield, Ellis County Press,
Brian Redman, Conspiracy Nation, Ben Partin, The folks at the BBC, Sarah McClendon, Bob Hall, Conspiracy Nation, Ken Armstrong, Rita
Cosby, Fox News, John Mattes, Julian Share, CBC, Louis Champon, Roger Bunn, Anthony J.

Hilder, Rick Sherrow, Audrey Cummings,
Moshe Tal, Stu Webb, Glenn Wilburn, Pat Briley, Monte Cooley, Idaho Observer, The Free American, Hoppy Heidelberg, Eric Lighter, Bill
Key, Martin Keating, Linda Thompson, Ramona McDonald, Robert Bickel, Tony Scarlatti, Dr."You shall know the truth and the truth shall make you mad."
— Aldus Huxley
Acknowledgements
The author would like to gratefully acknowledge the help and assistance of the following people, without whose help this story could not have
been told: Melissa Klinzing and Brad Edwards, KFOR-TV, Nolan Clay, Daily Oklahoman, Rodney Bowers, Arkansas Democrat Gazette,
Larry Myers and Rich Azar at Media Bypass, Juval Aviv of Interfor, Don Browning, Jon Rappaport, author of Oklahoma bombing: The
Supressed Truth, Michele Moore, author of Oklahoma City: Day One, former DEA agent Mike Levine, Jesse Clear, Mark Sanford, Paul
Friend, Idaho News Observer, video producer Chuck Allen, Oklahoma City: What Really Happened?, JD Cash and Jeff Holladay of The
McCurtain County Gazette, Britt Anderson and the writers at Mother Jones, The Village Voice, Frances McMorris, The Wall Street Journal,
Mike Whitely, Mike Vanderboegh, Mike Kemp, Ted Gundersen, Steve Wilmsen and Mark Eddy of the Denver Post, Mark Schafer, Arizona
Republic, Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, London Sunday Telegraph, Clayton Douglas, The Free American, Charlie Hatfield, Ellis County Press,
Brian Redman, Conspiracy Nation, Ben Partin, The folks at the BBC, Sarah McClendon, Bob Hall, Conspiracy Nation, Ken Armstrong, Rita
Cosby, Fox News, John Mattes, Julian Share, CBC, Louis Champon, Roger Bunn, Anthony J.

Hilder, Rick Sherrow, Audrey Cummings,
Moshe Tal, Stu Webb, Glenn Wilburn, Pat Briley, Monte Cooley, Idaho Observer, The Free American, Hoppy Heidelberg, Eric Lighter, Bill
Key, Martin Keating, Linda Thompson, Ramona McDonald, Robert Bickel, Tony Scarlatti, Dr.

Rick Nelson, Robert Jerlow, Robert Peterson,
Jason at CBS archives, David Parker, Billy at the Daily Oklahoman library, and the librarians at the Washington Post, New York Times,
Dallas Morning News, Los Angeles Times, Miami Herald, Toronto Star, Covert Action Quarterly, and others, Joe Taylor at Newstrack in
Tulsa, Oklahoma, Ann Bradley and Christie, and others in Stephen Jones' office, D'Ferdinand Carone, the clerks in the Oklahoma county
and federal courts, and scores of others who have selflessly provide information from their own research and investigations into this and
other scandals.Hilder, Rick Sherrow, Audrey Cummings,
Moshe Tal, Stu Webb, Glenn Wilburn, Pat Briley, Monte Cooley, Idaho Observer, The Free American, Hoppy Heidelberg, Eric Lighter, Bill
Key, Martin Keating, Linda Thompson, Ramona McDonald, Robert Bickel, Tony Scarlatti, Dr.

Rick Nelson, Robert Jerlow, Robert Peterson,
Jason at CBS archives, David Parker, Billy at the Daily Oklahoman library, and the librarians at the Washington Post, New York Times,
Dallas Morning News, Los Angeles Times, Miami Herald, Toronto Star, Covert Action Quarterly, and others, Joe Taylor at Newstrack in
Tulsa, Oklahoma, Ann Bradley and Christie, and others in Stephen Jones' office, D'Ferdinand Carone, the clerks in the Oklahoma county
and federal courts, and scores of others who have selflessly provide information from their own research and investigations into this and
other scandals.

My publisher, Adam Parfrey, who instinctively understood the significance of this crime, and, took a chance on me when none of big
publishers would.

State Representative Charles Key, who became a good friend.

A man whose humor, faith, and courage to stand up and publicly question the
governments' official line, putting his life and his career on the line, became an anchor for us all.

Jayna Davis of KFOR, the original lead investigator on the Middle Eastern angle, eventhough the New York Times Broadcasting Company
shut down her investigation and took away her helicopter and cell phone.

David Hall of KPOC-TV, who gave me most of the leads I wouldn't have gotten anywhere else.

Last I heard, the IRS was screwing with Hall
because of his courageous work on the Waco case.

Craig Roberts, whose patience and generosity proved invaluable.

Craig was a staunch ally whose tenacity and good humor proved an
inspiration when I became frustrated (which was pretty often).

Craig's cop friend Randy, who sneaked into the NCIC now and then when we needed it.

Leslie Jorgensen, (Newsweek and U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Craig's cop friend Randy, who sneaked into the NCIC now and then when we needed it. Leslie Jorgensen, (Newsweek and U.S. News & World Report ) a great gal with a marvelous sense of humor, who kept me up to date on the
latest gossip and straightened me out about certain lawyers. Gene Wheaton, who took me for a circuitous ride through the desert to talk to me in a scene reminiscent of Mr. "X" in the movie JFK, then
regaled me mostly with personal stories about his interesting life. Bill McCoy (may he rest in peace), who provided humorous translations for Wheaton's conspiracy theory theories, and was instrumental in
keeping "scribblers" like me on the path. Ace Hayes (may he rest in peace), publisher of the Portland Free Press, and my main mentor, who helped me to understand how the
system really works, or at least the system according to Ace. Sherman Skolnick, my other main mentor, who never let me forget how many years he's been in the business, and reminded me that I have
a long way to go,
Will Northrop, "Matzo-Ball Charlie," who claimed to work for every Israeli intelligence agency except the Mossad, then took me for $1600 to
sip Margaritas in Florida.

--- PAGE BREAK ---way to go,
Will Northrop, "Matzo-Ball Charlie," who claimed to work for every Israeli intelligence agency except the Mossad, then took me for $1600 to
sip Margaritas in Florida.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mike Johnston, who accused me of stealing his book, Abu-Nidal: A Gun For Hire, when he knows full well that it was stolen by Chinese
cleaning ladies and used as Won Ton wrappers.
James "Jimmy" Rothstein, whose openness, patience, and selflessness proved to be a guiding light in the murky and confusing world of
spooks and criminals.
Mien Furher, Al Martin, Iran-Contra "insider extraodinaire," whose still waiting for his $100,000 retainer fee.
Bill Jasper of the John Birch Society, who is convinced it really is all a Communist plot.
George Wallace who introduced me to Jasper and kept the Commie hunters off my back.
Roger Cravens, Dave Rydel, Claire Wolfe, Jon Roland, and other Patriots who posted important and much-needed information on the state
of our nation on the Patriots' Information Mailing List (PIML); and Ian Goddard, Bob Hall, and others who did the same on the OKBOMB
mailing list.
Laurie Mylroie of the Foreign Policy Institute, for her in-depth analysis of the Iraqis and the World Trade Center bombing.
Terry Cook, for his videos and books, and his excellent and comprehensive research on the staggering new technology that is taking control
over our lives.
Jim Levine, and Terry and Kelly, who handled our account and especially Jim's mother, who made me Chicken soup when I was sick.
And finally, Mr. "M," without who's generous financial support, none of this would have been possible.
And I can't leave out all those people who, although aware of the efforts of the authors and others in attempting to bring this information to
the public, were either indifferent, or actually obstructed these efforts. The first of these honors goes to the so-called "Justice" Department
and the FBI. And to the state Attorney General, Drew Edmondson, and the local District Attorney in Oklahoma City, Bob Macy, who has an
annoying tendency to talk out of both sides of his mouth. Oh, Bob, what is that stench?!
And the supervisors of the business office of Southwestern Bell and specifically Mr. Edwards and Mr. Dave Lopez, President of SWB, whose
cold, callous, indifference and lack of empathy when I became behind on my phone bill resulted in the termination of my phone service for
three weeks, my poor old mother thinking I was dead, and the interruption of our investigation, which they were fully aware of.
And the kind and generous folks of M.C.I. Communications, who not only refused to sponsor our investigation, they never even sent a reply
to my inquiry. May they and the principals of SWB get what they deserve.
And ultimately, all my friends who have kept me [partially] sane throughout the years, even though conspiracies have a way of making one
come unglued: Ron Ulfohn, Joe Williams, John Flores, David Wills, Lorenzo, Jon and Lisa, and all those helpful souls I've undoubtedly
missed, including my parents (although I'm not sure they've helped me keep sane).n Ulfohn, Joe Williams, John Flores, David Wills, Lorenzo, Jon and Lisa, and all those helpful souls I've undoubtedly
missed, including my parents (although I'm not sure they've helped me keep sane).

--- PAGE BREAK ---Foreward
On April 19, 1995 when I heard the news (and literally heard the explosion) of the Murrah building, I was dumbfounded.

As the realization
sunk in that so many people and children were killed, I, along with millions of others watching the news coverage, felt that indescribable,
overwhelming sensation in the pit of my stomach.

Yet as the "story" unfolded, my spirits were lifted as I saw example after example of sheer human compassion and an outpouring of
unblemished, unconditional love flow forth in a far greater degree than I had ever seen in any venue of life, including and especially in
political circles.

However, during the intense media coverage that followed, inconsistencies began emerging.

Stories kept changing and although I couldn't
see the emerging political angle, I could sense it.

Those who dared oppose the revisionist news accounts were ostracized, mocked,
discredited, dark-cornered, etc.

I know, I was one who dared to be politically incorrect.

At some point it became painfully apparent that there was more wrong than right with the federal investigation.

That is when I had a very
tough decision to make.

Should I sit and do nothing and remain in my comfort zone simply "playing the part" of the caring politician for the
photo ops?

Or should I really do the right thing even if it meant giving the phrase "politically incorrect" a whole new dimension?

It didn't take long after discussing it with my wife to determine that I had to do the right thing — no matter what the consequences were to be.

Having come to that conclusion, I decided to go forward to search out the truth and tell it to a waiting world.

Journalists such as David
Hoffman, concerned citizens, and a few ex-law enforcement officers, have made many personal sacrifices to bring this truth to the American
people.

In response, the major media launched unheard of attacks against our desire to conduct constitutionally sound and proper investigations.Journalists such as David
Hoffman, concerned citizens, and a few ex-law enforcement officers, have made many personal sacrifices to bring this truth to the American
people.

In response, the major media launched unheard of attacks against our desire to conduct constitutionally sound and proper investigations.

The Daily Oklahoman and the Tulsa World have published nine separate editorials viciously attacking me, Glenn Wilburn and all those who
have stood up and demanded all of the truth about this terrible crime.

An editorial from the Daily Oklahoman entitled, "Drop It, Mr.

Key" even had the audacity to say:
As we argued when Key first set out on this course, the Legislature and its staff had no business investigating the bombing.

It
was, and is, poorly equipped to do so.

The same can be said of a panel of local citizens.

People in powerful positions have repeatedly attacked those of us who have scrutinized the federal investigation.

Oklahoma Attorney
General Drew Edmondson issued a personal attack saying that I was proposing a "wasteful witch hunt" and was pushing "the worst kind of
paranoid conspiracy pandering."
Oklahoma Governor Frank Keating, a former FBI agent himself, went so far as to say that "raising questions would not bring one whit of
intelligence to the process." He later escalated his attacks saying those of us who were raising serious questions were "howling at the moon"
and "off the reservation."
All of these people are literally robbing the victims family members and survivors — and all of us — the opportunity and right to know the
truth.

All of us have had to fight the formidable disinformation and smear campaign waged by "faceless forces" that appear to have pockets of
unending depth and the mass media at their beck and call.

Glenn Wilburn, who lost two grandchildren in the tragedy, and I filed a petition in November, 1995, to have a local county grand jury
impaneled to investigate the bombing.--- PAGE BREAK ---

All of us have had to fight the formidable disinformation and smear campaign waged by "faceless forces" that appear to have pockets of
unending depth and the mass media at their beck and call. Glenn Wilburn, who lost two grandchildren in the tragedy, and I filed a petition in November, 1995, to have a local county grand jury
impaneled to investigate the bombing. This independent grand jury would be fully autonomous of the federal investigation, and would double
in the capacity of a watchdog of the federal investigation. Here in Oklahoma, we are very fortunate to be one of only two states that have a constitutional guarantee that the people of a county can
cause a grand jury to be impaneled whenever they feel there is a need simply by circulating a petition. It is and always has been a common
occurrence in our state. Nevertheless, the Presiding State District Judge, Dan Owens, tried to stop us from petitioning to impanel the grand jury, and we were forced
to appeal his actions to a higher court. That is where the latest and some of the most intense criticism has come from recently. One year
after our appeal, we finally got a written opinion from the Court of Appeals in the Tulsa district. On December 24, 1996 the court ruled not

--- PAGE BREAK ---only in our favor, but they did so unanimously.

Not only was it unanimous, but the court issued the decision "For Publication." That means that it was such a clear-cut case in regard to the
state constitution, statutes, and previous case law, that it constituted a precedent-setting case to be used in lawbooks, most likely for many
years to come.

Yet, why is there such extreme opposition to keep this independent grand jury from being allowed to assemble?

As you will learn by reading
this book, that is because some in our federal law enforcement agencies (i.e.

ATF and FBI) had prior knowledge that certain individuals were
planning to bomb the Murrah Federal Building!

Prior knowledge on the part of some individuals in the Federal Government may also be why the federal prosecutors barred every single
witness to John Doe(s) from the Federal Grand Jury.

Of the more than 20 witnesses to one or more John Doe(s), none — not even one —
were allowed to tell the Grand Jury what they saw.

Additionally, when the prosecution's list of witnesses was unsealed, we found that the one witness who will be allowed to testify in the trial to
McVeigh being in the company of a John Doe can't describe in any way who he saw.

Indeed, the best witnesses who can positively place
McVeigh in downtown Oklahoma City that morning saw him with one or more individuals and are able to describe to some degree what that
person or persons looked like.

Those witnesses were not even allowed to testify at McVeigh's trial.

As bizarre as that sounds, Federal Prosecutors were not allowing any of those witnesses to be seen or heard by the Federal Grand Jury.

This gives "blind justice" a whole new meaning.

To make this even more clear, the Federal Grand Jury wanted to interview both the eyewitnesses and the sketch artist who drew the John
Doe composites but they were flatly refused by the federal "authorities." Clearly they were blatantly deprived of their basic constitutional
rights as grand jurors.This gives "blind justice" a whole new meaning.

To make this even more clear, the Federal Grand Jury wanted to interview both the eyewitnesses and the sketch artist who drew the John
Doe composites but they were flatly refused by the federal "authorities." Clearly they were blatantly deprived of their basic constitutional
rights as grand jurors.

Why?

Just what is it that they are trying to accomplish?

Or, perhaps more pointedly, just who are they trying to protect?

And what are they trying to
hide?

Let's not forget, elected officials are supposed to be the servants of the people and not the other way around.

Just what's going on?

And how
are they getting away with it?

Our efforts to reinvestigate the case before a county grand jury are important for numerous reasons.

One of the reasons that concerns me
most is that I fear that the record of McVeigh's trial will comprise the "official story" of what happened.

If the evidence of prior knowledge and
other perpetrators is not presented in this case, I fear that the government will be successful in shaping the official story to permanently
exclude that evidence.

Another reason that I feel that the OKC bombing case is important and directly effects you is that the government has reached a new level of
operating out of the bounds of the law and is becoming more and more arrogant.

You will read about some of those cases in the second part
of this book.

I don't know about you, but that kind of arrogance sickens me and leaves me with a eerie feeling.

The government must not be allowed to
get away with yet another botched job!

The Government must be held accountable.

In spite of the seemingly impenetrable and insurmountable forces acting against us, on February 18, 1997 the Oklahoma State Supreme
Court miraculously ruled in favor of allowing the independent county grand jury and against the Federal Government's attempt to quash the
rights of the people.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Government must be held accountable. In spite of the seemingly impenetrable and insurmountable forces acting against us, on February 18, 1997 the Oklahoma State Supreme
Court miraculously ruled in favor of allowing the independent county grand jury and against the Federal Government's attempt to quash the
rights of the people. That grand jury is investigating the case as this book goes to press. Based on two years of intense research and investigation, this book gives the public an insight into the evidence which the grand jury will
confront. Hopefully now, the forgotten families, survivors, and victims who died from the blast will have their right to a full, open and truthful
investigation of the events of April 19. Sincerely,
Rep. Charles Key
State Capitol Bldg., Rm 508
Oklahoma City, OK 73105
(405) 521-2711
Publisher's note: The preceding Foreward was adapted for publication from an appeal letter sent by Representative Key to "concerned
citizens" on 12 March 1997. Its publication in this book does not necessarily imply Rep. Key's endorsement of the author's conclusions. Both
Rep. Key and David Hoffman spent long hours together investigating leads and sharing information regarding the Oklahoma City bombing. Author's note: While Representative Key and the people of Oklahoma have succeeded in impaneling their grand jury, they are without the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

necessary funds to proceed with the investigation. Any contributions towards this effort may be sent to:
Oklahoma County Grand Jury &
Bombing Investigation Fund
Post Office Box 75669
Oklahoma City, OK 73147

--- PAGE BREAK ---"All governments are run by liars and nothing they say should be believed."
— I.F.

Stone
Introduction
The images are forever etched in our minds.

Scorched, burning cars, pouring black smoke and charred, twisted metal.

Piles of rubble,
screaming sirens and battered, bloody bodies.

And the babies.

Frail, lifeless figures — tiny, silent witnesses of death and destruction.

In the early morning hours of April 19th, the Oklahoma City federal building had, in one long, horrible moment… exploded with the force of a
volcano, spewing forth the contents of its human carnage onto the streets below.

What had a few moments ago been the Alfred P.

Murrah
building was now a huge, gaping tomb.

The entire façade of the nine-story superstructure had been ripped away, exposing its innards —
dangling chunks of concrete, tangled strands of cables and bent pieces of rebar — into the choking, blackened sky.

Now it stood smoking
and eerily silent, except for the muffled cries of its few remaining inhabitants and the wailing of the sirens off in the distance.

One man, an ex-Marine, likened it to carnage he had witnessed in war-torn Lebanon.

Another veteran, Thu Nguyen, who had his five-year-
old son Christopher in the day care center, said, "I've seen war….

I've seen soldiers I fought with in Vietnam cut this way, cut in half, heads
cut off.

That was war.

These are children.

This is not a war.

This is a crime."
The scene was surreal — almost too horrific to bear.

There were bodies — and pieces of bodies — strewn about, along with childrens' toys
and workers' personal effects — tragic reminders of what had moments before been the meaningful mementos of someone's life.

One
passerby had been wrapped around a telephone pole, her head blown off.

Workers who had been sitting at their desks were still sitting
there… lifeless, morbid, like eerie figures out of a wax museum of horrors.One
passerby had been wrapped around a telephone pole, her head blown off.

Workers who had been sitting at their desks were still sitting
there… lifeless, morbid, like eerie figures out of a wax museum of horrors.

Police detective Jay Einhorn remembers one scene: "There was a guy — a black guy — on the second floor, just sitting there.

I knew he
was dead.

He's looking at me, and I'm looking at him… if you don't think that's fucking scary.

We just said, man we gotta go up there and
cover that guy up."[1]
Daina Bradley, who was trapped under a slab of fallen concrete, was still conscious.

With no way to remove her without upsetting the huge
piece of concrete, doctors were forced to amputate her leg.

As Bradley lay screaming in a pool of water, surgeons, using scalpels and saws,
and without anesthesia, amputated her leg below the knee.

The federal office building, home to over 550 workers, had also housed a day care center.

Nearby, a makeshift morgue had been set up in
what had once been the childrens' playground.

Refrigeration trucks lined up to haul away the dead bodies.

"Sheriff Clint Boehler, from
nearby Canadian County, recalls, "We went flying down there at about 110 miles an hour… you never saw so many services running over
each other." As hundreds of volunteers poured in from all over the country, fireman, police and medical personnel began laying out the
victims for identification.

Shirley Moser, a nurse, began tagging dead children.

"Their faces had been blown off, "said Moser.

"They found a
child without a head."
Those who were lucky enough to escape the carnage were wandering about, dazed and confused.

One man, his face bloodied, wandered
down the street, saying he was headed home, except that he couldn't remember his name or where his home was.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"They found a
child without a head."
Those who were lucky enough to escape the carnage were wandering about, dazed and confused. One man, his face bloodied, wandered
down the street, saying he was headed home, except that he couldn't remember his name or where his home was. Another man who was
entering the building had his arm blown off, but was in such a state of shock that he didn't notice it as he went about trying to help others.[2]
People who lived or worked nearby had been blown out of their chairs. Trent Smith, 240 pounds, was tossed seven feet into the air and
through the window of his hotel room. Several blocks away, a bus filled with people was nearly blown on its side. The force of the blast
extended for nearly 30 blocks, blowing out windows and heavily damaging a dozen buildings, and causing damage to almost 400 more.[3]
When it was all over, more than 169 people, including 19 children, lay dead, and more than 500 were injured. The damage was estimated in
the hundreds of millions. Federal authorities were calling the bombing the single largest terrorist attack in the history of the United States. Yet it was difficult to discern
whether the bombing was some ominous precursor to some as yet undeclared war, or the result of some criminal plot gone horribly awry. Just who had caused it wasn't clear. As rescue workers continued the difficult task of searching for bodies, and hospital workers began attending to victims, law enforcement
agents began searching for clues. What was clear as law enforcement personnel descended upon the scene, was that the blast had left a 30
foot wide, 8 feet deep crater in front of the building. Fortunately, a ATF agent who had recently attended a course on the identification of car

--- PAGE BREAK ---and truck-bombs just happened to be in the federal courthouse.

The agent was able to identify the cause of the blast immediately.

He
telephoned his superiors in Dallas and told them that an ammonium nitrate truck-bomb had just blown up the Murrah Building.

Sixty miles away, near Perry Oklahoma, Highway Patrolman Charles Hanger was making his usual rounds.

Around 10:30 a.m.

Officer
Hanger noticed a battered 1977 yellow Mercury, without a license plate, speeding along at 81 miles an hour.

Pulling the vehicle over, Hanger
cited the driver, 26-year-old Timothy James McVeigh, for driving without a license plate.

As he was about to let McVeigh go, Hanger noticed
a distinct bulge under McVeigh's windbreaker.

When he asked McVeigh what he had under his jacket, McVeigh casually informed the cop
that he had a gun — a 9mm Glock semi-automatic pistol.

Hanger subsequently arrested McVeigh for carrying a concealed weapon, driving
without a tags, and driving without insurance.[4]
Back in Oklahoma City, investigators were busily searching the wreckage for clues that could lead them to the perpetrators.

It didn't take
long for investigators to find what they were looking for — a piece of axle and a license plate — believed to have been part of the truck used
in the bombing.

After FBI agents ran the VIN (vehicle identification number) and the plate through their Rapid Start computer system, they
discovered the vehicle belonged to a Ryder rental agency in Florida.

A check with the agency revealed that the truck, a 1993 Ford, was
rented out of Elliott's Body Shop in Junction City, Kansas.

Elliott's said that they had rented the 20-foot truck to a Bob Kling on April 17th,
and gave the FBI artist a description of two men who had rented the truck, known as Unsub #1 and Unsub #2.

Kling, Unsub #1, had listed his address as 3616 North Van Dyke Road in Decker, Michigan.

The address was the home of James Douglas
Nichols and Terry Lynn Nichols.Kling, Unsub #1, had listed his address as 3616 North Van Dyke Road in Decker, Michigan.

The address was the home of James Douglas
Nichols and Terry Lynn Nichols.

A quick check of that address with the Michigan Department of Motor Vehicles revealed a license in the
name of Timothy James McVeigh.

FBI agents interviewing James Nichols and relatives in Decker quickly learned that Timothy McVeigh was a friend of Nichols, who
possessed large quantities of fuel oil and fertilizer.

Armed with a search warrant, agents found 28 50-pound bags of fertilizer containing
ammonium nitrate, a 55 gallon drum containing fuel oil, blasting caps, and safety fuse.

Interviews with neighbors[, including Daniel Stomber, Paul Isydorak and others,] revealed that the Nichols brothers and McVeigh had
experimented with explosives, using household items to produce small bombs using bottles and cardboard cartons, which they would
detonate on their property for fun.

Witnesses also claimed that in December of 1993, McVeigh and one of the Nichols brothers had visited
Thumb Hobbies, Etc.

to inquire about purchasing 100% liquid nitro model airplane fuel.

One of these witnesses had reported that James
Nichols had repeatedly blamed the U.S.

government for all the problems in the world.

Federal agents then decided they had enough evidence to arrest James Nichols, and to put out a warrant on his brother Terry, who was
living in Herrington, Kansas.

On April 22, Terry Nichols, wondering why his name was being broadcast on television, walked into the local
police station in Herrington.

In the meantime, witnesses at the scene of the bombing had given FBI agents a description of possible suspects.

While interviewing people
in Junction City, agents spoke to the manager of the Dreamland Motel who recognized the composite sketch of the suspect the FBI called
Unsub #1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the meantime, witnesses at the scene of the bombing had given FBI agents a description of possible suspects. While interviewing people
in Junction City, agents spoke to the manager of the Dreamland Motel who recognized the composite sketch of the suspect the FBI called
Unsub #1. The man had registered at the Dreamland from April 14 to April 18 under the name of Tim McVeigh, had driven a yellow Mercury,
and provided an address on North Van Dyke Road in Decker, Michigan. On April 21, Carl E. Lebron, a former co-worker of McVeigh's, recognized the composite sketch of Unsub #1 on TV and called the FBI. He
said that the man was named Timothy McVeigh, and that he was possessed of extreme right-wing views, was a military veteran, and was
particularly agitated over the deaths of the Branch Davidians in Waco, Texas in April, 1993. The man told the FBI that McVeigh expressed
extreme anger towards the Federal Government. The man gave the FBI the last known address he had for McVeigh: 1711 Stockton Hill
Road, #206, Kingman, Arizona. Back in Perry, Oklahoma, McVeigh was still sitting in a cell at the Noble County Courthouse, waiting for his arraignment. After feeding
McVeigh's name into the National Crime Information Center, the FBI discovered their suspect sitting quietly in the Noble County jail on a
traffic and weapons charge. Just as McVeigh was about to be set free, District Attorney John Maddox received a call from the FBI telling him
to hold on to the prisoner, that he was a prime suspect in the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City. So, by good luck, diligent work, and an amazing series of coincidences, federal law enforcement authorities solved the most heinous crime
in the history of the United States — all within 48 hours. Or did they? Next | Previous | Contents | Text Version

--- PAGE BREAK ---federal law enforcement authorities solved the most heinous crime
in the history of the United States — all within 48 hours. Or did they? Next | Previous | Contents | Text Version

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Endnotes
[E: In the original printed edition, there were both unnumbered footnotes and numbered endnotes. In this digital edition, all notes have been
converted to endnotes and re-numbered. The numbers of the printed edition endnotes are shown in parentheses. Footnotes of the printed
edition are also shown in parentheses, but with the format (<chapter number>:<page number>:<footnote symbol>). Thus, the footnote **
from Chapter 6, page 268, would be shown as (6:268:**). Some endnotes have been added or modified by the author or the digital editor,
and these are surrounded in double square brackets [[]], with those of the editor prefixed with "E:".]
1. (1) Detective Jay Einhorn, interview with author.
2. (2) Nancy Gibbs,"The Blood of Innocents," Time, 5/1/95.
3. (3) Ibid..
4. (4) According to "journalist" Larry Myers, McVeigh exited the vehicle and met Hanger between the two cars. Hanger asked McVeigh for
his license. He then informed the cop that he was moving from Arkansas, at which point Hanger walked back to his vehicle and ran
McVeigh's license. Hanger's video camera was on, as well as his microphone. As he walked back to McVeigh, he noticed a bulge under his
jacket, and as he handed McVeigh his license, he quietly flipped the snap on his holster. He asked McVeigh if he was carrying a gun, and
McVeigh informed him he was, at which point Hanger drew his weapon, shoved McVeigh against the car and spread his legs. McVeigh told
Hanger that he had a concealed carry permit and showed him is old Burns Security badge. McVeigh sat in the passenger side of the patrol
car and talked about the bombing as it flashed over the radio. When he arrived at the jailhouse, he asked, "when's chow?"
5. See Partin Report and diagrams in appendix.
6. (5) Sam Cohen's letter to Representative Key, 6/29/95, copy in author's possession.
7. (6) William Jasper, "Explosive Evidence of a Cover-Up," The New American, 8/7/95.
8. (7) Ibid.
9. The Atlas Powder Co. is in Dallas, Texas.
10. (8) Christine Gorman, "Bomb Lurking in the Garden Shed", Time magazine, 5/1/95.
11. (9) Rick Sherrow, interview with author.
12. (10) Linda Jones, trial transcript, U.S. v. McVeigh.
13. (11) Sacramento Bee, 4/30/95.
14. (12) Brian Ford, "McVeigh Placed at Kansas Store," Tulsa World, 9/12/97.
15. (1:5:*) They claimed they didn't know where it was built.
16. (13) Military Explosives, TM 9-1910/TO 11A-1-34, Dept. of the Army and the Air Force, 4/14/55, p. 121.
17. (14) Michele Marie Moore, Oklahoma City: Day One (Eagar, AZ: Harvest Trust, 1996), p. 122.
18. (15) KFOR-TV, 4/19/95.
19. (16) USA Today, 4/28/95.
20. (17) New York Times, 10/19/95.
21. (18) Memorandum to all US Attorneys from Acting Assistant Attorney General John C. Keeney, 1/4/96, and letter of Frederick4/19/95.
19. (16) USA Today, 4/28/95.
20. (17) New York Times, 10/19/95.
21. (18) Memorandum to all US Attorneys from Acting Assistant Attorney General John C. Keeney, 1/4/96, and letter of Frederick

--- PAGE BREAK ---Whitehurst, 1/9/96 copy in author's possession.

22.

(19) "Outside Experts to Review FBI Crime Lab,"Wall Street Journal, 9/19/95; OIG report, copy in author's possession.

23.

(1:7:*) "Williams' report also states that the initiator for the Primadet or the detonating cord was a non-electric detonator; non-electric,
burning type fuse of either hobby fuse or a commercial safety fuse was used as a safe separation and time delay system; and the time delay
for the burning fuse was approximately 2 minutes and 15 seconds.… No evidence of a non-electric detonator or the named fuses, however,
were found at the crime scene.… Williams also stated in his report that [a] fertilizer base explosive, such as ANFO… among other
commercial and improvised explosives, has an approximate VOD of 13,000 fps.

The statement of the VOD of ANFO, however, is incomplete
because ANFO has a broad VOD range.

For example, the Dupont Blasters' Handbook (Dupont) shows commercial ANFO products with
VODs in the 7,000-15,600 feet-per-second range.

When Williams wrote his Oklahoma City report, he was aware of this range.…"
24.

(20) The Gundersen Report on the Bombing of the Alfred P.

Murrah Building, Oklahoma City, April 19, 1995, 11/1/96, copy in author's
possession.

25.

(21) Ibid.

26.

As the OIG report states: "Whitehurst questions Williams' conclusion that none of the structural damage evident within the Murrah
building was caused by secondary explosive devices or explosions."
27.

(1:8:*) Partin pointed out that while the truck bomb that damaged the World Trade Center was in an enclosed space, thereby creating a
much higher destructive force than a bomb out in the open, it did not destroy the support column next to it.

28.

(22) Richard Sherrow, "Bombast, Bomb Blasts & Baloney,"Soldier of Fortune, 6/95.

29.

(23) Rabauch's letter to Partin dated 7/18/95, copy in author's possession.

30.

(24) CNN World News, 6/26/96.

31.

(25) Jim Loftis, interview with author.

32.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(25) Jim Loftis, interview with author. 32. (1:10:*) The Israelis' host in the U.S. was Oklahoma City business leader Moshe Tal, an Israeli. According to William Northrop, another
Israeli and Oklahoma City resident, Tal initially circulated the report, which was three pages and mentioned the Middle-Eastern bomb
signature. After Tal was summoned to Israel, he returned denying those aspects of the report. It was suddenly, in keeping with the U.S. Government's position, no longer a Middle-Eastern bomb, and the report itself incredibly shrank from three pages to only one. 33. (26) Lou Kilzer and Kevin Flynn, "Were Feds Warned Before OKC Bomb Built?" Rocky Mountain News, 2/6/97. The fuel dealer reported
the purchasing attempt to the ATF, but the agency did not follow up. 34. (27) Gronning's letter to Key, dated 6/27/95, copy in author's possession. 35. (28) James L. Pate, "Bloody April: Waco Anniversary Triggers Oklahoma City Atrocity," Soldier of Fortune, August, 1995. 36. (29) Larens Imanyuel, interview with author. 37. (30) Engineering News, May 1, 1995, page 10-11. 38. (31) The Gundersen Report on the Bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Building, Oklahoma City, April 19, 1995, 11/1/96, copy in author's
possession. 39. (32) Larens Imanyuel,"The Bombing of the Oklahoma City Federal Building: Was a Cruise Missile Warhead Design Used?" Veritas,
12/18/95. 40. (33) Timothy McVeigh's Petition for Writ of Mandamus, 3/25/97, p. 35. 41. (34) Ramona McDonald, interview with author. 42. (35) "The Worst Terrorist Attack on U.S. Soil: April 19, 1995," CNN, 12/20/95. 43. (1:13:*) Other people who were working in office buildings at the time reported that sparks flew out from their computers just before the
blast. The manager of the Journal Record parking garage, two blocks from the Murrah Building, reported that the electronic computers in at
least half a dozen cars had malfunctioned as a result of the blast.

--- PAGE BREAK ---44.

(36) Sam Cohen, interview with author.

45.

(37) Gene Wheaton, "The Covert Culture," Portland Free Press, May/June 1996.

46.

(38) David Noble, "Professors of Terror," Third World Resurgence (Penang, Malaysia), February-March, 1992, p.

34, quoted in Ramsey
Clark, The Fire This Time, (New York, NY: Thunder's Mouth Press, 1992), p.

44.

47.

(39) Adel Darwick and Gregory Alexander, Unholy Babylon, (New York, NY: St.

Martin's Press, 1991), p.

104.

48.

(40) Harry M., confidential letter to author.

49.

(41) "Iraq Also Worked on Hydrogen Bomb," Associated Press, quoted in The Nashville Tennessean, 10/9/91, as quoted in Charles T.

Harrison, "Hell in a Hand Basket: The Threat of Portable Nuclear Weapons," Military Review, May, 1993.

50.

(42) E-Mail message to Tony Scarlatti; Interview with author.

51.

(1:15:*) Within the last few years, articles have appeared in the U.S., European, and even Russian media dealing with an exotic new
material known as 'Red Mercury' which had been developed by the Russians and allegedly held properties capable of producing far more
efficient nuclear fission warheads than the conventional explosives developed thus far."
52.

(43) Harrison, Op Cit.

53.

New Yorker magazine, date unknown, quoted by nuclear physicist Galen Winsor on Radio Free America, 3/23/93.

54.

(44) Edward Zehr, "Turning Point: Resolving The Enigma of Oklahoma City," Washington Weekly, 11/18/96.

55.

Some rescue workers, it was also rumored, had become ill with mysterious illnesses.

They suffered from physical exhaustion and could
barely drag themselves to work, it was reported, although these reports have not been substantiated.

Of the 43 FEMA dogs that took part in
the rescue effort, four died and one became ill.

Rumors quickly spread that the dogs had died of radiation poisoning.

The body of one of the
deceased dogs, it was claimed, had been exhumed, his lungs found to be radioactive.

The culprit was supposedly a radioactive isotope
called Tritium.The body of one of the
deceased dogs, it was claimed, had been exhumed, his lungs found to be radioactive.

The culprit was supposedly a radioactive isotope
called Tritium.

A heavy form of hydrogen, Tritium is an essential ingredient in nuclear weapons.

In microscopic quantities it is also used as a
"tracer" in medical procedures — injected into the bloodstream as an aid in radiology scanning.

According to Larry Jacobson, Executive Vise
President of the National Association of Search & Rescue (NASR) in Fairfax, Virginia, "We don't know of any dog coming out of the
Oklahoma thing that had any more then cut paws… it was a totally baseless rumor." Mike Nozer, head of the Tulsa, Oklahoma K-9 Search &
Rescue team, was busy assembling his team for the Heroes of the Heart parade in Bethany on April 19, 1996.

He explained that all eight of
his dogs were still active, in fact were at the parade that day.

"My dogs were the first ones in the building," said Nozer, whose team worked
for six days to pull people out of the wreckage.

"I didn't have any one of my dogs down due to radiation." Nozer also explained that the Fire
Department had sprayed a chemical in the building on the evening of the fourth day to prevent contamination from decaying bodies still
inside.

However, according to Nozer, this would not have affected the dogs.

Skip Hernandez of Miami's Metro Dade Fire Department,
worked with his dogs in the "pit," an area likely to have been contaminated.

"Before we allow the dogs to go in, we ask certain questions [of]
the hazardous materials guys because the dogs work very low to the ground," explained Hernandez.

"All the dogs went thorough a thorough
physical.

None of our dogs left there injured…We would have known if there was radiation in there." Hernandez also said that the dog that
died was an older dog, who died of cancer.

The dog that had died was supposedly from a team in Virginia or Maryland.

Sgt.The dog that had died was supposedly from a team in Virginia or Maryland.

Sgt.

Lavelle of
Maryland Task Force 1, told me one dog became sick from lyme disease, but he didn't think it was related to the bombing.

As to the rumor of
Tritium poisoning, he said, "That's the first we've ever heard of it." Jacobson, who works with the team in Virginia, said absolutely no dog
died as a result of being in the Murrah Building.

I asked Samuel Cohen about the possibility of Tritium poisoning.

"Tritium could have been
mixed up with ANFO," said Cohen.

"But it seems far-fetched that they could have gotten that much into their systems to do any serious
radiation damage.

It's very unlikely to do damage unless it gets into the system in huge doses.

The culprit would have to steal more Tritium
than exists in any single lab on earth.

He would need pounds.

And Tritium is not cheap stuff.

The last I checked, it was a few thousand
dollars a gram." But whether search and rescue dogs actually died of radiation poisoning is another matter.

A Rotweiler named Weinachten
Gator Von Scott CD, who lived with his owner Jacob Scott in Broken Arrow, Oklahoma, died in June of 1996, of a broken neck after a fall.

Gator had pulled the last survivor out of the Murrah Building.

Another dog, a member of the Oklahoma County Sheriff's K-9 Unit named
Chita, was hit by a car after escaping from her pen during a hail storm.

While some have suggested that the dogs were killed to hide
evidence of radiation poisoning, there is no evidence that either animal was suffering from such a malady.

Yet considering the extent of the
cover-up underway at the time, and the number of people who feared for their jobs, the autopsy reports on the dogs could have been faked.

Certainly any revelation of a nuclear explosion would not only cause the government's already shaky premise to fall apart, but would cause
widespread panic among the population.

56.

Sam Cohen, interview with author.

57.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sam Cohen, interview with author. 57. (45) Sam Cohen, Journal of Civil Defense, Fall, 1995, quoted by F.R. Suplantier in Behind the Headlines. 58. According to demolition experts, simply wrapping Primacord around the column supports 27 times would be enough to destroy them. 59. (1:15:**) Authorities later backtracked on the leg, claiming that it belonged to Airforce recruit Lakesha Levy. They originally said the leg

--- PAGE BREAK ---es would be enough to destroy them. 59. (1:15:**) Authorities later backtracked on the leg, claiming that it belonged to Airforce recruit Lakesha Levy. They originally said the leg

--- PAGE BREAK ---

belonged to a light-skinned male in his 30s. They then said it belonged to a black female, in order to match it with Levy.
60. (46) "A classified Pentagon study determines Oklahoma bombing was caused by more than one bomb," Strategic Investment
Newsletter, 3/20/96.
61. (47) William Jasper, "Multiple Blasts: More Evidence," The New American, date unknown.
62. (48) "The Oklahoma City Bombing: Improved building performance through multi-hazard mitigation," FEMA, quoted in Relevance
magazine, April, 1997.
63. (49) General Benton K. Partin, interview with author.
64. (50) New American, date unknown.
65. (1:18:*) David Hall, manager of KPOC-TV in Ponca City, who has done considerable investigation into the bombing, told me that two
Southwestern Bell employees called him and claimed they had a surveillance tape that showed the Murrah Building shaking before the truck
bomb detonated.
66. (51) Sam Cohen, interview with author.
67. (52) Jeff Bruccelari, Oklahoma Radio Network, interview with Dr. Ray Brown, 2/18/97.
68. (53) Jerry Longspaugh, Cover-Up in Oklahoma City video, 1996.
69. Emphasis mine.
70. (54) Ramona McDonald, interview with author.
71. Although the tape was confiscated by the FBI it was later returned, likely altered, just as the FBI likely altered the famous Zapruder film of
the JFK assassination by reversing the frames that showed the president's head being blown back.
72. (55) William Jasper,"Seismic Support," The New American, 8/7/95, 1995.
73. (56) Nolan Clay, "Scientists Debate Meaning of Bombing Seismograms", The Daily Oklahoman, 11/21/95.
74. (57) Moore, Op Cit., p. 223.
75. (58) William Jasper,"Seismic Support", The New American, 8/7/95, 1995. Brown later added that the one-fourth of the building collapsing
on 4/19 could have created a larger pulse if it had help, say, from high-explosives, "so you wouldn't need quite as much building to be
collapsing to cause the same sized pulse that we observed on the day of the explosion."
76. (59) William Jasper, "Were There Two Explosions?", The New American, 6/12/95.
77. (60) Washington Post, 4/23/95.
78. (61) Moore, Op Cit., p. 223.
79. (62) Hassan Muhammad, interview with author.
80. (63) "William Jasper," OKC Investigator Under Attack," The New American, 6/23/97; video deposition of Jane C. Graham, 7/20/97, copy
in author's possession.
81. (64) "Oklahoma City: What Really Happened?", video by Chuck Allen, 1995.
82. (65) Media Bypass, June, 1995.
83. (66) Jasper, Op Cit., 6/12/95.
84. (1:23:*) Unfortunately, Partin shot himself in the foot in his first letter to Congress by insinuating that the bombing was the work of a
Communist conspiracy (The Third Socialist International), thereby possibly portraying himself in the eyes of some as a Right-Wing "kook."
But in spite of his politics, his technical credentials are beyond reproach.iracy (The Third Socialist International), thereby possibly portraying himself in the eyes of some as a Right-Wing "kook."
But in spite of his politics, his technical credentials are beyond reproach.

--- PAGE BREAK ---85.

(1:23:**) This is reminiscent of the cover-up of the JFK assassination, where Secret Service agents carefully washed down the
president's limo immediately after the shooting with buckets of water to remove all traces of bullet fragments, and had Governor Connolly's
clothes, bullet holes and all, cleaned and pressed.

86.

(67) Guy Rubsamen, interview with author.

87.

(1:24:*) Such a situation is reminiscent of JFK's visit to Dallas, where the plotters made sure the President's protective bubble was
removed from his limousine, and made sure the Secret Service never bothered to check the many open windows around Dealy Plaza — a
standard security procedure in such a situation.

88.

(68) Dr.

Paul Heath, interview with author.

89.

(69) "Witness Accounts Vary in Oklahoma City Bombing," Dallas Morning News, 10/8/95; Associated Press, 8/27/95; Associated Press,
9/9/95.

90.

(70) Statement of unidentified witness taking by Rep.

Charles Key, copy in author's possession.

[91].

After publication of this book, Jane Graham was shown a photograph of German national Andreas Strassmeir, discussed later, and
identified him as one of the men she saw.

92.

(71) Graham, Op Cit.

One of the men was tall, late '30s, nice-looking, very dark hair, mustache, black cowboy hat, jeans.

The others
were slightly older; wearing khakis, short sleeves, all Caucasians.

The FBI agent who interviewed Graham was Joe Schwecke .

93.

(72) Interviews with Paul Renfroe, OG&E; Thom Hunter, Southwestern Bell; Don Sherry, Oklahoma Natural Gas.

Interviews with
approximately 20 construction companies involved with a renovation bid by GSA.

Contractor list supplied by GSA to author.

94.

(73) David Hall, interview with author.

95.

(74) J.D.

Cash & Jeff Holladay, "Secondary Explosion Revealed in Murrah Blast," McCurtain Daily Gazette, 5/4/95.

96.

(75) Allen, Op Cit.

97.

(76) Jon Rappaport, Oklahoma City Bombing — The Suppressed Truth (Los Angeles, CA: Blue Press, 1995).

98.

(77) Veritas, 10/9/95.

99.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(77) Veritas, 10/9/95. 99. (1:27:*) According to Army technical manual on military explosives, Mercury Fulminate is only safe to handle if it is "dead-pressed."
100. (78) Craig Roberts, "The Bombing of the Murrah Federal Building: An Investigative Report," (prepared for the Tulsa Office of the FBI),
6/4/95, copy in author's possession. 101. (1:27:**) It was the presence of military ordinance that brought the 61st EOD (Explosive Ordinance Demolition) team from Fort Sill in to
examine and defuse the bombs. 102. (1:27:†) The Army had a recruiting office in the building, which would have made the presence of military personnel inconspicuous. The
Department of Agriculture also had an office in the building. The Department of Agriculture has been used as a front for IRS intelligence, and
also the 113th M.I.G. (Military Intelligence Group) in Chicago in 1970. Given the easy access to military personnel in the building, it would
have been easy for military personnel to go through the building unnoticed. 103. (79) General Benton K. Partin, interview with author. 104. (80) KFOR-TV. 105. (1:29:*) According to the September, 1995 edition of Firehouse magazine, there were three bomb scares: one at 10:22, one at 10:45,
and one at 1:51. (See Radio logs, Appendix)
106. Taped interview of Tiffany Smith by Rep. Charles Key. 107. (81) Jim Keith, OKBOMB — Conspiracy and Cover-Up (Lilburn, GA: Illuminit Press, 1996). 108. (82) Edward Comeau, "Fire Investigation Report: Oklahoma City Bombing and Rescue Operation," National Fire Protection Association,
11/12/95.

--- PAGE BREAK ---109.

It was rumored that one of the devices was taken to Kirkland Air Force Base in Albuquerque, NM.

Fred Shannon of the Ellis County
Press in Albuquerque claimed his source is too frightened to come forward.

If this account is true, it is curious to say the least, why a bomb
would be taken to a remote military base, when Tinker Air Force base is less than 10 miles away.

Interestingly, a branch of Sandia Labs is
located at Kirkland Air Force Base.

The Sandia Corporation, headquartered in Albuquerque, and the Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, located in Alameda County, CA, have cooperated on the development of highly sophisticated explosives, including nuclear
weapons.

Sandia often conducts it's tests at the White Sands Missile Test Range, just west of Alamagordo.

White Sands was the home to
the ATF's "Dipole Might" experiments (see below).

Was the government taking one of its bombs back home to Momma?

110.

(83) Allen, Op Cit.

111.

(84) Moore, Op Cit., p.

221.

Ricks made this statement the day of the bombing.

112.

(85) General Benton K.

Partin, interview with author.

113.

(86) Rick Sherrow, interview with author.

114.

(1:30:*) The TOW missile, inspected by the 61st EOD team out of Ft.

Sill was inert, as reported on the Oklahoma County Sheriff's
Evidence/Ordinance Acceptance Form, dated 4/19/95, copy in author's possession.

115.

(87) BATF RAC Dewy Webb, interview with author; OCPD Officer Don Browning, interview with author.

116.

This author requested the Sheriff's video under the Oklahoma Open Records Act.

I subsequently received the original version from a
friend.

It seems the Sheriff sent me an edited version, with the ordinance being removed edited out.

117.

(88) J.D.

Cash & Jeff Holladay, "Worker Helped Remove Munitions, Missile from Murrah Building," McCurtain Daily Gazette, 7/7/95.

118.

(89) Ibid.

119.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(89) Ibid. 119. The BATF lied about the presence of a methamphetamine lab on the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Texas in order to
circumvent the Posse Comitatus Act, which prevents the military from being used for domestic law enforcement. Consequently, tanks from
the Army's Joint Task Force Six were used (driven the FBI) to demolish and gas the Branch Davidian compound. Eighty-six men, women
and children were either crushed to death or burned alive. The FBI, ludicrously enough, claimed that the tanks were there to knock holes in
the walls in order to allow people to escape — an absolutely ridiculous assertion — they could have simply used the windows and doors. 120. (90) Relevance magazine, 7/95. 121. (91) Moore, Op Cit., p. 107. 122. (92) Ibid. 123. (1:33:*) This author interviewed a retired Army criminal investigator who complained about Lester Martz's stonewalling a similar
investigation he was involved in. 124. (93) Allen, Op Cit.; Moore, Op Cit. 125. (94) Ibid., p. 116. 126. (95) Richard L. Sherrow, "Aftershocks and Subterfuge: Cloud of Doubt Lingers Over Government Cover-up," Soldier of Fortune, April,
1996; Moore, p. 106. 127. This was reported briefly in the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal. The two articles were then quickly buried in scrap-heap of
history. 128. (96) Lawrence W. Myers, "Bureau of ANFO Truck-Bomb Fabrication," Media Bypass, November, 1996. 129. (97) "Who Are They? The Oklahoma Blast Reveals The Paranoid Life and Times of Accused Bomber Timothy McVeigh and His Right-
Wing Associates." Time, 5/1/95. 130. (98) Dale Russakock & Serge Kovaleski, "An Ordinary Boy's Extraordinary Rage; After a Long Search For Order, Timothy McVeigh
Finally Found a World He Could Fit Into,"Washington Post, 7/2/95. 131. (99) John Kifner, "Oklahoma Bombing Suspect: Unraveling a Frayed Life," New York Times, 12/31/95.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hy McVeigh
Finally Found a World He Could Fit Into,"Washington Post, 7/2/95. 131. (99) John Kifner, "Oklahoma Bombing Suspect: Unraveling a Frayed Life," New York Times, 12/31/95.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

132. (100) "An Ordinary Boy's Extraordinary Rage," Washington Post, 7/2/95.
133. (101) Robert D. McFadden, "Terror in Oklahoma: The Suspect — One Man's Complex Path to Extremism," New York Times, 4/23/95.
134. (2:36:*) Lori Fortier originally told the press, "It truly sickens me when I see my friend's face, yes my friend's face, portrayed on the
cover of Time magazine as the face of evil."
135. (102) Sheffield Anderson, interview with author.
136. (2:36:**) Noble County Assistant Attorney Mark Gibson, who has prosecuted many killers, said "You could just feel the evil in them." Yet
he said of McVeigh, "I looked at him and realized I felt no repulsion or fear."
137. (103) Prime Time Live, 5/10/95.
138. (104) "Biography: McVeigh, Part II," Media Bypass, May, 1996. Myers would later rescind this statement to me, saying he thought
McVeigh was the "most maniacal terrorist in U.S. history."
139. (105) "An Ordinary Boy's Extraordinary Rage," Washington Post, 7/2/95.
140. (106) Media Bypass. May, 1996.
141. (2:40:*) Real estate agent Anne Marie Fitzpatrick said McVeigh was "very dynamic" and had "a twinkle in his eye and a
smile." (Washington Post 7/2/95. )
142. (107) "An Ordinary Boy's Extraordinary Rage", Washington Post, 7/2/95.
143. (108) Media Bypass. 5/96.
144. (109) Washington Post, 7/2/95.
145. (110) Media Bypass. May, 1996.
146. (111) Robert D. McFadden, "Terror in Oklahoma: A Special Report — John Doe No. 1, A Life of Solitude and Obsessions," New York
Times, 5/4/95.
147. (112)Washington Post, 7/2/95.
148. (113) Media Bypass. May, 1996.
149. (114) Lana Padilla and Ron Delpit, By Blood Betrayed, (New York, NY: Harper Collins, 1995), p. 63.
150. (2:43:*) Padilla told me later that the information about McVeigh's so-called demolitions expertise was provided by co-writer Ron Delpit.
151. (115) David Hackworth & Peter Annin, "The Suspect Speaks Out," Newsweek, 7/3/95.
152. (116) Newsweek, 5/15/95.
153. (117) John Kifner, "The Gun Network: McVeigh's World — A Special Report; Bomb Suspect Felt at Home Riding the Gun-Show
Circuit." New York Times, 7/5/95.
154. (118) FBI 302 Statement of Carl. E. Lebron, Jr., 4/22/95, copy in author's possession.
155. (119) Washington Post, 7/2/95.
156. (120) New York Times, 5/4/95.
157. (121) Media Bypass, March, 1995.
158. (122) New York Times 5/4/95.
159. (123) Media Bypass, March, 1995.uthor's possession.
155. (119) Washington Post, 7/2/95.
156. (120) New York Times, 5/4/95.
157. (121) Media Bypass, March, 1995.
158. (122) New York Times 5/4/95.
159. (123) Media Bypass, March, 1995.

--- PAGE BREAK ---155. (119) Washington Post, 7/2/95.
156. (120) New York Times, 5/4/95.
157. (121) Media Bypass, March, 1995.
158. (122) New York Times 5/4/95.
159. (123) Media Bypass, March, 1995.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

160. (124) New York Times, 5/4/95.
161. (125) Ibid.
162. While other soldiers and airmen were quoted during the war making statements like "shooting fish in a barrel" … "We hit the jackpot" …
"a turkey shoot," only McVeigh "killed Iraqis." For a detailed account of atrocities committed by U.S. forces, see: Ramsey Clark, The Fire
This Time: U.S. War Crimes in the Gulf , (New York, NY: Thunder's Mouth Press, 1992).
163. (126) Media Bypass, March, 1995.
164. (127) "Oklahoma Bombing Suspect: Unraveling a Frayed Life," New York Times, 12/31/95.
165. (128) Padilla, Delpit, Op Cit., p. 153.
166. (129) Keith, Op Cit., p. 41.
167. (130) "McVeigh's Army Pals Join Bid to Save His Life," CNN, 6/9/97.
168. (131) Kenneth Stern, A Force Upon the Plain: The American Militia Movement and the Politics of Hate, (New York, NY: Simon and
Schuster, 1996), p. 190; New York Times, 5/4/95.
169. Stern's book, written on behalf of the American Jewish Committee with the tacit approval of the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) of the
B'Nai B'rith, seeks to completely discredit all factions of the emerging Patriot and Militia movements. Stern begins with the premise that
McVeigh is guilty, and then attempts to indict the militia movement by association. Most all of Stern's sources derive from mainstream press
accounts and ADL and SPLC (Southern Poverty Law Center) reports. There is no indication from his source notes that the author ever
interviewed any of McVeigh's friends or associates, or did any independent research on the bombing whatsoever.
170. (2:49:*) Rice is president of New England Investigations. He teaches the only accredited course in the subject of profiling, and has
testified in state and federal court in regards to handwriting analysis, and Moore runs an executive assessment firm in Washington, D.C. that
specializes in assessing personality traits of applicants based on their handwriting samples.
171. (132) "Inside the Mind of McVeigh." Media Bypass, April, 1996.
172. (133) "Biography: McVeigh, Part II," Media Bypass, May, 1996.
173. (134) New York Times, 12/31/95.
174. (135) Washington Post, 7/2/95.
175. (136) New York Times, 12/31/95.
176. (137) New York Times, 5/4/95.
177. (138) New York Times, 7/5/95.
178. (139) Washington Post, 7/2/95.
179. (140) "The Suspect Speaks Out," Newsweek. 7/3/95.
180. (141) Released by McVeigh's attorney Stephen Jones to the Washington Post.
181. (142) Newsweek, 7/3/95.
182. (143) Washington Post, 7/2/95.
183. (144) Media Bypass, March, 1995.
184. (145) Report of Investigation, David B. Fechheimer, 12/13/96, addressed to Stephen Jones, copy in author's possession.
185. (146) Released by McVeigh's attorney Stephen Jones to the Washington Post.
186. (147) New York Times, 5/4/95.vid B. Fechheimer, 12/13/96, addressed to Stephen Jones, copy in author's possession.
185. (146) Released by McVeigh's attorney Stephen Jones to the Washington Post.
186. (147) New York Times, 5/4/95.

--- PAGE BREAK ---187.

(2:52:*) McVeigh himself admitted that it "was delayed in my case."
188.

(148) Washington Post, 7/2/95, 4/23/95.

189.

(2:52:**) This was confirmed to me by Terry Nichols' ex-wife, Lana Padilla: "Terry told me that.

Terry just said that when he was in the
Gulf War, they had implanted that to keep track of him."
190.

(149) Glenn Krawczk, "Mind Control and the New World Order," Nexus magazine, Feb-March, 1993, quoted in Keith.

191.

(150) Ibid., p.

196.

192.

(2:53:*) The firm does classified research for both NASA and the Air Force, and is a ranking subcontractor for Sentar, Inc., an advanced
science and engineering firm capable, according to company literature, of creating artificial intelligence systems.

Sentar's customers include
the U.S.

Army Space and Strategic Defense Command, the Advanced Research Projects Agency (see discussion of ARPA later in this
chapter), Rockwell International, Teledyne, Nichols Research Corp.

and TRW.

Their sales literature boasts a large energy shock tunnel,
radar facilities "a radio-frequency (RF) simulator facility for evaluating electronic warfare techniques." (Constantine)
193.

(151) Constantine, Op Cit.

194.

(152) Nexus, Feb-March, 1993, quoted in Keith.

195.

(153) The U.S.

General Accounting Office issued a report on September 28, 1994, which stated that between 1940 and 1974, DOD and
other national security agencies studied hundreds of thousands of human subjects in tests and experiments involving hazardous
substances.

GAO stated that some tests and experiments were conducted in secret.

Medical research involving the testing of nerve agents,
nerve agent antidotes, psychochemicals, and irritants was often classified.

Additionally, some work conducted for DOD by contractors still
remains classified today.Medical research involving the testing of nerve agents,
nerve agent antidotes, psychochemicals, and irritants was often classified.

Additionally, some work conducted for DOD by contractors still
remains classified today.

For example, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) has not released the names of 15 of the approximately 80
organizations that conducted experiments under the MKULTRA program, which gave psychochemical drugs to an undetermined number of
people without their knowledge or consent.

According to the GAO report, the CIA has not released this information because the
organizations do not want to be identified.

("Is Military Research Hazardous To Veterans' Health?

Lessons Spanning Half A Century," The
Rockefeller Report (Senator Jay Rockefeller), 12/8/94.)
196.

(2:55:*) After his arrest, Bryant said that he had been "gotten to," and "had been programmed." "Sleepers" such as Bryant were most
likely programmed to kill their victims in order to precipitate law and order crack-downs, such as occurred in the aftermath of the Australian
melee, where the government recently outlawed almost all types of guns.

197.

"A Caution From Down Under," Portland Free Press, July/October, 1997.

198.

(154) "A By the Book Officer, 'Suspicious By Nature,' Spots Trouble and acts fast," New York Times, 4/23/95.

199.

(155) Dick Russell, The Man Who Knew Too Much, (New York, NY: Carroll & Graf), 1992, p.

679.

200.

(156) Project MKULTRA, The CIA's Program of Research in Behavioral Modification, Joint Hearing Before the Senate Committee on
Intelligence, 8/3/77.

U.S.

Government Printing Office, 1977.

201.

In fact, according to Ted Gundersen, West did indeed examine McVeigh.

When pressed on the accuracy of his source, Gundersen
insisted he was "100 percent reliable."
202.

Russell, Op Cit., p.

211-212.

203.

Martin A.

Lee and Bruce Shlain, Acid Dreams: The CIA, LSD, and the Sixties Rebellion (New York, NY: Grove Press, 1985), pp.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Martin A. Lee and Bruce Shlain, Acid Dreams: The CIA, LSD, and the Sixties Rebellion (New York, NY: Grove Press, 1985), pp. 22,
189-90; Gordon Thomas, Journey Into Madness, Bantam Books, 1989. 204. The 1957 American Psychiatric Association roster notes that 1,253 of its 7,104 members came from Germany and the Eastern
European countries. 205. Tim Kelsey, "The Oklahoma Suspect Awaits Day of Reckoning," London Sunday Times, date unknown. 206. (157) Thomas, Op Cit., p. 116. 207. (158) Russell, Op Cit., p. 673. 208. (159) William M. Turner and John G. Christian, The Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy: A Searching Look at the Conspiracy and

--- PAGE BREAK ---Cover-Up 1968-1978, (New York, NY: Random House, p.

197), Quoted in Constantine, p.

12.

209.

(160) Russell, Op Cit., p.

681.

210.

(161) Ibid., p.

675.

211.

(162) Ibid., p.

673.

(Warren Commission Report, Vol.

5, p.

105.)
212.

Alex Constantine, Psychic Dictatorship in the U.S.A., (Portland, OR: Feral House Press), 1995, p.

6.

213.

Hugh MacDonald, Appointment in Dallas, Zebra, pp.

107-108, quoted in Constantine, p.

6.

214.

On February 7, 1976, Ambassador Walter J.

Stoessel, Jr.

told some of the 125 members of his staff that the Russians were using
microwaves beams to listen in on conversations inside the embassy, and that such radiation could be hazardous to their health.

(Paul
Broudeur, The Zapping of America, (New York, NY: W.W.

Norton) 1977, p.

95.

215.

Ibid., p.

95.

216.

(163) Ibid., p.

19.

217.

(164) Art Ford & Lincoln Lawrence, Were We Controlled, (New York, NY: University Books), 1967, quoted in Russell.

218.

(165) Robert O.

Becker, M.D.

and Gary Selden, The Body Electric: Electromagnetism and the Foundation of Life, (New York, NY:
William Morrow & Co.), p.

1085, quoted in "Bioeffects of Microwave Radiation," Unclassfied, Vol.

IV, No.

3, June/July, 1992, National
Association of Security Alumni.

219.

(166) Turner and Christian, Op.

Cit., Anthony Sampson, The Arms Basaar: From Lebanon to Lockheed (New York, NY: Viking Press,
1977), p.

276, quoted in Constantine, p.

12.

220.

(2:60:*) Apparently, McVeigh was not there the entire time.

Phone records indicate he made steady calls until the 7th of April, when he
was seen at a bar in Tulsa, Oklahoma.

The phone calls resume on April 11.

221.

New York Times, 5/4/95.

222.

Ibid.

223.

(169) Sherman Skolnick, Conspiracy Nation, June, 1996.

224.

(170) Constantine, "The Good Soldier."
225.

Ibid.

226.

Ibid.

227.

In 1987, police in Tallahassee, Florida discovered six small children living in a van driven by two men dressed in suits.

The children
were naked, bruised and dirty, and acting like animals.In 1987, police in Tallahassee, Florida discovered six small children living in a van driven by two men dressed in suits.

The children
were naked, bruised and dirty, and acting like animals.

They were unaware of the function and purpose of telephones, televisions or toilets.

They were not allowed to live indoors, and were only given food as a reward.

The case was turned over to U.S.

Customs agents, who were
contacted by detectives from the Washington, D.C.

Metropolitan Police Dept., then investigating a cult known as the "Finders." When officers
searched the their premises, they discovered instructions for kidnapping and purchasing children, avoiding police detection, information on
the use of explosives and terrorism, and the international transfer of currency.

The officers also found a photo album showing pornographic
photos of children, adults and children participating in blood rituals involving the disembowelment of goats, and an alter surrounded with jars
of urine and feces.

Formerly called the "Seekers," the "cult" was run by Marion David Pettie.

An unconfirmed memo states that Pettie was
trained in counterintelligence; his CIA handler was Colonel Leonard N.

Weigner, a career Air Force and CIA operative.

When Customs
agents attempted to follow up on the MPD investigation, they were told that "the activity of the Finders had become a CIA internal matter.

The MPD report has been classified secret and was not available for review." Martinez was subsequently "advised that the FBI had
withdrawn from the investigation several weeks prior and that the FBI Foreign Counter Intelligence Division had directed MPD not to advise
the FBI Washington Field Office of anything that had transpired." What police and Customs agents were describing was undoubtledy part of
Operation "Monarch," a program of CIA mind control involving the use of small children raised in captivity to respond to various stimuli
invoked by their CIA captors.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When Customs
agents attempted to follow up on the MPD investigation, they were told that "the activity of the Finders had become a CIA internal matter. The MPD report has been classified secret and was not available for review." Martinez was subsequently "advised that the FBI had
withdrawn from the investigation several weeks prior and that the FBI Foreign Counter Intelligence Division had directed MPD not to advise
the FBI Washington Field Office of anything that had transpired." What police and Customs agents were describing was undoubtledy part of
Operation "Monarch," a program of CIA mind control involving the use of small children raised in captivity to respond to various stimuli
invoked by their CIA captors. One of the chief field operatives of Operation Monarch was none other than Michael Aquino. (U.S. Customs
Report: Detective Jim Bradley of the Washington, D.C. Metropolitan Police Dept. Daniel Brandt, Name Base Newsline, No. 5, April-June
1994: "Cults, Anti-Cultists, and the Cult of Intelligence." Department of the Treasury, United States Customs Service: Report of Investigation. Subject: "Finders." 2/12/87. Agent Raymond J. Martinez.)
Probably the best known case is Jonestown, a cult of over 900 followers in Guyana who committed "mass suicide" in 1978. led by the

--- PAGE BREAK ---Reverend Jim Jones.

Jonestown was a veritable prison where all the classic mind control techniques were utilized.

While little more than a
swamp, it nevertheless contained a modern hospital, from which massive quantities of behavioral modification drugs were recovered.

One of
Jones' top aides, George Philip Blakely, who recruited mercenaries for the CIA in Angola, was the son-in-law of Dr.

Lawrence Layton, a
former Army biochemical warfare specialist.

Researchers have speculated that Jonestown was part of the CIA's MKULTRA experiments.

(Joe Holsinger, "Statement to the Forum Entitled 'Psycho-Social Implications of the Jonestown Phenomenon,'" 23 May 1980, Miyako Hotel,
San Francisco, quoted in Brandt, Name Base Newsline, No.

5, April-June 1994: "Cults, Anti-Cultists, and the Cult of Intelligence.")
"Guyanese troops discovered a large cache of drugs, enough to control the entire population of Georgetown, Guyana (pop.

200,000), for
over a year.

One footlocker contained 11,000 doses of Thorazine, a dangerous tranquilizer, and others such as sodium pentothal (truth
serum), chloral hydrate (a hypnotic), demerol, Thallium (confuses thinking), haliopareael and Largatil (powerful tranquilizers) and many
others.

It was very evident that Jonestown was a tightly-run concentration camp, complete with medical and psychiatric experimentation." Bo
Gritz, Called to Serve.

The members of Jonestown were reported to have died from cyanide-laced punch, but many were found shot-to-
death by the compound's guards.

The military purposefully took over a week to remove the bodies, ensuring, as in the Waco case, that no
autopsies could be performed.

National Security Advisor Brzezinski's office ordered that "all politically sensitive papers and forms of
identification" be removed from the bodies, and Jonestown's mysterious financial resources were found scattered in banks and investments,
estimated to be from $26 million to $ 2 billion.The military purposefully took over a week to remove the bodies, ensuring, as in the Waco case, that no
autopsies could be performed.

National Security Advisor Brzezinski's office ordered that "all politically sensitive papers and forms of
identification" be removed from the bodies, and Jonestown's mysterious financial resources were found scattered in banks and investments,
estimated to be from $26 million to $ 2 billion.

(Kenneth Wooden, The Children of Jonestown (New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 1981), p.

196,
quoted in Brandt.)
Another well-known case is the Temple of Set, a satanic cult in San Francisco run by former Army psychological warfare specialist Lt.

Colonel Michael Aquino, who has written about the control of mass populations.

Aquino was accused by an Army Chaplain of molesting
several young children at the Presidio.

The case was investigated by the SFPD, then turned over to the Army's C.I.D.

(Criminal
Investigations Division), where it was subsequently dropped.

Freedom of Information Act requests I made about Aquino's investigation while
editor of the Free Press were stonewalled.

Aquino himself picked up on my interest and began bombarding me with letters both dismissing
these and all related allegations as "mass-hysteria," while backing up his claims with the threat of a libel suit.

(Aquino once announced that
he is the Devil incarnate.

I still wonder to this day why the Devil needed to take me to Municipal Court to extract his vengeance.)
228.

Deposition of anonymous Naval Intelligence officer, copy in author's possession.

229.

(171) Brandon Stickney, All American Monster: The Unauthorized Biography of Timothy McVeigh (New York, NY: Prometheus Books,
1996), p.

226.

230.

For an excellent account of the potential of hynosis and its use in military applications, see Science Digest, April 1971, "Hypnosis
Comes of Age," by G.H.

Estabrooks.

231.

Marchetti and Marks, Op Cit., p.

279.

232.279.

232.

(172) Scott Anderson, "Globe publishers' Viet tour in mind warfare," Now Magazine, Toronto, Canada, 5/26/94, Quoted in Keith, p.

179.

233.

(2:62:*) Former intelligence operative Gene "Chip" Tatum described a recent massive heroin and cocaine smuggling operation being
run by rogue elements of the U.S.

Government across the Canadian border into Montana with the complicity of local officials.

"These officials
were recruited to assist in the smuggling operations, thinking they were part of a government-sanctioned covert operation." (Excerpt of a
letter from Tatum to the Montana Senate Judiciary Committee, 3/22/97).

234.

(173) Gene Wheaton, memo, copy in author's possession; interview with author.

235.

Pitzer was later found "suicided" like Admiral Boorda, shot in the chest with a .45.

The left-handed Pitzer was found holding the gun in
his right hand.

As Craig Roberts writes in JFK: The Dead Witnesses, "Pitzer, a consummate note taker and maker, left no suicide note, and
no autopsy report was ever released to either the public or the family.… all references to Pitzer being present at the autopsy of John F.

Kennedy have been removed from government records." Neither does Pitzer's family believe he committed suicide.

236.

(174) Jay Wrolstad, "Smoking Gun: Does Dan Marvin Have Evidence of a Kennedy Assassination Conspiracy?" The Ithaca Times,
8/22/96; Franklin Crawford, "Local Man Tells JFK Story," The Ithaca Journal, 11/16/95; Daniel Marvin, "Bits & Pieces: A Green Beret on the
Periphery of the JFK Assassination," The Fourth Decade, May, 1995; Colonel Daniel Marvin, interview on Tex Marrs' World of Prophecy,
WWCR shortwave, 4/20/96.

Marvin's authenticity and credibility have been established by respected Kennedy researchers, as well as
Professor L.

Pearce Williams of Cornell University, and Jacqueline Powers, former managing editor of the Ithaca Journal, who said "[Col.

Marvin] had evidence to back up what he was claiming.

I believe him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Marvin] had evidence to back up what he was claiming. I believe him. Everything he has said to me has been true; he's willing to tell what he
knows, which can't be easy for him."
237. Captain David V. Vanek, who took the assassination course with Marvin, was allegedly asked by the CIA to assassinate Pitzer after
Marvin refused. Vanek denied the allegations in an affivavit. 238. (175) Jonathan Kwitny, The Crimes of Patriots (New York, NY: Simon & Schuster, 1987), p. 103; Affidavit of Colonel Edward P. Cutolo,
commander of the 10th Special Forces Group (Airborne), 1st Special Forces, 3/11/80, copy in author's possession. 239. (176) Hoppy Heidelberg, interview with author.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ard P. Cutolo,
commander of the 10th Special Forces Group (Airborne), 1st Special Forces, 3/11/80, copy in author's possession. 239. (176) Hoppy Heidelberg, interview with author.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

240. (177) "The Gundersen Report on the Bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, April 19, 1995, copy
in author's possession.
241. (178) Russell, Op Cit.
242. (179) "Something Big is Going to Happen," Time Magazine, 5/8/95.
243. (180) Washington Post, 5/4/95.
244. (2:66:*) The term "sheep-dipped" is best clarified by former CIA-Department of Defense liaison L. Fletcher Prouty, in his classic work on
the CIA, The Secret Team (Prentice Hall). "It is an intricate Army-devised process by which a man who is in the service as a full career
soldier or officer agrees to go through all the legal and official motions of resigning from the service. Then, rather than actually being
released, his records are pulled from the Army personnel files and transferred to a special Army intelligence file. Substitute but nonetheless
real-appearing records are then processed, and the man "leaves" the service."
245. (195) New York Times, 4/23/95.
246. (196) "Terror in Oklahoma: The Suspect; Arizona Neighbors Recall a Man's Love of Weaponry and 'Poor Attitude'", New York Times,
4/23/95.
247. (197) Washington Post, 7/2/95.
248. (198) Marylin Hart, Interview with author, 1/15/96 & 4/1/96.
249. (199) Rob Rangin, Interview with author, 4/1/96.
250. (200) John Kifner, "Arizona Trailer Park Owner Remembered the Wrong Man," New York Times, 4/25/95.
251. (201) Marylin Hart, Interview with author, 1/15/96.
252. (202) New York Times, 4/23/95.
253. (203) Steve Wilmsen and Mark Eddy, "Who bombed the Murrah Building?" Denver Post, date unknown.
254. (204) FBI 302 of Lebron, Op Cit.
255. (205) Patrick E. Cole, "I'm Just Like Anyone Else," Time, 4/15/96.
256. (206) "An Ordinary Boy's Extraordinary Rage", Washington Post, 7/2/95.
257. (207) New York Times, 4/24/95.
258. (208) Mark Schaffer, "Gun Class Sheds New Light On McVeigh," The Arizona Republic, 5/28/95, quoted in Keith.
259. (209) New York Times, 12/31/95.
260. (210) Kevin Flynn and Lou Kilzer, "John Doe 2 Remains a Mystery: OKC Bombing Case's Unknown Suspect Could be More Than One
Man, Investigators Believe," Rocky Mountain News, 3/3/97.
261. (211) New York Times, 4/24/95.
262. (*) The child protective services went to the compound, knocked on the door, walked in, and interviewed the children. They found no
evidence of abuse and left.
263. (*) This will be explored more fully in Volume Two.
264. (212) Media Bypass, March, 1995.
265. (213) New York Times, 7/5/95.
266. (214) Tim Kelsey, "The Oklahoma Suspect Awaits Day of Reckoning," London Sunday Times, 4/21/96.more fully in Volume Two.
264. (212) Media Bypass, March, 1995.
265. (213) New York Times, 7/5/95.
266. (214) Tim Kelsey, "The Oklahoma Suspect Awaits Day of Reckoning," London Sunday Times, 4/21/96.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Two.
264. (212) Media Bypass, March, 1995.
265. (213) New York Times, 7/5/95.
266. (214) Tim Kelsey, "The Oklahoma Suspect Awaits Day of Reckoning," London Sunday Times, 4/21/96.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

267. (215) Robert Vito, "Three Soldiers," CNN News, 8/9/95.
268. (216) Trial of Timothy McVeigh.
269. (217) Opening statement of lead prosecutor Joseph Hartzler at Timothy McVeigh's trial.
270. (218) Howard Pankartz and George Lane, "Sister Testifies Against Brother," Denver Post, 5/6/97.
271. (219) George Lane, "Letters Provide Damaging Evidence," Denver Post, 5/6/97; "Sister's Role Seen as Pivitol," Denver Post, 5/6/97.
272. (220) Time, 5/1/95.
273. (221) New York Times, 5/4/95.
274. (222) "Oklahoma Bombing Plotted for Months, Officials Say, but Suspect Is Not Talking," New York Times, 4/25/95, quoted in Keith, p.
28.
275. (*) Nichols' discharge in the spring of 1989 for "hardship" reasons is also interesting. Another parallel is that of Thomas Martinez, the
FBI infiltrator within the radical right Silent Brotherhood, who was given an honorable discharge during basic training. The Army choose not
to explained why. (Keith, Op Cit.)
276. (223) Emma Gilbey, "Brothers in Arms with a Destructive Hobby," London Sunday Telegraph, 3/24/95.
277. (224) Affidavit of FBI Agent Patrick W. Wease.
278. (225) Newsweek, 5/15/95.
279. (226) Robert Jerlow, interview with author.
280. (*) The letter to the girlfriend apparently was indicative of plans to bomb other locations. Interesting that the suspect would leave such
an curiously incriminating trail of evidence.
281. (227) New York Times, 7/5/95.
282. (228) Dateline, NBC, 2/13/96.
283. (229) Washington Post, 7/2/95.
284. (230) New York Times, 7/5/95.
285. (231) Ibid.; Washington Post, 7/5/95.
286. (232) The Spotlight, 5/26/97.
287. (*) Catina told London Sunday Telegraph reporter Ambrose Evans-Pritchard that the man was "always" there. "He seemes out of place,
but he was always around."
288. (233) Jim Garrison, On the Trail of the Assassins, (New York, NY: Warner Books, 1988), p. 157.
289. (*) In a rather prophetic statement, Michael Fortier's mother was heard to remark that McVeigh led "a double life."
290. (234) Media Bypass, 3/95; New York Times, 7/5/95.
291. (235) Beth Hawkins, "The Michigan Militia Greet the Media Circus," Detroit Metro Times, 3/26/95.
292. (236) David Van Biema, Time, 6/26/95.
293. (*) In what may appear to be an ominous coincidence, America in Peril made its debut just as the ATF and FBI were making their own
apocalyptic plans for the Branch Davidians in Waco, Texas.
294. (**) The Michigan Militia has officially disowned him.e, America in Peril made its debut just as the ATF and FBI were making their own
apocalyptic plans for the Branch Davidians in Waco, Texas.
294. (**) The Michigan Militia has officially disowned him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---295.

(237) Washington Post, 7/2/95.

296.

(238) Ken Armstrong, No Amateur Did This (Aptos, CA: Blackeye Press, 1996), p.

17.

297.

(*) Interestingly, Jennifer was found burning papers on an outdoor grill when the FBI showed up on April 23.

298.

(239) J.D.

Cash, "McVeigh's Sister Laundered Bank Robbery Proceeds: ATF Surveillance Confirmed by Informant," McCurtain Daily
Gazette, 1/28/97.

299.

(*) Interestingly, authorities wouldn't find any traces of ammonium nitrate in these lockers.

300.

(*) As pointed out previously, FBI chief chemist Frederick Whitehurst, who tested McVeigh's clothes, said no explosive residue was
found.

Whitehurst has since gone on to publicly accuse the FBI of manufacturing and tainting evidence in dozens of cases.

301.

(240) Arnold Hamilton, "Bombing Accounts are Varied," Dallas Morning News, 10/8/95.

302.

(241) Connie Smith, interview with author.

These accounts appeared in the McCurtain Gazette, The New American, and the Denver
Post, among other places.

303.

(242) Dr.

Paul Heath, interview with author.

304.

(243) Hoppy Heidelberg, interview with author.

305.

(244) Trish Wood, The Fifth Estate, Canadian Broadcasting Corporation; J.D.

Cash, "Is a Videotape From a Tulsa Topless Bar the
'Smoking Gun' in Oklahoma City Bombing?" McCurtain Daily Gazette, 9/25/96.

306.

(245) Tony Boller, Assistant Project Manager, Goodwill Industries, interview with author.

307.

(246) Jane Graham, interview with author.

Graham is a friend and co-worker of Joan's.

308.

(247) J.D.

Cash, McCurtain Daily Gazette, 7/14/96.

309.

(248) Sherie, confidential interview with author.

310.

(*) She saw the truck at 6:00 a.m.

at the diner, then it left before 7:00 a.m.

She then saw it at Geary Lake in the afternoon on her way to
Junction City, then saw it there on return trip around 3:00-4:00 p.m.

The mainstream-press originally said Whittenberg saw the truck on
Tuesday, parroting the FBI's line that McVeigh had rented the truck on the 17th.

311.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The mainstream-press originally said Whittenberg saw the truck on
Tuesday, parroting the FBI's line that McVeigh had rented the truck on the 17th. 311. (249) Dan Parker, "McVeigh Defense Questions Co-Defendant's Claim," Daily Oklahoman, date unknown; Steve Wilmsen and Mark
Eddy, "Who bombed the Murrah Building?" Denver Post, date unknown; Timothy McVeigh's Petition for Writ of Mandamus, 3/25/97, p. 36. 312. (250) Linda Kuhlman and Phyliss Kingsley, interviews with author. 313. (251) Mark Eddy, "Witnesses tell a different story," Denver Post, 6/16/96. 314. (*) What is interesting is that McVeigh's friend James Nichols said that McVeigh never wore a baseball cap, much less backwards. He
said McVeigh only wore an Army-issue cap. 315. (252) Chuck Allen, interview with author. 316. (253) Ibid. 317. (254) Jane Graham, interview with author. Graham is a friend and co-worker of Johnston's. 318. (*) It is interesting that McVeigh would choose to hang around the scene of the crime, along with his easily identifiable yellow Mercury
Marquis, minutes after it occurred. Johnston described the John Doe 2 as shorter and darker than McVeigh. 319. (255) "Feds Charge Terry Nichols in Bombing," Los Angeles Times, 5/10/95, quoted in Keith, p. 185. 320. (256) FBI FD-383 (FBI Facial Identification Fact Sheet) of Tom Kessinger, dated 4/20/95, copy in author's possession. 321. (257) London Sunday Times, 4/21/96.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n Keith, p. 185. 320. (256) FBI FD-383 (FBI Facial Identification Fact Sheet) of Tom Kessinger, dated 4/20/95, copy in author's possession. 321. (257) London Sunday Times, 4/21/96.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

322. (258) Affidavit of FBI Special Agent Henry C. Gibbons, 4/21/95, copy in author's possession.
323. (259) Garrison, Op Cit., p.65, 77.
324. (260) Bid, p.66.
325. (261) Ibid., p. 79.
326. (262) Julie DelCour, "Informant Says Tulsan Talked About Local, OC Bombings," Tulsa World, 2/9/97.
327. (263) "TNT, $5 a stick. Need more. Call after 1 May, see if I can get some more."
328. (264) William Pepper, Orders to Kill: The Truth Behind the Murder of Dr. Martin Luther King, (New York, NY: Carol & Graf), 1995, p.156.
329. (265) London Sunday Times, 4/21/96.
330. (266) Kevin Johnson, "McVeigh Lawyer Says FBI Agents Using Trickery," USA Today, 8/14/95, quoted in Keith, Op Cit, p. 57.
331. (267) Lana Padilla, interview with author.
332. (268) Bob Papovich, interview with author.
333. (269) "A Look at Terry Nichols," Associated Press, 4/5/96.
334. (270) Lana Padilla, interview with author, Diane Sawyer, ABC News Prime Time Live, 5/10/95.
335. (271) Padilla and Delpit, Op Cit., p. 36.
336. (272) Associated Press, 4/5/96.
337. (273) Steve Wilmsen and Mark Eddy, "Who bombed the Murrah Building?" Denver Post, date unknown.
338. (274) Serge F. Kovaleski, "In a Mirror, Nichols Saw a Victim," Washington Post, 7/3/95.
339. (275) "A look at Terry Nichols," Associated Press, 4/5/96.
340. (276) Media Bypass, date unknown.
341. (277) Ibid.
342. (278) Kovaleski, Op Cit.
343. (279) Padilla and Delpit,Op Cit., p. 168.
344. (280) Keith, Op Cit., p. 179.
345. (281) Kovaleski, Op Cit.
346. (*) In October of 1959, Lee Harvey Oswald appeared suddenly at the American Embassy in Moscow, and dramatically handed over his
U.S. Passport and a letter renouncing his American citizenship.
347. (282) Associated Press, 4/5/96.
348. (283) Kovaleski, Op Cit.
349. (284) Lana Padilla, interview with author.
350. (285) Elizabeth Gleick, "Who Are They? The Oklahoma blast reveals the paranoid life and times of accused bomber Timothy McVeigh
and his right-wing associates." Time, 5/1/95.terview with author.
350. (285) Elizabeth Gleick, "Who Are They? The Oklahoma blast reveals the paranoid life and times of accused bomber Timothy McVeigh
and his right-wing associates." Time, 5/1/95.

--- PAGE BREAK ---350. (285) Elizabeth Gleick, "Who Are They? The Oklahoma blast reveals the paranoid life and times of accused bomber Timothy McVeigh
and his right-wing associates." Time, 5/1/95.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

351. (286) Ibid.
352. (287) Barbara Whittenberg, interview with author.
353. (288) Washington Post, 7/3/95.
354. (289) Denver Post, date unknown.
355. (290) Kovaleski, Op Cit..
356. (291) Padilla and Delpit, Op Cit., p.3.
357. (*) When I questioned her about this apparent contradiction, she told me her later statement was correct, and the book's account was
wrong.
358. (292) Lana Padilla, interview with author.
359. (**) Nichols became interested in selling military surplus in December of 93' to April of 94' according to Padilla.
360. (293) Padilla and Delpit, Op Cit., p. 6; interview with author.
361. (294) KFOR interview with Lana Padilla. Interview with author.
362. (295) Padilla, Op Cit., p.5, 9.
363. (296) Lana Padilla, interview with author.
364. (297) Padilla, Op Cit., p. 12.
365. (298) Lana Padilla, interview with author.
366. (299) Lou Kilzer and Kevin Floyd, "McVeigh Team Tries Again for Delay," Rocky Mountain News, 3/26/97; Timothy McVeigh's Petition
for Writ of Mandamus, 3/25/97.
367. (300) Telephone records of Terry Nichols, copy in author's possession.
368. (*) Earlier, McVeigh had told Padilla, "I'll write to him (Nichols), but I guess I'd better do it in code, because there are a lot of nosy
people."
369. (301) David Jackson, Linnet Myers, Flynn McRoberts, Chicago Tribune, 5/11/95.
370. (302) Padilla and Delpit, Op Cit., p. 201.
371. (*) Nichols' attorney Michael Tigar claimed his client's use of aliases while renting the storage lockers was to prevent the credit card
companies from coming after him.
372. (*) McVeigh Defense attorney Christopher Tritico questioned the analysis, noting the FBI laboratory isn't accredited by any agency for
such a test. Tritico also used photographs of a test hole drilled into lead by the bit to argue that grooves and scratches didn't resemble those
in the hole closely enough to call them a match.
373. (303) J.D. Cash, McCurtain Gazette, date unknown.
374. (304) "McVeigh Appeals Conviction, Sentence," Reuters, 1/16/98.
375. (305) Barbara Whittenberg, interview with author.
376. (306) Nolan Clay, Robby Trammell, Diana Baldwin and Randy Ellis, "Nichols, Bomb Materials Linked," Daily Oklahoman, date unknown.
377. (307) Jerri-Lynn Backhous, interview with author.
378. (308) Dorinda J. "Wendy" Hermes, interview with author.in and Randy Ellis, "Nichols, Bomb Materials Linked," Daily Oklahoman, date unknown.
377. (307) Jerri-Lynn Backhous, interview with author.
378. (308) Dorinda J. "Wendy" Hermes, interview with author.

--- PAGE BREAK ---379.

(*) Butler and Snell also reportedly had connections to Jack Oliphant of Kingman, Arizona.

380.

(309) New York Times, 5/20/95.

381.

(310) Edward Zehr, "Oklahoma City Cover-up Exposed: But the Mainstream Media are Still in Denial," Washington Weekly, 2/17/97.

382.

(311) "The Company They Keep," Transcript of the Canadian Broadcasting Company "Fifth Estate" piece on Oklahoma City, originally
broadcast on 22 October 1996, Host, Bob Oxley, Voice-Over Announcer, Trish Wood, Francine Pelletier; Guest, Robert Millar, Leader,
Elohim City; Kerry Noble, Formerly Of CSA; Steven Jones, Timothy McVeigh's Lawyer; Joe Adams, Bailiff; Ross Mcleod, Security Agency
Owner.

383.

(312) Warren Gotcher, interview with author.

384.

(313) Anthony Thornton, "Bomb Plans Found in Defendant's Home, FBI Agent Testifies," The Daily Oklahoman, 4/3/96.

"Anthony
Thornton, "Three Defendants Found Guilty in Bomb Plot, The Daily Oklahoman.

date unknown.

385.

(314) Judy Thomas, "We Are Not Dangerous, Leader of Separatists Says" Kansas City Star, 3/17/96.

386.

(315) Mark Fazlollah, Michael Matza, Maureen Graham and Larry King, "FBI: Heist Trail Led to White Supremacists," Philadelphia
Inquirer, 6/30/96.

387.

(*) Mathews himself was the Northwest representative of William Pierce's National Alliance.

388.

(316) "Bank Bandits Tied to Rightists," Associated Press, 1/21/96; J.D.

Cash with Jeff Holladay, "Rebels With a Cause, Part 3: The
Aryan Republican Army, McCurtain Daily Gazette, 12/29/96.

389.

(317) Bill Morlin, "Devoted to Making Nation 'Ungovernable': Group Patterns its Organization After Irish Republican Army," Spokesman-
Review, 12/29/96.

390.

(318) J.D.

Cash, "The Spy Who Came in From the Cold," McCurtain Daily Gazette, 2/11/97.

391.

(319) J.D.

Cash with Jeff Holladay, "Rebels With a Cause, Part Four: An Ex-Wife's Suspicions In The OKBOMB Case," McCurtain Daily
Gazette, 12/31/96.

392.

(320) Andreas Strassmeir, interview with author.

393.

(321) Judy L.--- PAGE BREAK ---

393. (321) Judy L. Thomas, "Man Target of Bank Robbery Inquiry," Kansas City Star, 1/29/97. 394. (322) Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, The Secret Life of Bill Clinton: The Unreported Stories (Washington, DC: Regnery), p. 80. 395. (*) It may be telling that part of Strassmeir's training involved feeding people disinformation. 396. (323) Pritchard, Op Cit.; William Jasper, "More Pieces to the OKC Puzzle," The New American, 6/24/96. 397. (324) February, 1996 press release from the Cause Foundation, quoted in The New American. 398. (*) Around the same time, the caller telephoned the National Alliance office in Arizona. The National Alliance is the organization formed
by William Pierce, who wrote The Turner Diaries. 399. (325) Laura Frank, "Oklahoma City Probe May Touch Tennessee," The Tennessean, 6/30/96. 400. (326) J.D. Cash, "Is a Videotape From a Tulsa Topless Bar the 'Smoking Gun' in Oklahoma City Bombing?" McCurtain Daily Gazette,
9/25/96. 401. (327) Judy Thomas, Kansas City Star, 3/17/96. 402. (328) Dennis Mahon, interview with William Jasper. 403. (329) Timothy McVeigh's Petition for Writ of Mandamus, 3/25/97, pp. 44-45. 404. (330) Jeff Steinberg, interview with author.

--- PAGE BREAK ---405.

(331) The members, Gene Schroder, Alvin Jenkins, and Ed Petruski, met with Iraqi Ambassador Mohammed Mashat before the start of
Desert Storm.

The Iraqis took notice of the group's patriotic activities, and invited them to Washington.

"They were hoping to open up
negotiations with America," explained Schroder, a farmer and veterinarian from Campo, Colorado.

"They knew that we'd meet with them and
push the issue some with our Representatives and Congressmen." The entire affair was completely legitimate and well-publicized, having
been reported in at least one local newspaper in Colorado.

The Constitutionalists and anti-war activists also had the support of Senators
Hank Brown and Bob Dole.

"We called the State Department and everything was cleared," they explained.

Yet it seemed Jones' was trying
to portray the meeting as part of a broader conspiracy between Iraqis and American dissidents.

The attorney referred to the three men as
Posse Comitatus members — a tax-protest organization of the mid-'80s with anti-Semitic overtones and connections to white supremacist
groups.

All three denied belonging to the group.

Jones then mentioned that Petruski lived an hour's drive from bombing defendant Terry
Nichols' house.

Petruski denied knowing Nichols.

(Eugene Schroder, Alvin Jenkins, and Ed Petruskie, interviews with author; Timothy
McVeigh's Petition for Writ of Mandamus, 3/25/97.)
406.

(*) Although Jones only refers to "Suspect I," it is well-known that he is referring to Nichols, because he says he was "A subject of the
FBI and Grand Jury investigation.…" There were only two people investigated by the Federal Grand Jury: Timothy McVeigh and Terry
Nichols.

407.

(332) Pritchard, Op Cit., 3/30/97.

408.

(333) Ingo Hasselbach with Tom Reiss, Fuhrer-Ex: Memoirs of a Former Neo-Nazi (New York, NY: Random House, 1996), p.

215;
John Michael Johnston, "Investigative Report Concerning Fact-Finding Trip to Germany," 5/15/96, copy in author's possession.

409.215;
John Michael Johnston, "Investigative Report Concerning Fact-Finding Trip to Germany," 5/15/96, copy in author's possession.

409.

(*) The El Rukn case is documented in the Federal Reporter in Unites States v.

McAnderson, 914 F.

2d 934 (7th Cir.

1990).

"The El
Rukns sought to impress the Libyans and to demonstrate the depth of their commitment by discussing specific terrorist acts, among them
destroying a government building, planting a bomb, blowing up an airplane, and simply committing a wanton 'killing here and a killing there'
to get the Libyans' attention.

Eventually, the leader of the El Rukns decided that the Libyans would only be impressed by the use of powerful
explosives." (Jones, Writ of Mandamus, p.

85)
410.

(334) "Black History and the Class Struggle," The Separatist League, No.

11, August, 1994.

In a letter to his followers concerning his
strange alliance with the NOI, Rockwell wrote: "I was amazed to learn how much they and I agree on things: they think that blacks should
get out of this country and go back to Africa or to some other place and so do we.

They want to get black men to leave white women alone,
and white men to leave black women alone, and so do we.

The Honorable Elijah Muhammad and I have worked out an agreement of mutual
assistance in which they will help us on some things and we will help them on others.("
411.

(335) Washington Times, 9/30/85.

412.

(336) Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, "IRA supplied detonator for Oklahoma terror bomb," London Sunday Telegraph, 3/30/97.

413.

(*) British officials no doubt took the implications seriously.

Jones had spent considerable time consulting with British explosives experts
who planned to testify on behalf of the defense, as well as officials from MI5, Britain's domestic intelligence service and even an unnamed
IRA member.( (Associate Press, 3/30/97.)
414.

(337) Tom Conlon and Helen Curtin, Dublin Sunday Times, 7/13/97, quoted in McCurtain Daily Gazette, 7/15/97.

415.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(337) Tom Conlon and Helen Curtin, Dublin Sunday Times, 7/13/97, quoted in McCurtain Daily Gazette, 7/15/97. 415. (338) Rita Cosby reporting, KOKH, FOX, 4/2/97; Andreas Strassmeir, interview with author. 416. (*) Information obtained from the Military Records Center by Ambrose Evans-Pritchard reveals that Petruski served in the Air Force
Office of Special Investigations (OSI), retiring in 1975. His dalliance with the military included a stint as a Foreign Intelligence Officer in
Vietnam, then Special Projects Officer, Special Activities Branch, Counterintelligence Division in Washington, D.C. He was reactivated with a
"sensitive" assignment during the Gulf War. 417. (339) "Strassmeir, OKC, And The CIA," The New American, 7/22/96. 418. (340) Phil Bacharach, "Casting Doubts: Were Others Involved in the Federal Building Bombing?" Oklahoma Gazette, 2/13/97. 419. (*) Curiously, when the FBI queried various federal law-enforcement and intelligence agencies to determine if Strassmeir was a
cooperating witness or a confidential informant, only the CIA reported that it held any records on him. These records were turned over to
prosecutors, but not made available to McVeigh's defense team, despite a court order compelling their disclosure. 420. (341) J.D. Cash, with Jeff Holladay "Weeks Before OKC Bombing, ATF Had 'Wanted' Posters On Strassmeir," McCurtain County
Gazette, 7/28/96. 421. (342) J.D. Cash, "Agents Probe OKC Bombing Links To Bank Robberies," McCurtain Daily Gazette, 7/16/96. 422. (*) Interestingly, cases involving violence or planned violence by militias from around the U.S. show a recurring theme of government

--- PAGE BREAK ---penetration and infiltration of militia groups.

For example, testimony in the Muskogee bombing case showed that the FBI was literally paying
the operating expenses, including the phone bills for the Tri-State Militia.

423.

(*) OHP pilot Ken Stafford, ATF technician Pat McKinley, and acting ATF SAC Tommy Wittman flew over Elohim City on February 7,
1995, and reported to Finley-Graham.

424.

(*) BATF regional director Lester Martz denies that the BOLO was put out by the ATF.

425.

(343) Tulsa Police Intelligence, confidential interview with author.

426.

(344) An INS memo of January 10 stated: "Per your note, I talked to Angela Finely, ATF.

It may be awhile before the subject is
contacted or arrested, but we will probably be called to assist."
427.

(*) It seems the ATF and FBI were also concerned about the possiblity of an "intramural fire fight" between their respective agencies at
Elohim City.

428.

(345) Cash, Op Cit.

429.

(*) Howe's allegations of federal malfeasance dovetailed with those of federal informant Cary Gagan, who was inside the Middle
Eastern cell tied to the bombing.

430.

(346) Pritchard, Op Cit.

431.

(347) Ibid.; The OHP officer who made the arrest was Vernon Phillips.

432.

(348) J.D.

Cash, McCurtain Daily Gazette, 7/14/96.

Dennis Mahon also admitted that Strassmeir worked for the GSG-9.

433.

(*) The FBI didn't go to any great lengths to question Strassmeir, nor his roommate Michael Brescia.

Months after the bombing, the FBI
places a leisurely call to Strassmeir's home in Berlin.

They made no attempt to question or arrest Brescia.

434.

(**) When Middle Eastern suspect Hussain al-Hussaini came under scrutiny by KFOR and other investigators for his role in the
bombing, the FBI "debunked" the "rumors" about him, too.

Was he also an agent?

(See Chapter 6)
435.

(349) J.D.

Cash and Jeff Holliday, "Weeks Before Bombing, ATF Had Out "Wanted" Posters, McCurtain Gazette, 7/29/96, quoted in
American Freedom, September, 1996.

436.Cash and Jeff Holliday, "Weeks Before Bombing, ATF Had Out "Wanted" Posters, McCurtain Gazette, 7/29/96, quoted in
American Freedom, September, 1996.

436.

(*) The ostensible purpose of the raid was to recover bomb-making materials — materials which had been obtained by Howe at the
request of her ATF handler — Finley-Graham!

437.

(350) J.D.

Cash, "Controversy Over Howe's True Loyalties Become Focus of Her Trial," McCurtain Daily Gazette, 7/30/97.

438.

(351) J.D.

Cash, McCurtain Gazette, 7/14/96.

The source claimed that classified computer records of the ATF contained evidence that
Strassmeir was indeed a key component in the agency's espionage operation at Elohim City, and numerous neo-Nazi groups throughout the
country.

439.

(352) London Sunday Telegraph.

date unknown.

440.

(353) "Hate and the Law: Kirk Lyons, Esq." Anti-Defamation League, Special Edition, June, 1991.

441.

(354) Lyons had this to say about Mahon in an interview with Volkstreue, a German Neo-Nazi magazine: "I have great respect for the
Klan historically but sadly, the Klan today is ineffective and sometimes even destructive.

There are many spies in it and most of its best
leaders have left the Klan to do more effective work within the movement.

It would be good if the Klan followed the advice of former
Klansman Robert Miles: 'Become invisible.

Hang the robes and hoods in the cupboard and become an underground organization.' This
would make the Klan stronger than ever before."
442.

(355) Ambrose Evans-Pritchard & Andrew Gimson, "Did Agents Bungle US Terror Bomb?", date unknown.

Some of the dialogue was
added from Pritchard's 1997 release, The Secret Life of Bill Clinton(Washongton, DC: Regnery), p.

90.

443.

(*) "When The New American asked Evans-Pritchard if he believed Strassmeir was referring to himself when speaking in the third
person of the 'informant,' he replied, 'Of course, there's no doubt that is exactly what he meant to convey.--- PAGE BREAK ---

443. (*) "When The New American asked Evans-Pritchard if he believed Strassmeir was referring to himself when speaking in the third
person of the 'informant,' he replied, 'Of course, there's no doubt that is exactly what he meant to convey. He was stating it as plainly as he
could' without admitting criminal culpability on his own part." (William Jasper, "Elohim, Terror and Truth," The New American, 3/31/97.)
444. (356) Andreas Strassmeir, interview with author.

--- PAGE BREAK ---445.

(357) Alex Constantine, "The Nazification of the Citizen's Militias and the Transformation of Timothy McVeigh from Hyper-Military
'Robot' to Mad Bomber," 12/9/95.

446.

(358) Petition for Writ of Mandamus of Timothy McVeigh, 3/25/97, p.

44.

447.

(359) Constantine, Op Cit.

448.

(360) Ibid.

449.

(361) William Jasper, "Elohim, Terror, and Truth," New American, 3/31/97.

450.

(362) Charles, Op Cit.

In her report of September 26, 1994, Finley-Graham indicates that Mahon "gave 183 approximately 2 feet of
green safety fuse, a can of gun powder and a plastic funnel," and said he would "instruct 183 how to assemble hand grenades."
451.

(363) James Ridgeway, "Lone Assassins?: A Series of Arrests May Link the Oklahoma City Bombing Suspects to a Larger Plot,"
Village Voice, 2/5/97; Mark Eddy, "Others Eyed in Bomb Probe?" Denver Post, 1/29/97.

452.

(364) Cash, Op Cit.

453.

(365) Zehr, Op Cit.

454.

(*) According to reports, it was Cash who "persuaded" Mahon to make the recording.

455.

(366) ATF ROI 53270-94-0124-B, 1/11/95.

456.

(367) Ibid.

457.

(368) Letter read into testimony at Howe's trial.

458.

(369) ATF ROI, 9/26/94.

"Andy also told 183 that there exists a black market dealer who can get grenades, C-4 and a range of
explosives."
459.

(*) Dawson was also a paid informant for the Greensboro Police Department.

460.

(**) With a map of the parade route supplied by Greensboro Police Department Detective Jerry Cooper, Dawson, Butkovich, and their
KKK and neo-Nazi comrades were able to select the most advantageous site for their ambush.

Although Cooper and other officers surveilled
the house where the killers had assembled and took down license numbers, they inexplicably decided to take a lunch break less then 45
minutes before the march.

By the time the shooting started, the tactical squad assigned to monitor the demonstration was still out to lunch.Although Cooper and other officers surveilled
the house where the killers had assembled and took down license numbers, they inexplicably decided to take a lunch break less then 45
minutes before the march.

By the time the shooting started, the tactical squad assigned to monitor the demonstration was still out to lunch.

Even more inexplicably, two officers responding to a domestic call at the Morningside projects, the site of the CWP march, noted the
suspicious absence of patrol cars usually assigned to the area.

One of the cops, Officer Wise, later reported receiving a bizarre call from
police dispatch, advising him to "clear the area as soon as possible." The incident resulted in an ATF/FBI-led cover-up similar in most
respects to the Oklahoma City whitewash, with most of the suspects being acquitted of first degree murder charges.

Echoing the factitious
rants of federal officials in Oklahoma, FBI Director William Webster called the charges of federal complicity "utterly absurd." Although the
killers had been recruited, organized and led on their murderous rampage by ATF and FBI operatives, none ever served a day of jail-time.

((*) Frank Donner, Protectors of Privilege: Red Squads and Police Repression in America, (Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA, University of
California Press: 1990), p.

360; Michael Novick, "Blue by Day, White by Night: Organized White Supremacist Groups in Law Enforcement
Agencies," People Against Racist Terror, 2/3/93, p.

3.)
461.

(370) Ivo Dawnay, "Informant Accuses FBI Over Oklahoma Bomb," Electronic Telegraph, 7/20/97.

462.

(*) Just as federal informant Cary Gagan provided the FBI and U.S.

Marshals with warnings.

463.

(371) Kay Clarke, interview with author.

Snider's half-sister, Kay Clarke, testified that she drew the composite sketch of the man Snider
saw.

464.

(372) Diana Baldwin and Ed Godfrey, "Separatist Asks for Immunity — Witness Takes the Fifth Before Grand Jury," Daily Oklahoman,
7/17/97.

465.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(372) Diana Baldwin and Ed Godfrey, "Separatist Asks for Immunity — Witness Takes the Fifth Before Grand Jury," Daily Oklahoman,
7/17/97. 465. (373) Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, "'Master of Disguise' Ready to Run," London Sunday Telegraph, 3/30/97. 466. (374) Diana Baldwin, "Former Klansman Identifies Aryan Leader as John Doe 2," Daily Oklahoman, 10/8/97.

--- PAGE BREAK ---467.

(375) Cash, Op Cit.

468.

(*) When McVeigh's defense team asked federal prosecutors for Howe's reports in pre-trial discovery, they were informed the records
didn't exist.

When it was shown that the records did indeed exist, an angry Judge Matsch ordered the records delivered to the defense and
threatened the prosecutors with removal from the case if they lied one more time.

469.

(*) Finley-Graham admitted during Howe's subsequent trial that she was listed as an "active informant" through December 18, 1996, but
offered an interesting explanation for that status.

Both Finley-Graham and federal prosecutors claimed that removing her from the official
listing might have led to the destruction of records regarding the bombing.

"That was especially intriguing and troubling," writes New
American editor Bill Jasper, "because it left unanswered who would have destroyed which records, and why any records concerning the
deadliest terrorist attack on American soil would have been destroyed, especially while the investigation is ongoing and a trial is pending."
470.

(376) William F.

Jasper, "Undercover: The Howe Revelations," The New American, 9/15/97.

471.

(*) Her live-in neo-Nazi boyfriend, James Viefhaus Jr., had been arrested earlier for allegedly promoting a call-in message advocating
the bombing of federal buildings in 15 different cities.

The message, reportedly connected to the National Socialist Alliance of Oklahoma,
also endorsed the April 19th bombing.

The FBI claimed to have discovered bomb-making materials in Viefhaus' home.

472.

(377) "Ex-Informant Indicted on Charges," Associated Press, 3/13/97, Indictment No.

97-CR-05-C, Northern District of Oklahoma,
3/11/97.

473.

(378) Richard Leiby, "How a Wheaton Kid Became a Neo-Nazi Bank Robber, and One Confused Human," Washington Post, 2/13/97.

474.

(379) James Ridgeway, Village Voice, 7/23/96; Cash, Op Cit.

475.

(380) Fazlollah, et al., Op Cit.

476.

(381)Ibid.

477.

(382) Leiby, Op Cit.

478.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(382) Leiby, Op Cit. 478. (383) Morlin, Op Cit. 479. (384) Leiby, Op Cit. 480. (*) Chevie and Cheyne Kehoe, two brothers who opened fire on police in Ohio in February of 1997 during a routine traffic stop, also
lived at Elohim City. Were they some of the people trained in weaponry by Strassmeir? 481. (385) Paul Queary, "Bombing Informant Ruffles Case," Associate Press, 2/23/97. 482. (386) Robert Heibel, interview with author. 483. (387) Walter Goodman, "Terror in Oklahoma City: TV Critics' Notebook; Wary Network Anchors Battle Dubious Scoops, New York
Times, 4/20/95. 484. (388) Craig Roberts, interview with author. 485. (*) Lipkin also told Roberts that Stinger missiles have been smuggled into the country. A Stinger is thought to have been responsible for
the attack on TWA flight 800. 486. (389) Arnold Hamiltion, "Oklahoma City Car bomb Kills at Least 31; Scores Missing in Rubble of Office Building," Dallas Morning News,
4/20/95. 487. (390) Hugh Davies, "Rental Car is Key Clue on Trail of Terrorists," London Sunday Telegraph, 4/21/95. Abdul Yasin, another Iraqi, was
released and returned to Iraq. Abdul Basit is Yousef's real name. 488. (*) No evidence was produced for the so-called assassination attempt. The allegations were reminiscent of the tale of Iraqi soldiers
pulling babies out of incubators, which turned out to be a lie. 489. (391) Patrick Cockburn, "Defector Exposes Saddam's Lies on Chemical Weapons," The Independent, 5/7/96. "General Sammara'i says
that the committee in charge of sabotage on which he served, and which uses a special 600-strong military unit called 888 to carry out
operations, still exists and he suspects it was involved in giving support to the bombers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---490.

(392) Paul Anderson, Metro Correspondent Chicago, IL "Threat of Terrorism Further Increases," Net News Service , 07/07/93.

491.

(393) Ibid., Center for National Security Policy, No.

95-D23 11 April 1995 Decision Brief.

492.

(394) William Carley, "A Trail of Terror," Wall Street Journal, 6/16/93, p.

A1, quoted in James Phillips, "The Changing Face Of Middle
Eastern Terrorism," Heritage Foundation Report, 10/6/94.

493.

(395) Jack Anderson, Dale Van Atta, "Iraq Reported to Send Terrorists to U.S.," Washington Post, 1/28/91.

494.

(*) A note on Steven Emerson: Although there is no evidence contradicting these claims, it should be noted that Emerson has, in the
past, served as an official mouthpiece for the U.S.

government, as a consultant to the Pentagon.

He played a large role in covering up the
truth of the Pan Am 103 bombing, by attacking and smearing Lester Coleman, Juval Aviv, and any others who tried to bring forth the truth.

Emerson also went on the Heraldo Rivera show in June of 1997 and attempted to bash Kevin Flynn of the Rocky Mountain News who had
uncovered connections between Terry Nichols and suspects in the Philippines.

The author attempts in this instance merely to report a few
basic facts as related by Emerson, who does have some experience in Middle East terrorism.

The author, however, holds Emerson's
dubious connections with elements of the government in question.

495.

(396) The bombings included a Jewish community center in Buenos Aires and the Israeli embassy, the downing of a commuter plane in
Panama, and a Jewish charity organization in London.

It is assumed that the July, 1994 attacks by Hizbollah — which coincided with King
Hussein's peace-making trip to Washington — were primarily to disrupt the Israeli/PLO peace talks.

496.

(397) According to Phillips: "Islamic radicals also often have a different audience in mind than Palestinian nationalists.496.

(397) According to Phillips: "Islamic radicals also often have a different audience in mind than Palestinian nationalists.

Instead of using
terrorism to influence Western powers to change their policies, they often use terrorism to punish Western powers and inspire other Muslims
to rise up against the West.

This focus on the Muslim audience rather than an American audience helps explain how the bombers of the
World Trade Center could rationalize their bloody actions.

The bombing was meant to demonstrate the power of Islamic radicals and the
vulnerability of the U.S., not to lead the U.S.

to rethink its Middle East policy."
497.

(398) Confidential report of William Northrop to KFOR, 5/10/96.

Copy in author's possession.

498.

(399) Phillips, Op Cit.

"Between 1980 and 1989 over 400 terrorist actions spilled over from the Middle East to other regions, with 87
percent of these actions occurring in Western Europe." Paul Wilkinson, "Terrorism, Iran and the Gulf Region," Jane's Intelligence Review,
May 1992, p.

222.

499.

(400) "Jihad in America," PBS Documentary, 11/21/94.

500.

(*) Shimon Havitz, an Israeli General attached to the Prime Minister's office, also told McVeigh Defense Attorney Stephen Jones that
the Israelis had issued a warning to the Americans.

501.

(401) Yehizkel Zadok, "The FBI is Conducting a Search for 'Three Middle Easterners,'" Yediot Arhonot, 4/20/95.

502.

(402) Report of William Northrop, and interview with author.

503.

(403) Timothy McVeigh's Petition for Writ of Mandamus, 3/25/97, p.

81.

Jones points out, given the issue of the credibility of the
information, that the head of Saudi Intelligence is the King's own son.

504.

(*) Jones said that Lipkin met with his U.S.

"counterpart," Phil Wilcox, the U.S.

State Department's coordinator for terrorism, after the
bombing to "compare notes." The reader will also recall that two Israeli bomb experts traveled to Oklahoma City after the bombing to analyze
the bomb signature.

505.--- PAGE BREAK ---

State Department's coordinator for terrorism, after the
bombing to "compare notes." The reader will also recall that two Israeli bomb experts traveled to Oklahoma City after the bombing to analyze
the bomb signature. 505. (*) Jones originally said that the meeting took place in Kingman, AZ. According to Gagan, that was incorrect, and was to protect
Gagan's information. 506. (*) Gagan had intermittent contact with the Soviets throughout the mid-'80s. In 1982, Gagan met a Soviet spy named Edward
Bodenzayer while in Puerto Vallerta. Bodenzayer had been exporting classified technology to Russia through his import/export business. He
was eventually arrested as a result of a joint FBI/Customs counterintelligence sting operation known as Operation Aspen Leaf. 507. (404) Cary Gagan, interview with author. 508. (405) Deposition of Cary James Gagan, 7/14/95. Copy in author's possession. 509. (*) Gagan later seemed to waver on this point: "I don't care what they say — where he was supposedly — he was there." He later said:
"I'm not sure, but it sure looked like him. He just didn't fit."
510. (**) Gagan recalls that Omar threw something in the trash. Gagan later fished it out. They were technical diagrams in Spanish that

--- PAGE BREAK ---appeared to be bomb plans.

511.

(*) According to Gagan, his Arab friends were interested in buying the Postal Center, and asked Gagan to propose a cash deal to
Colombo.

They were apparently interested in its mail and truck rental facility.

512.

(406) Mike Levine, interview with author.

513.

(407) Report of Craig Roberts, 5/8/95, copy in author's possession.

Roberts is the author's partner on the Oklahoma City bombing
investigation.

514.

(*) What is interesting, considering the FBI's lack of response, is that the Tulsa office of the FBI had commissioned Roberts to provide a
report on the bombing.

515.

(**) Gagan coyly admitted to knowing Iran-Contra drug runner and pilot Barry Seal.

516.

(408) Gagan contacted Dave Floyd at the U.S.

Marshals Office.

He said 'We've got to get moving on this right away.' I said, 'Well, I've
got to have immunity.'"
517.

(*) Gagan was referring to a Middle Eastern man who flew in from Oklahoma City.

Gagan had never seen him before.

518.

(*) Gagan gave accurate and specific descriptions of street addresses he had been in Kingman, and provided receipts for his travels to
the Arizona town.

He also provided receipts for hotel rooms in which he claims bomb planning meetings were held.

He said the original plot
involved blowing up a Jewish convention center in Denver where President Clinton was speaking.

519.

(409) FBI Agent Mark Holtslaw, interview with author.

520.

(410) Hand-written letter from Gagan to Tina Rowe, copy in author's possession.

521.

(*) Jayna Davis, KFOR-TV broadcast, June, 1995.

U.S.

Marshals Service head Tina Rowe said, regarding Cary Gagan's hand-delivered letter: "I work in a federal
building and all my friends work in federal buildings, and it's not something that anyone working in that environment would ever overlook." KFOR then uncovered a copy of
Gagan's envelope, on which the matching signature of a Marshals Service employee was found.U.S.

Marshals Service head Tina Rowe said, regarding Cary Gagan's hand-delivered letter: "I work in a federal
building and all my friends work in federal buildings, and it's not something that anyone working in that environment would ever overlook." KFOR then uncovered a copy of
Gagan's envelope, on which the matching signature of a Marshals Service employee was found.

The Marshals Service claimed it was suspicious, because it's office policy to
sign both the first and last name, and to stamp all incoming mail.

522.

(**) The Judge who sent Gagan to the mental hospital, John P.

Gately, was later termed incompetent and disbarred due to brain
cancer.

523.

(411) Kevin Flynn, "Romer, Norton get Bomb Threats: CBI Informant's Reliability in Question; He Also Warned of Federal Building
Blast," Rocky Mountain News, 8/12/95.

Gagan was worried about what had happened in Mexico with the Soviets, and didn't want to accept a
plea bargain.

524.

(412) Federal Public Defender, confidential interview with author.

525.

(*) A voice stress analysis the author ran on Gagan's interview tapes showed he was telling the truth.

526.

(**) Reports indicating that Gagan had been of assistance to the DEA were illegally removed from his informant file in an attempt to
discredit him.

527.

(413) Letter of Immunity from U.S.

Justice Dept.

signed by Henry Solano, to Gary James Gagan, copy in author's possession.

528.

(414) "FBI Furor," Unclassified, Summer, 1997.

529.

(415) Gail Gibson, "The Strange Murder-For-Hire Trial of Chuck Hayes Got Even Stranger Yesterday," Lexington Herald-Leader,
1/16/97.

Myers claimed that Hayes, a former CIA operative, had tried to hire a hit-man with a mere $5,000, using an open phone line.

530.

(416) Former Army C.I.D.

investigator, confidential interview with author.

531.

(417) Dick Russell, "Spook Wars In Cyberspace: Is the FBI Railroading Charles Hayes?" High Times, June, 1997.

532.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(417) Dick Russell, "Spook Wars In Cyberspace: Is the FBI Railroading Charles Hayes?" High Times, June, 1997. 532. (*) Gagan says the Letter of Immunity was not filed with the court, in violation of standard procedure. He also asserts that Allison's
signature was signed by his secretary, and is no good. 533. (418) Florida police detective, confidential interview with author.

--- PAGE BREAK ---534.

(*) Gagan claims that on January 15, 1997, as he was waiting for a bus at 1st and Lincoln in downtown Denver, a dark four-door Buick
came careening around the corner, firing at him with a silenced automatic weapon.

A check with Doug Packston at the Colorado Transit
Authority revealed a bullet hole in the bus shelter and glass that had been replaced.

535.

(*) It is unlikely that Gagan could have known about King's story, which was not widely reported.

536.

(**) The Florida police detective I spoke with told me that the FBI and state authorities "didn't want to investigate this," referring to the
connections he uncovered between Arab-Americans, the PLO, and the Cali Cartel, in the mid-80s.

He believes the FBI's head of
Counterintelligence came to Florida disguised as an agent, found out what they were working on, and took off.

As he said, "Things weren't
right.… It was as if someone were looking at this and saying 'stay away from it.'" His experience ties into that of an Army C.I.D.

officer who
investigated the brother of one of the Middle-Easterners allegedly involved in the bombing, who was involved in military espionage in
Huntsville, Alabama in the mid-80s.

He said the FBI "stonewalled" the case.

(More on this later)
537.

(419) OCPD Dispatch of 4/19/95.

538.

(420) David Harper, "Just who is Carol Howe?

Jurors Will Have To Decide Who the Real Woman Is," Tulsa World, 7/28/97.

"Howe said
she heard a 'powerful murmur' in the fall of 1995 that Tulsa could be the target of a major bombing in the spring of 1996.

Howe said
Thursday she left messages in 1995 but that her calls weren't returned."
539.

(*) A specific warning regarding flight 103 was also passed on from a Mossad Agent working at the Frankfurt airport.

540.

(**) What is interesting is that Oliver "Buck" Revell, former Counter-Terrorism chief of the FBI, pulled his son and daughter-in-law off
Pan Am 103 minutes before the flight.

Did Revell know something the rest of us did not?(**) What is interesting is that Oliver "Buck" Revell, former Counter-Terrorism chief of the FBI, pulled his son and daughter-in-law off
Pan Am 103 minutes before the flight.

Did Revell know something the rest of us did not?

(Steven Emerson doesn't bother mentioning that
little fact in his psyop piece entitled The Fall of Pan Am 103 , which, incidentally, leaves out the entire CIA/drug connection that many feel
was linked to the bombing.

541.

(**) Was Solano pressured to ignore Gagan's warning?

The Denver U.S.

Attorney had earlier intended to proceed with an investigation
into corruption by top U.S.

officials connected with Boulder Partnerships, Ltd., Twin Cities Bank of Little Rock, and MDC Holdings of Denver,
until he realized who was involved — friends of Bill Clinton and George Herbert Walker Bush.

542.

(421) Robert Rudolph, "Lawmen Get Warning of Plot on U.S.

Targets," Newark Star Ledger, 3/22/95.

543.

(422) Wendy Holden and David Millward, "Oklahoma Bomb Suspect Seized at Heathrow," London Sunday Telegraph.

date unknown.

544.

(423) Ibid.

545.

(424) Ibid.

546.

(425) Steven Emerson and Brian Duffy, The Fall of Pan Am 103, (New York, NY: G.P.

Putnam's), 1990, p.

176; also see "The Maltese
Double Cross," a British TV documentary on Pan Am 103.

547.

(*) Ahmed's detention produced a flurry of responses from the ACLU (American Civil Liberties Union), who were notified by Ahmed's
friend Sam Khalid.

The ACLU has long been funded (some say taken over) by the Roger Baldwin Foundation, a CIA front.

Perhaps they
wanted their man Ahmed released, just as the CIA wanted Jordanian Marwan Kreeshat released.

548.

(**) Haider Al Saiidi, one of Khalid's workers, had a wife who miscarriaged after the bombing due to harassment.

When Haider made
that public, Khalid fired him.

If Clear's theory is true, it is curious why Khalid fired him.

549.

(426) Police Report of arrest of Hussain Al-Hussaini.--- PAGE BREAK ---

549. (426) Police Report of arrest of Hussain Al-Hussaini. Sharon Twilley also stated she believed she had seen McVeigh in a bar on NW
10th Street, and had seen Hussaini and other Khalid employees in the same bar at different times. (* What must be pointed out again is that the FBI is claiming McVeigh rented the Ryder truck the following Monday,
April 17, which he did. This account indicates that two Ryder trucks were involved in the operation, not one, as the
FBI claims. 550. (*
551. (*
552. (427) Craig Freeman and Dennis Jackson, interviews with author. 553. (428) Sharon Cohen, Associated Press, 4/26/95.

--- PAGE BREAK ---554.

(429) Ruby Foos, interview with author; Davies, Op Cit., 4/21/95.

555.

(430) Jim Polk, CNN, 4/20/95; Sharon Cohen, Associated Press, 4/21/95.

556.

(431) William Jasper, "The Trial of John Doe No.

2," The New American, 5/13/96.

557.

(432) J.D.

Cash, "Lose Your Illusion," Media Bypass, February, 1996.

558.

(433) Margaret Hohmann and Ann Domin, interviews with author.

559.

(434) Debra Burdick, interview with author.

560.

(435) Jayna Davis, KFOR, shadow interview with Kay H., 6/17/95.

561.

(436) David Snider, interview with author.

562.

(437) OKPD Dispatch of 4/19/95.

563.

(438) David Hall, interview with author.

564.

(*) A source in the Sheriff's Office interviewed by Jayna Davis said the FBI refused to explain why it had cancelled the APB.

David Hall
said the APB was canceled by an FBI agent named Webster.

Yet according to OCPD officer Don Browning, the FBI later "admitted" to
"fabricating" the APB.

565.

(**) Both Ernie Cranfield and neighbors saw the brown pick-up at Sahara Properties.

566.

(439) Ernie Cranfield, interview with author.

567.

(*) Heather Khalid also told Cranfield in a secretly-taped interview that she had not been able to find any time record on Hussaini for
April 19, so she made one up and gave it to Dave Balut, a reporter for KWTV.

Khalid employee Terry Holliday, told a reporter at KOCO-TV
that Hussaini had been painting the house at NW 31st Street on April 19, then later told Cranfield that Hussaini had not actually been there
on the 19th.

Heather claimed that she had taken some supplies to Hussaini that morning, but Holliday claimed she had never been there.

Khalid worker Barnaby Machuca also repeatedly changed his story regarding Hussaini's whereabouts.

568.

(*) Numerous FBI and law enforcement sources Davis contacted agreed that Hussaini resembled the sketch of John Doe 2, and
believed there was a Middle Eastern connection to the bombing, possibly connected to the World Trade Center bombing.--- PAGE BREAK ---

568. (*) Numerous FBI and law enforcement sources Davis contacted agreed that Hussaini resembled the sketch of John Doe 2, and
believed there was a Middle Eastern connection to the bombing, possibly connected to the World Trade Center bombing. (KFOR's
Response to Plaintiff's Interrogatories, Hussaini vs. KFOR). 569. (440) OCPD D.U.I. report, copy in author's possession. 570. (* FBI spokesman Steve Mullins wouldn't confirm or deny whether Hussaini was a suspect; FBI agent James Strickland, who would
later investigate Khalid's alleged shooting of his secretary, Sharon Twilley, also declined to comment on whether Hussaini was a suspect. 571. (441) George Lang, "Out on a Limb," date unknown. 572. (442) Dave Balut reporting, KWTV, 10:00 p.m. newscast, 6/16/95. 573. (443) Sam Khalid, interview with author. 574. (*) William Northrop is an ex-Isreali intelligence officer who was indicted by former U.S. Attorney Rudolph Gulianni, and testified against
Israel's role in Iran-Contra. A friend of the late CIA Director William Casey, Northrop's name was reportedly found in Casey's diary upon his
death. 575. (*( Khalid, speaking on behalf of Hussaini, claimed his INS records were "stolen."
576. (*) Yousef arrived in New York on September 1, 1992. Many New York law enforcement officials reportedly believe that Iraq was
involved [in the Trade Center bombing], although they can not prove it. (Laurie Mylroie, "World Trade Center Bombing — The Case of Secret
Cyanide," The Wall Street Journal, July 26, 1994, p. A16.), quoted in James Phillips, The Changing Face of Middle Eastern Terrorism," The
Heritage Foundation, Backgrounder, #1005, 10/6/94. 577. (444) Mylroie, Op Cit. Yousef, who grew up in Kuwait, was also identified by Kuwaiti Interior Minister Sheik Ali al Sabah al Salim as an
Iraqi collaborator during Iraq's 1990 invasion of Kuwait. (Charles Wallace, "Weaving a Wide Web of Terror," Los Angeles Times, 5/28/95.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---578.

(*) Hussain al-Hussaini moved to Houston after going public and suing KFOR.

579.

(445) Louis Champon, interview with author.

According to Champon, who is suing the federal government, Peter Kawaja, who was
head of security for Champon's plant, hired Wackenhut.

Kawaja was later given immunity to act as an informant.

Said Robert Bickel, a
Customs informant and investigator familiar with the case: "Hell, Barbouti was treated more like a damn state bird than a terrorist."
580.

(*) Louis Champon said he saw Barbouti meet with Secord at the Fountain Blue Hotel in Miami in 1988.

581.

(446) Mike Johnston, interview with author.

John Conally, "Inside the Shadow CIA," Spy magazine, September, 1992; Said Louis
Champon, "They are so well-protected by an entity in our own government, that they have put up a wall.…"
582.

(*) Yet according to Champon's former head of security Peter Kawaja, and Iraqgate investigator Robert Bickel, Champon himself isn't
so innocent.

"Champon had to know about the cyanide leaving the plant," said Bickel.

"He was there every day, while the plant was being
built and operated." Nevertheless, Champon went public, and was threatened and shut down by U.S.

Customs and the I.R.S.

583.

(447) TK-7 is a chemical company in Oklahoma City owned by Moshe Tal, an Israeli.

Barbouti had attempted to purchase a formula
from them that could extend the range of rocket fuel for the Iraqi SCUD missiles.

584.

(*) While Ishan Barbouti allegedly "died" of heart failure in London in July of 1990, he was reportedly seen afterwards alive and well
flying between Aman, Jordan and Tripoli, Libya.

Other accounts indicate that he is living safe and well in Florida.

585.

(448) Clark, Op Cit,
586.

(449) Ibid., pp.

70-72, Quoted in William Blum, Killing Hope: U.S.

Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II (Common Courage
Press, 1996), p.

335; "The Gulf War and its Aftermath," The 1992 Information Please Almanac (Boston, 1992), p.

974, Quoted in Blum, p.

335.

587.--- PAGE BREAK ---

335. 587. (450) Laurie Garrett (medical writer for Newsday), "The Dead," Columbia Journalism Review, May/June, 1991, p. 32, quoted in Blum, p. 335. 588. (451) Needless Deaths Op. Cit., p. 135, quoted in Blum, p.335. 589. (452) Ibid., pp. 201-24; Clark, pp. 72-4; Los Angeles Times, 1/31/91; 2/3/91, quoted in Blum, p. 336. 590. (453) Bill Moyers, PBS Special Report: After the War, Spring, 1991, quoted in Clark, p. 53. 591. (454) "Biography: McVeigh, Part Two, Media Bypass, March, 1995. 592. (*) World Trade Center bomber Mahmud Abouhalima told Egyptian intelligence that the World Trade Center bombing had been
approved by Iranian intelligence. 593. (455) Yossef Bodansky, Terror: The Inside Story of the Terrorist Conspiracy in America (New York, NY: SPI Books, 1994), quoted in
Keith, Op Cit., p. 154. 594. (456) Ibid., p. 153. 595. (457) Indeed, a major terrorism summit sponsored by Tehran in June of 1996 saw delegates from Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iraq, Saudi
Arabia, and other Mid-East and African states, as well as Bosnia-Herzegovina, Germany, France, Britain, Canada, and the U.S. come
together to form a joint working committee under the command of the new HizbAllah International — transforming that group into "the
vanguard of the revolution" of the Muslim world. 596. (458) Defense & Foreign Affairs, Op Cit. 597. (459) Ibid. 598. (460) Ronald W. Lewis, "Uncivil Air War" (The Shootdown of TWA Flight 800)," Air Forces Monthly, No. 104, November 1996, posted
by S.A.F.A.N. Internet Newsletter, No. 213, December 21, 1996. 599. (461) Dr. Laurie Mylroie, Ph.D., "Terrorism in Our Face," American Spectator, April, 1997. 600. (*) This will be explored more fully in Volume Two. 601. (462) Phillips, Op Cit. It is reported that hundreds of them are also being trained by Iranian Revolutionary Guards in Sudanese training

--- PAGE BREAK ---camps.

602.

(463) See Edward Gargan, "Where Arab Militants Train and Wait," New York Times, 8/ 11/93; Tim Weiner, "Blowback From the Afghan
Battlefield," New York Times Magazine, 3/13/94; Daniel Klaidman and Gregory L.

Vistica, "In Search of a Killer," Newsweek, 8/11/97.

603.

(464) "The New Era of Global Terrorism," MSA News, date unknown, posted on Internet.

The leaders of Abu Sayyaf are: Abdurajak
Abubakr Janjalani, Amilhussin Jumaani, Edwin Angeles, Asmad Abdul.

604.

(465) "U.S.

Forces in Gulf on High Security Alert," Reuter, 4/7/97.

605.

(466) Patrick Cockburn, "Defector exposes Saddam's Lies on Chemical Weapons," The Independent, 5/7/96.

"General Sammara'i says
that the committee in charge of sabotage on which he served, and which uses a special 600-strong military unit called 888 to carry out
operations, still exists and he suspects it was involved in giving support to the bombers.

606.

(*) Abdul Rahman Yassin, an Iraqi indicted for his part in the World Trade Center bombing fled to Baghdad.

His brother, Musab Yasin,
provided a safehouse for the later plots.

While the New York office of the FBI wanted to arrest him, curiously, the Washington office
objected.

Another Iraqi with a Ph.D.

in microbiology, currently living in New Jersey, is Walied Samarrai.

607.

(467) Charles Wallace, "Weaving a Wide Web of Terror," Los Angeles Times, 5/28/95; Robert D.

McFadden, "Nine Suspected of
Terrorism are Arrested in Manila," New York Times, 12/30/96.

608.

(*) The nine suspects are: Yousef's brother, Adel Anonn (alias Adel Bani); Abdul Kareem Jassim Bidawi; Haleem Jassim Bidawi;
Jamaal Jaloud; Ibrahim Abid; and Najim Nasser (Iraqis); Emad Almubarak (Sudanese); Saleh Al Quuwaye, and Zaid Al Amer (Saudis).

609.

(**) Angeles told Jones that there are links to Philippine mail-order-bride businesses and criminal/terrorist activity.

It was not clear from
Jones' brief exactly what this entailed.

610.

(468) Ibid., p.3.

611.

(469) Lana Padilla, interview with author.

612.(469) Lana Padilla, interview with author.

612.

(**) Referring to the place in Davao, Angeles said, "It was also the place where Muslims were taught in bomb making."
613.

(470) Lou Kilzer and Kevin Floyd, "McVeigh Team Tries Again for Delay," Rocky Mountain News, 3/26/97; Timothy McVeigh's Petition
for Writ of Mandamus, 3/25/97.

614.

(471) Lana Padilla, interview with author.

615.

(472) "Petition For Writ of Mandamus of Petitioner-Defendant, Timothy James McVeigh and Brief in Support", Case No.

96-CR-68-M,
3/25/97.

616.

(*) A source close to Jones said that attorney Jim Hankins actually prepared the Writ.

617.

(*) Northrop claims that when he tried to run the information down in Kingman he came up empty.

His source in the U.S.

Marshals
Service, who was looking into the matter, received a call from the Justice Department, and was promptly stonewalled, he said.

618.

(*) Casinos have been used to launder money.

A drug dealer or other criminal enters the casino with dirty money, buys large quantities
of chips, gambles a bit, then cashes in the chips for clean money.

Russbacher told Stich that the process also works in reverse.

He
explained in one case how the CIA, through Shamrock Overseas Disbursement Corporation, gave money to the casino, who in turn would
give gambling chips to the recipients when they arrived, then the chips were cashed in.

Russbacher named three Las Vegas casinos
allegedly involved in the operation, including the Frontier, Stardust, and Binyon's Horseshoe.

619.

(† Considering the reports from dancers at two stripper bars — one in Tulsa and one in Junction City — McVeigh and Nichols had a
penchant for these types of places.

620.

(473) As interrogatory answers filed by KFOR in its defense against al-Hussaini state: [Lana] Padilla said that her son, Josh, went to
Las Vegas about once a month, where he was with Tim McVeigh, Terry Nichols, and Middle-Eastern men.--- PAGE BREAK ---

620. (473) As interrogatory answers filed by KFOR in its defense against al-Hussaini state: [Lana] Padilla said that her son, Josh, went to
Las Vegas about once a month, where he was with Tim McVeigh, Terry Nichols, and Middle-Eastern men. Padilla expressed the opinion that
there was a Middle-Eastern connection to the Oklahoma City bombing. 621. (474) "Omar Khalif was one of the aliases listed on Khalid's 1990 federal indictment. 622. (475) Melissa Klinzing, former KFOR news director, interview with author.

--- PAGE BREAK ---623.

(**) After Davis questioned several employees at the MGM, two were fired.

624.

(476) Louis Crousette and Jayna Davis, transcript in author's possession.

625.

(477) Gordon Novel, interview with author.

626.

(*) Gagan recognized Abraham Ahmed being with Khalid.

Gagan said he saw Ahmed (by another name) in Las Vegas with Omar-
Khalid in the Summer or Fall of 1994.

He said he also saw Hussain al-Hussaini in Oklahoma City when he was here in April.

627.

(**) Al Saiidi, incidentally, was the man who's wife who had a miscarriage after stones were thrown through his window.

When Al Saiidi
went before news cameras to complain about the incident, Khalid fired him.

628.

(478) Ernie Cranfield, interview with author.

629.

(*) The State Tax Commission also wanted Cranfield to testify against Khalid.

Instead, Khalid paid a fine.

"That covered up for his ex-
wife getting killed," said Cranfield.

630.

(† At the same time, interestingly, two Middle Eastern residents of the Woodscape apartments skipped out without paying their rent.

It
should also be noted that two heavy-set Arabs work for Sam Khalid.

631.

(479) Keith, Op Cit, p.

148.

632.

(480) Joe Royer, interview with author.

The FBI agent who interviewed the couple told them that one VIN number was left intact, and
fingerprints were found.

633.

(481) Rex Carmichael, interview with author.

634.

(*) Was the brown pick-up painted at Route 66, or elsewhere?

According to information obtained by Will Northrop, Haider al-Saiidi was
hired by Ali Khoddami at International Auto works, a body shop located at 16th and Blackwielder, after he was fired by Khalid.

An Iranian,
Khoddami is reportedly a friend of Khalid's.

Sharbat Khan, a Pakistani and Rizwan A.

Shaikh were reportedly going to buy International Auto
Works from Khoddami.

635.

(482) Tom's is run by Tom Breske, who Carmichael described as "bad news."
636.

(483) Confidential interview with author.

637.

(484) Michael Reed, interview with author.

638.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(484) Michael Reed, interview with author. 638. (**) Don Browning, interview with author. Kamal had been working with the FBI to track Khalid and others who were involved in
insurance fraud scams. Although he definitely knew Khalid, he disputed that he said "This is the Mossad" to Browning. Browning swears he
did. Yet Jayna Davis said Browning told her that Kamal said that Khalid was a member of "Hamas," a far cry from the Mossad, the Israeli
intelligence agency. Another possible explanation is that there were Mossad agents posing as members of Hamas, but it seems unlikely that
Kamal would know that. 639. (485) Bob Jerlow, interview with author. 640. (486) OCPD detective, confidential interview with author. 641. (*) When Jerlow asked an FBI source if KFOR was on the right track, he was told "Keep doing what you're doing." Curiously, an OCPD
contact of Davis' was told by his FBI source, "stay away."
642. (*) Macy and State Attorney General Drew Edmondson had also pushed certain aspects of the Anti-Terrorism Bill, using the bombing
as a platform. 643. (**) This is doubly interesting, since Richardson was the U.S. Attorney who prosecuted Khalid for insurance fraud in 1990. Richardson
"committed suicide" in July of 1997 over "work-related" matters. 644. (*) While Khalid's attorney claimed that only $15,000 dollars or so was involved in the scams, the U.S. Attorney's report is more
incriminating. Khalid was also accused during his arson case of employing false Social Security numbers. One of them is registered to a
woman in Oklahoma City; the other to a woman in Miami. 645. (**) One of the agents, James Strickland, would later be assigned to the Twilley assault case.

--- PAGE BREAK ---646.

(† He later told investigative journalist William Jasper he emigrated from Libya.

647.

(487) U.S.

vs.

Sam Khalid, Response to Presentence Report; Sam Khalid, interview with author.

648.

(*) According to a local HUD representative I checked with, Khalid paid cash for most of his properties, avoiding the scrupulous
background checks and the typical paper trail which accompanies them.

Additionally, none of Khalid's three companies, which employ
numerous employees, are registered with the State or have Federal Tax I.D.

numbers.

649.

(*) Emphasis in original.

650.

(488) FBI spokesman Charles Steinmetz said the information he gave Burnes came from former FBI Deputy Assistant Director Bob
Ricks.

651.

(489) Karen Burnes, "Palestinians: Dirty Business," CBS West 57 Street News magazine, 5/2/89, Citd in Howard Rosenberg,
"'Palestinian Network': A Full Report?, Los Angeles Times, 6/1/89.

652.

(*) "Before the bombing, we couldn't get the U.S.

Attorney's office interested," said private investigator Ben Jacobson.

"After the
bombing, they just wanted us to keep our mouths shut."
653.

(490) Northrop, Op Cit.

654.

(491) In federal court filings, WISE was described as "a front used to bring international terrorists to the United States."
655.

(*) It seems the reference to "Iranians" as used by this CID officer is a generic term meant to refer to Middle-Easterners in general,
although some Iranians were definitely involved.

656.

(**) According to Mike Johnston, the head of security for 777 Post Oak Corporation (a high-rise office complex in Houston affiliated with
IBI, Ishan Barbouti's company) had a son in the U.S.

military intelligence.

The father, who was later wanted for impersonating a CIA agent,
would call his son at the Major Command Assignments Center at Bolling Air Force in Washington, D.C.

around August 1990, just prior to the
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.

Some of the calls apparently involved the use of a modem to tap into the command center's computers.

657.Some of the calls apparently involved the use of a modem to tap into the command center's computers.

657.

(492) Retired U.S.

Army CID investigator, Interview with author.

658.

(493) General Robert L.

Moore (Ret.), interview with author.

659.

(*) Tom Weisman was the FBI SAC of the Huntsville office.

660.

(**) This detective also said that the chief of the FBI's counterintelligence division masqueraded as a police officer and traveled to
Florida to collect data on the their investigation.

661.

(† Brazelton didn't return calls.

662.

(*) Had it actually come from Mexican drug king-pin Juan Garcia Abrego, who is linked to the Cali Cartel, and had reportedly sent two
bag-men up to Oklahoma City to finance the bombing?

663.

(**) Kingman has also been called the "Golden Triangle" of Speed (Methamphetamine), and McVeigh had known Clark Volmer, a
paraplegic drug dealer and loan shark in town.

On October 19, six months to the day of the bombing, Gagan was directed by a man he
describes as "Hizbollah" to take a bus from Las Vegas to Kingman, to deliver a large bag of money — estimated to be between $200,000
and $300,000 to an individual who was "militia looking in appearance."
664.

(† McPeak hired McVeigh in 1993 to do security work at a local shelter.

When his girlfriend was arrested in Las Vegas on a bad credit
charge, Clark Vollmer, a paraplegic drug dealer in Kingman, helped bail her out.

In February of '95, McPeak claims, Vollmer asked him to
ferry some drugs.

He refused.

Shortly thereafter, an ANFO bomb exploded under a chair outside McPeak's home.

When he went to
Vollmer's house to confront him, he found Timothy McVeigh, along with another man he didn't recognize.

665.

(494) "FBI Finds Possible Evidence in OKC Bombing, CNN, 7/20/95.

666.

(495) Hugh Dellios, "Federal Marshals Arrest Chemist," Chicago Tribune, 5/13/95; Mark Schaffer, "Probe Nets 2nd Man in Oatman,"
Arizona Republic, 5/14/95, quoted in Keith, p.--- PAGE BREAK ---

666. (495) Hugh Dellios, "Federal Marshals Arrest Chemist," Chicago Tribune, 5/13/95; Mark Schaffer, "Probe Nets 2nd Man in Oatman,"
Arizona Republic, 5/14/95, quoted in Keith, p. 52; Katherine Mauro, Oatman Mining Co., interview with author; Records of the Federal
Bureau of Prisons. 667. (496) Diane Sawyer, "Prime Time Live," 4/25/95.

--- PAGE BREAK ---668.

(497) Mike Johnston, "Investigative Fact Finding Trip to Germany," 1995, copy in author's possession; Jonathan Vankin, Conspiracies,
Cover-Ups & Crimes: From Dallas to Waco, (Lilburn, GA: Illuminit Press, 1996), p.

211.

669.

(*) Skorzeny was at the nexus of the surviving elements of the Nazi movement, and helped organize its tentacles after WWII.

670.

(498) Johnston, Op.

Cit.; Vankin, Op Cit., p.

226; Martin A.

Lee and Kevin Coogan, "Killers on the Right: Inside Europe's Fascist
Underground," Mother Jones, May, 1987.

671.

(499) Der Speigel writer Martin Killian, interview with author.

Libya also reportedly funded the Irish Republican Army.

672.

(500) Johnston, Op.

Cit.

673.

(501) Mike Levine, interview with author.

674.

(502) Tom Jarriel, ABC 20/20, January 19, 1996.

675.

(503) Jeffrey A.

Builta, "Extremist Groups," Office of International Criminal Justice, Chicago, date unknown.

The connection is
reportedly through Pakistani Brigadier General Imtiaz.

676.

(504) Terrorist Group Profiles, Dudley Knox Library, Naval Postgraduate School, date unknown.

677.

(505) Builta, Op Cit.

678.

(*) The Bureau of Prisons had "no record" of Edward Flinton, eventhough he served time in federal prison.

Usually this means the
individual is under the "witness protection program."
679.

(506) Kevin Flynn, "Romer, Norton Get Bomb Threats: CBI Informant's Reliability in Question; He Also Warned of Federal Building
Blast," Rocky Mountain News, 08/12/95.

Gagan said he met with Al Fuqra members on different occasions between October, 1995 and
February 1996.

680.

(507) Judge Lewis Babcock and John Strader, interview with author.

Gagan said he met with U.S.

Marshal Jake Warner at Brooklyns
restaurant on October 27, 1995.

"In all the years that I've known [Gagan], he's never met with a pair of people in suits," said the manager in
an interview with the author.

681.

(*) Gagan said he saw Daniel with Omar and Ahmed in Mexico.--- PAGE BREAK ---

681. (*) Gagan said he saw Daniel with Omar and Ahmed in Mexico. On November 27, Gagan says he was instructed by his "Hizbollah"
contact to rent a room at the La Vista Motel in Denver in preparation for another meeting. Gagan said his attempts to have the FBI stake out
the room were ignored. The informant claims he learned of plans to bomb simultaneous targets in Phoenix and Denver on or about February
8, 1996 — the specific targets being the ATF office in the Mile High Center at 1700 Broadway in Denver, and the DEA/Customs office at 115
Inverness Drive in Englewood, Colorado. 682. (508) Hampton's alias was Abd al-Rashid Abdallah, and Gant's was Abd Rashid. 683. (*) A voice stress analysis run on the caller indicated he was telling the truth. 684. (*) This claim was allegedly based on DNA tests and footprint matches. 685. (509) Jim Killackey, "Leg Confirmed as 169th Victim's," Daily Oklahoman, date unknown; "Leg Lost in Blast Still a Mystery," Dallas
Morning News, 10/19/95; "Oklahoma Bomb Victim Exhumed," 3/15/96, Associated Press; Gary Tuchman, "Does severed leg prove
McVeigh's innocence?," CNN, 8/7/95. 686. (510) William Jasper, interview with author. Mahon stated this to Jasper on October 1, 1996,
687. (511) "Rise of HizbAllah International," Defense & Foreign Affairs, 8/31/96. 688. (512) FBI 302 statement of Mohammad Abdul Haggag, quoted in Mylroie, Op Cit. 689. (513) Timothy McVeigh's Writ of Mandamus, 3/25/96, copy in author's possession, also quoted in William Jasper, " Defense Cits
Mideast Connection," The New American, 5/12/97. 690. (514) Phillips, Op Cite. 691. (515) She said that her father had also met Yasser Afafat, and had his photograph on his wall.

--- PAGE BREAK ---692.

(*) Michele also said she overheard her father talk about approaching neo-Nazis through the National Socialist Party.

Did Hirram Torres
try to contact National Socialist leader Gary Lauck?

Apparently, Strassmeir was on to Lauck, as he was arrested on his way to Denmark.

Strassmeir had learned about Lauck's travel plans from WAR leader Dennis Mahon, a friend of Brescia and Strassmeir, who, as mentioned
previously, was being paid by the Iraqis.

693.

(516) Keith, Op Cit., p.

151.

694.

(**) We ran Torres' tapes through a voice stress analyzer.

They indicated she was being truthful.

695.

(517) There were no purges in the Communist intelligence services in the former Soviet Union [FSU].

Documents and records, as
General Sejna points out, were transferred from Eastern Europe to Moscow.

Those who ran the KGB still run the SVR, and a dozen other
services in Russia and the FSU.

696.

(518) Michael Hedges, "Senate Resolution Asks Clinton to Block Resettlement of Iraqis," Washington Times, 9/14/93; "Iraq: Admission
of Refugees into the United States," Congressional Research Service Report for Congress, Library of Congress, 10/28/93; Letter from
Senator David Boren to Craig Roberts, 3/14/94, copy in author's possession; Denmark, Norway, Sweden, the U.K., Australia, Pakistan, and
Syria absorbed the remaining refugees.

697.

(*) The Federal Government allocated $6,000 per refugee for resettlement purposes, at the same time that veterans who suffered from
Gulf War illness were being ignored by the Veterans Administration.

698.

(519) Ibid.

699.

(*) On December 4, 1981, President Reagan issued an Executive Order permitting the CIA to conduct covert operations inside this
country.

Not that they didn't already.

700.

(*) Like Andreas Strassmeir, Hussaini was unable to come up with his INS records.

Khalid claimed they were stolen by KFOR, a claim
that Jayna Davis just laughed at.

701.Khalid claimed they were stolen by KFOR, a claim
that Jayna Davis just laughed at.

701.

(*) The government's refusal to admit the terrorist missile shoot-down of TWA flight 800 may very well have as its basis the need to
maintain the ability of the crucial airline industry to continue functioning.

702.

(*) As Washington insider journalist Sara McClendon told me, "Bush has a hold on the Clinton administration, and I don't know what it
is.… George Bush starts these things… he's pushing Mena, Arkansas off on Clinton.… Most of the people don't know that Bush is
manipulating the administration."
703.

(520) McVeigh was indicted on 11 counts: conspiracy to use a bomb to destroy the Federal Building, detonating the bomb, destroying a
federal building, and murdering eight federal law enforcement agents.

704.

(521) Brandon M.

Stickney, All American Monster: The Unauthorized Biography of Timothy McVeigh (New York, NY: Prometheus
Books, 1996), p.

177; "Richard Serrano, "Clues Sought in Details from McVeigh's Arrest," Los Angeles Times, 9/10/95, quoted in Armstrong,
Op Cit.

p.

118.

705.

(*) McVeigh was taken over to Hanger's patrol car, where he heard radio broadcasts about the bombing, and casually chit-chated with
Officer Hanger.

( When he arrived at the jailhouse, he simply asked, "when's chow"?

706.

(522 Col.

David Hackworth and Peter Anninn, j"And We're Going to Go to Trial," Newsweek, 7/3/95.

707.

(523) Richard A.

Serrano, "Clues Sought in Details from McVeigh's Arrest," 9/10/95, quoted in Ibid.

708.

(524) Application and Affidavit FBI Special Agent Henry C.

Gibbons.

709.

(525) Elizabeth Gleick, "Who Are They?" Time, 5/1/95.

710.

(526) New York Times, 4/22/95.

711.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(526) New York Times, 4/22/95. 711. (*) For that matter, why would he rent an easily traceable truck, apply for jobs at the Federal Building using his real name, allow himself
to be filmed by numerous security cameras, stop to ask directions minutes before the bombing, hang around two blocks from the crime
scene minutes after the blast, speed away without a license plate, and fail to shoot the cop who stopped him? 712. (527) United States v. Timothy James McVeigh, direct testimony of FBI Agent James Elliott, 4/28/97. The complete confidential vehicle
identification number was 1FDNF72J4PVA26077.

--- PAGE BREAK ---713.

(*) The author saw a close-up videotape of the axle taken by Deputy Sheriff Melvin Sumter, which clearly shows the serial number on
the differential housing, which is part of the rear axle assembly.

It was not, as some amateur researchers claimed, on the axle itself.

714.

(528) FBI FD-383 (FBI Facial Identification Fact Sheet) of Tom Kessinger, dated 4/20/95, copy in author's possession.

Tim Kelsey, "The
Oklahoma Suspect Awaits Day of Reckoning," London Sunday Times, 4/21/96.

715.

(529) Cash, Op Cit.

716.

(530) Edward Zehr, "The McVeigh Trial Gets Underway: Mainstream Media Miss The Real Story," Washington Weekly, 5/5/97.

717.

(*) Elliott stated in his FBI 302 that a second man accompanied "Kling" on April 17, and thought he saw "fair size" light blue sedan.

718.

(*) In fact, Elliott testified that he met with the prosecution for two hours, several days prior to the his appearance at trial.

719.

(531) Affidavit of Richard Renya, July 5, 1995
720.

(532) Newsweek reporter, confidential interview with author.

721.

(*) An anonymous informant who contacted State Representative Charles Key several times stated, "…the ATF regularly uses leased
Ryder trucks to move ordinance.

And you know it's against ICC regulation and everything but he said they secretly do it." Investigator Craig
Roberts said the Army also has "open contracts" with Ryder.

722.

(533) "Phone Records Link Suspects Before Blast," Daily Oklahoman, 5/3/96.

723.

(534) Testimony of OPUS Telecom expert John Kane, U.S.

v.

McVeigh.

724.

(535) Kevin Flynn, "Computer Records Show Calls Made But Aren't Clear Who Made Them," Rocky Mountain News, date unknown.

"Prosecutors have pressured OPUS representatives not to discuss this issue with the News, even asking them not to verify how their
computer systems work, the employees said."
725.

(536) Steve Wilmsen, "Records Point to John Doe 2," Denver Post, date unknown; Steven K.

Paulson, Associated Press, 2/15/97.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(536) Steve Wilmsen, "Records Point to John Doe 2," Denver Post, date unknown; Steven K. Paulson, Associated Press, 2/15/97. In a
later ruling, Judge Matsch stated that Manning denied prosecutors did anything wrong to elicit his testimony. 726. (537) J.D. Cash, interview with James Sargeant, Media Bypass, July, 1996. 727. (538) Barbara Whittenberg, interview with author. 728. (*) Interestingly, McGown did not state on his FBI 302 who was driving the truck on April 16, when his mother had asked him to request
that the driver move it. 729. (539) Investigation on 5/7/95 at Junction City, Kansas File # 174A-OC-56120-D-815 by SA Mark M. Bouton -WSA, date dictated 5/8/95. 730. (540) Robert Vito, "Oklahoma Bombing Investigators Hit Troublesome Snags," CNN, 11/24/95. 731. (541) Newsweek reporter, confidential interview with author. 732. (542) Hoppy Heidelberg, Interview with author. 733. (543) Joseph Vinduska and Dennis Euwer are two witnesses who saw the truck at the lake on the 18th. 734. (544) Steve Wilmsen and Mark Eddy, "Who bombed the Murrah Building?" Denver Post, date unknown. 735. (545) Jack Douglas Jr. "Bomb link to lake reportedly scrapped, Fort Worth Star-Telegram, 3/25/97. 736. (546) Evan Thomas, "This Doesn't Happen Here," Newsweek, 5/1/95; U.S. v. McVeigh. 737. (547) U.S. v. James Douglas Nichols and Terry Nichols, Criminal Complaint, statements of FBI Special Agent Patrick Wease. 738. (548) "Some Witnesses Leery Of Bombing Grand Jury," Daily Oklahoman, 8/10/97; Gary Antene, interview with author. 739. (549) U.S. v. McVeigh, testimony of Richard Chambers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---740.

(550) "FBI Investigates Possible McVeigh Link to Fuel Buy," Rocky Mountain News, 4/11/97.

741.

(*) However, the indictment named Libyan Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi as the customer.

Authorities' second witness, Abdu Maged
Jiacha, a Libyan intelligence officer who defected to the U.S., was put into the Federal Witness Protection Program and given a $4 million
dollar reward for his testimony against Megrahi.

742.

(551) Ed Hueske, interview with author.

743.

(552) Frank Shiller and Max Courtney, interviews with author.

744.

(553) Lou Kilzer and Kevin Flynn, "Were Feds Warned Before OKC Bomb Built?" Rocky Mountain News, 2/6/97.

745.

(554) Testimony of Kevin Nicholas, U.S.

v.

McVeigh.

746.

(555) Padilla and Delpit, Op Cit., p.

209; David Johnson, "Agents in Kansas Hunt for Bomb Factory as Sense of Frustration Begins to
Build," New York Times, 4/30/95, quoted in Keith, p.

37.

747.

(556) James.

D.

Nichols, Freedom's End: Conspiracy in Oklahoma, self published, 1997, p.

164.

748.

(557) "McVeigh's Fingerprints Not on Key Items," CNN, 5/15/97.

749.

(*) As the Associated Press recently reported, police in upstate New York had been falsifying evidence, including fingerprints, for years.

750.

(558) Jim Garrison, On The Trial of the Assassins (New York, NY: Warner Books, 1988), p.

113.

751.

(559) Whitehurst contended the problems in the FBI's lab had been occurring since at least 1989.

752.

(560) David Johnston and Andrew C.

Revkin, "Report Finds FBI Lab Slipping From Pinnacle of Crime Fighting," New York Times,
1/29/97.

753.

(561) "Report: FBI Lab Botched Oklahoma Bombing Evidence," CNN, 3/22/97.

754.

(*) As Whitehurst stated: "…Mr.

Thurman, in my estimation does intentionally misrepresent evidence and is, absolutely, without a doubt,
beyond any possible other explanation's grasp, result oriented.

He wants the answer that will prove guilt.…"
755.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thurman, in my estimation does intentionally misrepresent evidence and is, absolutely, without a doubt,
beyond any possible other explanation's grasp, result oriented. He wants the answer that will prove guilt.…"
755. (**) Whitehurst testified that he was told not to provide any information or evidence, such as alternate theories to the urea-nitrate theory,
that could be used by the defense to challenge the prosecutors' hypothesis of guilt in the World Trade Center case. (Ryan Ross, "Blasting
the FBI," Digital City Denver, 1997)
756. (562) John Kelly, "FBI: McVeigh Contradictions," Unclassified, date unknown; Memorandum to All U.S. Attorneys from John Keeney,
Acting Assistant Attorney General, 1/4/96, copy in author's possession; "Outside Experts to Review FBI Crime Lab," Wall Street Journal,
9/19/95; "Team to Investigate FBI Chemist's Bias Claims," Associated Press, date unknown; Pierre Thomas, "FBI Lab Audit Finds Some
Discrepancies," Washington Post, 9/15/95. 757. (**) "Mr. Williams… rewrote my reports in an unauthorized rewriting, issued these reports, unauthorized, changes being in them, and
changed the meaning of the reports I think, without realizing it," Whitehurst later testified. 758. (563) Memorandum to Scientific Analysis Chief James Kearny, copy in author's possession, date unknown. 759. (564) Garrison, Op Cit., P. 116. 760. (565) "FBI Furor,"Unclassified, Summer, 1997. 761. (566) Ryan Ross, "Blasting the FBI," Digital City Denver, 1997. 762. (567) Nolan Clay, "McVeigh Items Seized From Home, Brief Says," Daily Oklahoman, 6/11/96; U.S. v. McVeigh, testimony of Special
Agent Steven Burmeister. 763. (568) Karen Abbott, "Defense Says FBI Tainted Residue: Evidence Questioned; British Expert Testifies; The Tables Turn Today, Rocky
Mountain News, 5/21/97. Burmeister said he photographed the crystals before they disappeared. 764. (569) Deputy Sheriff Clint Boehler, interview with author.

--- PAGE BREAK ---765.

(570) Ryan Ross, Digital City Denver, 1997.

Reno would later comment, "It is unfair, it is unreasonable, it is a lie to spread the poison
that the government was responsible at Waco for the murder of innocents.

That kind of language is unacceptable in a society that values
truth."
766.

(571) U.S.

v.

McVeigh.

767.

(*) McVeigh selected Oklahoma City for the fact that the agents and the orders that came out of that building were responsible for the
tragedy at Waco, Fortier alleged at trial.

768.

(572) The gun — a Ruger Mini-30 rifle, Serial No.

18957425 — was actually purchased by Terry Nichols on November 10, 1993, from
Randy's Hunting and Sport in Bad Axe, Michigan.

769.

(573) Hoppy Heidelberg, interview with author.

770.

(574) Copy of letter in author's possession.

771.

(575) David Maranise, Pierre Thomas, "Officials See Conspiracy of at Least Four in Blast; Probe Focuses on Suspect's Right-Wing
Ties, Washington Post, 4/23/95.

772.

(576) Ibid.

773.

(577) Dallas Morning News, 6/15/95.

774.

(578) Peter Carlson, Washington Post, 3/23/97.

775.

(*) Hartzler's letter, Jones said in his brief, "indicates that the Justice Department is still searching for John Doe No.

2 and may be
releasing disinformation to lessen public pressure to find [him]."
776.

(579) Nolan Clay and John Parker, "John Doe 2 Still Sought, Letter: Says Prosecutors Doubt Witnesses Mistaken," The Daily
Oklahoman, date unknown.

777.

(580) William Jasper, New American, date unknown.

778.

(581) Nolan Clay and Penny Owen, "'Wacky Theories' Unfair, McVeigh Attorney Says," Daily Oklahoman,10/29/96.

"We have an
obligation to investigate everything," Hartzler told a group of bombing victims.

"And if we find some rumor or whatever it is, it makes it into an
FBI report."
779.

(582) John Gibson, interview with Charles Key and V.Z.

Lawton, MSNBC, 4/25/97; V.Z.

Lawton, interviews with author.

780.

(583) New York Times, 12/3/95.

781.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(583) New York Times, 12/3/95. 781. (*) The federal prosecutors' lame excuse for confining the evidence to McVeigh and Nichols was to maintain a "deadline" set by federal
guidelines on providing speedy trials. 782. (584) Harry Wallace, CBS This Morning, 10/16/95. 783. (585) Jon Rappaport is the author of The Oklahoma Bombing: The Suppressed Truth (Santa Monica: Blue Press, 1995). 784. (586) Hoppy Heidelberg, interview with author. 785. (587) J.D. Cash, "New Investigation Into Oklahoma City Bombing Demanded," Jubilee, Nov/Dec, 1995. In the Whitewater affair, a
special federal judge panel, by statute, appointed an Independent Counsel, Kenneth Starr, supposed to be separate and apart from the
Justice Department. Under the law, this was supposed to assure the public that there would be an "independent" investigation of possible
high-level criminality, not a white-wash. Miguel Rodriguez was reportedly blocked by Starr and others from probing and calling independent
witnesses, not necessarily FBI nor forensic experts beholden to a political agenda. All this, in respect to suspicions that White House deputy
counsel Vincent Foster, jr. was not really a suicide but murdered. "Whitewater And The 'Runaway' Federal Grand Jury", Sherman H. Skolnick. Conspiracy Nation, Vol. 5, No. 30. 786. (*) It seemed that the John Doe 2 lead was officially dropped in early May. An FBI memo regarding a John Doe 2 lead instructs all FBI
offices: "In view of the fact that the Oklahoma Command Post has directed all offices to hold unsub #2 leads in abeyance, San Francisco will
conduct no further investigation regarding this lead." (174A-OC-56120 TPR:tpr, investigation was conducted by Special Agent (SA) Thomas
P. Ravenelle regarding Richard Dehart, DOB 6/21/65, as a Phoenix resident and a possible look- alike for unsub #2, dated 5/3/95.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---gation was conducted by Special Agent (SA) Thomas
P. Ravenelle regarding Richard Dehart, DOB 6/21/65, as a Phoenix resident and a possible look- alike for unsub #2, dated 5/3/95.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

787. (588) Reddy and Wilmsen, Op Cit.
788. (589) Dr. Paul Heath, interview with author.
789. (590) Sharon Cohen, Associated Press, 4/27/95, quoted in Armstrong, Op Cit, p. 27.
790. (*) It should be noted that McVeigh was supposedly on the road on April 12, traveling from Kingman to Junction City.
791. (591) Barbara Whittenberg, interview with author.
792. (592) Jayna Davis, interview with author.
793. (593) Linda Kuhlman and Phyliss Kingsley, interviews with author.
794. (594) Connie Hood, interview by Glenn Wilburn and J.D. Cash; Keith, Op Cit., p. 147.
795. (595) Ibid.
796. (596) Tony Boller, Assistant Project Manager, Goodwill Industries, interview with author.
797. (597) Jerri-Lynn Backhous and Dorinda Hermes , interviews with author.
798. (598) Kevin Flynn, "Guard saw 2nd truck at building: Story Mirrors Bombing Trial Witness' Account of Blast Day," Rocky Mountain
News, 5/24/97.
799. (599) Arnold Hamilton, Dallas Morning News, 11/27/95.
800. (600) Brian Ford, "McVeigh Placed at Kansas Store," Tulsa World, 9/12/97.
801. (601) Hamilton, Op Cit.
802. (*) This is the same thing that Brian Marshall, the Johnny's Tire Store employee, said.
803. (*) David Snider, interview with author. Snider appeared to be a credible witness.
804. (602) Mark Eddy, "Witnesses Tell a Different Story," Denver Post, 6/16/96.
805. (603) Rodney Johnson, interview with author.
806. (604) "Some Witnesses Leery Of Bombing Grand Jury," Daily Oklahoman, 8/10/97.
807. (605) Monterey County Herald, 4/29/95, quoted in Armstrong, Op Cit, p. 8.
808. (606) Judy Kuhlman and Diana Baldwin, "Witnesses Say McVeigh Not Alone — Testimony Places John Doe 2, Another Man With
Bomber," Daily Oklahoman, 9/11/97.
809. (607) "FBI Searching for Third Man in Oklahoma City Bombing," CNN, 3/10/97.
810. (*) "Reference lead #10,220: Referenced lead #10,220, San Francisco was directed to locate and interview LESTER SCANLON
concerning his knowledge of STEVEN COLBERN. In view of the fact that COLBERN has been eliminated as a suspect in this matter, San
Francisco will conduct no further investigation concerning lead #10,220." (FBI memo dated 5/3/95.)
811. (608) Cash, Media Bypass, February, 1996, Op Cit.
812. (*) As the Legal Times noted: "Within hours of landing, [Deputy A. G. Merrick] Garland was hit by a barrage of legal concerns.… In
subsequent days, Garland met with Oklahoma County District Attorney Robert Macy, gently notifying him of the Justice Department's desire
not to have a local investigation going on simultaneously."
813. (609) Foreign Policy Institute expert, confidential interview with author.
814. (*) The Brady Rule and Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 16(a)(1)(C) provides: "Upon request of the defendant the government shall
permit the defendant to inspect and copy and photograph, books, papers, documents, photographs… which are within the possession,a)(1)(C) provides: "Upon request of the defendant the government shall
permit the defendant to inspect and copy and photograph, books, papers, documents, photographs… which are within the possession,

--- PAGE BREAK ---custody or control of the government, and which are material to the preparation of the defendant's defense.…"
815.

(610) U.S.

v.

McVeigh, Timothy McVeigh's Petition for Writ of Mandamus, 3/25/97.

816.

(611) Ambrose Evans Pritchard, "Victims Sue in Oklahoma: Fight for Truth," London Sunday Telegraph, 3/23/97.

817.

(612) J.D.

Cash and Jeff Holladay, "Day of Blast 'an Amazing Coincidence,'" McCurtain Gazette, 12/1/95.

818.

(613) Pat Briley, interview with author.

819.

(*) Judge Matsch was not impressed with this evidence.

He commented during trial that there must be half a million blue GMC pick-ups
with camper tops.

820.

(614) Ken Armstrong, interview with Oklahoma Highway Patrol, August 30, 1995.

821.

(615) Amber McGlaughlin, interview with author.

822.

(616) Ken Armstrong, No Amatuer Did This (Aptos, CA: Blackeye Press, 1997).

823.

(*) The assertion was that McVeigh was demonstrating how to make a "shaped charge," which would have been impossible to make
using 55-gallon barrels of ANFO.

824.

(617) Testimony of Deborah Brown, U.S.

v.

McVeigh.

The author has had personal experience with methamphetamine users, and can
vouch for the drug's ability to induce psychotic states.

825.

(*) In fact, Fortier was very intent during testimony on impressing upon the jury that the guns from the Moore "robbery" were stolen,
saying in response to Jones' cross-examination: "No, no!

I'm convinced those guns were stolen!" As J.D.

Cash observed, Fortier's
successful plea-bargain was partly dependent on carrying that fact forward.

826.

(618) Hoppy Heidelberg, interview with Jon Rappaport.

827.

(*) Even Judge Matsch was forced to tell the jury: "You should bear in mind that a witness who has entered into such an agreement has
an interest in this case different from any ordinary witness.

A witness who realizes that he may be able to obtain his own freedom or receive
a lighter sentence by giving testimony favorable to the prosecution has a motive to testify falsely.(*) Even Judge Matsch was forced to tell the jury: "You should bear in mind that a witness who has entered into such an agreement has
an interest in this case different from any ordinary witness.

A witness who realizes that he may be able to obtain his own freedom or receive
a lighter sentence by giving testimony favorable to the prosecution has a motive to testify falsely.

Therefore, you must examine his testimony
with caution and weigh it with great care."
828.

(619) The Fifth Estate, Fall, 1996, Vol.

31, #2.

829.

(620) Denver Post, 5/6/97.

830.

(621) "Juror's Emotions With Crying Witnesses," The Spotlight, 5/26/97.

831.

(622) "Nichols' Wife Says She Didn't Understand FBI Consent Form," CNN, 6/28/96
832.

(623) Keith, Op Cit., p.

35.

833.

(624) Chris Hansen, "His Brother's Keeper," Dateline, 1995, quoted in Keith, p.

36; Bob Popavitch, interview with author.

834.

(*) Most noticeably the Tulsa World, which earned the knick-name, The Tulsa Pravda." The Daily Oklahoman has been called the "Daily
Joke-la-homan" by locals.

835.

(**) Levine also graciously represented Representative Key and several investigators, including the author, who had set up a charitable
trust to investigate the bombing, for free, and brought Chicken soup to the author when he was sick.

836.

(† Keating told Gary Harper during one of his weekly citizen chat sessions that Key was sleeping with a judge's wife.

Keating also
unsuccessfully tried to find a political candidate to run against the popular 5-term Representative.

As Portland Free Press publisher Ace
Hayes writes, "[Keating] is a pure devotee of Imperial State power and his approach is, 'to hell with free speech, free thought or free
association.' He will protect the rich by attacking people no matter what fine words he swears an oath to.…"
837.

(625) Robby Trammel and Randy Ellis, "Call For Bomb Investigation Debated," Daily Oklahoman, 6/29/95.

838.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(625) Robby Trammel and Randy Ellis, "Call For Bomb Investigation Debated," Daily Oklahoman, 6/29/95. 838. (626) As we argued when Key first set out on this course, the Legislature and its staff had no business investigating the bombing. It
was, and is, poorly equipped to do so. The same can be said of a panel of local citizens who would be asked to investigate one of the most

--- PAGE BREAK ---complicated cases ever to come before the courts.

Yet as The New American pointed out, state legislatures are regularly tasked on
important and sensitive investigations.

And the County Grand jury?

Is that not "a panel of local citizens," the same as the Federal Grand jury
that originally "investigated" the bombing?

839.

(**) It is interesting to examine the attitudes of the Tulsa World and Daily Oklahoman in light of their sister papers in Nebraska and
Arkansas, two other corruption-ridden states.

Former Nebraska State Senator John DeCamp investigated a shocking pattern of financial
improprieties, child abuse, and murder in his home state.

In his book, The Franklin Cover-Up, DeCamp exhorts the media to honestly report
the facts.

But, as DeCamp notes, "…the World-Herald's long-standing pattern of behavior is just the opposite.

If it has an editorial attitude on
a story, its news coverage and every other aspect of the newspaper are mustered to accentuate the preferred side of the issue and suppress
opposing views.… "Why all this effort?

Because, tragically, the people who control the World-Herald appear to have a strong vested interest
in suppressing the truth.…" As The Clinton Chronicles notes with regard to Arkansas: "First, the Clintons have very cleverly manipulated and
compromised the press in Arkansas, a small state with only one major newspaper, the Arkansas Democrat-Gazette....

Despite revelations of
scandal after scandal regarding the Clintons, the Arkansas press has been in a state of denial, portraying most of the revelations as attacks
on the people of Arkansas themselves." [John W.

DeCamp, The Franklin Cover-up: Child Abuse, Satanism, and Murder in Nebraska
(Lincoln, NE: AWT, Inc., 1996), p.95; Patrick Matrisciana, The Clinton Chronicles, (Hemet, CA: Jeremiah Books, 1994), p.

21.]
840.

(627) Nolan Clay and Penny Owen, "'Wacky Theories' Unfair, McVeigh Attorney Says," Daily Oklahoman,10/29/96.

841.(627) Nolan Clay and Penny Owen, "'Wacky Theories' Unfair, McVeigh Attorney Says," Daily Oklahoman,10/29/96.

841.

(*) Shortly after Key and Wilburn drew up their petition to impanel the grand jury, a bill was introduced in the State Legislature to change
the grand jury petitioning process.

842.

(628) Mark Sanford, interview with author.

843.

(629) Even Palmer admitted that the statutes were limited as to what Judge Owens could do or how he could interpret the law.

844.

(*) The County didn't possess the resources and funds, Palmer replied, to pursue such a big case.

Besides, she pleaded, the
"investigation" was already "complete," being a "thorough investigation" from "several different federal agencies."( Palmer claimed a County
Grand Jury would "jeopardize the Federal case." The federal gag order prevents interviewing prospective witnesses, she claimed.

Sanford
countered that there would be no interference with the federal case as long as they were interviewing witnesses and suspects that federal
prosecutors ignored, which seem to be in abundance.

845.

(630) Moore, Op Cit., p.

140.

846.

(631) District Attorney Bob Macy, interview with author.

847.

(632) Rep.

Charles Key, interviews with author.

848.

(633) Diana Baldwin and Judy Kuhlman, "Court Filings Stop Bombing Testimony of Postal Worker," Daily Oklahoman, 9/9/97.

849.

(634) Rita Cosby, FOX News, 4/4/97.

850.

(635) Interview with Jayna Davis.

Macy's Assistant DAs who handled that case were John Farely and Jane Brown.

851.

(636) Daily Oklahoman, 8/14/97.

852.

(**) "They're coming up with a substitute for proof," said Denver defense attorney Larry Pozner.

"They're softening the jury up with
emotional testimony about the bombing and McVeigh's politics.

They're saying, 'We'll give you every reason in the world to hate Tim
McVeigh.'" (Kevin Flynn, "Softening the Jury," Rocky Mountain News, 5/8/97.)
853.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"They're softening the jury up with
emotional testimony about the bombing and McVeigh's politics. They're saying, 'We'll give you every reason in the world to hate Tim
McVeigh.'" (Kevin Flynn, "Softening the Jury," Rocky Mountain News, 5/8/97.)
853. (637) "The CIA & The Media," Rolling Stone, 10/20/77, cited in Mark Zepezauer, The CIA's Greatest Hits, 1994. 854. (638) Mark Sanford, interview with author; William Jasper, "OKC Investigator Under Attack, " New American, 6/23/97. 855. (639) Brian Ford, "Fund-Rasing Probed: Jury Looks into Efforts of Rep. Charles Key," Tulsa World, 5/6/97. 856. (640) Jasper, Op Cit. 857. (*) Just as the letter is a sham masquerading as an honest response from bombing survivors, Drew Edmondson [and Frank Keating]
are sub-human pieces of effluvia masquerading as human beings. 858. (*) Nor the rewards of political office and bribes. 859. (641) Ibid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---860.

(642) Brian Ford, "McVeigh Placed at Kansas Store,"Tulsa World, 9/12/97.

861.

(*) Fortunately, the smear tacticians weren't successful at disuading everyone from the truth.

In a CNN/USA TODAY/GALLUP poll
conducted in April of 1996, 68 percent of those surveyed said they didn't agree that all of the suspects have been captured.

862.

(*) The building was demolished because officials claimed it was an eyesore, an errie reminder of that tragic day.

Yet authorities made
no effort to remove the charred, twisted, gutted remains of the Athenian Restaurant directly across the street, which to this day still stands as
a shocking monument to the brutality of the bombing.

863.

(*) According to a 1988 GAO (General Accounting Office) report, the Federal Building was not a "safe" place to install a day care
center.

Allegedly based on the 1983 plot by white supremacist Richard Wayne Snell (CSA member and friend of Robert Millar) to bomb the
facility, the report concluded that a day care center should not be placed inside the Murrah Building.

"No federal law enforcement agents
who worked in the building, including the BATF, Secret Service, and the DEA, ever had any of their children in the Murrah's day care
center… ever," said Smith.

864.

(*) Smith complained that when she appears on local radio shows, it seems to her that "more people around here now hate me than like
me...

People that don't want to think that the government would do such a thing."
865.

(643) Glenn Wilburn, interview with author.

866.

(644) Kathy Wilburn and Edye Smith, interview with author.

867.

(645) "Tested by Fire," People magazine, date unknown, quoted in, Gene Wheaton, "Another Bush Boy," Portland Free Press, July
1995.

Keating stated, "The leftists I dealt with would never consider themselves patriots, and they had contempt for the government.

The
right-wing crowd has contempt for the government, and yet see themselves as patriots.Keating stated, "The leftists I dealt with would never consider themselves patriots, and they had contempt for the government.

The
right-wing crowd has contempt for the government, and yet see themselves as patriots.

It's a curious anomaly, but both of them are very
similar."
868.

(*) "Because of my youthful appearance, I did undercover work on the Berkeley campus," Keating said.

The assignment dissolved
shortly after Keating attended a Black Panther rally.

A federal informant who later identified people at the protest took one look at a photo of
Keating and muttered, "That's a pig." (Oklahoma Gazette, 9/26/97)
869.

(*) Keating also presided over the federal prison system.

His wife, Cathy, is a consultant to U.S.

News & World Report, a magazine that
often serves as an organ of black propaganda.

870.

(646) Gene Wheaton, "Another Bush Boy," Portland Free Press, July 1995.

871.

(647) Ace Hayes, letter to author.

872.

(648) Deposition of William C.

Duncan, copy in author's possession.

873.

(*) Interestingly, Mena/Iran-Contra player Raymond "Buddy" Young, the former Arkansas State Police Captain who told ADFA director
Larry Nichols he was a "dead man" if he did not drop his suit against Clinton, was appointed director of FEMA's (Federal Emergency
Management Agency) Region IV post by Clinton.

FEMA played a significant coordination role in the aftermath of the Oklahoma City
bombing.

Was Young given the $90,000-a-year job to keep his mouth shut?

874.

(**) In fact, Wheaton suggested that Keating is being groomed for the 2000 presidential [or vice-presidential] candidacy.

875.

(† The same reason for demolishing the Federal Building was given for demolishing the buildings at Waco: "Safety concerns." Yet the
Waco buildings were miles from anywhere.

Furthermore, an architect who inspected the Federal Building soon after the bombing said there
was no immediate danger.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(† The same reason for demolishing the Federal Building was given for demolishing the buildings at Waco: "Safety concerns." Yet the
Waco buildings were miles from anywhere. Furthermore, an architect who inspected the Federal Building soon after the bombing said there
was no immediate danger. But, according to David Hall, owner of KPOC-TV in Ponca City, Oklahoma, this architect was later "persuaded" to
change his opinion. 876. (649) William Jasper, New American, date unknown. 877. (650) Affidavit of Neil Hartley. 878. (651) Melissa Klinzing, interview with author. 879. (652) Ann Domin, interview with author. 880. (653) Rappaport, Op Cit. 881. (654) Hoppy Heidelberg, interview with Jon Rappaport.

--- PAGE BREAK ---882.

(*) In fact, many times that I have spoken to Heidelberg, I could hear the distinctive clicks of a tapped phone.

883.

(**) "They sent another team out on October 20," added Heidelberg.

"Agents Marry Judd and Dave Swanson.

"They said 'do you know
how much trouble you're in?', and I said 'well, apparently not,' and I just laughed at them like I'm laughing now (bursts out laughing).

And
they don't know what the hell to do with that.

What do you do with a guy that just laughs at you?"
884.

(655) Hoppy Heidelberg, interview with author.

885.

(656) Timothy McVeigh's Petition for Writ of Mandamus, 3/25/97, pp.

71-72.

886.

(*) Jim Garrison, On the Trail of the Assassins (Warner Books, 1988), p.252.

In 1993, shortly before Vince Foster's body was found at
Fort Marcy Park, Patrick Knowlton saw a car with a suspicious looking character.

He informed the FBI, but later complained that the their
rendering of his testimony was inaccurate.

After he was subpoenaed by Kenneth Starr's Whitewater committee, he was stalked and
intimidated by cars with license plates registered to the U.S.

government.

887.

(657) Newsweek reporter, confidential interview with author.

888.

(658) Debra Burdick, interview with author.

889.

(659) Deposition of Jane C.

Graham, 7/20/97; Statement of Jane Graham, 11/15/96.

890.

(660) Sharon Cohen, Associated Press, 4/26/95; Brian Duffy, "The Manhunt: Twisting Trail," U.S.

News & World Report, 5/8/95.

891.

(661) Bill Jasper, interview with author.

892.

(*) Mackey also accused Davis of telling a bartender in Denver that McVeigh was in the room.

Davis denied it.

893.

(662) Testimony of John Jeffrey Davis, U.S.

v.

McVeigh.

894.

(663) Timothy McVeigh's Petition for Writ of Mandamus, 3/25/96, p.

36.

895.

(*) During the Pan Am 103 investigation, authorities attempted to coerce a civilian searcher into signing a statement that he had
discovered a piece of microchip on which the government's theory hinged.--- PAGE BREAK ---

895. (*) During the Pan Am 103 investigation, authorities attempted to coerce a civilian searcher into signing a statement that he had
discovered a piece of microchip on which the government's theory hinged. In fact, the searcher was brought a bag of various unidentified
components and asked to sign the statement, eventhough he wasn't sure he had found the items. 896. (664) J.D. Cash, McCurtain Gazette, quoted in B.C. Specht, "Ministry of 'Slick Justice' Scores Big Coup," posted on Internet, 5/26/97. 897. (665) Ryan Ross, "Final Witness Before Explosion — Two Men in Truck, Neither was McVeigh?" Digital City Denver News, 5/23/97;
Adrian Croft, "Oklahoma City Bombing Trial Takes Dramatic Twist," Reuter, 5/23/97. 898. (666) Diana Baldwin and Ed Godfrey, "Sighting Accounts Differ — Grand Jury Witnesses Put Bomber in 2 Places," Daily Oklahoman,
7/15/97. 899. (667) Rep. Charles Key, interview with author, account of interview with Gary Lewis. 900. (*) Heath called the agent's supervisor and complained, then, when he asked how he could fill out a Freedom of Information Act request
to see what the FBI had said about him, was told they didn't know where he could get one. When he went to the FBI office, he was rebuffed
once again. After he finally got the FOIA filled out, he received word 60 days later that his request was denied. 901. (668) Dr. Paul Heath, interview with author. 902. (669) David Keen and Connie Hood, interview by J.D. Cash, tape transcribed by author. 903. (*) This was originally reported on the major networks, then retracted as a "radar anomaly."
904. (670) Roberts, Op Cit., p. 311. Part of Roberts' current assignment as a liaison officer to an Air Force Reserve fighter squadron entails
analyzing surface-to-air threats. 905. (671) ABC World News Sunday, 07/21/96. 906. (672) New York Daily News, 11/09/96, quoted in Ibid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---907.

(673) Elftherotypia, Athens, 08/23/96.

Ian Williams Goddard, "The Veracity of the Russell Report," 11/20/96, posted on Internet.

Goddard is the author of the book, The Downing of TWA Flight 800.

908.

(674) Ibid.

909.

(675) David Fulghum, "ANG Pilot: Jet by Object," Aviation Week & Space Technology, 3/10/96, quoted in Goddard, "TWA 800 Missile
Theory: Stonger Than Ever," © 1997.

910.

(676) "Report: Pilot Saw Projectile Near Jet," Associated Press, 7/29/97.

911.

(677) E.

Phillips, P.

Mann, "Terrorist Fears Deepen with 747's Destruction," Aviation Week & Space Technology, 7/22/96, quoted in
Goddard, Op Cit.

912.

(678) Associated Press, 7/20/97, quoted in William F.

Jasper, "What Happened to TWA 800?" The New American, 10/8/96.

913.

(679) David Fulghum, "ANG Eyewitnesses Reject Missile Theory," Aviation Week & Space Technology, 7/29/96, quoted in Goddard,
Op Cit.

914.

(680) Joe Sexton, "Behind a Calm Facade Investigation Embodied Chaos, Distrust, Stress," New York Times, 8/23/96, quoted in
Goddard, Ibid.

915.

(*) Lt.

Comdr.

Rob Newell, a Navy spokesman at the Pentagon, said the Navy's only aircraft in the area was a P-3 Orion anti-submarine
plane, which does not carry missiles.

916.

(681) Letter to David Hendrix, Riverside, CA, Press Enterprise from CINCLANTFLT (Commander in Chief Atlantic Fleet), Public Affairs
office, 8/30/96, quoted in Roberts, Op Cit., p.

324-25.

917.

(682) Pat Milton, "Salinger Sticks By Missile Theory While Feds Shoot It Down," Associated Press, 11/9/96.

918.

(683) Minton, Op Cit.

919.

(684) Bo Gritz, Center For Action Monthly Newsletter ,Vol.

6 No 11, June, 1997.

920.

(685) "Sonar Finds Underwater Wreckage," Lexington Herald-Leader, 7/21/96, quoted in Ian Williams Goddard, "TWA 800 Investigation
Cover-Up: The Proof," 7/26/97, posted on Internet.

921.

(686) Ronald W.

Lewis, "Uncivil Air War" (The Shootdown of TWA Flight 800)," Air Forces Monthly, No.

104, November 1996, quoted in
S.A.F.A.N.

Internet Newsletter, No.

213, 12/21/96.

922.213, 12/21/96.

922.

(*) Another story that circulated among the press for a time reported that the DEA, along with Customs, the National Guard, and the
Coast Guard, were practicing how to shoot down drug-smuggling planes with SAMs (surface-to-air missiles).

The P-3's job was to drop white
phosphorous flares, called Willie Peters, to use as targets.

According to some reports, the C-130 was seen dropping white phosphorous
parachute flares before TWA 800 went down.

If this is true, were the flares being dropped as part of a target exercise for heat-seeking
missiles?

Or had C-130 been alerted to a possible missile threat and dropped flares to divert missiles from targeting it and other aircraft in
the area?

923.

(687) Jasper, Op Cit.

924.

(688) W.

Michael Pitcher, "Fax Gives Glimpse of Crash Investigation,"The Southampton Press, 7/24/97, quoted in Ian Williams
Goddard, "Navy Missile Drone Debris Found at TWA Crash Site?" 07/28/97, posted on Internet.

925.

(689) Indeed, a major terrorism summit sponsored by Tehran in June of 1996 saw delegates from Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iraq, Saudi
Arabia, and other Mid-East and African states, as well as Bosnia-Herzegovina, Germany, France, Britain, Canada, and the U.S.

come
together to form a joint working committee under the command of the new HizbAllah International — transforming that group into "the
vanguard of the revolution" of the Muslim world.

926.

(690) Murray Weiss, "TWA Probers: Missile Witnesses 'Credible,'" New York Post, 9/22/96.

927.

(691) Michael D.

Towle, "Missile Unlikely, but not Ruled Out in Crash," Fort Worth Star-Telegram, 7/20/96.

928.

(692) "U.S.

Worries Over Missiles it Gave Afghan Rebels: U.S.

Concerned that Stinger Anti-aircraft Missiles Could Get into the Wrong
Hands," New York Times, 4/27/92; "As Afghan War Funding Dries Up, Weapons Flood Pakistani Market," Christian Science Monitor, 1/8/92;
"Afghan Rebel Bars Return of U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Worries Over Missiles it Gave Afghan Rebels: U.S. Concerned that Stinger Anti-aircraft Missiles Could Get into the Wrong
Hands," New York Times, 4/27/92; "As Afghan War Funding Dries Up, Weapons Flood Pakistani Market," Christian Science Monitor, 1/8/92;
"Afghan Rebel Bars Return of U.S. Stingers" (Islamic Party of Yunis Khalis), New York Times, 3/14/89; numerous other articles reported this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---929.

(693) Letter from Rodney Stich to Senator Arlen Specter, 10/20/95, posted on Internet.

930.

(694) In the late 1970s, two Rhodesian airliners were reportedly shot down by Russian SA-7s.

In 1986, a Sudan Airways jet was shot
down by a SAM.

And in September of 1993, Abkhazian separatists of the ex-Soviet republic of Georgia shot down three Tu-134 and Tu-154
airliners using shoulder-fired SAMs from boats out on the Black Sea.

The FBI was advised that small missiles such as the Russian SA-14
Gremlin, SA-16 Gimlet and SA-18 Grouse, are equipped with "proportional convergence logic" systems sensitive enough to home in on
airframe radiation once it nears its target.

931.

(695) Towle, Op Cit.

932.

(696) Jasper, Op Cit.

933.

(697) Weiss, Op Cit.

934.

(698) Washington Times, 12/17/96.

935.

(699) Allen, Op Cit.

936.

(700) William Jasper, New American, date unknown.

937.

(701) Ibid.

938.

(*) He said they made up a bogus complaint about him threatening a reporter.

I spoke to that reporter and discovered the complaint was
false.

939.

(702) Paul Queary "Oklahoma Hero Commits Suicide," Associated Press, 5/13/96.

940.

(*) According to Rivera, the recalcitrant police officer was forced into making a public service announcement with Governor Keating.

"He was told he'd make that or he was fired," said Rivera.

The officer they sent to Washington to accept an award on behalf of the OCPD, he
told Rivera, wasn't even at the site!

941.

(*) Yeakey was also angry because he couldn't get access to his own report about the bombing (which numbered between 9-10 pages).

"He was in a full-fledged rampage over the report," said Rivera, whom he wouldn't even show it to.

942.

(703) Cpt.

Ted Carlton, interview with author.

943.

(*) Interestingly, Yeakey's superiors, Major Upchurch and Lt.

Randall, according to Rivera, were claiming Yeakey was "delusional" from
the back injury he sustained during his fall in the Murrah Building on April 19.

944.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Randall, according to Rivera, were claiming Yeakey was "delusional" from
the back injury he sustained during his fall in the Murrah Building on April 19. 944. (704) Oklahoma City Medical Examiner's Report, copy in author's possession; Dr. Larry Balding and Dr. Fred Jordan, interview with
author. They said the drug test costs between $400 and $500 dollars. 945. (705) Report of ME investigator Jeffrey A. Legg, CME-1 Report, copy in author's possession. 946. (*) Several Medical Examiners explained that it is not uncommon for an individual to attempt suicide by one method, then continue to
take additional measures until they are dead. San Francisco's ME told me about a man who, upon discovering he had AIDS, tried to hang
himself, then threw himself off the balcony. Perhaps Terrance Yeakey was not satisfied with his alleged attempts to slash himself. As Dr. Fred Jordan, Oklahoma's Chief Medical Examiner explained, "It hurts, and nothing much is happening."
947. (706) This was verified by school officials. 948. (707) The harassment and surveillance on Rivera and the rest of the family was confirmed by Vicki Jones, and her husband, Reverend
Glenn Jones. Reverend Jones told me that Rivera had come to them several times "frantic" that she was being tailed and harassed. Vicki
saw evidence of the break-ins at Rivera's apartment. 949. (708) Taylor recalled the incident for this author. "There's only a few times in my life that I remember that somebody had done
something weird like that, and that's why I wrote it down."
950. (709) Tonia-Rivera Yeakey, interview with author. They had at one time been friends, she explained, but had a falling-out in 1992, and
had remained apart ever since. Rivera attempted to hire an attorney to bring a Slander suit against Jim Ramsey, based on the false
allegations of his death. No local attorney would accept it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---951.

(710) OCPD Detective Mullinex, interview with author.

952.

(711) Regarding Rivera's source, she claimed he knew things about her that no one could possibly have known.

"He sat there and told
me about stuff I hadn't told anybody," which included break-ins at her apartment.

953.

(712) Officer Mike Ramsey, interview with author.

954.

(713) This finding is based on the testimony of a former police officer and Marine sniper.

955.

(*) This funeral home, curiously enough, has been mixed up in some rather strange incidents.

956.

(714) Karen Von T., letter to author.

957.

(715) The author knows the name of this individual, but cannot release it at this time.

958.

(716) Shaun Jones, interview with author.

959.

(717) FAA report, copy in author's possession.

Investigators and pilots I've talked to indicated various ways a plane can be rigged to
crash, including tampering with the fuel gauge so it reads full when empty, and putting a corrosive acid on the control cables.

960.

(718) Mike Evett, interview with author.

961.

(719) Clint Boehler, interview with author.

Interestingly, Boehler would later discount the murder scenario of police officer Terrance
Yeakey, despite overwhelming evidence that Yeakey was murdered.

962.

(720) Christopher C.

Lyons, "The Whitewater FAQ: Deaths & Injuries," 1996, posted on Internet.

963.

(721) John De Camp, The Franklin Cover-Up; FAA report, copy in author's possession.

964.

(722) Medical Examiner's report, 8/5/97, by Dr.

Fred Jordan, copy in author's possession.

965.

(*) He was wearing a t-shirt inscribed: "Nameless Saints We Give Our Thanks — The hundreds of people that give it their all without
personal individual acknowledgment, April 19, 1995, Oklahoma City, OK"
966.

(723) Dan Richardson, interview with author.

967.

(**) His partner was ATF agent Harry Eberhardt.

968.

(724) John Michael Johnston, interview with author.

969.

(725) Al Martin on the Tom Valentine show, date unknown.

The author has interviewed Martin extensively.

970.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The author has interviewed Martin extensively. 970. (726) Craig Roberts and John Armstrong, JFK: The Dead Witnesses (Tulsa, Oklahoma: Consolidated Press Int'l, 1995), pp. iii-vii, 173-
76. 971. (727) D'Ferdinand Carone, interview with author. Carone was subsequently threatened by anonymous telegram after I interviewed her
on my radio show, KHNC, Denver, American Freedom Network. 972. (*) The only mainstream media who have made some effort to report the truth have been CNN, the Dallas Morning News, the Denver
Post, FOX News, and ABC 20/20. Unfortunately, the information 20/20 presented only covered limited aspects of prior knowledge by the
government. KFOR, the only station that has covered the Middle Eastern connection, ceased their reporting when they were bought out by
the New York Times Broadcasting Company. 973. (*) Potts was later taken off the case due to the heat from the Ruby Ridge incident. 974. (*) As a sideline, the FBI and DOJ occasionally arrest and prosecute real criminals. 975. (728) Rael Jean Isaac, "Abusive Justice: Janet Reno's Dirty Secret," National Review, 6/30/97. 976. (*) In 1984, Reno prosecuted Grant Snowden, Miami's 1983 Police Officer of the Year, whose wife ran a day-care center. Snowden had
threatened to report a father whose son showed up with bruises. The man retaliated by accusing Snowden of the abuse. The case was
finally dropped when the psychiatrist examining the boy revealed that the father had coerced the child into perjury. Reno pervservered,

--- PAGE BREAK ---however, bringing in two self-styled child-abuse experts — Joseph and Laurie Braga — to elicit the required testimony from the latest victim
that Reno's office had turned up.

Snowden was acquitted.

Making good on her promise to try Snowden one child at a time until there was a
conviction, Reno pushed ahead.

While the latest child was not even able to identify Snowden in court, the judge allowed the testimony from
the previous two children (eventhough Snowden was found to be innocent), excluded testimony of Snowden's flawless record, and
sentenced him to secure five consecutive life sentences.( These cases, although highly manipulated by government prosecutors, should not
be taken as an inference that child-abuse, including ritual child abuse, does not occur, as some media pundits have tried to suggest.

977.

(**) Reno had previously displayed her concern for children when several days earlier, two men who had driven all day and all night
from Indiana to bring baby food to the children at Waco were arrested.

978.

(729) Thompson, Op Cit.

979.

(**) Letter from Rep.

James Traficant to members of Congress, 4/15/97, copy in author's possession.

Traficant introduced a bill (H.R.

692) that seeks the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate cases of DOJ misconduct.

The bill is pending as of this writing.

980.

(*) As the Congressional committee probing the Inslaw affair later wrote: "The enhanced PROMIS software was stolen by high level
Justice officials and distributed internationally in order to provide financial gain to Dr.

Brian and to further intelligence and foreign policy
objectives of the United States."
981.

(730) Ratiner was then paid $120,000 over the next five years on the condition that he not practice law during that time.

Former Mossad
agent Ari Ben-Menashe claimed he personally saw a cable from Israel's Joint Committee to the U.S., requesting that $600,000 be
transferred from the CIA-Israeli slush fund to Hadron to pay Rariner.(730) Ratiner was then paid $120,000 over the next five years on the condition that he not practice law during that time.

Former Mossad
agent Ari Ben-Menashe claimed he personally saw a cable from Israel's Joint Committee to the U.S., requesting that $600,000 be
transferred from the CIA-Israeli slush fund to Hadron to pay Rariner.

Former National Security Advisor Robert "Bud" McFarlane had sold
PROMIS to the Israelis.

982.

(731) Rodney Stich, Defrauding America (Alamo, CA: Diablo Western Press, 1994), pp.

371-97.

983.

(732) Barron's, 3/21/88.

As Judge Bason wrote, "I have come to believe that my non-reappointement as bankruptcy judge was the
result of improper influence from within the Justice Department which the current appointment process failed to prevent."
984.

(733) Stich, Op Cit., pp.

377-78.

985.

(*) Ibid., pp.

394-95.

Sherman Skolnick and Mark Sato of Chicago's Citizens Committee to Clean Up the Courts filed a lawsuit against
Bua and Knight, charging them with obstruction of Justice.

They informed Bua that they were going to circumvent the special prosecutor and
present evidence to the grand jury themselves.

Bua replied that he would hold them in contempt.

"I do not intend to prosecute anyone," he
told them.

986.

(*) Those within the DOJ who had an interest in covering up Casolaro's death were quick to point out that the investigative reporter
suffered from Multiple Sclerosis, and was therefore despondent.

Interestingly, Hartzler also suffers from Multiple Sclerosis.

In his letter to
Dwire, he adds: "The more the implicit connection between Mr.

Casolaro's Multiple Sclerosis and his suicide may create too dire a picture of
Multiple Sclerosis.

That linkage invites readers to cluck with pity and nod knowingly about the presumably devastating effect of Multiple
Sclerosis.… I trust that if Ms.

Reno, Ms.

Gorlick and Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Reno, Ms. Gorlick and Mr. Smith are not already familiar with MS, you will offer them this note of balance and
assure them that Multiple Sclerosis flourishes even in the Justice Department and expects no pity."
987. (734) Robert Schmidt, "Low Key, High Pressure," Legal Times, 9/2/96. 988. (*) Leighton was the secret attorney for Lee Harvey Oswald. 989. (735) "An Irrestibale Case," Newsweek, 8/14/95. 990. (736) Schmidt, Op Cit. Justice Department officials say Hartzler's disability played no role in his selection. 991. (737) Ibid. 992. (738) Sherman Skolnick, Conspiracy Nation, date unknown. 993. (*) It has also been speculated that Richardson was the Assistant U.S. Attorney who was providing information to Tonia Rivera-Yeakey
about the murder of her ex-husband, through an intermediary. According to Richardson's brother Dan, Ted had a stable, loving relationship
with his wife, Julie, and adored his children. Dan told me his brother had no reason to commit suicide. He was allegedly suffering from "work
pressure."
994. (739) The committee noted: "Riconosciuto stated that a tape recording of the telephone threat was confiscated by DEA agents at the
time of Riconosciuto's arrest.… the timing of the arrest, coupled with Mr. Riconosciuto's allegations that tapes of a telephone conversation
he had with Mr. Videnieks were confiscated by DEA agents, raises serious questions concerning whether the Department's prosecution of
Mr. Riconosciuto was related to his cooperation with the committee.

--- PAGE BREAK ---995.

(740) The government also attempted to destroy William Chasey, author of The Lockerbie Cover-Up.

996.

(741) Ibid.

997.

(742) John Ashton, "US Government Still on Ropes Over Lockerbie," The Mail on Sunday, 6/9/96.

998.

(743) Kevin Flynn, "Testimony Blocked at Trial of McVeigh," Rocky Mountain News, 7/14/97.

999.

(*) "My thought was that it was our government," said Carone.

"I honestly believe that." According to one account of the conversation,
Shackley was elated.

1000.

(744) D'Ferdinand Carone, interview with author.

1001.

(745) Paul Hudson, head of U.S.

Pan Am survivors group, interview with author.

1002.

(*) North contacted Meese through Admiral Poindexter.

Meese informed Revell, who called Deputy Assistant Attorney General for the
Criminal Division Mark Richard, and told him: "[p]lease get on top of this; Jensen is giving a heads up to the NSC.

Deposition of Mark M.

Richard before the Joint Congressional Committees, 8/19/87, quoted in Christic, Op Cit.; Jensen is Deputy Attorney General Lowell Jensen;
Kellner is Attorney General Leon Kellner.

The rest of the conversation went as follows: "Call Kellner, find out what is up, and advise him that
decision should be run by you"; Cockburn, Op Cit., p.

136.

1003.

(*) As investigative journalist Joel Bainerman writes: Officials said that Al-Kassar maintained offices in Warsaw and was a major
broker of the Polish-owned weapons company, Cenzin.

The first arms purchase by North from al-Kassar totaling $1 million was sent by boat
to an unidentified Caribbean port in the Fall of l985 and was later distributed to the Contra fighters.

In April of that year, a second shipment of
Polish arms was sold to the CIA as part of this transaction.

(Los Angeles Times, 7/17/87, quoted in Joel Bainerman, "Bush Administration's
Involvement in Bombing Pan Am 103," Portland Free Press, May/June, 1997.

See Bainerman's book, The Crimes of a President, SPI Books,
1992, regarding the illegal deals of George Bush).(Los Angeles Times, 7/17/87, quoted in Joel Bainerman, "Bush Administration's
Involvement in Bombing Pan Am 103," Portland Free Press, May/June, 1997.

See Bainerman's book, The Crimes of a President, SPI Books,
1992, regarding the illegal deals of George Bush).

In another part of the deal, more than $42 million was laundered through BCCI accounts
in the Cayman Islands.

Al-Kassar earned more than $1 million.

Private Eye, 10/25/9l, quoted in Ibid.)
1004.

(746) Administration officials who discussed these deals said Al-Kassar had clear business links with Abu Nidal's organization, Los
Angeles Times, 7/17/87.

1005.

(**) These were the same hostages that sparked the Iran-Contra arms-for-drugs scandal.

1006.

(747) Jim Berwick, a Pan Am security consultant in London, told Francovich, "An HM Customs officer involved in the investigation of
narcotics, left a message for me.

I subsequently contacted him and met with him and he advised me that he had been in Frankfort and had
been at a meeting of drug enforcement agents in Germany, America and Britain, and that it was well known and discussed at that meeting
that Pan Am was the airline that was being used as a drug conduit."
1007.

(† As former Iranian president Abulhassan Bani Sadr observed, "The people of Iran saw this as a crime… shooting down an airplane,
killing almost 300 people is a crime.… Had it involved another country, there would have been legal proceedings.

A lot of fuss would have
been made all around the world.

But here they destroyed the aircraft, and then congratulated themselves."( (Allan Francovich, The Maltese
Double-Cross, 1992)
1008.

(*) U.S.

investigators traced a wire transfer of several million dollars from Teheran to a bank account in Vienna controlled by the PFLP-
GC.

(U.S.

News & World Report, 11/25/9l).

1009.

(748) One interesting piece of evidence was a call to Damascus, Syria, intercepted by authorities, in which Khreesat stated: "I have
made some changes to the medicine.--- PAGE BREAK ---

1009. (748) One interesting piece of evidence was a call to Damascus, Syria, intercepted by authorities, in which Khreesat stated: "I have
made some changes to the medicine. It is better and stronger."
1010. (749) Pritchard, Op Cit. 1011. (*) This also raises the issue of whether Abraham Ahmed, who was released from custody after his mysteriously-timed departure from
the U.S. after the Oklahoma City bombing, was an operative of the U.S. Government. 1012. (750) According to a special report in Time (April 27, 1992), COREA used the following front companies for its overseas operations:
Sevens Mantra Corp., AMA Industries, Wilderwood Video and Condor Television Ltd. The report revealed that Condor did its banking
through the First American Bank, a subsidiary of BCCI. (Bainerman, Op Cit. )
1013. (751) Donald Goddard and Lester Coleman, On the Trail of the Octopus (London, Bloomsbury Publishing, LTD., 1993), pp. 143, 201. 1014. (*) PBS Frontline investigators believe that the intelligence officers were "a strong secondary target."

--- PAGE BREAK ---1015.

(**) Aviv believes the original target of the attack was American Airlines.

When a Mossad agent tipped off the airline, the target was
switched to Pan Am.

1016.

(*) Also aboard flight 103 was Bernt Carlsson, the Swedish UN diplomat who had just completed negotiating the Namibian
independence agreement with South Africa.

He was due in New York the next day to sign the agreement.

1017.

(752) Two separate eyewitnesses remember General Crosby ordering the "immediate bulldozing of the crash site."
1018.

(*) The passengers were members of the 101st Airborne Division, part of a UN peacekeeping force (MFO) in the Egyptian Sinai.

While
officials sought to bamboozle the public with claims of "wing icing," four members of the Canadian Aviation Safety Board disagreed.

The
flight engineer and ground refueller saw no signs of ice on the wings moments before the plane took off and crashed.

With the help of Oliver
North, Vince Cannistraro, and CIA Deputy Director [for European Operations] Duane "Dewy" Clarridge (along with Bud McFarlane and
Richard Secord) North had been negotiating with Iran for the release of the hostages.

In exchange, North was selling the Iranians TOW anti-
tank missiles and other equipment for use in its war with Iraq.

Upon delivery and testing of one of the HAWKs, the Iranians realized they had
received an older version, and felt double-crossed.

North was told by one of his advisors that there was a "good chance of condemning
some or all of the hostages to death in a renewed wave of Islamic Jihad." North's insouciant response: the deaths of the hostages would be
our "minimum losses." Given what happened next, his words may have proved prophetic.Upon delivery and testing of one of the HAWKs, the Iranians realized they had
received an older version, and felt double-crossed.

North was told by one of his advisors that there was a "good chance of condemning
some or all of the hostages to death in a renewed wave of Islamic Jihad." North's insouciant response: the deaths of the hostages would be
our "minimum losses." Given what happened next, his words may have proved prophetic.

While the plane was being loaded, the captain
noticed that the Egyptian guard stationed on the ground outside the aircraft would "disappear from his post several times, sometimes for as
long as an hour." The baggage handlers also got into a fist fight, which struck him as odd since Arabs rarely touch one another due to
religious beliefs.

Finally, someone pulled a power cord on the tarmac, cutting all light around the plane.

Had someone used these diversions
to plant a bomb?

Given the suspicious train of events, it seems highly likely.

Yet if the downing of the plane was a simple act of terrorism,
why the elaborate cover-up?

Another question that has never been satisfactorily answered is why there were approximately 20 members of
an elite Special Forces unit known as Task Force 160 on the plane.

This is significant, considering that the role of the MFO is peacekeeping.

In contrast, Task Force 160's main objectives are covert missions and rescues.

Had North, realizing his position after double-crossing the
Iranians, planned a covert rescue?

North reportedly knew the exact position of the hostages, down to the very room they were being held.

If
the rescue attempt failed, did the 20 mysterious coffin-sized boxes on the plane contain dead servicemen?

Or did they contain the 18
rejected HAWKs?

Despite attempts to identify the cargo through Army files, no records of the boxes has ever been found.

Either way, the
Iranians were sure to be angered.Despite attempts to identify the cargo through Army files, no records of the boxes has ever been found.

Either way, the
Iranians were sure to be angered.

A bomb on board a military transport would send a message to the Americans that the arm of Islamic
Jihad had a long reach.

1019.

(*) This assertion was backed up by NBC News when it reported, on October 30, l990, that the DEA was investigating a Middle East
based heroin operation to determine whether it was used by the terrorists to place a bomb on the flight 103.

Naturally, the DEA denied any
connection to the sting operation (Barron's, 12/17/90).

Original quote, Francovich, Op Cit.

1020.

(**) Polygraphs conducted on baggage handler Tiling Kuzcu by James Keefe, a polygraph examiner with 30 years experience with the
Army's C.I.D., revealed that Kuzcu was not telling the truth when he stated that he did not know who switched the suitcase, and further when
he stated that he did not switch the suitcases himself.

He also lied when he said that Roland O'Neill, the loadmaster, had not told him to
switch the bags.

O'Neill also failed his polygraph.

A second polygraph examiner brought in to review the results agreed with the findings
concerning Kuzcu, but thought the results on O'Neill were inconclusive.

1021.

(753) Interfor report, copy in author's possession; PBS Frontline believes the suitcase belonging to Gannon was switched in London.

According to their investigators, Gannon's was the only piece of luggage not accounted for from the flight.

1022.

(† The fact that the team was onboard made it, in the words of PBS Frontline, "a strong secondary target." The fact that the team was
onboard made it, in the words of PBS Frontline, "a strong secondary target."
1023.

(*) As British journalist David Ben-Aryeah reported: "Very strange people were at work very early on.

Within a matter of three hours
there were American accents heard in the town.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(*) As British journalist David Ben-Aryeah reported: "Very strange people were at work very early on. Within a matter of three hours
there were American accents heard in the town. Over that night there were large numbers, by which I mean twenty, twenty-five, thirty people
arrived.…" (Franckovich, Op Cit.)
1024. (**) As investigator and former law-enforcement officer Craig Roberts points out in The Medussa File: "The unusual activity of this
alleged "FBI" agent is striking, but not quite as odd as the fact that Lockerbie is over 350 miles from London, which is the nearest point an
American FBI agent might be. To reach Lockerbie that night from London, even if traveling by air, would have taken far more than one hour
considering the sequence of events that would have had to occur. Assuming a timely notification, an American agent in London would have
had to have been tracked down considering the late hour, notified to pack up for an investigation, rush to Heathrow, board a waiting airplane,
fly immediately to the nearest airport that could land a jet transport, obtain ground transportation from there to Lockerbie, then locate the
command center. An effort that would require four to six hours at the minimum."
1025. (754) Debra Burdick, interview with author. 1026. (755) J.D. Reed, "Wednesday, April 19, 1995: A Black Day for All of Us," Workin' Interest, Vol. 96, Issue No. 3. 1027. (756) Ibid. 1028. (757) Ibid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1029.

(758) Ibid.

1030.

(759) Allen, Op Cit.

1031.

(760) The Jaffar clan had been at the center of the opium production in the Bekka Valley for years.

1032.

(761) "Files Before Victims," New York Daily News, 5/1/95.

1033.

(762) Tulsa Fire Captain, confidential interview with Craig Roberts.

1034.

(*) While Sheriff Deputy Melvin Sumtner told me he had found the axle, an Oklahoma City Policeman, Mike McPherson, claimed that
he had in fact discovered it, as did an FBI agent.

These three accounts were contradicted by Governor Frank Keating, who claimed that he
had actually found the axle.

1035.

(*) Although Thatcher acknowledged the conversation took place, she denied that she and Bush sought to interfere with the
investigation.

1036.

(*) Interestingly, some of these same players worked with CIA Director Bill Casey and Vice President George Bush to build Iraq
(whose president, Saddam Hussein, Bush called "worse than Hitler") into a major military power.

This policy perfectly illustrated the Reagan/
Bush administration's propensity to cuddle up to whatever dictator or terrorist was in favor at the time.

1037.

(*) Yet they were still left with the problem of proving how the microchip had been traced to Al-Megrahi and Fhima.

The FBI claimed it
had traced the chip to Mebo, a Swiss manufacturing firm in Zurich run by Edwin Bollier.

Agents showed Bollier a photograph of the chip, and
asked if it was from their MST-13 O-series.

"I immediately recognized from the photo that the fragment found in Lockerbie was without a
doubt from a timer that we ourselves had made," stated Bollier.Yet they still hadn't proven is how the timer had come to be in the possession
of Fhima and al-Megrahi.

Stasi (East German secret police) files showed that Bollier had not only sold timers to the Libyans, but to the
Palestinians, the Red Army Faction, and Arabs in both Germanies."I immediately recognized from the photo that the fragment found in Lockerbie was without a
doubt from a timer that we ourselves had made," stated Bollier.Yet they still hadn't proven is how the timer had come to be in the possession
of Fhima and al-Megrahi.

Stasi (East German secret police) files showed that Bollier had not only sold timers to the Libyans, but to the
Palestinians, the Red Army Faction, and Arabs in both Germanies.

The Stasi concluded that Bollier was a triple agent, probably working for
the CIA as well, since he seemed to easily be able to get very special American equipment for them.Yet when Bollier asked the FBI to see
the actual fragment, they said they didn't have it; the Scottish police had it.

When Bollier approached the Scottish police, they refused to
show it to him.

Nor was he was given a satisfactory explanation of how either the FBI or the Scotts managed to trace it to the Libyans.

1038.

(*) Ollie North served on the planning committee that selected the targets for the Libyan raid.

1039.

(*) When the new allegations were first made public, Libya formally offered to submit the matter to the International Court of Justice, or
to an international arbitration tribunal.

Their plea falling on deaf ears, Libya finally invoked Article 14 of the Montreal Sabotage Convention,
which states that in the event of a dispute over the interpretation or application of the convention that cannot be resolved by means of
negotiation, any party has the right to submit the matter to an international arbitration tribunal.

All of the offers were just rejected unilaterally
and summarily by the U.S.

and the U.K., which subsequently rammed a UN Security Council resolution through that was highly critical of
Libya.

1040.

(*) U.S.

officials also tried to blame the murder of three IBEX executives in August of 1976 on "Libyan-trained Islamic Marxist
guerrillas."
1041.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(*) U.S. officials also tried to blame the murder of three IBEX executives in August of 1976 on "Libyan-trained Islamic Marxist
guerrillas."
1041. (763) Jeffrey Steinberg, "CIA Man: Iran, Syria Bombed Pan Am 103," The New Federalist, 7/2/93. 1042. (*) U.S. Attorney General Robert Mueller told the public, "We have no evidence to implicate another country (other than Libya) in this
disaster." Gene Wheaton described it as "OPSEC" (operation security), providing layers of deniability and disinformation, false leads and
stories. 1043. (764) In August l991, Larry Cohler, a writer for the Washington Jewish Week, reported on a set of secret negotiations which took place
between Syria and the U.S. over the release of the hostages and which led to a number of covert trips by Bush to Damascus; Regarding the
announcement of the Libyan theory, see: New York Times, 11/15/91; Time, 4/27/92. 1044. (765) Coleman/Goddard, Op Cit., pp. 201, 256, 275; James Shaughnessy said that he "had also been advised separately by four
investigative journalists" that they had "evidence" of these intercepts, one having claimed to have actually heard the tapes. "Finally, I was
told that Mr. Lovejoy used a number of aliases, including Michael Franks."
1045. (766) This wasn't difficult, as the McKee team (via Gannon) had made its travel arrangements through the DEA's travel agent in
Nicosia. 1046. (767) A May l989 report in the Arabic newspaper Al-Dustur reported on the situation involving Lovejoy/Franks/Schafer. Lester
Coleman, a trained DIA agent, claims he warned Hurley repeatedly about the compromised situation. Hurley would later seek to dismiss
Coleman's claims as unsubstantiated, and seek to discredit Coleman.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1047.

(*) One person familiar with the case believes it was Shackley himself.

1048.

(*) In 1984, Cannistraro, newly transferred to the NSC, oversaw covert assistance to the Mujahadeen.

1049.

(768) Dave Emory, Pacifica Radio Network, WBAI-FM, date unknown.

1050.

(769) Mike Levine, interview with author.

1051.

(*) "NBC News on February 7 carried a somewhat different version of the revelations that later appeared in the McCurtain Daily
Gazette, ambiguously suggesting that although Howe gave the government information regarding 'alleged threats' prior to the bombing,
there is 'no evidence' that she reported 'specific threats' against the Murrah Building until two days after the bombing." (Edward Zehr,
"Oklahoma City Cover-up Exposed: But the Mainstream Media are Still in Denial," Washington Weekly, 2/17/97.)
1052.

(*) I managed to partially confirm this by speaking to Judge Babcock, and his neighbor, both of whom said that extra security was
provided the judge at that time.

1053.

(770) Dave Hogan, "If He'd Been at Work… Former Portlander Says," Portland Oregonian, 4/20/95.

1054.

(771) Glenn Wilburn, interview with author.

1055.

(772) Press conference, 1/14/98.

1056.

(773) J.D.

Cash and Jeff Holladay, "Day of Blast 'an Amazing Coincidence,'" McCurtain Gazette, 12/1/95.

1057.

(774) Tom Jarriel, ABC 20/20, 1/17/97.

1058.

(775) Ian Williams Goddard, "Federal Government Prior Knowledge of the Oklahoma City Bombing," 5/26/97, posted on Internet.

1059.

(776) Sherry Koonce, Panola Watchman, 4/23/97.

1060.

(777) Allen, Op Cit.

1061.

(778) KFOR, Jayna Davis reporting, 11/21/96; WNBC Extra, Brad Goode reporting, 3/19/97.

1062.

(779) J.D.

Reed, "Wednesday, April 19, 1995: A Black Day for All of Us," Workin' Interest, Vol.

96, Issue No.

3.

1063.

(780) Ibid.

1064.

(781) ABC EXTRA: Prior Knowledge, 11/20/96.

1065.

(782) "Indictment: Inside the Oklahoma City Grand Jury, The Hoppy Heidelberg Story," Equilibrium Entertainment, 1996.

1066.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(782) "Indictment: Inside the Oklahoma City Grand Jury, The Hoppy Heidelberg Story," Equilibrium Entertainment, 1996. 1066. (*) As previously mentioned, Guy Rubsamen, the Federal Protective Services guard on duty that night, said that nobody had entered
the building. Yet Rubsamen took off at 2:00 a.m., and claimed that nobody was guarding the building from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. 1067. (783) V.Z. Lawton, interview with author; "Diana Baldwin and Judy Kuhlman, "Elevator Accounts Questioned — Inspector Talks of
Bomb's Effect," Daily Oklaho;man, 7/16/97. 1068. (784) William Jasper, "Prior Knowledge: Powerful Evidence Exists that Federal Agents were not Surprised by OKC Blast," New
American, 12/11/95. 1069. (785) "Since his story was made public, Shaw said he and his wife have taken a lot of flak over it, and it has created a hardship for
them. 'There's us that knows the truth and those who hate us. The ones that hate us are the ones trying to cover it up,' Shaw said." ("Some
Witnesses Leery Of Bombing Grand Jury," Daily Oklahoman, 8/10/97.)
1070. (786) William Jasper, New American, date unknown. 1071. (787) J.D. Cash, "ATF's Explanation Disputed," McCurtain Sunday Gazette and Broken Bow News, 7/30/95. Schickedanz won the
National Policeman of the Year Award for his "heroic" role. 1072. (*) The author confirmed the story with Oscar Johnson, owner of the elevator company. According to Johnson, the freight elevator's
doors were blown outward. If the sole blast had come from outside the building, how could this be?

--- PAGE BREAK ---1073.

(788) Ed Godfrey and Diana Baldwin, "Bombing Grand Jury Calling 6 Witnesses This Week, " Daily Oklahoman, 7/13/97.

1074.

(789) "Diana Baldwin and Judy Kuhlman, "Elevator Accounts Questioned — Inspector Talks of Bomb's Effect," Daily Oklaho;man,
7/16/97.

1075.

(790) Rick Sherrow, interview with author.

1076.

(791) David Hall, interview with author.

1077.

(792) Gordon would not return the author's calls.

The interview conducted by the other reporter was early on, before the cover-up got
into high gear.

1078.

(793) Ames Yates, interview with author.

1079.

(794) Rick Sherrow, interview with author; Don Webb, interview with author.

1080.

(795) Letter of Terrance Yeakey to Ramona McDonald, copy in author's possession.

1081.

(796) Federal agent, confidential interview with author.

1082.

(797) List of attendees of Sheriff's golf tournament, copy in author's possession.

1083.

(*) In kind of a bizarre twist to the story, they said that at one point one of the men rolled a hoop across the road to the team on the
other side.

A witness who saw the black-garbed team operating hoops by the Murrah building called the FBI's special 800 number to report
what he saw.

Afterwards he began noticing that his phone clicked constantly, and a mysterious black car began appearing outside his
house.

By the time State Representative Key and I drove to Dallas to interview him, he was too afraid to talk, and we had to get the
information through a friend.

1084.

(798) Pritchard, Op Cit., p.

90.

1085.

(*) Strassmeir told the author in an interview from his home in Berlin that Pritchard misquoted him — that Strassmeir relayed the
preceding statement from another BATF agent.

Pritchard disagrees, and stands by his story.

1086.

(799) Edward Zehr, "Turning Point: Resolving The Enigma of Oklahoma City," Washington Weekly, 11/18/96.

1087.

(800) J.D.

Cash, "Agents Probe OKC Bombing Links To Bank Robberies," McCurtain Daily Gazette, 7/16/96.

1088.

(801) Pritchard, Op Cit., p.

90.

1089.--- PAGE BREAK ---

90. 1089. (802) Harry Eberhart interviewed by Tom Jarriel, ABC 20/20, 1/18/97. 1090. (803) Dewy Webb, interview with author. 1091. (*) As for Eberhardt, his name showed up on an ATF report concerning Carol Howe's activities at Elohim City. The report indicated
that an "irate" Eberhardt expressed his concern that Howe's cover had been "severely compromised" due to the release of a report by FBI
agent James R. Blanchard II. Although the report was prepared almost a year after the bombing, the fact that Eberhardt's name appeared
prominently on the report suggests that his office was involved, along with the Tulsa office, on the Elohim City investigation. 1092. (804) Richard Sherrow, interview with author. 1093. (805) Charles, Op Cit.; William F. Jasper, "Undercover: The Howe Revelations," The New American, 9/15/97. 1094. (806) David Hall, interview with author; Rick Sherrow, interview with author. 1095. (*) Luke Franey claimed at McVeigh's trial that the only sting they were working on involved a narcotics case with the Norman Police
Department. Yet Norman Police Chief Phil Cotten could give me no details of that operation, nor could anyone there remember any specifics
as to which ATF agents were working on that case. Cotten said most of the officers had retired. 1096. (807) David Hall, interview with Tom Valentine. 1097. (*) Franey claims that agent Darrell Edwards was at home, talking on the phone to Franey. Bruce Anderson was on his way to a
compliance inspection, and agent Mark Michalic, who had worked late with Franey the night before, was on his way to the office.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1098.

(808) David Hall, interview with author.

1099.

(809) David Hall, interview with author.

1100.

(810) Jon Rappoport, Oklahoma City Bombing: The Supressed Truth (Santa Monica, CA: Blue Press, 1995), pp.

75-76.

1101.

(811) Conversation between informant and Rep.

Charles Key, copy in author's possession.

A voice stress analysis we ran on this
individual's interview tape indicated he was being truthful.

1102.

(812) David Hall, interview with author.

1103.

(813) Pritchard, Op Cit, p.90.

1104.

(*) Notice how the caller depicts McVeigh as the sole target of the sting, and attempts to distance himself from the operation by talking
of it in the third tense.

1105.

(814) Statement of Jane Graham, 11/15/96.

1106.

(*) Recall that Sheriff's Deputies Don Hammons and David Kachendofer signed sworn affidavits that Rep.

Istook told them of the
government's prior knowledge of the attack.

Istook told bombing investigator Pat Briley that he was very close to the FBI's investigation of
the bombing, and made it his business to know the details.

"There is nothing you can tell me and the FBI about the bombing that we don't
already know," Istook said.

1107.

(815) Bill Jasper, The New American; The author also heard one of the Cancemi tapes, but with a slightly different account.

1108.

(816) Lana Padilla, interview with author.

1109.

(*) According to former C.I.D.

investigator Gene Wheaton, Salem worked for the TRD — Egypt's version of the CIA, controlled by the
CIA.

Salem admitted to being a double-agent for the U.S.

and Egypt.

1110.

(817) Ralph Blumenthal, "Tapes Depict Proposal to Thrawr Bomb Used in Trade Center Blast," New York Times, 10/28/93.

The
transcripts, which are stamped "draft" and compiled from 70 tapes recorded secretly during the last two years by Salem, were turned over to
defense lawyers, in the second bombing case, by the government under a judge's order barring lawyers from disseminating them.(817) Ralph Blumenthal, "Tapes Depict Proposal to Thrawr Bomb Used in Trade Center Blast," New York Times, 10/28/93.

The
transcripts, which are stamped "draft" and compiled from 70 tapes recorded secretly during the last two years by Salem, were turned over to
defense lawyers, in the second bombing case, by the government under a judge's order barring lawyers from disseminating them.

A large
portion of the material was made available to the New York Times.

1111.

(818) Waldman and McMorris, Op Cit.

1112.

(819) Jim Dwyer, David Kocieniewshi, Deidre Murphy, and Peg Tyre, Two Seconds Under the World, 1994, quoted in William Jasper,
"Evidence of Prior Knowledge," New American, 5/13/96.

1113.

(820) J.D.

Cash, "The Rev.

Robert Millar Identified As FBI Informant," McCurtain Daily Gazette, 7/1/97.

1114.

(*) Craig Roberts, a 20-year Tulsa police officer, concurrs: "[The Tulsa ATF office] did surveillance, took photos, used informants
(Howe) and yet no matter what they did, they couldn't get any cooperation out of D.C.

They knew something was wrong, but couldn't get a
handle on it.

I think it's because Strassmeir was working as an infiltrator at the D.C.

level, and they were protecting him without tipping off the
local office — which they obviously didn't trust to keep a secret from the local police.

This in not unusual.

In fact, the field agents with the
ATF and FBI often do not get along well with the D.C.

officials — and vice/versa."
1115.

(821) Citizens Research and Investigations Committee and Louis Tackwood, The Glass House Tapes (New York, NY: Avon Press,
1973), p.

5, quoted in Alex Constantine, Blood, Carnage, and the Agent Provacateur, 1993, p.

13; "King Aftermath Rekindles Police Spying
Controversy, Los Angeles Times, 6/18/91, quoted in Ibid., pp.

16-18.

1116.

(822) Ibid.

1117.

(823) In fact, the Pepsi bottling plant in Marseilles was used as a cover for heroin production.

1118.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(823) In fact, the Pepsi bottling plant in Marseilles was used as a cover for heroin production. 1118. (*) General John Singlaub, a former OSS agent, has the distinction of being the first U.S. officer to pay his indigenous personnel at
Kinming, China with five pound bags of opium. Ray Cline (Iran-Contra) was a member of Singlaub's team at the time. (Wall Street Journal,
4/18/80)
1119. (*) After the Contra torture manual scandal, McFarlane was fired, then kicked upstairs to the NSC to become Armitage's Deputy. Among those who participated in the original to plan "privatize" the Contra operation were: Gen. John Singlaub (Ret.), Andrew Messing, then

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the Conservative Caucus, Ted Shackley, Harry (Heinie) Aderholt, Edward Luttwak, Gen.

Edward Lansdale (Ret.), Seal Doss, and Col.

John Waghelstein, former head of the U.S.

military groups in El Salvador.

1120.

(824) Andrew Eiva, former Green Beret, part of lobby effort for Mujahadeen, interview with author; Christic, Op Cit.

Reagan's March,
1981 decision was formalized in November as National Security Decision Directive 17, and hidden from Congress.

1121.

(825) Levine, Op Cit.

1122.

(826) Roberts, Op Cit.

1123.

(827) Bo Gritz, Called to Serve, 1991.

1124.

(*) The real reason that Britain went to war against the Chinese (The Boxer Rebellion) was to prevent the emperor of China —
concerned about the spread of drug use among his people — from destroying China's opium crop.

The British, who were making huge
profits from the opium trade, had Parliament declare war against the Chinese for interfering with their profitable "commerce." One of the
spoils of that war was that Hong Kong became British territory, resulting in a port controlled by England for the transshipment of drugs.

1125.

(828) Speech given to the Arizona Breakfast Club in Phoenix in 1989, quoted in Craig Roberts, The Medussa File: Crimes and Cover-
Ups of the U.S.

Government (Tulsa, OK: Consolidated Press, 1996), p.

200.

1126.

(829) Jack Colhoun, "The Family That Preys Together," Covert Action Quarterly, date unknown.

President Bush later appointed former
Florida Governor Bob Martinez as head of the U.S.

Office of National Drug Control Policy.

Martinez had accepted campaign donations from
drug trafficker Leonel Martinez (no relation).

Bush's son Jeb also had links with the Contra drug supply line through Leonel Martinez; In
November 1984, two years after Reagan announced his "bold, confident plan" promising to "be on the tail" of drug traffickers, cocaine
imports had jumped 50 percent and heroin was more plentiful than at any other time since the late 1970s.Martinez had accepted campaign donations from
drug trafficker Leonel Martinez (no relation).

Bush's son Jeb also had links with the Contra drug supply line through Leonel Martinez; In
November 1984, two years after Reagan announced his "bold, confident plan" promising to "be on the tail" of drug traffickers, cocaine
imports had jumped 50 percent and heroin was more plentiful than at any other time since the late 1970s.

An estimated 63 tons of cocaine
glutted the U.S.

market in 1984.

(James Mills, The Underground Empire, p.1125.)
1127.

(830) Dennis Bernstein and Robert Knight, "DEA Agent's Decade Long Battle To Expose CIA-Contra-Crack Story," Pacific News
Service, 10/96; "Will Whitewash Of CIA-Cocaine Connection Continue?

Revelations Of CIA's Connection To Crack Shouldn't Come As A
Surprise," The Birmingham News, 9/29/96.

"Richard Gregorie, one of the country's top narcotics prosecutors in Miami… had aggressively
pursued big-time cocaine bosses and drug-corrupted officials in and out of the United States.

But as he began going up the drug-business
chain of command, he targeted foreign officials friendly with the U.S.

government, and the State Department started interfering with his
investigations, telling him to stay away from certain sensitive areas.

Gregorie's operations were subsequently stopped at the request of the
State Department and he quit in protest." -Project Censored, 1989.

NSC memos discovered during the Iran-Contra investigation revealed
that Bush's NSC advisor Donald Gregg was aware early on of Contra involvement in the drug trade.

Could ex-CIA chief George Bush, at that
point Vice President and Drug Czar, be unaware of such goings-on when his reporting subordinate was quite aware of Contra involvement in
the drug trade?

1128.

(831) Celerino Castillo III and Dave Harmon, Powderburns: Cocaine, Contras and the Drug War (Oakville, Ontario: Mosaic Press),
1988.1128.

(831) Celerino Castillo III and Dave Harmon, Powderburns: Cocaine, Contras and the Drug War (Oakville, Ontario: Mosaic Press),
1988.

As ex-CIA field officer John Stockwell noted: "We cannot forget the Senate Kerry Committee findings of cocaine smuggling on CIA/
Contra aircraft, the DEA reports on the number of prosecutions in which the CIA has intervened to block prosecution of drug smugglers, the
note that escaped Lt.

Col.

Oliver North's shredder that $14 million of drug money had gone to the Contras, or the CIA's 20-odd year
relationship with Manuel Noriega."( (Austin American-Statesman, op-ed editorial)
1129.

(832) Mike Levine, interview with author.

1130.

(*) Shackley's main contact was Richard Armitage.

1131.

(*) Edward G.

Lansdale, working with Shackley, headed a subset of JM/WAVE called "Operation Moongoose." The assassination
team was called "Operation 40." Shackley's later partners in the "Enterprise," Tom Clines and Edwin P.

Wilson, also worked on JM/WAVE
and Operation 40.

Roselli and Giancana were murdered only days before they were to testify before Congress regarding their alleged roles
in the Kennedy assassination.

1132.

(*) Shackley and Clines also directed an assassination program to eliminate Vang Pao's heroin competition.

A CIA officer addressing
a group of Green Berets in Vietnam claimed that Shackley had been responsible for 250 political murders in Laos.

Shackley would later
become CIA Station Chief of Saigon.

1133.

(833) Wall Street Journal, March, 1983; quoted in Cockburn, p.

103.

Michael Jon Hand was a U.S.

Green Beret who served under
Shackley in Laos.

1134.

(**) In fact, Nugan Hand rented adjoining offices with the DEA in its Chiang Mai, Thailand branch, even sharing the same secretary!

The overall operation resulted in the huge heroin epidemic that swept the country in the late 1960s and '70s, not to mention the U.S.

troops
in Vietnam who became addicts.

1135.--- PAGE BREAK ---

troops
in Vietnam who became addicts. 1135. (834) Although Congress declared Phoenix unlawful in 1971, and ordered the military to prosecute the guilty parties, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---assassinations continued until 1975.

One operative — a Mr.

Reaux — was ultimately arrested and hung out to dry.

1136.

(*) As Marchetti stated regarding William Colby, "Colby is a very dangerous man.

I think he's got the mentality of a Heinrich Himmler.

He would have made — and might still from the way he's going — a very good Communist.

I mean that he's the kind of guy who is best
qualified to run a concentration camp, not an agency like the CIA."
1137.

(835) Michael Parenti, Inventing Reality: The Politics of the Mass Media (New York, NY: St.

Martin's Press, 1986), p.

178.

Also
responsible for the squelching of trade unions in Chile was the American Institute for Free Labor Development (AIFLD), a CIA front,
supported by corporations like W.R.

Grace and ITT.

1138.

(*) Col.

H.

Norman Schwarzkopf, Sr., the father of 'Stormin' Norman Schwarzkopf, was an intelligence operative in Iran in the 1940s
and 50s, and helped set up the dreaded Savak.

1139.

(*) It is rumored that he was looking forward to inheriting the Italian Fascist P2 account.

1140.

(**) It is interesting to note that Bush had been implicated in "October Surprise," the backdoor deal with Iranian terrorists to hold the 66
American hostages seized by pro-Khomeini forces until after Carter's defeat.

It is therefore not surprising that Shackley and Bush — both
groomed for CIA directorships, but forced to resign — would work together on covert and illegal deals such as October Surprise and Iran-
Contra.

1141.

(836) Weiner, Op Cit.

1142.

(837) Gene Wheaton, interview with author.

1143.

(*) Victor Marchetti aptly summed up this philosophy by examining former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger: "He's power-mad, a
manipulator of events.

I don't think he does it for any ideological reason, just out of instinct.

I don't think he understands what this country is
all about.

To him, everything is a deal…"
1144.

(*) As Al Martin, an Iran-Contra player, said, "Oklahoma City begins with Iran-Contra.To him, everything is a deal…"
1144.

(*) As Al Martin, an Iran-Contra player, said, "Oklahoma City begins with Iran-Contra.

If you want to understand Oklahoma, start with
Iran-Contra."
1145.

(838) Affidavit of Colonel Edward P.

Cutolo, commander of the 10th Special Forces Group (Airborne), 1st Special Forces, 3/11/80,
copy in author's possession.

1146.

(839) Maas, p.

286.

The C-4 came from J.S.

Brower & Associates.

1147.

(**) On July 3, 1976, Israeli commandos raided the Ugandan airport at Entebbe after one of their airliners had been hijacked by the
PLO.

McKenzie was instrumental in helping the Israelis, who had used Kenya as a staging area.

In his book, Manhunt, Peter Maas
describes what McKenzie got for his efforts: "Although he had been counseled not to, McKenzie went to Uganda as part of a Kenya trade
mission to patch up relations with Idi Amin.

The warnings seemed unnecessary.

Amin himself was on hand to bid McKenzie good-bye,
presenting him with the traditional Ugandan friendship gift, an African Antelope's head.

Soon after McKenzie's plane took off, it blew up.

Inside the Antelope head was a bomb, placed there by Frank Terpil."
1148.

(† Gene Wheaton, IBEX;s subsequent director of security who investigated the murders, claims Shackley, Clines, Hakim, Rafael "Chi
Chi" Quintero, and Secord are all linked to the murders.

John Harper would later show up in Honduras training the Contras in the use of
explosives.

1149.

(840) Kwitny, Op Cit., p.

103.

1150.

(841) Hoppy Heidelberg and Ted Gundersen, interviews with author.

Recall that Heidelberg heard McVeigh's sister Jennifer read the
letter into testimony.

1151.

(*) Dewy Clarridge and Oliver North were in charge of the harbor mining operation.

Moore's friend Don Aranow, owner of Magnum
Marina, which had the original contract to build the boats, gave the contract to Moore.

Aranow was killed one day before he was to testify at
the Iran-Contra hearings.

1152.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Aranow was killed one day before he was to testify at
the Iran-Contra hearings. 1152. (**) My source told me that Moore's FBI contact was Tom Ross out of Hot Springs, Arkansas, one of Ollie North's "damage control"
men. "
1153. (842) Nolan Clay, "Robbery Victim's Alliances Promise Drama in Nichols' Trial," Daily Oklahoman, 11/9/97. 1154. (843) AEI articles of incorporation. The president of AEI, Harry Huge, was a partner in the law firm of Rogovin, Huge, and Schiller. 1155. (844) Cliff Lewis, interview with author. Mujeeb Cheema, interview with author.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1156.

(*) Interestingly, some of Khalid's workers were spotted in a Tulsa nightclub, The Ocean Club, which is curious, since Tulsa is 100
miles from Oklahoma City.

McFarlane would not return repeated calls.

1157.

(845) Indeed, a major terrorism summit sponsored by Tehran in June of 1996 saw delegates from Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iraq, Saudi
Arabia, and other Mid-East and African states, as well as Bosnia-Herzegovina, Germany, France, Britain, Canada, and the U.S.

come
together to form a joint working committee under the command of the new HizbAllah International — transforming that group into "the
vanguard of the revolution" of the Muslim world.

1158.

(846) Timothy McVeigh's Petition for Writ of Mandamus, 3/25/97, p.

81.

Jones points out, given the issue of the credibility of the
information, that the head of Saudi Intelligence is the King's own son.

1159.

(*) As former high-ranking CIA official Victor Marchetti explained, "They're smart enough always to work through other parties.

Generally, the dirtier the work is, the more likely it is to be farmed out."
1160.

(**) Some of the members of ZR/RIFLE, such as Felix Rodriguez (AKA: Max Gomez), and the leader of CORU, Frank Castro, would
go on to form the nucleus of the Contra drugs-for-guns operation.

1161.

(847) Scott and Marshall, Op Cit., p.

16.

1162.

(848) Deirdre Griswold "Cuba Defended Itself, Washington Is The Terrorist," Workers World, 3/7/96; Jack Calhoun, "The Family that
Prays Together," Covert Action Quarterly, Summer, 1992; also see Thomas & Keith.

1163.

(*) This is not surprising, as it has been alleged by former CIA agents that Bush allowed the Agency to use his off-shore oil drilling
company, Zapata Oil, as a front for numerous CIA operations, including the Bay of Pigs invasion.

1164.

(849) Friedman, Op Cit.

1165.

(850) Ibid.

1166.

(851) Mary Ann Weaver, "Blowback," The Atlantic Monthly, May, 1996.

1167.(851) Mary Ann Weaver, "Blowback," The Atlantic Monthly, May, 1996.

1167.

(*) Recall that another one of the CIA's "valuable assets," Mir Aimal Kansi, opened fire with an AK-47 outside of CIA headquarters in
January, 1993, killing two Agency employees.

Like World Trade Center bomber Ramzi Yousef, he fled to Pakistan.

1168.

(852) Friedman, Op Cit.

1169.

(*) Egyptian President Hosani Mubarak claimed that Sheik Rahman was connected to the CIA.

(Las Vegas Sun, 8/1/93)
1170.

(853) Peter Waldman and Frances A.

McMorris, "The Other Trial: As Sheik Omar Case Nears End, Neither Side Looks Like a
Winner," Wall Street Journal, 9/22/95.

1171.

(**) As William Norman Grigg, writing in the New American points out, "The FBI engaged in a curiously timed fit of incompetence when
the opportunity arose for a preemptive strike against Sheik Omar's network.

Following the shooting of Rabbi Meir Kahane in November
1990, the FBI seized and impounded 49 boxes of documents from Nosair's New Jersey apartment; the cache included bomb-making
instructions, a hit list of public figures (including Kahane), paramilitary training materials, detailed pictures of famous buildings (including the
World Trade Center), and sermons by Sheik Omar urging his followers to 'destroy the edifices of capitalism."'
1172.

(854) National Review, 7/10/95, quoted in Ibid.; Curt Gentry, J.

Edgar Hoover: The Man and the Secrets (New York, NY: W.W.

Norton,
1991), p.

484.

1173.

(*) Not only was Rowe never prosecuted, the FBI paid his medical bills and gave him a $125 bonus for "services rendered."
1174.

(855) Donner, Op Cit., p.

365
1175.

(856) Frank Donner, Protectors of Privilege: Red Squads and Police Repression in America, (Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA,
University of California Press: 1990), p.

360
1176.

(857) Ward and Churchill, Op Cit., p.

181; Washington Post, 7/15/80; New York Times' 5/15/80, quoted in Ibid.

1177.

(858) Gene Wheaton, interview with author.

1178.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(858) Gene Wheaton, interview with author. 1178. (*) Using such individuals would also prove far easier than attempting to recruit American operatives, even hardened killers. The

--- PAGE BREAK ---potential recruits willing to kill American men, women and children would be far more numerous among foreigners with a vendetta against
the U.S.

1179.

(859) Intelligence Newsletter (France), April 1993; Unclassfied, National Association of Security Alumni, date unknown.

1180.

(*) Kansi's original target was believed to have been CIA Director Robert Gates.

1181.

(860) Ben MacIntrye, London Times, 4/21/95, quoted in Keith, Op Cit., p.

154.

1182.

(**) Curiously, Robert Jerlow, KFOR's private investigator, spotted the FBI watching al-Hussaini at the same time he was.

Would this
subsume that Hussaini was not part of an FBI-sanctioned operation?

1183.

(**) It is also curious why one prominent alternative investigator ignored the Middle Eastern lead altogether, focusing solely on Elohim
City.

What this alleged reporter consistently missed is the dismembered military leg found in the rubble, the numerous witnesses who saw
Middle Eastern suspects, and the APB on the brown pick-up driven by al-Hussaini.

This reporter even went so far as to suggest that the men
in the pick-up were Dennis Mahon and his comrades dressed up as Arabs!

Given the scenario of a "second-level damage-control" operation
steering critics of the government's case solely onto Elohim City, it can be surmised that at least some of the real bombers were part of the
Middle Eastern contingent, and were CIA/FBI controlled, supplied and activated.

This would explain why Gagan's involvement in the Middle
Eastern cell was apparently ignored by the FBI.

It would explain why Gagan was asked by an covert operative to deliver a Lely mixer to
Junction City.

And it would explain why the FBI cleared Hussain al-Hussaini, and why Sam Khalid acted so non-chalant when confronted
with evidence of his involvement.

1184.

(861) Statement of Jane Graham, 11/15/96.

1185.

(862) Jane Graham, video deposition of 8/20/97 and interview with author.

1186.(862) Jane Graham, video deposition of 8/20/97 and interview with author.

1186.

(*) As previously mentioned, representatives of the electric, telephone and gas companies, as well as local contractors bidding ona
GSA renovation project, all denied having workmen who fit the mens' description at that location.

1187.

(**) Also recall that on the same day or the following Monday, VA employees Dennis Jackson and Craig Freeman saw a suspicious
group of Arabs inside the building after hours.

One of them closely matched the description of the suspect seen with "McVeigh" by Phyliss
Kingsley at the Hi-Way Grill that Sunday.

They exited, said Freeman, towards the underground parking garage.

1188.

(† Moreover, why would he do it so conspicuously, running a red light, attracting the attention of the police?

This makes about as
much sense as flying down the highway at 80 mph without a license plate.

1189.

(863) Jane Graham, interview with author.

Graham is a friend and co-worker of Johnston's.

1190.

(*) How interesting that McVeigh and his co-conspirator would be loitering around the scene of such a heinous crime, right next to his
readily identifiable yellow Mercury.

1191.

(864) Statement of Jane Graham, 11/15/96.

1192.

(**) When Francis Gary Powers' U-2 spy plane was discovered and shot down over Soviet air space, he failed to pull the destruct ring.

Powers suspected that the CIA had it hooked to a zero-delay fuse — so he bailed out without activating the self-destruct.

Unfortunately, he
had a fatal helicopter crash the week before he was supposed to testify before the House Select Assassination Committee.

1193.Unfortunately, he
had a fatal helicopter crash the week before he was supposed to testify before the House Select Assassination Committee.

1193.

(*) It has been well-documented that the FBI and ATF illegaly leveled the crime scene at Waco, which was supposed to be under the
jurisdiction of Texas Rangers; destroying evidence that ATF helicopters had indiscriminately fired into the roofs of the building at the
beginning of the raid killing several people; had fired at the front door well before any shots had been fired in return, and had set explosive
charges on top of a concrete vault in which women and children were hiding to escape the fire set.

The front door (a metal door) which would
have proved the second allegation was later found to be mysteriously "missing."
1194.

(865) Tim Weiner, "Aging Shop of Horrors: The C.I.A.

Limps to 50," New York Times, 7/20/97.

As Milt Bearden, the Agency's last chief
of Soviet operations, said, "The collapse of our enemy ensured our own demise." "We're a confused group, dying for stability," the Agency's
Inspector General, Fred Hitz, said in a May speech.

1195.

(*) It is interesting to examine this from the perspective of the German BND, the intelligence organization founded by Reinhard Gehlen
at the behest of the CIA after WWII.

Gehlen had been Hitler's senior intelligence officer on the Eastern Front, commanding the Fremde
Heere Ost or "Foreign Armies East." The U.S.

Government absorbed the Gehlen Org into its emerging intelligence apparatus (the CIA) in its
entirety, in the belief that Gehlen's still largely intact network of spies would prove invaluable in America's fight against the Soviets.

Walter
Schellenberg, ex-head of Nazi foreign intelligence, claimed to author William Stevenson that Gehlen's organization was primarily a front for
escaping Nazi war criminals.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Government absorbed the Gehlen Org into its emerging intelligence apparatus (the CIA) in its
entirety, in the belief that Gehlen's still largely intact network of spies would prove invaluable in America's fight against the Soviets. Walter
Schellenberg, ex-head of Nazi foreign intelligence, claimed to author William Stevenson that Gehlen's organization was primarily a front for
escaping Nazi war criminals. It was ultimately proved that approximately 90 percent of the "intelligence" coming out of the Gehlen Org
regarding the Soviet threat, which led to the rise of the Cold War, was false, but was used by Gehlen and his Nazi comrades to perpetuate

--- PAGE BREAK ---his organization.

1196.

(*) Iron Mountain is supposedly a nuclear corporate hideout in Hudson, NY, similar to Mt.

Weather in Virginia.

It is also a reference to
the town of Hudson, N.Y.

where, at the Hudson Institute, war games and studies on future life were developed under the direction of Herman
Kahn for governmental and private agencies.

Kahn did not claim authorship however.

As for Leonard Lewin, who finally claimed authorship
of the report in 1972, "as a hoax," said that his intent was "to caricature the bankruptcy of the think-tank mentality by pursuing its style of
scientistic thinking to its logical ends." Interestingly, the New York Times wrote "Many analysts believe that the report reflects a grasp of the
Washington scene as well as an understanding of social psychology, ecology, economics and sociology that is beyond the ability of most
satirists." Arthur I.

Waskow of the Institute for Policy Studies told the Times he was surprised to see one of his privately circulated reports
mentioned in the book.

Waskow added that only about 60 people in Washington saw the report, "[so] if it's a hoax, it must involve somebody
high up," he said.

(New York Times, 11/1/67)
1197.

(866) Leonard C.

Lewin, Report from Iron Mountain on the Possibility and Desirability of Peace (New York, NY: Simon & Schuster/
Free Press, 1996); Victor Navasky, "Anatomy of a Hoax," The Nation, 6/12/95; Robert Tomsho, "A Cause for Fear; Though Called a Hoax,
'Iron Mountain' Report Guides Some Militias," Wall Street Journal, 5/9/95, quoted in "Report from Iron Mountain: A Fraud?" Conspiracy
Nation, Vol.

5 No.

8.

1198.

(**) In much the same way as George Orwell's 1984 seems to be coming to pass today.

1199.

(*) Emphasis mine.

1200.

(867) Lewin, Op Cit., pp.94-96.

1201.

(*) Emphasis mine.

1202.

(868) Foreign Affairs, June/July, 1995.

1203.

(869) Rappaport, Op Cit.

1204.

(870) DeCamp, Op Cit., p.

380.

1205.380.

1205.

(*) As Report from Iron Mountain states: "War supplies the basis for the general acceptance of political authority" which "has enabled
societies to maintain necessary class distinctions," and "ensured the subordination of the citizen to the state…."
1206.

(871) Noam Chomsky, Alternative Press Review, Fall, 1993.

1207.

(872) David P.

Hamilton and Bill Spindle, "Tokyo's Threat Was Just in Jest, But Some Call It a U.S.

Backlash," The Wall Street
Journal, 6/25/97.

As the Journal noted: "offering to sell even a portion of that amount would likely send the Treasury market into a free
fall.…"
1208.

(873) The majority of militia members are nonviolent and some have assisted the bureau in its investigations, he said.

1209.

(874) William Jasper, "Enemies of World Order," The New American, 6/23/97.

1210.

(875) DeCamp, Op Cit., p.

382.

1211.

(*) As another famous politician once declared: "The streets of our country are in turmoil.

The universities are filled with students
rebelling and rioting.

Communists are seeking to destroy our country.

Russia is threatening us with her might.

And the Republic is in danger.

Yes, danger from within and without.

We need law and order.

Without law and order our nation cannot survive." The politician who made that
famous statement was Adolph Hitler.

1212.

(**) George Mintzer, the director of criminal investigations of the U.S.

Southern District Attorney's Office from 1926 to 1931,
maintained files on over 32,000 "subversive" Americans at the behest of his boss, Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau, a man who had
close links with the ADL.

Mintzer's files were made available to the Office of Naval Intelligence, the State Department, and to the FBI.

In the
mid-1950s, New York publisher Lyle Stuart exposed how the ADL was actually financing a rag-tag "neo-Nazi" group, which would engage in
loud demonstrations outside synagogues at precisely the same time that the ADL was engaging in anti-Nazi fund-raising efforts.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mintzer's files were made available to the Office of Naval Intelligence, the State Department, and to the FBI. In the
mid-1950s, New York publisher Lyle Stuart exposed how the ADL was actually financing a rag-tag "neo-Nazi" group, which would engage in
loud demonstrations outside synagogues at precisely the same time that the ADL was engaging in anti-Nazi fund-raising efforts. What is also
interesting is that the ADL played a large role in protecting Mob figures such as Meyer Lansky, smearing potential law enforcement
opponents as "Anti-Semetic." (Dope, Inc.: The Book That Drove Kissinger Crazy, (Washington DC: Executive Intelligence Review, 1992). p. 582; The Spotlight, 5/26/97)
1213. (876) "The Truth Steps Out: End of Blind Trust in the Media," Relevance, April, 1997. 1214. (877) Daniel Brandt, "The 1960s and COINTELPRO: In Defense of Paranoia," NameBase NewsLine, No. 10, July-September 1995.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1215.

(*) A recent Scripps Howard News Service and Scripps School of Journalism poll of "conspiracy fears" revealed that 40% of
Americans think it is very likely or somewhat likely that the FBI deliberately set the fires at Waco; 51% believe federal officials were
responsible for the Kennedy assassination; 52% believe that it is very or somewhat likely that the CIA pushes drugs in the inner-cities; 39%
believe it is very likely the U.S.

Navy accidentally or purposefully shot down TWA Flight 800.

80% believe that the military is withholding
evidence of Iraqi use of nerve gas or germ warfare during the Gulf War.

Yet in the wake of the Oklahoma City bombing, 58 percent of
Americans surveyed by the Los Angeles Times indicated they would trade some civil liberties if it would help thwart terrorism.

Another poll,
taken after the bombing by the Associated Press, revealed that 54 percent of Americans were willing to trade off some of their rights to
prevent more Oklahoma City-style attacks.

A poll taken during the Bush administration revealed that 60 percent of the population said that
they would give up their rights to win the drug war
1216.

(878) Rep.

Steve Stockman, letter to Attorney General Janet Reno, 3/22/95, copy in author's possession.

1217.

(879) Ibid.

1218.

(*) Foster had allegedly used Pollard, a low-level naval intelligence analyst, on behalf of Reagan, Bush, and Casper Weinberger, to
convey data to the Israelis.

The favor was in return for Israel's help in trans-shipping U.S.

weapons to Iran, as a pay-off for delaying the
release of the American hostages, thereby defeating Jimmy Carter's bid for re-election.

That scandal was known as "October Surprise." A
federal judge, a Clinton crony, has kept the indictment sealed to this day.

1219.

(*) The C-21 Lear Jet is a highly reliable aircraft.

This particular plane was part of the presidential fleet based at Andrews Air Force
base.(*) The C-21 Lear Jet is a highly reliable aircraft.

This particular plane was part of the presidential fleet based at Andrews Air Force
base.

According to military sources, the pilots who fly them are the best of the best.

Clark Fiester, an assistant Air Force secretary for
acquisitions, served on the NSA advisory board.

Other ranking personnel were Maj.

Gen.

Glenn Profitt II, and Col.

Jack Clark II.

("Rescuers
Find Recorders in Military Crash," Washington Post (Reuters), 4/18/95; "The Eight Who died in Ala.

Crash," Air Forces Monthly, date
unknown; Alexander City Outlook, 4/18/95; Joe L.

Jordan, National Vietnam P.O.W.

Strike force; other information from confidential sources.)
1220.

(**) The downing was suspiciously similar to the U.S.

Air Force plane carrying Commerce Secretary Ron Brown that crashed in Bosnia
on April 3, 1996, killing all 35 people.

While the major news media attributed the crash to foul weather, the Air Force investigation report
concluded that "the weather was not a substantially contributing factor to this mishap." The pilot had nearly 3,000 flight hours, and the co-
pilot had even more.

Five other planes had landed at the airport without difficulty in the minutes before the crash, and none experienced
problems with the navigation beacons.

The Air Force also skipped the first step of its investigative process, known as a safety board, in
which all crashes are treated as suspicious, and went imediately to the second phase, an accident investigation.

Two military pathologists at
the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology (AFIP) — Air Force Lt.

Col.

Steve Cogswell and Army Lt.

Col.

David Hause — were quoted in the
[Pittsburg] Tribune-Review as saying Brown suffered a head wound that could have been caused by a gunshot.

"Essentially… Brown had
a .45-inch inwardly beveling circular hole in the top of his head, which is essentially the description of a .45-caliber gunshot wound," said
Cogswell.David Hause — were quoted in the
[Pittsburg] Tribune-Review as saying Brown suffered a head wound that could have been caused by a gunshot.

"Essentially… Brown had
a .45-inch inwardly beveling circular hole in the top of his head, which is essentially the description of a .45-caliber gunshot wound," said
Cogswell.

Cogswell said that the original X-ray of Brown's head showed metal fragments in Brown's brain consistent with a disintegrating
bullet.

Forensic pathologist Dr.

Cyril Wecht concluded there was "more than enough" evidence that Brown was assassinated.

No autopsy
was conducted, and all of the original head X-rays of Brown are now "missing" from Brown's case file.

The sole survivor, stewardess Shelly
Kelly, who had only minor cuts and bruises, mysteriously bled to death from a neat 3" incision above her femoral artery upon arrival at the
hospital (the official story was that she died of a broken neck).

Brown's law partner at Patton, Boggs and Blow died in a mysterious car wreck
within one hour of the crash.

Three days later, Niko Jerkuic, the maintenance chief at the Tulsa airport, who had guided the plane to its fatal
rendezvous, "committed suicide." Brown, who was under investigation for bribery at the time [linked to the DNC and the Lippo Group, in turn
linked to President Clinton], reportedly possessed sensitive information that could have implicated Clinton in a long list of criminal acts, and
had threatened to blow the whistle.

Congresswoman Maxine Waters and Kweisi Mfume, head of the NAACP, have called for an investigation
into the matter.

(Christopher Ruddy and Hugh Sprunt, "Questions linger about Ron Brown plane crash," 11/24/97; Christopher Ruddy,
"Experts differ on Ron Brown's head wound," Tribune-Review, 12/3/97; "Ron Brown conspiracy protest today," UPI, 12/24/97.)
1221.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Congresswoman Maxine Waters and Kweisi Mfume, head of the NAACP, have called for an investigation
into the matter. (Christopher Ruddy and Hugh Sprunt, "Questions linger about Ron Brown plane crash," 11/24/97; Christopher Ruddy,
"Experts differ on Ron Brown's head wound," Tribune-Review, 12/3/97; "Ron Brown conspiracy protest today," UPI, 12/24/97.)
1221. (*) A conversation with former IRS investigator Bill Duncan (who, along with Arkansas Highway Patrol investigator Russell Welch, first
uncovered the activities at Mena) shed little light on the matter. Duncan said he was unaware of any files removed from Arkansas to
Oklahoma, although Duncan and Welch were under intense scrutiny for their courageous efforts. (An attempt on Russell's life was later
made by poisoning him.) Curiously, long-time Washington correspondent Sara McClendon reported that the CIA was also seen removing
large quanties of files from their offices on April 19. 1222. (880) Carol Moore, "Report on 1995 House Waco Hearings," revised, May, 1996. 1223. (**) Although FBI supervisor Larry Potts claimed there was one. 1224. (881) Peter Kawaja, interview with author. 1225. († Secretary of State Warren Christopher had unveiled a similar plan four months earlier. "International terrorists, criminals and drug
traffickers pose direct threats to our people and to our nation's interests," Christopher stated, as though he was referring to elements within
our own government. 1226. (882) Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, "IRA 'supplied detonator for Oklahoma terror bomb,'" London Sunday Telegraph, 3/30/97. 1227. (883) Theodore Shackley, The Third Option: An Expert's Provocative Report on an American View of Counterinsurgency Operations,
(New York, NY: Dell Publishing, 1981), p.17.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1228.

(884) Gene Wheaton, "CIA: The Companies They Keep," Portland Free Press, July-October, 1996.

1229.

(*) As Laventi Beria, Stalin's chief of security, stated in a speech at V.

I.

Lenin University regarding what he called "Psychopolitics,"
"Our fruits are grown in chaos, distrust, economic depression, and scientific turmoil.

At last a weary populace can seek peace only in our
offered Communist State; at last only Communism can resolve the problem of the masses."
1230.

(885) Portland Free Press, June/July, 1997.

1231.

(886) William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich,
1232.

(887) Suzanne Harris, J.D., "From Terrorism to Tyranny: How Governments Use Domestic Terrorism to Promote Totalitarian Change,"
The Law Loft, Los Angeles, CA, 1995.

1233.

(888) Shirer, Op Cit.

1234.

(889) Orville R.

Weyrich, Jr., "Reichstag Fire," Weyrich Computer Consulting, 1995; William Jasper, "A Post-Oklahoma Kristallnacht,"
The New American, 5/129/95.

1235.

(890) Jonas Bernstein, "U.S., Russia Sign Anti-Gangster Pact," Washington Times, 7/6/94; quoted in Namebase Newsline,
"Organized Crime Threatens the New World Order," Jan-March, 1995; "FBI Chief: U.S.

'Under Attack' by Terrorists," U.S.

News & World
Report, 8/1/96.

1236.

(891) USA TODAY, 3/11/93.

1237.

(892) MTV, 3/22/94.

1238.

(893) The Bill appropriates $114 million dollars for the FBI for fiscal year 1997 and $166 million for 1998.

The White House, Press
Briefing By Under Secretary of the Treasury For Enforcement Ron Noble, Deputy Attorney General Jamie Gorelick, and Deputy Assistant to
the President for Domestic Policy Bruce Reed, 4/26/95.

1239.

(894) Ace R.

Hayes, "G-Men Cop Plea on Ruby Ridge," Portland Free Press, September/October, 1995.

"The third sub-unit of this
division is the "Special Detail Unit" which is designated to keep Gen.

Reno from harm."
1240.

(895) HR 97's sponsor is Rep.

Barbara Kennelly (D-CT).

The Senate's version is S.

1581, introduced in 1993 by Senator Joseph
Lieberman (D-MA).--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Senate's version is S. 1581, introduced in 1993 by Senator Joseph
Lieberman (D-MA). Page 5 of the bill states: Members of the Rapid Deployment Force who are deployed to a jurisdiction shall be deputized
in accordance with State law so as to empower such officers to make arrests and participate in the prosecution of criminal offenses under
State law. "On The Fast-track To Fascism," Relevance magazine, February, 1995. 1241. (896) Joe Hendricks, Chief of Police, Windsor, Missouri, "Police Chief Rejects Trend Toward National Police," The Idaho Observer,
June, 1997. 1242. (*) Recent rules in certain counties in Wyoming have changed this policy, and legislation is pending as of this writing in Montana to
require federal agents to seek authorization of the local sheriff before conducting a raid. 1243. (897) In a nationwide survey of 690 police departments in cities with populations of 50,000 or more, researchers found that 90 percent
now have active SWAT teams, compared to 60 percent in the early 1980s. 1244. (898) Soldier of Fortune, August, 1995. 1245. (899) William Booth, Washington Post, 6/17/97. 1246. (900) To obtain a copy of these hearings call (202) 224-3121 and ask for the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime and Criminal
Justice, or call your Congressman. 1247. (901) Associated Press, 12/24/94. 1248. (902) "Hard Landing by Army Copter Hurts Two," Houston Chronicle, 10/29/96. 1249. (903) Mike Blair, The Spotlight, 11/14/94; Miller, Op Cit. 1250. (904) Lori-Anne Miller, "Bombing Sounds Rattle Neighborhood," The Detroit News, 10/2/94; Mark Spencer, posted on AEN
Newsgroup, 10/02/94.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1251.

(*) It seems that President Clinton suspended the law restricting the use of military force within U.S.

borders in a little-known codicil of
PDD-25, a Presidential Decision Directive that is an "open secret" in the military and Congress, but is largely unknown to the American
citizens.

1252.

(905) "The Pentagon Brings its Wars Home," Sources Ejournal, Volume 2, Issue 1, January, 1997.

Army Lt.

Gen.

J.H.

Binford Peay
points out in an Army publication titled, Tomorrow's Missions, that "military forces [today] are required to provide domestic national
assistance, such as internal peace-keeping and anti-drug operations and support of civil authorities to maintain stability in a rapidly changing
America."
1253.

(906) Jonathan Volzke, "Urban Combat Training: Marines Hit the Rooftops," Orange County Register, 3/19/93, quoted in Terry Cook,
The Mark of the New World Order (Springdale, PA, Whitacker House, 1996), p.

81.

1254.

(907) Major General Max Baratz, "New shape of Army Reserve Supports New Missions," Army Reserve, Summer, 1994.

1255.

(908) William F.

Jasper, "Fact and Fiction: Sifting Reality from Alarmist Rumors," New American, 10/31/94.

1256.

(*) Now, with the Crime Bill, the FBI can be "deputized" in local areas to enforce local laws upon demand by the FBI.

In other words, if
the FBI wants to work locally and use state and local laws, they can demand the local sheriff deputize them — then they are not constrained
by federal limitations.

1257.

(*) In February, 1982 President Ray-Gun signed a series of National Security Decision Directives (NSDDs), which provided for
increased domestic counterintelligence efforts and the maintenance of law and order in a variety of emergencies, including terrorist
incidents, civil disturbances, and nuclear emergencies.

1258.

(909) "Could It Happen Here?" Mother Jones, April, 1988.1258.

(909) "Could It Happen Here?" Mother Jones, April, 1988.

"Packard's directive says turning over law enforcement to the army will
'normally' require a Presidential Executive Order, but that this requirement can be waived in 'cases of sudden and unexpected
emergencies...

which require that immediate military action be taken.'"
1259.

(910) Keenen Peck, "The Take-Charge Gang," The Progressive, May, 1985; Reynolds, Op Cit.

1260.

(*) Former Attorney William French Smith blocked the expansion of FEMA's jurisdiction in 1984, but after Smith left office, North and
his FEMA cronies came up with the Defense Resource Act, designed to suspended the First Amendment by imposing censorship and
banning strikes.

1261.

(911) Michael Levine with Laura Kavanau, Triangle of Death, (New York: Delacorte Press, 1996), p.

353.

1262.

(912) Mike Levine, interview with author.

1263.

(*) The Los Angeles riots resulted in 11,113 fires, 2,383 injuries, and 54 deaths.

There were 13,212 arrests.

The damage was
estimated at $717 million.

1264.

(913) "Police May Have Ignored Basic Riot Plan," New York Times, 5/7/92, quoted in Ibid.

1265.

(914) "Riot Found Police in Disarray — Officers Kept from Flash Point Despite Pleas," Los Angeles Times, 5/6/92, quoted in
Constantine, p.

33.

1266.

(*) In 1979, five Communist Workers Party members were murdered by neo-Nazis and Klansmen in Greensboro, NC during a protest
march.

The KKK and Nazi groups were infiltrated and led by FBI provocateur Edward Dawson and ATF informant Bernard Butkovich.

Interestingly, two police other officers responding to a domestic call in the area just prior to the shootings noted a suspicious lack of patrol
cars in the area.

Officer Wise subsequently reported being asked by police dispatch how long they anticipated being at their call, and were
then advised to "clear the area as soon as possible." (See Chapter 15)
1267.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Interestingly, two police other officers responding to a domestic call in the area just prior to the shootings noted a suspicious lack of patrol
cars in the area. Officer Wise subsequently reported being asked by police dispatch how long they anticipated being at their call, and were
then advised to "clear the area as soon as possible." (See Chapter 15)
1267. (**) Alex Constantine (Blood, Carnage, and the Agent Provocateur), who interviewed local residents, discovered that some of the
arsonists were clearly not locals. 1268. (915) Parker and Bradley Clash at Riot Inquiry, Los Angeles Times, 9/15/65, quoted in Ibid., pp. 65-66; Ibid., p. 53. 1269. (916) Ibid., p. 69. McCone testified before the Warren Commission that Lee Harvey Oswald's connections to the Agency were "minor."
1270. (917) "The Kent State Shootings," KPFK-FM, Los Angeles, 5/3/89, quoted in Constantine, p. 25. 1271. (918) Tackwood, Op Cit., quoted in Ibid., p. 61.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1272.

(919) William Mendel, Colonel, USA, (retired), "Combat in Cities: The LA Riots and Operation Rio," Foreign Military Studies Office,
Fort Leavenworth, KS, July 1996.

1273.

(920) Ace R.

Hayes, "G-Men Cop Plea on Ruby Ridge," Portland Free Press, September/October, 1995.

1274.

(921) Mark Riebling, Wedge: The Secret War Between the FBI and CIA, p.429.

1275.

(*) During the 1994 elections, House Judiciary Committee chair Jack Brooks was overheard joking about the massacre: "Horrible
people.

Despicable people.

Burning to death was too good for them.

They'd like a slower method."
1276.

(*) PBS Frontline did a piece in 1995 showing victims of torture which occurred in one Chicago police district.

It was claimed that
torture was often used on suspects in that district so as to obtain confessions.

1277.

(922) Shackley, Op Cit., p.

13.

1278.

(**) U.S.

Army psychological warfare expert Lt.

Col.

Michael Acquino, who wrote a manual on mind control for mass populations, was
fascinated by the Nazis and their relationship to the occult.

Acquino traveled to Weiselsburg Castle in Germany where Hitler and Himmler
performed their occult rituals in order to control their SS puppets to slay the population.

1279.

(*) Acquino is the leader of the Temple of Set.

He was accused by a Presidio Army Chaplain of molesting the Chaplain's 3-year-old
daughter, and was investigated by San Francisco police.

The Army buried the case, and my Freedom of Information Act requests went
unheeded.

Acquino, his satanic powers apparently on the wan, threatened to sue the author.

1280.

(923) Ivan Sharp, "Presidio Satanist a Scarey Enigma," San Francisco Examiner, 11/2/98.

1281.

(924) The New American, 3/18/96, Vol.

12, No.

6.

Apparently, Schumer felt that Militia hearings were more important than an
investigation of the murder of 82 innocent people by the Federal Government at Waco.

Fortunately, most of his fellow Congressmen did not
agree.

1282.

(*) Emphasis in original.

1283.(*) Emphasis in original.

1283.

(925) Marchetti, O p Cit.

1284.

(926) Frank Donner, The Age of Surveillance: The Aims and Methods of America's Political Intelligence System, (New York, NY:
Vintage Books, 1981), quoted in Connolly, Op Cit.

1285.

(*) Nichols had arranged a joint venture between Wackenhut and the Cabazon reservation in Indio, California to manufacture
machineguns, night-vision goggles, fuel-air explosives, poison gas, and biological weapons, some of which were illegally shipped to the
Contras.

Wackenhut used the tribe's status as a sovereign nation to evade the Boland Amendment prohibiting aid to Somoza's so-called
"freedom fighters."Jimmy Hughes, Nichols' former Wackenhut bodyguard, claims to be in possession of documentation linking Cabazon
operatives to a hit list of political targets, including Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme, murdered in 1986, reportedly for interfering in a
similar covert arms operation in his country, involving Israeli intelligence agent Amiram Nir, and Cyrus Hashemi, both high-level operatives in
the Reagan/Bush arms-for-hostages-for-drugs network.( (Thomas and Keith, Op Cit., pp.

28-34.)
1286.

(927) Daniel Brandt, "Organized Crime Threatens the New World Order," NameBase NewsLine, No.

8, January-March 1995.

1287.

(*) Interestingly, William Northrop is a good friend of George Petrie's, and acted as a middle-man between the CIA, the Israelis, and
the Contras in illegal arms deals.

He was prosecuted by former U.S.

Attorney for the Southern District of New York (now Mayor) Rudolph
Gulliani, who described him as one of the "Merchants of Death."
1288.

(928) Frank Greve, Matthew Purdy, and Mark Fazlollah, "Firm Says U.S.

Urged Covert Plots," Philadelphia Inquirer, 4/26/87, quoted in
Christic, Op Cit., and Rodney Stich, Defrauding America (Alamo, CA: Diablo Western Press, 1994), p.

604.

"Richard Meadows served for a
time as Peregrine's president.

Charles Odorizzo and William Patton, worked for the group.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Richard Meadows served for a
time as Peregrine's president. Charles Odorizzo and William Patton, worked for the group. Peregrine's key contacts were retired Army Lt. Gen. Samuel Wilson (former Director of the DIA) and Lt. Col. Wayne E. Long, who as of April 1987 worked as a senior officer in the Foreign
Operations Group, which is a part of the Army's intelligence support activity office."
1289. (929) Stich, Op Cit., p. 604; ANV had a contract with U.S. Military Central Command, the influential connection coming through USMC
Major General Wesley Rice of the Pentagon Joint Special Operations Agency. Rice was a close friend of Bush, Helms, and Shackley,
Wheaton, Op Cit.; Deposition of Sam Hall, 9/9/87, quoted in Christic, Op Cit. 1290. (*) Emphasis in original. 1291. (930) Gene Wheaton, "Secret Island Spy Base," Portland Free Press, July-October, 1996. Wheaton and Hunt both claims that an ABC

--- PAGE BREAK ---news helicopter was shot down over the island in 1985, killing a female reporter.

The incident was covered up for reasons of "national
security."
1292.

(931) Declaration of Plaintiff's Counsel, U.S.

District Court, Southern District of Florida, Tony Avirgan and Martha Honey v.

John Hull,
et al., Civil Case No.

86-1146-CIV-KING, filed 3/31/88 by the Christic Institute; It seems Whitlam was about to announce the truth of Pine
Gap at a press conference.

By November 7, 1975, the covers of three more CIA agents had been blown in the press.

1293.

(*) This will be explored more fully in Volume Two.

1294.

(932) Luigi DiFonzo, St.

Peter's Banker, (New York, NY: Franklin Watts, 1983); NameBase NewsLine, No.

5, April-June 1994.

According to Conspiracy Nation publisher Brian Redman, Gelli attended Ronald Reagan's inauguration and the accompanying ball in 1981;
Mark Aarons and John Loftons, Ratlines (London, Heinemann, 1991), p.

89, quoted in Nexus, February/March, 1996.

1295.

(933) Ibid.

1296.

(934) "Staying Behind: NATO's Terror Network," Arm The Spirit, October, 1995, (Source: Fighting Talk - Issue 11 - May 1995; Thomas
& Keith, Op Cit., p.77.

According to Jonathan Vankin, Italian Journalist Mino Percorelli claimed the CIA pulled P2's strings.

He was killed
after publishing the article.

1297.

(*) One early result of this fear on the Right was a failed coup attempt in 1970 by Navy Commander Prince Valerio Borghese, a
supporter of the main Italian Fascist party MSI.

1298.

(935) Stuart Christie, Stefano Delle Chiaie: Portrait of a Black Terrorist (London: Dark horse Press, 1984), p.

32.

1299.

(936) Ibid.

1300.

(937) Christie, Op Cit.

1301.

(938) Stuart Christie, "Stefano Delle Chiaie: Portrait of a Black Terrorist," (London: Anarchy Magazine, Refract Publications, 1984), p.

52.

1302.

(939) Ibid.

1303.

(*) This is similar to the release of Cuban terrorist Orlando Bosch by George Bush.

1304.

(940) David Yallop, In God's Name (London: Corgi Books, 1985), p.--- PAGE BREAK ---

1304. (940) David Yallop, In God's Name (London: Corgi Books, 1985), p. 172; "Il Gladio," BBC exposé, June, 1995, quoted in Ibid. 1305. (941) Steve Mizrach, "Murder in the Vatican? The attempt on the life of John Paul II," posted on Internet. 1306. (942) Christie, Op Cit. 1307. (943) Edward S. Herman, The Terrorism Industry (New York, NY: Pantheon, 1989), p. 226. 1308. (*) It was also discovered by the Belgian press that Wackenhut guards had been luring immigrant children into basements and beating
them. 1309. (944) Reuter, 7/14/96. 1310. (945) New American, Op Cit. 1311. (946) Ari Ben-Menashe, Profits of War: Inside the Secret U.S.-Israeli Arms Network, (New York: Sheridan Square Press, 1992), p. 122. Eitan was responsible for collecting scientific and intelligence information from other countries through espionage. (Art Kunkin: "The
Octopus Conspiracy"). 1312. (947) Patrick Seale, Abu Nidal: A Gun for Hire, (New York, NY: Random House, 1992), p. 158. 1313. (948) Ibid., p. 153, 214. 1314. (949) Ibid., pp. 265-66. 1315. (*) Abu Nidal did business at the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI), a CIA proprietary which laundered drug
proceeds for the North/Secord "Enterprise," the Mujahadeen, and catered to the likes of Manuel Noriega, Saddam Hussein, and Ferdinand
Marcos.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1316.

(950) Mike Levine, interview with author.

1317.

(951) William Jasper, "The Price of Peace," The New American, 2/5/96.

1318.

(952) Uri Dan and Dennis Eisenberg, A State Crime: The Assassination of Rabin, (Paris: Belfond, 1996), quoted in Conspiracy Nation,
Vol.

8 Num.

02.

1319.

(953) New American, 12/25/95.

1320.

(954) Roberts, Op Cit., p.

395.

1321.

(955) Ibid., p.

369.

1322.

(956) Ibid., p.

402.

1323.

(*) In fact, Singlaub is known to control at least one airfield in Arizona.

1324.

(957) "FBI accidentally faxes memo on Amtrak suspect," Associated Press, 9/4/97.

1325.

(*) Chief Superintendent Job Mayo, head of the National Capital Region Command of the police claimed a group called the Paracale
Gang apparently did the bombings after failing to rob the Citibank on Paseo de Roxas in Salcedo Village, Makati.

1326.

(958) "Grenade blast Rocks Makati — 4 wounded: Rep Arroyo Accuses Military of Bombing to Justify Anti-Terrorist Bill," source:
Manila dailies.

1327.

(959) Husayn Al-Kurdi, "Libya: The Perpetual Target," News International Press Service, date unknown.

Regarding America's reaction
to Libyan independence, Kurdi notes: "The idea that emancipation from want, ignorance and injustice was to be actually implemented
somewhere is unacceptable to an entity that foments poverty and dependence everywhere."
1328.

(960) Under the authority of the 1977 International Emergency Economic Powers Act
1329.

(961) John Goetz, "Ten Years Later: La Belle Disco Bombing," Covert Action Quarterly, Spring, 1996.

(author's note: The Los Angeles
Times reported that "Israeli intelligence, not the Reagan administration, was a major source of some of the most dramatic published reports
about a Libyan assassination team allegedly sent to kill President Reagan and other top U.S.

officials...

Israel, which informed sources said
has wanted an excuse to go in and bash Libya for a long time,' may be trying to build American public support for a strike against Qaddafi.")
1330.--- PAGE BREAK ---

officials... Israel, which informed sources said
has wanted an excuse to go in and bash Libya for a long time,' may be trying to build American public support for a strike against Qaddafi.")
1330. (962) Seymour Hersh, "Target Qaddafi," New York Times Magazine, 2/22/87, quoted in Covert Action Quarterly, date unknown. 1331. (963) Ibid. 1332. (964) Goetz, Op Cit. Faysal testified, saying: "I am not of the opinion that the attack against La Belle was done by those Libyans whom
I know [the Nuri group], but rather by a different group Many of the Libyans behaved suspiciously. That was to hide the group that in reality
did the attack."
1333. (965) Rick Atkinson, "US Delays Underlined As Disco Bombing Suspect Freed in Lebanon," Washington Post, 8/3/94; quoted in Ibid. 1334. (966) Goetz, Op Cit. "A week after the bombing, Manfred Ganschow, chief of the anti terrorist police in Berlin, "rejected the
assumption that suspicion is concentrated on Libyan culprits."
1335. (*) Posey denied the allegations in an interview with the author. In an interview with the author, Federal Public Defender John Mattes
felt the plot wasn't being seriously considered. 1336. (967) Christic, Op Cit.; Jack Terrell, interview with author. (Also: See the Village Voice, 9/29/87, and 13/30/86.)
1337. (*) Statements of Jesus Garcia to Federal Public Defender John Mattes; The plot is briefly mentioned in Jack Terrell's book,
Disposable Patriot (Bethesda, MD, National Press Books, 1992), p. 321; Terrell also confirmed the plot in an interview on NBC nightly news;
Peter Glibbery, a mercenary operating in Contra camps near Hull's ranch, recalled attempting to transport explosives from the ranch to
Jones' ranch, and being told it was needed "for the embassy job."
1338. (968) Jack Terrell, NBC transcript, quoted in Christic, Op Cit. The Octopus would attempt to silence Terrell by informing the FBI that
he had threatened the life of the President.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1339.

(*) According to Jack Terrell, Contra leader Adolfo Calero complained that Pastora had described the FDN (Contras) as "homicidal,
Somicista sons of bitches."
1340.

(969) Cockburn, Op Cit.

1341.

(970) Deposition of Gene Wheaton; Deposition of Eden Pastora; testimony of Jack Terrell, quoted in Christic, Op Cit.

1342.

(*) On June 22, 1984, Pastora met with Dewy Clarridge and Vince Cannistraro, who offered to help Pastora find the killers.

(Sure.)
Harper's explosives training was allegedly courtesy of John Singlaub and Robert K.

Brown (publisher of Soldier of Fortune ).

1343.

(971) Cockburn, Op Cit., pp.

56-57; Christic, Op Cit.

1344.

(*) GArcia and his family were later threatened with a live 105mm mortar round placed on their front lawn.

1345.

(972) Ibid., John Mattes, interview with author.

1346.

(973) Jack Terrell, Disposable Patriot (Washington, D.C: National Press Book, 1992).

1347.

(974) As Col.

Dan Marvin notes, that statement, written by White in a letter to a friend, was broadcast on ABC TV in 1979 in a
documentary produced by John Marks.

1348.

(975) Sara McClendon, interview with author; Debra Von Trapp, interview with author.

1349.

(976) V.Z.

Lawton, interview with author.

1350.

(*) Maroney's wife also told me Mickey was seconded to the DEA and FBI in Cyprus, who were investigating a counterfeiting ring
(probably Iranian).

As discussed previously, Cyprus is where DIA agent Lester Coleman worked with the DEA, and where he learned about
Khalid Jaffer, the courier who allegedly carried the bomb onboard Pan Am flight 103.

Maroney worked in Cyprus in 1993.

1351.

(977) Daily Oklahoman, 8/14/97.

1352.

(978) Mike Levine, interview with author.

1353.

(979) Ace R.

Hayes, "Sacrificial Goat," Portland Free Press, July/October, 1997.

1354.

(*) "The prosecutors must pare down their case so that it does not bore the jury," legal analyst Kenneth Stern recommended in the
American Jewish Committee's recent white paper on the trial.1354.

(*) "The prosecutors must pare down their case so that it does not bore the jury," legal analyst Kenneth Stern recommended in the
American Jewish Committee's recent white paper on the trial.

"In cases such as these, prosecutors too often present a 'Cadillac' when a
'Chevrolet' would do much better." (Associated Press, 04/18/97)
1355.

(980) Steven K.

Paulson, "Media Object to Sealed Documents in Oklahoma City Bombing Case," Associated Press,12/13/96.

1356.

(*) Also recall that former CIA operative Gunther Russbacher claimed that several Las Vegas casinos, including Binyon's Horseshoe,
are slush-fund pay-off points through Shamrock Development Corp.

The recipients collect their money in the form of gambling chips, which
they then cash in.

It is worth noting that the CEO of Shamrock, Donald Lutz, was on the management staff of Silverado Savings & Loan.

"E.

Trine Starnes, Jr., the third largest Silverado borrower, was a major donor to the National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty (NEPL),
directed by Carl "Spitz" Channell, which was a part of Oliver North's Contra funding and arms support network.

Wayne Reeder, another
Beebe associate, a big borrower from Silverado, defaulted on a $14 million loan.

Reeder was involved in an unsuccessful arms deal with the
Contras.

(Jack Colhoun, "The Family That Preys Together," Covert Action Quarterly, date unknown.)
1357.

(*) As Jones explained in the Writ: "This issue arrives before the Court at this late date simply because the defense has repeatedly
gone to the government with information and requests, had to then seek intervention from the district court, and the last district court order
has been issued within the last two weeks…."
1358.

(981) Jones' defense team member, confidential interview with author.

1359.

(*) As McVeigh later explained to his hometown newspaper: "In the instant context, you could take [the statement] to reflect on the
death penalty and the charges leveled against me.--- PAGE BREAK ---

1359. (*) As McVeigh later explained to his hometown newspaper: "In the instant context, you could take [the statement] to reflect on the
death penalty and the charges leveled against me. I was accused and convicted of killing — they say that's wrong, and now they're going to
kill me."
1360. (982) Associated Press & The Hays Daily News, 8/14/97. 1361. (983) Bill Hewitt and Nickie Bane, "Humble? Forget It," People, 3/31/97.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1362.

(*) Senior partner Brendon Sullivan represented Oliver North during the Iran-Contra hearings.

1363.

(984) Janet Elliott, Mark Ballard, Robert Elder Jr., Gordon Hunter, "Nichols' Lawyers: The Odd Couple," Texas Lawyer, 3/22/96;
Robert Schmidt, "Representing the Accused Bomber," Legal Times, 5/22/95; Constantine, "The Good Soldier," Op Cit.

1364.

(985) Jim Bellingham, interview with author.

1365.

(986) John DeCamp, The Franklin Cover-Up (Lincoln, NE: AWT, Inc., 1996), pp.

345-46.

1366.

(987) Letter from Stephen Jones to author, 4/21/97.

1367.

(*) As McVeigh's appeal brief stated: "Because the government's counsel attributed Mr.

McVeigh's conduct to his anger at the Federal
Government over Waco, Mr.

McVeigh should have been entitled to show that the government had some culpability in provoking that anger,"
his attorneys said.

"This evidence and argument would have provided a mitigating explanation for the otherwise inexplicable transformation
of Mr.

McVeigh from the thoughtful, responsible and playful person described by Mr.

McVeigh's childhood friends, teachers and families… to
someone who appeared bent on destruction.'" (AP, 1/16/98)
1368.

(988) General Benton K.

Partin, interview with author.

1369.

(989) Stephen Jones, letter to author, 9/9/97.

1370.

(990) Ibid.

1371.

(*) "[Howe] said she saw McVeigh walking with Elohim City security chief Andreas Strassmeir, who had advocated violence against
the government.

One juror didn't at first even recall Howe's testimony.

Another, [juror Chris] Seib, said, "I don't know.

We felt there was
something there.

You know, we kind of skimmed through that pretty quick."
1372.

(991) Nolan Clay, "Some Jurors Convinced Others Involved — Nichols Trial Renews Speculation Concerning John Doe 2," Daily
Oklahoman, 1/11/98.

1373.

(992) Steven K.

Paulson, "Jurors leave bombing sentence to judge, criticize prosecution's case, "Associated Press, 1/8/98.

1374.

(993) Ibid.

1375.

(994) Ibid.

1376.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(994) Ibid. 1376. (995) Nolan Clay, "Some Jurors Convinced Others Involved — Nichols Trial Renews Speculation Concerning John Doe 2," Daily
Oklahoman, 1/11/98. 1377. (*) The first man LBJ met with on Nov 29th, after he had cleared the foreign dignitaries out of Washington was Waggoner Carr, Texas
Attorney General, to tell him. "No trial in Texas... ever." (Prouty)
1378. (996) John Greiner, "Court Asked to Ensure Macy Explores All Bombing Angles," Daily Oklahoman, 6/28/97. 1379. (*) Key's attorney Mark Sanford said the Supreme Court was willing to back Key up, by forcing Macy to do his job properly. 1380. (997) District Attorney Bob Macy, interview with author. 1381. (998) George Hansen, interview with author. 1382. (*) According to Oklahoma Statutes, Title 22, Section 331 (General powers and duties of grand jury), Notes of Decisions: "Grand jury
functions as an inquisitorial body; once it is convoked by the court, its duty is to investigate law violations [Tweedy v. Oklahoma Bar Ass'n,
Okl. 624 P.2d 1049 (1981)]... Investigation by grand jury or a preliminatry examination by magistrate is not a trial, and the rules of evidence
are not to be applied as rigidly as in trial of case before court. [Magill v. Miller, Okl. Cr., 455 P.2d 715 (1969)]…."
1383. (*) In a letter hand-delivered to the Grand Jury, Representative Key asked to testify a second time to present evidence that the DA's
office refused to allow a video of "contemporaneous news accounts" because it was considered to be hearsay. As Mike Johnston, Key's
attorney, stated in the letter, "The objection or contention that a grand jury cannot use hearsay evidence is not well founded." Morgan
responded by thereafter refusing to communicate with Key except through his attorney. So much for cooperation. 1384. (999) "Grand Jury Told Seismic Readings Unclear in Bombing," Daily Oklahoman, 9/19/97. 1385. (1000) Ibid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---icate with Key except through his attorney. So much for cooperation. 1384. (999) "Grand Jury Told Seismic Readings Unclear in Bombing," Daily Oklahoman, 9/19/97. 1385. (1000) Ibid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1386. (1001) KWTV Channel 9 broadcast, 06/16/97.
1387. (1002) Lynn Wallace, posted on OKBOMB mailing list.
1388. (1003) Michael Rivero, posted on OKBOMB mailing list.
1389. (1004) Edye Ann Smith, Individually and on Behalf of Her Minor Children, Chase Smith, Deceased, and Colton Smith, Deceased,
Plaintiffs, vs. Timothy James McVeigh, Michael Brescia, Michael Fortier and Andreas Carl Strassmeir and Other Unknown Individuals,
Defendants, Case No. CJ-96-18.
1390. (1005) KFOR's information is currently in possession of the Congressional Task Force on Terrorism and Unconventional Warfare. As
of this writing, Rep. James Traficant (D-OH) displayed an interest inholding OKBOMB hearings.
1391. This statement by Ben Menache about Mohammed Radi Abdullah was proven to be libelous. See the documents to that effect.
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---1
The Mannlicher-Carcanno Bomb
"It had to have been mined," said the gruff, gnarly voice on the other end of the line.

"It's real simple.

You cannot bring down a building like
that without cutting charges set on the support pillars."
Bud, an ex-Green Beret who saw heavy combat in Vietnam, should know what he's talking about.

Bud had military demolitions training —
the kind taught to men who need to know how to blow up hardened targets.

"It couldn't have been done externally like that," added Bud.

"Without cutting charges, there's just no way to do it."
Bud didn't want me to use his full name.

He was worried about his VA benefits.

One man who wasn't worried about government reprisals was General Benton K.

Partin.

A retired U.S.

Air Force Brigadier General, Partin
had responsibility for the design and testing of almost every non-nuclear weapon device used in the Air Force, including precision-guided
weapons designed to destroy hardened targets like the Alfred P.

Murrah Building.

Partin has exhaustively researched the bombing and the
resulting pattern of damage.

In a letter dated May 17, 1995, hand-delivered to each member of the Congress and Senate, Partin stated:
When I first saw the pictures of the truck-bomb's asymmetrical damage to the Federal Building, my immediate reaction was
that the pattern of damage would have been technically impossible without supplementing demolition charges at some of the
reinforcing concrete column bases….

For a simplistic blast truck-bomb, of the size and composition reported, to be able to
reach out on the order of 60 feet and collapse a reinforced column base the size of column A-7 is beyond credulity.

The full text of Partin's report, reproduced in the appendix, is too complex to elaborate on here, says a truck filled with ammonium nitrate
could not have caused the degree of damage done to the Alfred P.

Murrah building.

Not when it was parked at least 20 feet away from that
building.Murrah building.

Not when it was parked at least 20 feet away from that
building.

Without direct contact, the fall-off from the blast would be too great to do any serious structural damage.[5]
Another man who knows a thing or two about bombs is Samuel Cohen, inventor of the Neutron Bomb.

Cohen began his career on the
Manhattan Project at Los Alamos, where he was charged with studying the effects of the atomic bombs that destroyed Hiroshima and
Nagasaki.

During his 40 year career, Cohen worked with every application of nuclear weapons design and testing.

Cohen stated his position in a letter to Oklahoma State Representative Charles Key:
It would have been absolutely impossible and against the laws of nature for a truck full of fertilizer and fuel oil… no matter how
much was used… to bring the building down.[6]
Interestingly, the Ryder truck-bomb has earned the nickname the "Mannlicher-Carcanno Bomb" after the cheap Italian-made rifle with a
defective scope that was allegedly used to kill President Kennedy.

District Attorney Jim Garrison joked during the Shaw conspiracy trial that
the government's nuclear physics lab could explain how a single bullet could travel through President Kennedy and Governor Connally five
times while making several u-turns, then land in pristine condition on the President's gurney.

In the Oklahoma bombing case, it appears the government is attempting to perform a similar feat of light and magic.

The fact that a non-
directional, low-velocity fertilizer bomb parked 20 to 30 feet from a modern, steel-reinforced super-structure could not have caused the
pattern and degree of damage it did is not being widely touted by the government or the mainstream press.

The government expects the
public to believe that two disgruntled amateurs blew up the Oklahoma City Federal Building with a homemade fertilizer bomb.

Dr.

Roger Raubach doesn't believe the government.

Raubach, who did his Ph.D.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roger Raubach doesn't believe the government. Raubach, who did his Ph.D. in physical chemistry and served on the research faculty at
Stanford University, says, "General Partin's assessment is absolutely correct. I don't care if they pulled up a semi-trailer truck with 20 tons of
ammonium nitrate; it wouldn't do the damage we saw there."
Raubach, who is the technical director of a chemical company, explained in an interview with The New American magazine:
"The detonation velocity of the shock wave from an ANFO (ammonium nitrate/fuel-oil) explosion is on the order of 3,500

--- PAGE BREAK ---meters per second.

In comparison, military explosives generally have detonation velocities that hit 7,000 to 8,000-plus meters
per second.

The most energetic single-component explosive of this type, C-4 — which is also known as Cyclonite or RDX —
is about 8,000 meters per second and above.

You don't start doing big-time damage to heavy structures until you get into
those ranges, which is why the military uses those explosives."[7]
The government is not happy about people like Dr.

Roger Raubach.

They don't want you to know what Dr.

Raubach knows.

Sam Gronning,
a licensed, professional blaster in Casper, Wyoming with 30 years experience in explosives, told The New American:
"The Partin letter states in very precise technical terms what everyone in this business knows: No truck-bomb of ANFO out in
the open is going to cause the kind of damage we had there in Oklahoma City.

In 30 years of blasting, using everything from
100 percent nitrogel to ANFO, I've not seen anything to support that story."[8]
In an interview with the author, Gronning said, "I set off a 5,000 lb ANFO charge.

I was standing 1,000 feet from it, and all it did was muss
my hair, take out the mud in the creek that we were trying to get rid of, and it shattered a few leaves off the trees around it.

It didn't cause
any collateral damage to any of the deeply set trees that were within 20 feet of it."
The FBI has a different story to tell.

The FBI claims that Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols bought several thousand pounds of ammonium nitrate at a farm supply store in
Manhattan, Kansas, then drove to Geary State Park where they mixed a bomb.

The FBI claims that the suspects then hauled their magic
bomb a distance of over 500 miles, where, nearly 24 hours later, they blew up the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.

Yet what the FBI — those bastions of truth and justice — don't want you to know, is that fertilizer-grade ammonium nitrate isn't a very good
blasting agent.The FBI claims that the suspects then hauled their magic
bomb a distance of over 500 miles, where, nearly 24 hours later, they blew up the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.

Yet what the FBI — those bastions of truth and justice — don't want you to know, is that fertilizer-grade ammonium nitrate isn't a very good
blasting agent.

As a publication from the Atlas Powder company states:
…agricultural fertilizer prills when made into ANFO had very poor explosive characteristics.

They would not detonate
efficiently because of their high density, lack of porosity and heavy inert coatings of anti-setting agents.… The ability of an
oiled prill to be detonated depends greatly upon the density of the prill.

Dense prills, such as agricultural grade, often are not
detonable at all; or if initiated, perform at a very low rate of detonation and may die out in the bore hole performing no useful
work.[9]
U.S.

Army Technical Manual TM 9-1910 states it thusly:
The grade of ammonium nitrate used in the manufacture of binary explosives is required to be at least 99 percent pure,
contain not more than 1.15 percent of moisture, and have maximum ether-soluble, water-insoluble acidity, sulfate, and
chloride contents of 0.10, 0.18, 0.02, 0.05, and 0.50 percent, respectively.

Moreover, a bomb like that is not easy to mix.

According to Gronning, "You'd have to stir and stir and stir to get just the right mixture for
proper combustibility.

And then, if it isn't used immediately, the oil settles to the bottom and the bomb doesn't go off."
"ANFO is easy to make if you know how to do it," adds Jeffrey Dean, Executive Director of the International Society of Explosives Engineers,
"but it takes years of experience to work with safely." According to Dean, "It is almost impossible for amateurs to properly mix the ammonium
nitrate with the fuel oil.According to Gronning, "You'd have to stir and stir and stir to get just the right mixture for
proper combustibility.

And then, if it isn't used immediately, the oil settles to the bottom and the bomb doesn't go off."
"ANFO is easy to make if you know how to do it," adds Jeffrey Dean, Executive Director of the International Society of Explosives Engineers,
"but it takes years of experience to work with safely." According to Dean, "It is almost impossible for amateurs to properly mix the ammonium
nitrate with the fuel oil.

Clumps of ANFO would inevitably fail to detonate."[10]
The scenario of two men mixing huge barrels of fertilizer and fuel-oil in a public park also stretches the limits of credulity.

Such a spectacle
would surely have been seen by anyone passing by: hikers, picnickers, fishermen.

"That would have drawn so much attention," said Rick Sherrow, a former ATF (Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms) agent with 25
years experience in explosives.

"It would have required an area twice the size of a truck just to walk around… that would have not have
gone okay."[11]
Naturally, the expert who testified for the government disagrees.

Linda Jones, an explosives specialist who has studied IRA bombings in
Great Britain, "concluded that there was one device… in the rear cargo compartment of a Ryder truck…." Jones added that it wouldn't be
difficult to build such a large bomb "provided they had a basic knowledge of explosives and access to the materials — it would be fairly
simple.

One person could do it on their own, but more people could do it quicker."[12]
While the government built its case on witness accounts of the single Ryder truck, numerous witnesses, uncalled to testify by the
prosecution for the McVeigh trial, recall seeing two trucks.

Could two trucks — one rented by McVeigh, and one rented by the suspect
known as John Doe 2 — have been used to transport the huge quantities of material necessary to build such a bomb?--- PAGE BREAK ---

One person could do it on their own, but more people could do it quicker."[12]
While the government built its case on witness accounts of the single Ryder truck, numerous witnesses, uncalled to testify by the
prosecution for the McVeigh trial, recall seeing two trucks. Could two trucks — one rented by McVeigh, and one rented by the suspect
known as John Doe 2 — have been used to transport the huge quantities of material necessary to build such a bomb? "I would buy two trucks simply for logistics," said Sherrow. "One truck full of barrels of ammonium nitrate, and you still got to put the fuel into
it. Because you don't want to put the fuel in and let it settle for days at a time. They would have to have something to bring everything
together and mix it, and that's going to take more then one truck."

--- PAGE BREAK ---Two days prior to the Murrah Building bombing — on April 17th — David King, staying at the Dreamland Motel in Junction City, Kansas,
where McVeigh and John Doe 2 spent time, remembered seeing the Ryder truck with a trailer attached to it.

Inside the trailer was a large
object wrapped in white canvas.

"It was a squarish shape, and it came to a point on top," said King.

"It was about three or four feet high."
King said that later in the day, the trailer was gone, but the truck was still in the lot.[13]
Was this witness describing some sophisticated explosive device?

Or was he describing a Lely farm mixer?

A Lely farm mixer is about four
feet high with a pointed top.

What happened to this trailer?

Why did we never hear anymore about it?

Then around 2:00 a.m.

on April 19, a Ryder truck pulled into the Save-A-Trip convenience store in Kingman, Kansas, followed by a light
colored car and a brown pick-up.

Assistant manager Richard Sinnett clearly recalls three men, including McVeigh and a man resembling
John Doe 2 enter the store.

Yet Sinnett was particularly struck by the odd contraption they were towing — a large plastic, semi-transparent
tank full of clear liquid.[14] Was this diesel fuel that the bombers intended to add to their ammonium nitrate mixture at the last minute?

Despite a mountain of evidence against the [government's] ANFO theory, the government has gone to great lengths to convince the jury and
the public that the Murrah Building was destroyed by a single ANFO bomb delivered by a pair of disgruntled Right-wing extremists.

In fact,
the ATF televised a demonstration of an ANFO truck-bomb detonating in an effort to prove their contention.

"They fired the thing off," said
Gronning.

"We saw it — it was on CNN — so what?

All it did was set off an explosion and wiggle the trees behind it.

It didn't even knock
them over.

"My knowledge comes from practical handling of explosives," added Gronning.It didn't even knock
them over.

"My knowledge comes from practical handling of explosives," added Gronning.

"And my belief is that 4800 lbs of ANFO wouldn't have
scuffed the paint on the building!"
The FBI also changed the size of the bomb numerous times.

They originally claimed that it weighed 1,200 pounds, upgraded that figure to
2,000 pounds, then to 4,000 pounds, and finally, they issued a press release stating that the bomb weighed 4800 pounds.

"It appears the government keeps up-grading the size of the vehicle and the 'fertilizer' bomb to coincide with the damage," said retired FBI
SAC (Senior Agent-in-Charge) Ted Gunderson.

The government also originally claimed the bomb cost less than $1,000 to build.

Then just before the start of McVeigh's trial, that figure was
upgraded to $5,000.

Their rationale was based on the "discovery," almost two years after the fact, that the suspects had constructed their
magic bomb with racing fuel, not diesel fuel, which is far less expensive.

To maintain some semblance of credibility in light of increasingly publicized reports of General Partin and others, the government also
conceded — right before the start of McVeigh's trial — that the suspects probably hadn't built their bomb at Geary State Park after all.[15]
If Timothy McVeigh or anyone else with military training wanted to destroy the Alfred P.

Murrah Building, it is highly unlikely they would use
ANFO.

As Army demolition manuals clearly state, ANFO is not good for destroying concrete or steel.

McVeigh, the consummate soldier who
studied every conceivable Army manual in his spare time — including Army Manual TM 31-210: Improvised Munitions Handbook — certainly
would have known this.[16]
Yet the FBI insists that amateur bomb-makers Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols built this amazing ANFO bomb that killed 169 people and
destroyed a modern nine-story steel-reinforced concrete building.As Army demolition manuals clearly state, ANFO is not good for destroying concrete or steel.

McVeigh, the consummate soldier who
studied every conceivable Army manual in his spare time — including Army Manual TM 31-210: Improvised Munitions Handbook — certainly
would have known this.[16]
Yet the FBI insists that amateur bomb-makers Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols built this amazing ANFO bomb that killed 169 people and
destroyed a modern nine-story steel-reinforced concrete building.

Of course, that was before the government's damage-control apparatus
went into effect.

Before it did, even the usual government talking-heads were insisting that no amateurs could have done this.

Vince Cannistraro, ABC News corespondent and former CIA intelligence advisor to the National Security Council stated, "This is something
professional and it really implies that the person who constructed the explosive device has experience, was trained in the use of explosives,
and knew what they were doing."[17]
Before he began attacking critics of the government's case, Oklahoma Governor and former FBI agent Frank Keating stated, "…obviously
whatever did the damage to the Murrah Building was a tremendous, very sophisticated explosive device."[18]
The very next day, the government was insisting that a homemade ANFO bomb, made with agricultural grade ammonium nitrate, did the job.

FBI Special Agent John Hersley contends that traces of a military-type detonation cord known as PDTN (pentadirythri-tetranitrate),
commonly known as Primadet, were found on McVeigh's clothing at the time of his arrest (In another report it was PETN, or pentaerythritol-
tetranitrate).

PDTN was allegedly used to wire the barrels of ANFO.[19]
Senior FBI chemist Frederick Whitehurst conducted a test on McVeigh's clothing but found no residue there, or in McVeigh's car either.[20]
Whitehurst came forward with allegations that the FBI has been slanting results of its forensic tests for years.--- PAGE BREAK ---

FBI Special Agent John Hersley contends that traces of a military-type detonation cord known as PDTN (pentadirythri-tetranitrate),
commonly known as Primadet, were found on McVeigh's clothing at the time of his arrest (In another report it was PETN, or pentaerythritol-
tetranitrate). PDTN was allegedly used to wire the barrels of ANFO.[19]
Senior FBI chemist Frederick Whitehurst conducted a test on McVeigh's clothing but found no residue there, or in McVeigh's car either.[20]
Whitehurst came forward with allegations that the FBI has been slanting results of its forensic tests for years. Collected in a 30-page
memorandum, Whitehurst criticized FBI laboratory personnel for incompetence. As a Justice Department memorandum states: "Dr. Whitehurst contends that the Explosives Unit and the Chemistry and Toxicology Unit inappropriately structure their conclusions to favor the

--- PAGE BREAK ---prosecution."[21]
According to the Wall Street Journal, "[Whitehurst's] accusations of bias and even manufacturing evidence have called into question several
high-profile government cases, including the Oklahoma City and World Trade Center bombings."[22]
Whitehurst's allegations were further elaborated on in a highly revealing report issued by the DoJ Inspector General's Office, which
concluded that "[SSA David] Williams repeatedly reached conclusions that incriminated the defendants without a scientific basis and that
were not explained in the body of the report."
Indeed.

It appears Williams reached his conclusions based, not on empirical evidence, but on the fact that Terry Nichols allegedly purchased
large quantities of ANFO.

As the OIG (Office of Inspector General) report states:
Without the evidence of these purchases, Williams admitted he would have been unable to conclude that ANFO was used.

Indeed, Williams stated that based on the post-blast scene alone it could have been dynamite….

Williams claimed "that the initiator for the booster(s) was either a detonator from a Primadet Delay system or sensitized detonating cord." Yet
as the OIG report states, "No evidence of a Primadet system or sensitized detonating cord was found at the crime scene."[23]
Controversial scientist and bomb expert Michael Riconoscuito told former FBI agent Ted Gundersen that the theory of drums of ANFO being
detonated by PDTN-soaked loops of rope or "det" cord is highly improbable, if not impossible.

"The only way to obtain blast control is with
volumetric initiation," explained Riconoscuito.

"This takes electronic circuits of similar sophistication as would be required in nuclear
weapons."The only way to obtain blast control is with
volumetric initiation," explained Riconoscuito.

"This takes electronic circuits of similar sophistication as would be required in nuclear
weapons.

This sophistication is not available to the average person," he added, stating that the resultant blast would have been "confused
and uncontrolled," and the energy would have ultimately "canceled itself out."[24]
Finally, the OIG report states: "Whitehurst questions Williams' conclusion that none of the structural damage evident within the Murrah
building was caused by secondary explosive devices or explosions."[25]
So why is the government going to such great lengths, in spite of overwhelming evidence to the contrary, to make us believe that the Alfred
P.

Murrah Building was destroyed by an ANFO bomb?

Because the government's case is built upon the premise that Timothy McVeigh and
Terry Nichols built their alleged bomb with ammonium nitrate.

The calls allegedly made by McVeigh were to stores that sell racing fuel and
ammonium nitrate.

McVeigh's fingerprint is allegedly on a receipt for ammonium nitrate.

And a small trace of ammonium nitrate was
allegedly found at the scene.

The government's case must proceed along those lines.

Any evidence that proves the bomb was made of
anything other than ANFO would not only destroy the government's case, it would open up inquiries about who really bombed the Murrah
Building… and why.[26]
The government [also had to stick] with the ANFO theory is because Michael and Lori Fortier agreed to testify in a plea-bargain that their
friend McVeigh arranged soup cans in their kitchen to demonstrate how to make a "shaped charge." Yet as bomb experts explained, there is
no way to make a shaped charge out of a collection of ANFO barrels.

But the [government doesn't want any serious inquiries as to who really blew up the Murrah Building.Any evidence that proves the bomb was made of
anything other than ANFO would not only destroy the government's case, it would open up inquiries about who really bombed the Murrah
Building… and why.[26]
The government [also had to stick] with the ANFO theory is because Michael and Lori Fortier agreed to testify in a plea-bargain that their
friend McVeigh arranged soup cans in their kitchen to demonstrate how to make a "shaped charge." Yet as bomb experts explained, there is
no way to make a shaped charge out of a collection of ANFO barrels.

But the [government doesn't want any serious inquiries as to who really blew up the Murrah Building.

The] government expects us to believe
that two lone amateurs with a crude fertilizer bomb, out in the open, twenty to thirty feet away from a hardened target, destroyed eight
reinforced columns and killed 169 people.

As General Partin said, such a scenario is "beyond credulity."[27]
Former ATF [agent] Rick Sherrow, who wrote an article for Soldier of Fortune magazine entitled "Bombast, Bomb Blasts & Baloney,"
contends that General Partin's assessment of the bombing is somehow inaccurate.

Sherrow claims that the pressure wave that would have
struck the building from the [rapidly deteriorating] blast of the ANFO bomb (375 p.s.i.

according to Partin's figures) would be more than
enough to destroy reinforced concrete columns, which Sherrow claimed in his article disintegrate at 30 p.s.i.

(pounds per square inch).[28]
To Sam Gronning, such a statement is preposterous: "That's bullshit!" exclaimed Gronning.

"Thirty p.s.i.

wouldn't take out a rubber tire!" Both
Partin and Rabauch contend that at least 3,500 p.s.i.

is required to destroy reinforced concrete.

In a letter to Partin, Rabauch states:
I took the liberty of checking with the leading concrete supplier in my area in order to confirm the compressive yield figure that
you used, that being 3,500 p.s.i.

What I was told about concrete was very interesting.

A 3,500 p.s.i.--- PAGE BREAK ---

What I was told about concrete was very interesting. A 3,500 p.s.i. figure is extremely low for
structural concrete. A properly mixed and cured structure of the type dealt with in your report would probably have a yield
strength of 5,600 p.s.i.[29]
Those who rush to refute the evidence presented by Partin, Raubach and others, cite as evidence the 1982 destruction of the Marine bunker
in Beirut by a truck-bomb driven by an Islamic terrorist. In that instance, however, the truck was driven directly into the building — a structure
much smaller and lighter than the Alfred P. Murrah Building. In August of 1970, 1,700 pounds of ANFO parked in a van exploded outside the Army Math Research Lab at the University of Wisconsin in
Madison. Although parked closer than the Ryder truck was to the Murrah Building, the bomb merely blew a hole in the outer wall and took

--- PAGE BREAK ---out the windows.

One person was killed.

(See photo)
In 1989, Colombian narco-terrorists detonated a truck-bomb outside the National Security Department in Bogota, Columbia.

The vehicle was
parked approximately ten feet from the modern high-rise building.

The bomb decimated the face of the building, but left the support columns
intact.

Fifteen people were killed.

In the summer of 1996, an IRA truck-bomb detonated in the heart of Manchester's financial district.

The device, constructed of ANFO and
3,500 pounds of Semtex, a high-velocity, military-grade plastic explosive, caused considerable damage to the surrounding buildings, but left
them relatively intact.

Although the device managed to break a lot of windows and injure 206 people, no one was killed.

On June 25, 1996, a tanker-trailer packed with RDX plastic explosives blew up outside the Khobar Towers apartment complex at King Abdul
Aziz Air Base in Saudi Arabia, killing 19 American servicemen and injuring hundreds more.

While the blast produced a crater 35 feet deep
and 85 feet across (the crater in Oklahoma was approximately 6 feet deep and 16 feet across, although the government claimed it was 30
feet), it didn't do the same amount of damage done to the Murrah Building — a building constructed to much more rigorous codes and
specifications.On June 25, 1996, a tanker-trailer packed with RDX plastic explosives blew up outside the Khobar Towers apartment complex at King Abdul
Aziz Air Base in Saudi Arabia, killing 19 American servicemen and injuring hundreds more.

While the blast produced a crater 35 feet deep
and 85 feet across (the crater in Oklahoma was approximately 6 feet deep and 16 feet across, although the government claimed it was 30
feet), it didn't do the same amount of damage done to the Murrah Building — a building constructed to much more rigorous codes and
specifications.

Yet authorities claim that the bomb was at least the size as that which blew up the Federal Building.[30] [See photo]
In an analogy offered by Partin, "It would be as irrational or as impossible as a situation in which a 150 pound man sits in a flimsy chair
causing the chair to collapse, while a man weighing 1,500 pounds sits in an identical flimsy chair and it does not collapse — impossible."
"But," contends Sherrow in Soldier of Fortune, "the [Murrah] Building was not designed to withstand explosions or earthquakes, and it's
basically a weak building."
Jim Loftis, one of the building's architects, told me they were asked to make the building bomb-resistant, due to left-wing radicals who were
blowing up federal facilities in the early 1970s.

Loftis also said the building was designed to meet earthquake standards.

"We designed it to
meet the building codes and earthquakes are part of that code," said Loftis.

Loftis also said that the north side of the lower level (the area impacted by the truck-bomb) was steel-rebar reinforced concrete without
windows.

He also concurred with Raubach and Partin that the pressure necessary to destroy reinforced concrete is in the 2,500 to 4,000 p.s.

i.

range — a far cry from the 30 p.s.i.

cited by Sherrow.[31]
Yet Sherrow concludes that since there was so much collateral damage (damage to the surrounding buildings) the truck-bomb must have
been responsible.range — a far cry from the 30 p.s.i.

cited by Sherrow.[31]
Yet Sherrow concludes that since there was so much collateral damage (damage to the surrounding buildings) the truck-bomb must have
been responsible.

"The collateral damage just discounts [Partin's] material," says Sherrow.

Two experts who seem to agree with Sherrow are Dorom Bergerbest-Eilom and Yakov Yerushalmi.

The Israeli bomb experts were brought
to Oklahoma at the request of ATF agent Guy Hamal.

According to their report, the bomb was an ANFO bomb boosted with something more
powerful… and it had a Middle Eastern signature.[32]
The Athenian restaurant, which sits approximately 150 feet northwest of the Murrah Building, was almost completely destroyed.

Pieces of
the Murrah Building were actually blown into the Athenian.

As video producer Jerry Longspaugh points out, only a bomb inside the Federal
Building would be capable of projecting parts of the building into another building 150 feet away.

As Gronning notes in a letter to Representative Key: "Not in your wildest dreams would that much ANFO affect peripheral damage at that
distance.

Which leads me to suspect that another more powerful explosive was used."
According to a source quoted in the Rocky Mountain News, an ammonium nitrate bomb made with a racing fuel component known as
hydrazine "would create one of the largest non-nuclear blasts possible." McVeigh had allegedly attempted to procure the substance from a
dealer in Topeka, Kansas, who refused.

In fact, hydrazine is extremely hazardous and difficult to obtain.[33]
While not knowledgeable about hydrazine, Gronning noted that "C-4, for example, would be capable of creating those kinds of pressure
waves and destroying the local foundation of the Federal Building.

"If you had 4,000 lbs of C-4 in there," Gronning said, "now you're talking a real high-order explosive at some serious speed.

And when that
goes off, you're liable to take out the thing.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"If you had 4,000 lbs of C-4 in there," Gronning said, "now you're talking a real high-order explosive at some serious speed. And when that
goes off, you're liable to take out the thing. But I still have a problem believing even at that distance away from the building, it would create
that kind of damage. All you have to do to see what I'm talking about is to see what kind of bomb damage you get from a bomb in the [WWII]
attacks on London."[34]
It is precisely this analogy that Sherrow attempts to use in Soldier of Fortune. "For perspective, notes SOF 'demo' expert Donovan, "consider
that the German V-1 and V-2 missiles that devastated London carried only 1,650 pounds of an explosive not dissimilar in brisance and yield. In other words, would three V-2s simultaneously striking the first floor of the Murrah Building do such damage? Of course they would."
Yet the Ryder truck did not impact the Murrah Building at the speed of a rocket, nor did it impact it at all. Even to the layperson, one can see
that such an analogy is ridiculous. In his article, Sherrow never speculates that C-4 or any other high-velocity military type explosive might
have been used.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Still, the former ATF man contends that an ANFO bomb parked out in the open could have caused the pattern and degree of damage done
to the Murrah Building.

"Absolutely and without a shadow of a doubt, and I base that on 30 years in the business, and shooting ANFO —
from a couple pounds to 630 tons in one shot." Sherrow goes on to state that Partin's conclusions were based upon mere "theoretical
analysis," not hands-on experience.

Yet Partin spent 25 years in the defense research establishment, including hands-on work at the Ballistic Research Laboratories;
Commander of the Air Force Armament Technology Laboratory; Air Force System Command, and the Office of the Secretary of Defense
(OSD) management.

Such credentials speak of a man who knows his explosives.

It is unclear why the former ATF man was trying to discredit Partin, and by association, others who disagreed with the government's theory.

What is clear however is that Soldier of Fortune, the magazine in which Sherrow's article appeared, is owned by Paladin Press, regarded a
CIA proprietary.

Robert K.

Brown, the magazine's publisher, is an associate of General John Singlaub, a key Iran-Contra player who ran the
genocidal Phoenix Program in Vietnam, and helped train death squads in Central America.

Both men reportedly played an ancillary role in
the 1984 La Penca bombing, which resulted in the deaths of eight journalists.

[See Chapter 14] Sherrow admitted to working for the CIA in
Africa.

What he did there wasn't exactly clear.[35]
If the CIA (or one of its tentacles) were involved, as they invariably tend to be in such cases, they would have a strong motive to cover up
their involvement and re-direct the investigation.

The most common way of doing this is through the use of propaganda and disinformation.What he did there wasn't exactly clear.[35]
If the CIA (or one of its tentacles) were involved, as they invariably tend to be in such cases, they would have a strong motive to cover up
their involvement and re-direct the investigation.

The most common way of doing this is through the use of propaganda and disinformation.

While Sherrow himself has criticized the ATF, and wrote several articles debunking the government's theory regarding militia groups, this
particular article appeared to be a "hit-piece" designed to discredit any legitimate analysis of the bombing.

Yet some critics of the government's story have gone beyond the relatively ordinary explanations of Partin, Gronning and others to suggest
that the Federal Building was destroyed by a device called an "A-Neutronic Bomb." These advocates cite as evidence the nature of the
spalling (the disintegration of the concrete into tiny pieces) on the top of the building, and the extent of the damage to surrounding buildings
that even men like General Partin claim would be impossible for an ANFO bomb.

Larens Imanyuel, a Berkeley assistant physics professor who has studied the bombing, is one such advocate.

Imanyuel's analysis, which
appeared in Veritas newsletter, indicates that the wide extent of the collateral damage was not consistent with a conventional explosion.

As
Imanyuel writes:
There was some very sophisticated bomb that was capable of causing a tremendous blast atmospheric pressure wave that
blew out windows in so many of the surrounding buildings.

This had to be some sort of very high-tech dust explosive-like
bomb — one that creates a widely dispersed explosive mixture in the very air and then detonates it with a secondary charge.As
Imanyuel writes:
There was some very sophisticated bomb that was capable of causing a tremendous blast atmospheric pressure wave that
blew out windows in so many of the surrounding buildings.

This had to be some sort of very high-tech dust explosive-like
bomb — one that creates a widely dispersed explosive mixture in the very air and then detonates it with a secondary charge.

This last spectacular high-tech bomb served the purpose of convincing the general public that the alleged solitary truck-bomb
was powerful and "devastating" enough that it could wipe out and collapse a nearby building.[36]
Consider the comments of a local structural engineer, Bob Cornforth, "The range of this blast has really impressed me — the extent of the
damage and the distance out." A mile away, window frames had been pushed back two feet.

On the other hand, he inspected two buildings
just a little over 200 ft.

from the so-called crater, the YMCA center and the Journal Record building, which lost part of its pitched concrete
roof.

To his surprise, "The structural frames performed extremely well.

We design for 80-mph winds," which he says seems adequate.

The
lack of damage to the frames, despite the massive light-structural damage showed that the shock waves were of short duration.

This was
consistent with a many-point explosion, but not with a single-point explosion large enough to knock out the four heavy columns that had
collapsed in the Murrah Building.[37]
The A-Neutronic bomb, or "Electro-Hydrodynamic Gaseous Fuel Device," was reportedly developed by the young scientist-prodigy in the
early 1980s while he was working for Hercules Manufacturing in Silicon Valley, CA.

The first bomb test at the Pentagon's super-secret Area
51 in Nevada apparently resulted in the death of a technician and injured several others due to their underestimation of its power.

The
project was reportedly compartmentalized and classified under a "Nuclear Weapons" category by President Reagan.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The first bomb test at the Pentagon's super-secret Area
51 in Nevada apparently resulted in the death of a technician and injured several others due to their underestimation of its power. The
project was reportedly compartmentalized and classified under a "Nuclear Weapons" category by President Reagan. [For a description of
the device, see Appendix]
[What does Samuel Cohen have to say about the A-Neutronic bomb? "Well, I'm not expert enough to really vouch for his statements, but I've
got a hunch that it's technically well-based. I've spoken to Michael Riconosciuto (the inventor of the A-Neutronic Bomb) and he's an
extraordinarily bright guy. I also have a hunch, which I can't prove, that they both (Riconosciuto and Lavos, his partner) indirectly work for the
CIA."]
According to Imanyuel, a member of a public watch-dog group that monitors military and nuclear procurement activities, "The design would
be particularly suitable for use as a cruise missile warhead, where a non-nuclear charge is required that can reliably destroy a hardened
target despite a several-meters targeting error. Such weapons are designed as part of the Advanced Technology Warhead Program of
Lawrence Livermore and Los Alamos National Laboratories."
Ted Gundersen, who has independently investigated the bombing, included numerous letters and memos in his report which pointed to the
existence of such a device. He reported that the government contract number for the bomb was DAAA-21-90-C-0045, and was
manufactured by Dyno-Nobel, Inc., in Salt Lake City. Dyno-Nobel was previously connected with Hercules Manufacturing, where
Riconosciuto worked. The Department of the Army denies that contract DAAA-21-90-C-0045 exists. Dyno-Nobel refused to respond to

--- PAGE BREAK ---inquiries from Gundersen or the author.[38]
Curiously, the bomb specialist the government called as its expert witness during the Federal Grand Jury testimony was Robert Hopler.

Hopler recently retired from Dyno-Nobel.

Sherrow raised the issue of the Electro-Hydrodynamic Gaseous Fuel Device in his Soldier of Fortune article.

According to Imanyuel,
"Gundersen's bomb model was clearly unworkable as presented in Soldier of Fortune, but contained the essential information that the bomb
generated an electrostatically charged cloud."[39]
One victim in the HUD office in the Murrah Building described in a National Public Radio interview on May 23, 1995 how she felt a heat wave
and a static electricity charge immediately before the windows blew in.

Daina Bradley, who lost her mother and two children in the bombing, said she felt electricity running through her body right before the bomb
went off.[40]
Another victim, Ramona McDonald, who was driving about block away, remembers seeing a brilliant flash and described the feeling of static
electricity.

"It made a real loud static electricity sound.

It sounded like big swarm of bees — you could actually hear it.

The next thing was a
real sharp clap, like thunder.…" McDonald also described both gold and blue flashes of light.

Interestingly, Riconiscuto has called his device
"Blue Death."[41]
Another survivor of the blast was quoted on CNN as saying, "It was just like an atomic bomb went off.

"The ceiling went in and all the
windows came in and there was a deafening roar…"[42]
Proponents of the A-Neutronic Bomb conclude that these are all signatures of such a device.[43]
While both Gundersen and Riconosciuto have received ridicule for suggesting that a super-secret pineapple-sized device may have
destroyed the Murrah Building, Cohen cautions: "Look, when I first came up with that concept (the Neutron Bomb, developed in the 1970s),
the ridicule I took from the scientific community was something awful.Interestingly, Riconiscuto has called his device
"Blue Death."[41]
Another survivor of the blast was quoted on CNN as saying, "It was just like an atomic bomb went off.

"The ceiling went in and all the
windows came in and there was a deafening roar…"[42]
Proponents of the A-Neutronic Bomb conclude that these are all signatures of such a device.[43]
While both Gundersen and Riconosciuto have received ridicule for suggesting that a super-secret pineapple-sized device may have
destroyed the Murrah Building, Cohen cautions: "Look, when I first came up with that concept (the Neutron Bomb, developed in the 1970s),
the ridicule I took from the scientific community was something awful.

And this included scientists at the Nobel Prize level." "Regarding
Riconosciuto," adds Cohen, "the guy's a madman… but technically, there's no doubt in my mind that he's brilliant."[44]
Gene Wheaton, a former Pentagon CID investigator, claims that the fuel-air bomb was deployed in the Gulf War, along with other
experimental weapons responsible for much of the massive devastation inflicted on Iraq.[45] The fuel-air explosive, or FAE, can cover an
area 1,000 feet wide with blast pressures of 200 p.s.i.

According to a CIA report on FAEs:
[T]he pressure effects of FAEs approach those produced by low-yield nuclear weapons at short ranges.

The effect of an FAE
explosion within confined spaces is immense.

Those near the ignition point are obliterated.

Those at the fringes are likely to
suffer many internal… injuries, including burst eardrums and crushed inner-ear organs, severe concussions, ruptured lungs
and internal organs, and possible blindness.[46]
Moreover, it seems that Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm supplied Iraq with plans for a fuel-air explosive.

The blueprints were allegedly passed
on to the Iraqis by the Egyptians, and Iraq commenced commercial production of the weapon — the force of which is the equivalent of a
small atomic explosion.[47]
A few minutes before 9:00 a.m.Those at the fringes are likely to
suffer many internal… injuries, including burst eardrums and crushed inner-ear organs, severe concussions, ruptured lungs
and internal organs, and possible blindness.[46]
Moreover, it seems that Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm supplied Iraq with plans for a fuel-air explosive.

The blueprints were allegedly passed
on to the Iraqis by the Egyptians, and Iraq commenced commercial production of the weapon — the force of which is the equivalent of a
small atomic explosion.[47]
A few minutes before 9:00 a.m.

on April 19, a young Arabic man carrying a backpack was seen in the Murrah Building hurriedly pushing the
elevator button as if trying to get off.

A few minutes after he exited the building, the bomb(s) went off.

The elevator doors, which were on the
opposite side of the building from the truck-bomb, had their doors blown outward.

Another former military source agreed that a device similar to the fuel-air explosive exists.

"It's called a Special Atomic Demolition Munitions
or SADM," said Craig Roberts, a Lt.

Colonel in Army Reserve [Intelligence].

According to Roberts and Charles T.

Harrison, a researcher for
the Department of Energy and the Pentagon, this munition has been deployed with artillery units in Europe.

The SADM can also be carried
in a backpack.

Another source who has monitored top-secret weapons projects confirmed this information:
I do not know a lot about SADM's, but I have friends — ex British SAS and RAF — who were trained in their use a few years
ago for behind-the-lines sabotage in the event of a Russian breakthrough in Europe.

They believe from their still-serving
military contacts that the earlier football sized back pack weapons that they were trained on have been significantly microed
such that a device would now easily fit in a grapefruit and deliver five to ten tons TNT equivalent — or less [i.e: down to one
ton TNT].

These things easily fit into a 105mm howitzer shell or a briefcase.

...--- PAGE BREAK ---

These things easily fit into a 105mm howitzer shell or a briefcase. ... Exactly what components are utilized in these weapons is difficult to get as the still serving British officers are reluctant to talk
about them in detail. One can assume that a mixture of Plutonium 239 (highly refined hence relatively low radioactivity

--- PAGE BREAK ---emission on detonation), Lithium 6 Deuteride Tritide, Tritium, and possibly Beryllium and Uranium 238 (NOT 235) would be
involved as a series of lenses in a Bi-Conical shape.

I am endeavoring to get more data but this a very touchy area…[48]
An article in the The Nashville Tennessean insists Iraq's Saddam Hussein has been developing 220 pounds of lithium 6 per year.

lithium 6
can be converted to tritium, an essential ingredient in thermonuclear reactions.[49]
Other sources say that 6,000 to 7,000 SADM's were produced, some of which made their way to Israel and other countries.[50] Sam Cohen
confirms this information in the Fall issue of Journal of Civil Defense.

Cohen, echoing Harrison, charges that the U.S.

has purposefully
underestimated the number of nuclear warheads that Iran, Iraq and North Korea could produce, and deliberately discounted their capacity to
produce substantially smaller warheads.

"A couple of years ago," states Cohen, "disturbing statements on advanced small, very low-yield nuclear warheads, began emanating from
Russia.[51] Cohen adds that these articles "revealed a massive smuggling ring had emerged where the material was being sold around the
world to a number of countries, some of which were terrorist nations."[52]
[Writing in Nexus Magazine, Australian journalist and military authority Joe Vialls points out that the bombing which destroyed a financial
center in London in July of 1993, and which almost destroyed the World Trade Center in New York four months later, could not have been
caused by conventional explosives.

In a bizarre coincidence predating Cohen's analysis, theoretical physicist and former Pentagon nuclear
expert Theodore B.

Taylor stated in his book, The Curve of Binding Energy, that someday someone was going to blow up the World Trade
Center with a nuclear device the size of a stick of gum.In a bizarre coincidence predating Cohen's analysis, theoretical physicist and former Pentagon nuclear
expert Theodore B.

Taylor stated in his book, The Curve of Binding Energy, that someday someone was going to blow up the World Trade
Center with a nuclear device the size of a stick of gum.

Taylor's prediction first appeared in the New Yorker magazine in 1973.[53]
Vialls adds that the British government was quick to blame the London attack on an IRA (Irish Republican Army) truck-bomb, in the same
manner that U.S.

authorities were quick to blame the Oklahoma bombing on a truck-bomb constructed by a pair of so-called disgruntled anti-
government loners.

Yet at the same time the British government was issuing these statements, their bomb technicians were exploring the
bomb site in full nuclear protective suits.]
Had the Murrah Building been destroyed by a SADM or a backpack nuke, using the truck-bomb as a cover?

British bomb experts, with
extensive experience dealing with terrorist truck-bombs, told McVeigh's attorney, Stephen Jones, that the ANFO bomb could not have done
all of the damage to the Murrah Building.[54]
British bomb expert Linda Jones, testifying for the prosecution in McVeigh's trial, came to the opposite conclusion however.

Nevertheless,
the site was quickly demolished and covered over with concrete; the remains taken to a secure dump and buried.

What was the government
trying to hide?

Nuclear Physicist Galen Winsor, General Ben Partin, and KPOC manager David Hall went to the building and disposal sites
with radiation measuring equipment, but were kept away.

They managed to gather some fragments anyway, and when they measured them
with Winsor's NaI Scintillator detector, they registered radiation levels 50 percent higher than normal.[55]
[The specter of radioactive terrorism is not exactly brand new.Nuclear Physicist Galen Winsor, General Ben Partin, and KPOC manager David Hall went to the building and disposal sites
with radiation measuring equipment, but were kept away.

They managed to gather some fragments anyway, and when they measured them
with Winsor's NaI Scintillator detector, they registered radiation levels 50 percent higher than normal.[55]
[The specter of radioactive terrorism is not exactly brand new.

In Paris, the French secret police foiled terrorists planning to set off a
conventional bomb designed to spread particles of deadly radioactive plutonium in the air.

Cohen suggests that if it had been a radioactive attack, and it were made public, it would have panicked a public already frightened about
terrorist attacks: "If the perpetrators had been able to get their hands on just a traceable amount of radioactivity, and mixed it up with the
explosive, so that it would virtually assure that it would be picked up by some detecting meter, and this had gotten out, that there was a fairly
copious amount of radioactivity in the explosive, all hell would have broken loose….

It would scare the pants off a very large fraction of the U.

S.

citizenry, by saying this was used by terrorists, and contaminated an area…"[56]
Given the government's long history of covering up radiation tests on U.S.

citizens, from radiating entire towns downwind of nuclear test
sites, to slipping radioactive isotopes to crippled children in their oatmeal, it goes without saying that they would also cover this up.]
"A new class of nuclear weapons could exist which could have an extremely disturbing terrorist potential," said Cohen.

"And to admit to the
possibility that the warheads might be sufficiently compact to pose a real terrorist threat was equally unacceptable [to the government]."[57]
So was the Federal Building blown up by demolition charges, a truck filled with C-4, a fuel-air explosive, a miniature nuke, or some
combination of the above?--- PAGE BREAK ---

citizens, from radiating entire towns downwind of nuclear test
sites, to slipping radioactive isotopes to crippled children in their oatmeal, it goes without saying that they would also cover this up.]
"A new class of nuclear weapons could exist which could have an extremely disturbing terrorist potential," said Cohen. "And to admit to the
possibility that the warheads might be sufficiently compact to pose a real terrorist threat was equally unacceptable [to the government]."[57]
So was the Federal Building blown up by demolition charges, a truck filled with C-4, a fuel-air explosive, a miniature nuke, or some
combination of the above? ["It really doesn't make any difference," says Cohen. "From the standpoint of practicality… I would lean towards Ben Partin. Because all the
stuff Partin's put out, it just holds up — it makes eminent sense — he doesn't have to get into this exotica. Partin says using ordinary
Primacord wrapped around these pillars could have done the job." [58]
In fact, it does make quite a bit of difference from an investigative point of view, since the more sophisticated the bomb, the more
sophisticated the bombers. And Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols weren't that sophisticated.]
KFOR-Channel 4 reported that the mysterious severed leg clothed in military garb found in the rubble allegedly had PVC embedded [in] it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---PVC pipe is sometimes used to pack plastic explosives.

It increases the shear power.

Had this leg, unmatched to any of the known victims,
belonged to the real bomber?[59]
[In fact, it does make quite a bit of difference from an investigative point of view, since the more sophisticated the bomb, the more
sophisticated the bombers.

And Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols weren't that sophisticated.]
Then on March 20, 1996,Strategic Investment Newsletter reported that a Pentagon study had been leaked which backed up General Partin's
analysis:
A classified report prepared by two independent Pentagon experts has concluded that the destruction of the federal building in
Oklahoma City last April was caused by five separate bombs.

The two experts reached the same conclusion for the same
technical reasons.

Sources close to the Pentagon study say Timothy McVeigh did play a role in the bombing but peripherally,
as a "useful idiot." The multiple bombings have a Middle Eastern "signature," pointing to either Iraqi or Syrian involvement.[60]
Finally, in the Spring of 1997, explosives experts at Eglin Air Force Base's Wright Laboratory Armament Directorate released a study on the
effects of explosives against a reinforced concrete building similar to the Federal Building.

The Air Force's test closely matched the
conditions under which the government contends the Murrah Building was destroyed.

The Eglin Blast Effects Study, or EBES, involved a three-story reinforced concrete structure 80 long, 40 feet wide, and 30 feet high.

The
building constructed for the test, the Eglin Test Structure (ETS), while smaller than the Murrah Building, was similar in design, with three
rows of columns, and six-inch-thick concrete panels similar to those in the Murrah Building.

Overall, the ETS was considerably weaker than
the Murrah, which had five times the amount of steel reinforcing than the ETS, and 10 times the amount of steel in its columns and beams.The
building constructed for the test, the Eglin Test Structure (ETS), while smaller than the Murrah Building, was similar in design, with three
rows of columns, and six-inch-thick concrete panels similar to those in the Murrah Building.

Overall, the ETS was considerably weaker than
the Murrah, which had five times the amount of steel reinforcing than the ETS, and 10 times the amount of steel in its columns and beams.

As New American editor William Jasper noted in regards to the EBES:
If air blast could not effect catastrophic failure to the decidedly inferior Eglin structure, it becomes all the more difficult to
believe that it was responsible for the destruction of the much stronger Murrah Building.

The experts at Eglin conducted three tests.

They first detonated 704 pounds of Tritonal (equivalent to 830 pounds of TNT or approximately
2,200 pounds of ANFO), at a distance of 40 feet from the structure, equivalent to the distance the Ryder truck was parked from the Murrah
Building.

The second test utilized an Mk-82 warhead (equivalent to 180 pounds of TNT) placed within the first floor corner room
approximately four feet from the exterior wall.

The third test involved a 250-pound penetrating warhead (equivalent to 35 pounds TNT),
placed in the corner of a second floor room approximately two and a half feet from the adjoining walls.

The first detonation demolished the six-inch-thick concrete wall panels on the first floor, but left the reinforcing steel bars intact.

The 14-inch
columns were unaffected by the blast — a far cry from what occurred at the Murrah Building.

The damages to the second and third floors fell
off proportionally, unlike that in Oklahoma City.

The 56-page report concluded:
Due to these conditions, it is impossible to ascribe the damage that occurred on April 19, 1995 to a single truck-bomb
containing 4,800 lbs.

of ANFO.The 56-page report concluded:
Due to these conditions, it is impossible to ascribe the damage that occurred on April 19, 1995 to a single truck-bomb
containing 4,800 lbs.

of ANFO.

In fact, the maximum predicted damage to the floor panels of the Murrah Federal Building is
equal to approximately 1% of the total floor area of the building.

Furthermore, due to the lack of symmetrical damage pattern
at the Murrah Building, it would be inconsistent with the results of the ETS test [number] one to state that all of the damage to
the Murrah Building is the result of the truck-bomb.

The damage to the Murrah Federal Building is consistent with damage
resulting from mechanically coupled devices placed locally within the structure ....

It must be concluded that the damage at the Murrah Federal Building is not the result of the truck-bomb itself, but rather due
to other factors such as locally placed charges within the building itself ....

The procedures used to cause the damage to the
Murrah Building are therefore more involved and complex than simply parking a truck and leaving ....[61]
Even the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) was forced to conclude that 4,800 pounds of ANFO could have not caused the
so-called crater in Oklahoma City.

FEMA's report, published on August 30, 1996, inadvertently concluded that the bombers would have had
to use approximately three times the amount reportedly used in Oklahoma City.[62]
Another interesting confirmation came from FBI agent Danny Defenbaugh, who, along with U.S.

Attorney Beth Wilkerson, visited General
Partin in June of 1995.

Part of the team that prosecuted McVeigh and Nichols, Wilkerson interviewed Partin on the presumption that he
would be called as a witness.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Attorney Beth Wilkerson, visited General
Partin in June of 1995. Part of the team that prosecuted McVeigh and Nichols, Wilkerson interviewed Partin on the presumption that he
would be called as a witness. "…and [Agent Defenbaugh] was going through the report that I did," said Partin, "and he put his finger on that
picture I had in the report… the designated crater, and he said, 'Suppose I told you that is not the crater?'"
Partin believes Wilkerson and Defenbaugh (who Partin described as belligerent) interviewed him as part of a ruse to find out what he knew
about the blast(s), so the government could carefully avoid those issues at trial. While they pretended to be interested in Partin's analysis,
they never kept their word to follow up the interview. "I think what they did," said Partin, "was they looked at my credentials and technical justification of all this stuff, and they felt found that what
I had was based on some pretty sound footing.… I think that's why they framed the case the way they did."[63]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Whatever blew up the Alfred P.

Murrah Building, one thing's for sure, there was enough ANFO present at the site to leave visible traces.

Randy Ledger, a maintenance man who was in the building at the time of the blast, claims fellow workers who rushed into the building
immediately after the explosion "complained of burning eyes, heavy dust and choking lungs.

That is right out of the textbook of a diesel-
fertilizer bomb, because it creates nitric acid," said Ledger.

"The guys I work with, they're not going to make it up that their eyes are
burning."[64]
Dr.

Paul Heath, a VA psychologist who was on the fifth floor of the building at the time of the blast, said, "I picked fertilizer out of my skin… I
could see the fertilizer actually exploding in the air; you could see it popping all around you."
Ramona McDonald, who also survived the blast, concurs with Heath.

"There was a bright flash, and then boom!

And you could see the
fertilizer popping in the air."
Given this scenario, it's reasonable to conclude that the Ryder truck was filled with something more powerful, with just enough ANFO to
leave a visible trace.

Cohen agrees.

"The damage that resulted could not have occurred from a van parked outside… I don't care how fancy an explosive was
used.

What did in that building… was an inside job."
It would appear that experts' analysis' are not the only evidence of an inside job.

In an interview with a local TV station, a man who escaped
the building said, "I was sitting at my desk, and I felt a rumbling, a shaking in the building… so I decided to get under my desk.… the glass
windows blew in and knocked down the ceiling and some of the stuff above the ceiling and it all landed on top of my desk."
Another man said, "I thought it was an earthquake because I resided in California for many years, and it was almost like it was in slow
motion.What did in that building… was an inside job."
It would appear that experts' analysis' are not the only evidence of an inside job.

In an interview with a local TV station, a man who escaped
the building said, "I was sitting at my desk, and I felt a rumbling, a shaking in the building… so I decided to get under my desk.… the glass
windows blew in and knocked down the ceiling and some of the stuff above the ceiling and it all landed on top of my desk."
Another man said, "I thought it was an earthquake because I resided in California for many years, and it was almost like it was in slow
motion.

I felt a shake, and then it began shaking more, and I dove under my desk, and then the glass all came flying in."
A friend of Dr.

Ray Brown's, who's secretary was in the building said, "She was standing by a window.

The window cracked, then she got
away from it and then she was blown across the room and landed in another woman's lap.

Another woman I know, Judy Morse, got under
her desk after feeling the building shake, and before the glass flew."
"Dr.

Brian Espe, who was the sole survivor in the Department of Agriculture's fifth floor office, told the author he first "heard a rumbling noise."
According to these individuals' accounts, if the truck-bomb — the alleged sole bomb — had detonated first, how would they have felt a
rumbing, had time to think about the situation, then dive under their desks?

The resulting blast wave from the truck-bomb would have been
immediate and total.

Such an account could only be indicative of demolition charges placed inside the building.[65]*
"The inside charges — demolition charges," said Cohen, "may have gone off first, and so the columns now started to collapse.

Boy, that
would produce one hell of a rumble, to put it mildly…."[66]
A caller to the Oklahoma Radio Network related the experiences of his friend, a Federal Government worker, who had witnessed the blast
first-hand.Such an account could only be indicative of demolition charges placed inside the building.[65]*
"The inside charges — demolition charges," said Cohen, "may have gone off first, and so the columns now started to collapse.

Boy, that
would produce one hell of a rumble, to put it mildly…."[66]
A caller to the Oklahoma Radio Network related the experiences of his friend, a Federal Government worker, who had witnessed the blast
first-hand.

"He was approximately five blocks from the building whenever the building went up.

He claims that the top of the building went up
like a missile going through it.

The debris was coming back down when the side of the building blew out.

He said third and last, the truck
blew up on the street."[67]
Notice this witness said the building "blew out." This is contrary to the effect of an explosive blast from the street blowing the building in from
the street.

Candy Avey, who was on her way to the Social Security office when the explosions occurred, was blown away from the building,
struck a parking meter, and then hit her car.[68] Said Suzanne Steely, reporting live for KFOR, "We could see all the way through the
building.

That was just the force of the explosion — it just blew out all the walls and everything inside."[69] Ramona McDonald saw a flash
and smoke rising up from inside the building, "like a rocket had shot out the top of the building."[70]
It should be obvious to the reader that it's implausible an ANFO bomb parked out in the street would have the force to blow all the way
through a huge superstructure like the Alfred P.

Murrah Building.

No matter how hard the government tried to lie, obsfucate, and distort the truth, the evidence would come back to haunt them.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Murrah Building. No matter how hard the government tried to lie, obsfucate, and distort the truth, the evidence would come back to haunt them. On April 19, a tape recording made during a conference at the Water Resources Board directly across from the Murrah Building appears to
indicate a succession of blast events, spaced very close together.[71]
The tape recorder at the Water Resources Board was not the only instrument recording explosions that morning. The seismograph at the
Oklahoma Geological Survey at the University of Oklahoma at Norman, 16 miles from the Murrah Building, recorded two waves, or "two
events," on the morning of April 19th. Another seismograph at the Omniplex Museum, four miles away from the Federal Building, also
recorded two events. These seismic waves, or "spikes," spaced approximately ten seconds apart, seem to indicate two blasts. [See
Appendix]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Professor Raymond Brown, senior geophysicist at the University of Oklahoma who studied the seismograms, knew and talked to people
inside the building at the time of the blast.

"My first impression was, this was a demolition job," said Brown.

"Somebody who went in there
with equipment tried to take that building down."
Not so, according to the U.S.

Geological Survey's analysis.

The USGS put out a press release on June 1st, entitled "Seismic Records
Support One-Blast Theory in Oklahoma City Bombing."
The bomb that destroyed the Alfred P.

Murrah Building in Oklahoma City produced a train of conventional seismic waves,
according to interpretations by scientists with the U.S.

Geological Survey and the Oklahoma Geological Survey (OGS).

Scientists from those agencies said the seismic recordings of the May 23 demolition of the building reproduced the character
of the original, April 19th seismic recording by producing two trains of seismic waves that were recorded on seismometers
near Norman, Okla.

"Seismic recordings from the building's implosion indicate that there was only one bomb explosion on April 19," said Dr.

Thomas Holzer, a USGS geologist in Menlo Park, Calif.

Holzer is one of several USGS and OGS scientists who analyzed the
shock waves created by the April 19 explosion and the May 23 implosion.[72]
Holzer added that the two distinct waves from the April 19 explosion(s) were the result of the same wave traveling at two different speeds
through two separate layers of the earth's crust.

The "illusion" of a double explosion was simply the result of the building's collapse, he
claimed.

"So the bottom line then," said Holzer, "is I think these observations are totally consistent with a single explosion.

It doesn't require
multiple explosions to do it."[73]
Dr.

Brown has an honest difference of opinion with folks at the U.S.

Geological Survey.

"I will candidly say that we are having trouble finding
that velocity difference," said Brown.Geological Survey.

"I will candidly say that we are having trouble finding
that velocity difference," said Brown.

"We have not identified a pair of layers that could account for the ten-second difference.

"Whatever the USGS saw in that data convinced them that the original blast was one bomb," he added.

"I find that hard to believe….

What
was uncomfortable and might be construed as pressure is that they were going to come out with a press release that says we have
concluded that data indicates one bomb.

It puts us in the uncomfortable stance of saying that we, too, have concluded that, and we haven't."
Yet the USGS press release said that Dr.

Charles Mankin of the OGS, Brown's boss, was "pleased with the work performed by Dr.

Holzer
and his USGS colleagues in the analysis of the seismic records." Yet Mankin had actually urged Holzer to delay the press release.

"Everybody that has looked at the signal has said a refraction (an echo) would really be strange because there's absolutely no loss of energy
in the recorded seismic signal.

The second event has the same amplitude as the first… The arrival time is wrong for a refracted wave…
We've ruled out reflections, refractions, and the air blast… We determined that these two records of these two events corroborate our
interpretation that there were two explosions."[74]
The mainstream media, of course, jumped on the USGS's findings, with headlines like "Single Bomb Destroyed Building" and "Seismic
Records Shake Murrah Multiple Bomb Theory." "The news media even reported two bomb blasts initially," said Mankin, "but later changed
their story."
"The USGS's conclusions are not supported by either data or analysis," added Brown, who asked that his name be taken off the report."Everybody that has looked at the signal has said a refraction (an echo) would really be strange because there's absolutely no loss of energy
in the recorded seismic signal.

The second event has the same amplitude as the first… The arrival time is wrong for a refracted wave…
We've ruled out reflections, refractions, and the air blast… We determined that these two records of these two events corroborate our
interpretation that there were two explosions."[74]
The mainstream media, of course, jumped on the USGS's findings, with headlines like "Single Bomb Destroyed Building" and "Seismic
Records Shake Murrah Multiple Bomb Theory." "The news media even reported two bomb blasts initially," said Mankin, "but later changed
their story."
"The USGS's conclusions are not supported by either data or analysis," added Brown, who asked that his name be taken off the report.

Although Brown cautions that his own conclusions are far from conclusive and require "more thorough investigation," the most logical
explanation for the second event says Brown, is "a bomb on the inside of the building."
"Even the smallest of those detonations (from the May 23rd demolition) had a larger effect on the recording than the collapse of the
building," he added, "which demonstrates that the explosives are much more efficient at exciting the ground motion than is the collapse of
three-fourths of the building.

So it is very unlikely that one-fourth of the building falling on April 19th could have created an energy wave
similar to that caused by the large [truck-bomb] explosion."[75]
One of the problems with the two event theory is that the spikes on the seismic readings were ten seconds apart.

With that much difference,
most everybody in the vicinity should have heard two separate blasts.

But given the traumatic nature of being in the immediate vicinity of a
bombing, would witnesses necessarily have heard two explosions?--- PAGE BREAK ---

With that much difference,
most everybody in the vicinity should have heard two separate blasts. But given the traumatic nature of being in the immediate vicinity of a
bombing, would witnesses necessarily have heard two explosions? Although the sound of a truck-bomb would certainly have made a loud,
roaring noise, complete with lots of smoke and flying debris, experts say that the "crack" of a C-4 cutting charge is "downright disappointing"
to hear. One man who works as a parking garage attendant one block north of the Murrah Building told The New American that he was test driving a
new pickup truck near the building when the bomb went off. "It seemed like one, big, long explosion," he said, "but I can't say for sure. My
ears were ringing and glass and rocks and concrete were falling all over and around me."[76]
Dr. Paul Heath, who was on the fifth floor, says he heard only one blast. But fellow VA worker Jim Guthrie stated in an interview with the
Washington Post:

--- PAGE BREAK ---"I felt a boom and was picked up off my feet and thrown under a water fountain." He heard a second explosion and covered
his ears.

Diane Dooley, who was at a third floor stairwell, also believes she heard a second explosion.[77]
P.

G.

Wilson, who worked in the Murrah Building, told researcher Michele Moore, "A second explosion came after the first one and shards of
glass began flying in the office."[78]
Hassan Muhammad, who was driving for a delivery service that day, had his ears ruptured by the explosions.

Muhammad told the author he
clearly recalled hearing two distinct blasts.

"…when I was crossing the street [at 10th and Robinson]… the first explosion went off, and it was
a loud explosion.

And my friend who was coming out of the warehouse asked me what was it, because we thought it was a drive-by
shooting… and we got on the ground, and by the time we got on the ground, another one went off, and that's when all the windows came
out." Muhammad recalls that it was about three to four seconds between blasts.[79]
Jane C.

Graham, a HUD worker injured in the bombing, also clearly felt two distinct blasts.

As Graham stated in a videotaped deposition: "I
want to specify that the first bomb — the first impact — the first effect, was a waving effect, that you got when the building was moving, you
might have maybe felt a little waving, perhaps an earthquake movement, and that lasted for several seconds.

"About 6 or 7 seconds later, a bomb exploded.

It was an entirely different sound and thrust.

It was like it came up right from the center up.

You could feel the building move a little.… But there were two distinct events that occurred.

The second blast not only was very, very loud, it
was also very powerful.

And as I said, I just felt like it was coming straight on up from the center of the building — straight up."[80]
Michael Hinton, who was on a bus near NW 5th and Robinson — one block away — also heard two explosions.The second blast not only was very, very loud, it
was also very powerful.

And as I said, I just felt like it was coming straight on up from the center of the building — straight up."[80]
Michael Hinton, who was on a bus near NW 5th and Robinson — one block away — also heard two explosions.

"I had just sat down when I
heard this violent type rumble under the bus," said Hinton.

"It was a pushing type motion — it actually raised that bus up on its side.

About
six or seven seconds later another one which was more violent than the first picked the bus up again, and I thought that second time the bus
was going to turn over." [81]
What Hinton is describing is consistent with a two-bomb scenario.

The first, smaller explosion being the more subdued blast of the
demolition charges.

The second, larger explosion being the blast of the truck-bomb — the blast pressure wave of which almost tipped the
bus over.

In an interview with Media Bypass magazine, attorney Charles Watts, who was in the Federal Courthouse across the street, described
hearing, and feeling, two separate blasts:
Watts: I was up on the ninth floor, the top floor of the Bankruptcy Court, with nothing in between the two buildings.

We were
on the south side, out in the foyer, outside the courtroom.

It was nine o'clock, or just very, very shortly thereafter.

Several
lawyers were standing there talking and there was a large explosion.

It threw several of the people close to me to the floor.

I
don't think it threw me to the floor, but it did move me significantly, and I threw myself to the floor, and got down, and about
that time, a huge blast, unlike anything I've ever experienced, hit.

Media Bypass: The blast wave hit?

Watts: A second blast.

There were two explosions.

The second blast made me think that the whole building was coming in.

Watts, a Vietnam veteran, has experienced the effects of bombings, including being within 100 feet of B-52 air strikes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The second blast made me think that the whole building was coming in. Watts, a Vietnam veteran, has experienced the effects of bombings, including being within 100 feet of B-52 air strikes. Watts told Media
Bypass he never experienced anything like this before.[82]
Another veteran who heard the blast is George Wallace, a retired Air Force fighter pilot with 26 years in the service. Wallace, who lives nine
miles northwest of the Federal Building described the blast as a "sustained, loud, long rumble, like several explosions." Wallace likened the
noise to that of a succession of bombs being dropped by B-52s.[83]
Taken together, the evidence and witness accounts appears to indicate that there were at least two blasts on the morning of April 19. General Partin, along with Senator Inhoffe, Representative Key and others, asked Congress that the building not be demolished until an
independent forensic team could be brought in to investigate the damage. "It is easy to determine whether a column was failed by contact demolition charges or by blast loading (such as a truck-bomb)," Partin wrote
in his letter to Congress. "It is also easy to cover up crucial evidence as was apparently done in Waco. I understand that the building is to be
demolished by May 23rd or 24th. Why the rush to destroy the evidence?"[84]
Cohen echoed Partin's sentiments: "I believe that demolition charges in the building placed at certain key concrete columns did the primary
damage to the Murrah Federal Building. I concur with the opinion that an investigation by the Oklahoma State Legislature is absolutely
necessary to get at the truth of what actually caused the tragedy in Oklahoma City."

--- PAGE BREAK ---Yet the feds in fact did demolish the Murrah Building on May 23, destroying the evidence while citing the same reason as they did for quickly
demolishing the Waco compound: "health hazards." In the Waco case, what was destroyed was evidence that the feds had fired from
helicopters into the roof of the building during the early part of the raid, killing several people, including a nursing mother.

In the Oklahoma
case, what was destroyed was evidence that the columns had been destroyed by demolition charges.[85]
The rubble from the Murrah Building was hauled by Midwest Wrecking to a landfill surrounded by a guarded, barbed-wire fence, sifted for
evidence with the help of the National Guard, then subsequently hauled off BFI Waste Management and buried.

Along with it was buried the
evidence of what really happened on the morning of April 19.

"It's a classic cover-up," said General Partin, "a classic cover-up."
"Everything Short of a T-72 Tank"
If the bombing of the Murrah Building was the result of an inside job, who is responsible?

Was it wired for demolition, and if so, who could
have wired it?

Dr.

Heath, who has worked in the Murrah Building for 22 years, was present on the day of the bombing.

Although Heath personally discounts
the second bomb theory, he explained that poor security in the building would have permitted access to almost anyone, anytime.

"The security was so lax in this building, that one individual or group of individuals could have had access to any of those columns," said
Heath, "almost in every part of the building, before or after hours, or even during the hours of the workday, and could have planted bombs."
Guy Rubsamen, the Federal Protective Services guard on duty the night of the 18th, said that nobody had entered the building.

Yet
Rubsamen took off at 2:00 a.m., and said that nobody was guarding the building from 2:00 a.m.

to 6:00 a.m.[86]
"It was a building you could have planted a bomb in anytime you wanted to," said Heath.Yet
Rubsamen took off at 2:00 a.m., and said that nobody was guarding the building from 2:00 a.m.

to 6:00 a.m.[86]
"It was a building you could have planted a bomb in anytime you wanted to," said Heath.

"It was a building that was not secure at all.

I've
gone in and out of this building with a pen knife, just by slipping a knife in the south doors, slide the bolt back, and go in without a key.

I've
done that ever since the building was new.

If you wanted into it, you could have gotten into it any time you wanted to."[87]
Heath also explained that visitors could drive right into the garage, anytime.

"There was no guard.

You could drive inside the garage — four
stories — anytime you wanted to, and carry anything you wanted to inside the car."[88]
It appears that alleged bomber Timothy McVeigh (or someone driving his car) did just that.

On the morning of April 19, attorney James
Linehan was stopped for a light at the corner of NW 4th and Robinson at approximately 8:38 a.m.

when he observed a battered yellow
Mercury run the light and drive directly into the underground parking garage.

Linehan said the driver had sharp facial features similar to
McVeigh's, although he thought the driver may have been a woman.

Referring to the well-publized scene of McVeigh being led out of the Noble County Courthouse, Linehan said, "…that's it!

That's the same
profile." Curiously, one month later Linehan said, "My gut feeling is that it was a female driving."[89]
Why did "McVeigh" drive into the garage?

Could he have done so to plant additional bombs?

Or perhaps someone in McVeigh's car made it
appear that he was doing so?

A fall-guy for the real bombers?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Or perhaps someone in McVeigh's car made it
appear that he was doing so? A fall-guy for the real bombers? "If McVeigh was totally outside the law, he certainly wouldn't have snuggled up against them like driving into that basement that morning,"
said David Hall, general manager of KPOC-TV in Ponca City, Oklahoma, who has investigated the ATF's role in the bombing."
Yet Hall doesn't believe "the ATF or the FBI or anybody went around and wired columns or anything like that. What he (Partin) said was that
there may have been some explosives stored by some columns that went off. I don't feel that those people set out to kill 168 people in
Oklahoma City intentionally. But I think that because of incompetence on their part that very well may have happened in two or three
different ways…"
Shortly after the bombing, an unidentified witness called Representative Key and told him that she saw two men in the garage who appeared
to be "sawing" on the pillars. The men were working in almost total darkness. When she asked them what they were doing, they said, "We're
just putting things right again."
Were they "putting things right," or were they weakening the support columns just enough to make sure that they'd fail at the appropriate
moment?[90]
Then, on the Friday before the bombing, HUD worker Jane Graham noticed three men in the garage whom she thought were telephone
repairmen. As Graham stated in her deposition, the men were holding what appeared to be C-4 plastic explosives:
"It was a block, probably 2 by 3 inches of 3 by 4, in that area, but it was a putty color — solid piece of block — I don't know

--- PAGE BREAK ---what it was.

But they had that and they had this wiring.

When they saw me watching them, they were down there and they
had plans of the building.

They were discussing — they were arguing in fact — apparently there was a disagreement,
because one of the men was pointing to various areas of the garage.

They were talking about, I assume, plans of the building.

I thought maybe they were telephone men at first.

"When they saw me watching them, they took the wiring — it looked like cord, telephone cord — it was putty colored — they
took whatever else was in their hand, they put all of that back into a paper sack, they put it in the driver's side, behind the
passenger seat [of a] pale green, slightly faded station wagon."
Graham later told me that one of the men was holding a one by two by three inch device that looked like "some sort of clicker, like a small
TV remote-control," she said.

The men stopped working abruptly when they saw Graham.

"They looked uncomfortable," she said.

"They were as intent looking at me as I
was at them."
She also stated that the men were not wearing uniforms and were not driving a telephone or electric company truck.

They were, however,
very well built.

They "obviously lifted weights" said Graham.

(Graham's account is backed up by IRS worker Kathy Wilburn, who also saw the trio of men in the garage, as did a HUD employee named
Joan.)[[91]]
Although the FBI interviewed Graham, they never showed her any pictures or brought her before a sketch artist.

"They only wanted to know
if I could identify McVeigh or Nichols," she said.

"I said it was neither of these two gentlemen."[92]
A call to the local electric, telephone, and natural gas companies revealed that the men were not authorized repairmen.

Nor were they
construction workers inspecting the premises for a proposed renovation project by the General Services Administration (GSA)."I said it was neither of these two gentlemen."[92]
A call to the local electric, telephone, and natural gas companies revealed that the men were not authorized repairmen.

Nor were they
construction workers inspecting the premises for a proposed renovation project by the General Services Administration (GSA).

The 20 or so
contractors involved in that bid stated emphatically that the men were not their employees.[93]
David Hall (who stopped working on the case in late 1995 due to an IRS audit) wasn't aware of the Graham deposition, he did drop a
bombshell.

"We do know that explosives were delivered there without a doubt.

We know there were six boxes of 25 to 35 pounds marked 'high
explosives' delivered to the building two weeks prior to the explosion.

We had contact with the truck driver who was involved in that delivery.

The name of the trucking company is Tri-State, located in Joplin, Missouri."
Tri-state… is an explosives carrier.

"We've talked to the driver," said Hall.

"We've talked to two drivers.

Nobody knows what was in them because they were boxed and marked
'high explosive.'"
Then Hall dropped another bombshell.

"We also know that the ATF had a magazine inside the building, which was illegal.

But the floor was blown out of that magazine.

And there's
some question about what was in there too that created that damage, because that was a foot of concrete that was blown out of that
magazine."[94]
While several other unexploded bombs were pulled out of the wreckage, none were widely mentioned.

One such bomb was a 2 X 2 foot box marked "High Explosives" which had a timer on it.

This was confirmed by Oklahoma City Fire Marshal
Dick Miller.

The timing mechanism apparently had been set to detonate at ten minutes after nine.

Apparently it had malfunctioned due to the
initial blast.[95]
According to Toni Garrett, a nurse who was on the scene tagging dead bodies.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The timing mechanism apparently had been set to detonate at ten minutes after nine. Apparently it had malfunctioned due to the
initial blast.[95]
According to Toni Garrett, a nurse who was on the scene tagging dead bodies. "Four people — rescue workers — told us there was a bomb
in the building with a timing mechanism set to go off ten minutes after nine." According to Garrett, witnesses told her it was an active bomb. "We saw the bomb squad take it away."[96]
This fact was confirmed by an Oklahoma City Police officer who inadvertently began to walk into the building when a fireman yelled, "Hey
idiot, that's a bomb!" The stunned officer looked over and saw the 2 X 2 box surrounded by police crime tape. He then heard the fireman yell,
"There's one over there and another over there! We're waiting for the bomb squads to come back from hauling off the others."
Investigator Phil O'Halloran has Bill Martin of the Oklahoma City Police Department on tape stating that one of the bombs found in the
building was two to three five-gallon containers of Mercury Fulminate — a powerful explosive — one not easily obtainable except to military

--- PAGE BREAK ---sources.[97]
Citizens monitoring police radios heard the following conversation on the morning of the 19th:
First voice: "Boy, you're not gonna' believe this!"
Second voice: "Believe what?"
First voice: "I can't believe it… this is a military bomb!" [98]
Apparently, the containers, with "Milspec" (military specification) markings clearly visible, were found in the basement.

Could this explain
what McVeigh's car was doing in the underground parking garage?

Mercury Fulminate is a highly volatile booster material.

Volatile enough
to create a very powerful explosion.[99]
Shortly thereafter, a fireman up on the third floor of the building noticed two military ambulances pull up to the building, and saw several men
in dark fatigues carrying stretchers from the building to the waiting ambulances.

What were on the stretchers were not bodies, but boxes,
which appeared to contain documents.

One of the stretchers had on it what appeared to be a missile launch tube.

The missile, apparently
part of the Army recruiting office's display, was confirmed the 61st EOD to be inert.[100][101]
What is also interesting is that General Partin stated the building's support structures failed primarily at the third floor level.

In speculating
who would have access at that juncture, it may be relevant to note that the Department of Defense (DoD) was on the third floor, adjoining
column B-3, which Partin believes contained the main detonation charge.[102]
Partin was also informed by an acquaintance in the CIA that several of their personnel who examined the site discovered Mercury Fulminate
residue on several rooftops near the building.

[103]
Around the same time as the Eglin Air Force Base report was being made public, William Northrop, a former Israeli intelligence agent, told
me that a friend in the CIA's Directorate of Operations informed him that there was plastic explosive residue on the building's columns.In speculating
who would have access at that juncture, it may be relevant to note that the Department of Defense (DoD) was on the third floor, adjoining
column B-3, which Partin believes contained the main detonation charge.[102]
Partin was also informed by an acquaintance in the CIA that several of their personnel who examined the site discovered Mercury Fulminate
residue on several rooftops near the building.

[103]
Around the same time as the Eglin Air Force Base report was being made public, William Northrop, a former Israeli intelligence agent, told
me that a friend in the CIA's Directorate of Operations informed him that there was plastic explosive residue on the building's columns.

Adding more fuel to the theory of an inside job was the dismembered military leg found in the wreckage — a leg not belonging to any of the
known victims.

(Although authorities would later attempt to attribute the leg to Airman Lakesha Levy.)
Nor was the local media attributing the bombing to the work of amateurs.

"Right now, they are saying that this is the work of a sophisticated
group," stated a KFOR-TV newscaster.

"This is the work of a sophisticated device, and it had to have been done by an explosives expert,
obviously, with this type of explosion."[104]
Even Governor Frank Keating told local news stations: "The reports I have is that one device was deactivated, and there's another device,
and obviously whatever did the damage to the Murrah Building was a tremendous, very sophisticated explosive device."
Newscasters live on the scene could be heard throughout the day announcing, "We have reports of two other bombs pulled out of the
building," and "The second two devices were larger than the first," and so on:
KFOR Channel 4: The FBI has confirmed there is another bomb in the Federal Building.

It's in the East side of the building.

They've moved everybody back several blocks, obviously to, uh, unplug it so it wont go off.

They're moving everybody back.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They've moved everybody back several blocks, obviously to, uh, unplug it so it wont go off. They're moving everybody back. It's a… it's a weird scene because at first everybody was running when they gave the word to get everybody away from the
scene, but now people are just standing around kind of staring. It's a very surreal, very strange scene. Now, we want to get some information out to people, to people who are in the downtown area. You don't want to stand on the
sidewalk, and the reason for that is there are gas mains underneath and if there's a second explosion, that those gas mains
could blow. But, again, we do have confirmation. There is a second bomb in the Federal Building. We know it's on the east
side. We're not sure what floor, what level, but there is definitely danger of a major second explosion. They're warning
everybody to get as far back as they can. They're trying to get the bomb defused right now. They are in the process of doing
it, but this could take some time. They're telling people that this is something to take very seriously, and not to slip forward to
get a look at this, because this thing could definitely go off. KWTV Channel 9: All right, we just saw, if you were watching, there, there was a white pickup truck backing a trailer into the
scene here. They are trying to get people out of the way so that they can get it in. Appears to be the Oklahoma Bomb Squad. It's their Bomb Disposal Unit, is what it is, and it is what they would use if, if, the report that we gave you just a few minutes
ago is correct, that a second explosive device of some kind is inside the building. They'll back that trailer in there, and the
Bomb Squad folks will go in and they'll use that trailer. You see the bucket on the back? This is how they would transport the
Explosive Device away from this populated area. They would try to do something.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Finally, KFOR announced:
The second explosive was found and defused.

The third explosive was found — and they are working on it right now as we
speak.

I understand that both the second and the third explosives were larger than the first.[105]
[Paramedic Tiffany Smith, who was working with other rescue personnel in the Murrah Building that morning, claims she was told by a black-
suited ATF agent that another bomb had been found attached to a gas line.[106]]
When Channel 4 interviewed terrorism expert Dr.

Randall Heather at approximately 1:00 P.M.

he stated: "We should find out an awful lot,
when these bombs are taken apart.… We got lucky today, if you can consider anything about this tragedy lucky.

It's actually a great stroke of
luck, that we've got defused bombs.

It's through the bomb material that we'll be able to track down who committed this atrocity."[107]
In fact, it is uncertain if the bombs were taken apart and examined.

As stated in a report prepared by the National Fire Protection
Association: "The device was removed in the sheriff's bomb trailer and exploded in a remote location."[108][109]
Incredibly, all these reports were quickly hushed up and denied later on.

Suddenly, the additional bombs inside the building became a car-
bomb outside the building, then a van containing 2,000 pounds of ANFO, then a truck containing 4,800 pounds.

Governor Keating, who himself had reported a second device, would later reverse his position, leading a statewide cover-up proclaiming that
Representative Key and others investigating additional bombs and suspects were "howling at the moon," and "off the reservation."
When J.D.

Cash, a journalist writing for the McCurtain County Gazette, tried to interview members of the Bomb Squad, Fire Department and
Police, he was generally told by potential interviewees, "I saw a lot that day, I wish I hadn't.Governor Keating, who himself had reported a second device, would later reverse his position, leading a statewide cover-up proclaiming that
Representative Key and others investigating additional bombs and suspects were "howling at the moon," and "off the reservation."
When J.D.

Cash, a journalist writing for the McCurtain County Gazette, tried to interview members of the Bomb Squad, Fire Department and
Police, he was generally told by potential interviewees, "I saw a lot that day, I wish I hadn't.

I have a wife, a job, a family… I've been
threatened, we've been told not to talk about the devices."[110]
When I attempted to interview two members of the Sheriff's Bomb Squad who were first on the scene, they told me there were no additional
bombs taken away or detonated.

When questioned further they became visibly uptight and referred me to their superior.

One law-enforcement official who had a little more practice at lying was Oklahoma City FBI SAC Bob Ricks, the master propagandist of
Waco fame, who coolly stated to the press, "We never did find another device.… we confirmed that no other device existed."[111]
The ATF, who initially denied even having any explosives in the building, eventually recanted their statements and told reporters that the 2 X
2 foot box was a "training bomb." I asked General Partin if there could be such a thing as an ATF "training bomb."
"I would certainly not think so," said Partin.

"Look, when you have an EOD team — EOD teams are very well trained people.

And any
training device would have to be so labeled — so labeled.

And the EOD people who were there were claiming it was explosives."[112]
Former ATF man Rick Sherrow had his own thoughts on the issue of training bombs.

"All the field offices have that material (training bombs).

It's 100 percent on the outside — weighs the same, looks the same, but it has no fill — no inert markings or anything else."All the field offices have that material (training bombs).

It's 100 percent on the outside — weighs the same, looks the same, but it has no fill — no inert markings or anything else.

I can't say
absolutely that's what was found in the building, but it's more than likely.

They had stun grenades too, which are live.

They can't contribute or
anything [to the damage], but they lied about it, and that jams up their credibility."[113]
Cash interviewed GSA workers who helped the ATF unload their arsenal room two weeks after the blast.

Cash described in a series of
Gazette articles beginning on May 4, 1995, how the ATF had stored weapons, explosives and ammunition in the Murrah Building in
contravention of the very laws they were supposed to enforce:
Both the Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Bureau (ATF) and the Drug Enforcement Bureau (DEA) had explosives and weapons
— including an anti-tank missile — illegally stored in the building when it blew up April 19, the McCurtain Gazette has learned.

An eyewitness observer told the Gazette recently of assisting federal agents to remove weapons and explosive devices from
a partially-damaged arsenal inside the Federal Building after the explosion.[114]
Lester Martz, ATF Special Agent in Charge for the region, denied this.

"That locker was intact," said Martz in an interview with the Dallas
Morning News, and with the author.

Martz went on to say that the blasted out area between columns B-2 and B-4 was the result of DEA
ordinance.

Yet the DEA offices were on the west side of the building on the seventh floor, nowhere near that area.

The ATF offices,
however, were in close proximity to it, being located in the top rear corner of the building, on the east side.

ATF officials were adamant in denying that no explosives were stored in the building.

But it seems they did have C-4.

OCPD Officer Don
Browning, who viewed video footage taken by Sheriff Melvin Sumter, says C-4 was "definitely" carried out of the building.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But it seems they did have C-4. OCPD Officer Don
Browning, who viewed video footage taken by Sheriff Melvin Sumter, says C-4 was "definitely" carried out of the building. Browning, a
Vietnam veteran, described the explosives he saw: "It was in wide blocks, about 3/4" thick, around 10" long, and about 2" wide, wrapped in
cellophane."[115][116]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Cash interviewed at least one unnamed witness who described helping ATF agents remove ordinance from their storage locker:
"One night, up on the ninth floor, where the ATF offices [were], I helped some of their agents load onto an elevator small
arms, machine guns, several cases of ammunition and even some boxes marked 'Explosives'" he said.[117]
The Gazette interviewed two more witnesses who assisted in the post bombing clean-up.

One, a civilian contractor hired by the GSA, told
the Gazette July 30th:
"They had everything!

…home-made zip guns, AK-47s, sawed-off shotguns, AR-15s, M-16s — literally hundreds of guns.

You
name it, they had it all… any kind of weapon you could ever want." He also said he recalls seeing an ATF agent with a five-
gallon bucket of hand-grenades.

"They carried out every conceivable type of firearm known to man," Cash told video producer Chuck Allen, "including hundreds of thousands
of rounds of ammunition, boxes marked explosives, hand grenades, everything short of a Russian T-72 tank." Finally, a witness told the
Gazette:
"What was left of that [ATF magazine] room is in the far south-east end of the ninth floor, but much of it was blown away and
[apparently] disappeared into the rubble right on top of the America's Kids Day Care Center."
The area just below the ATF's arsenal room — the coned-in area on the far left (south-east) side of the building seen in aerial photographs
— is where most of the casualties occurred.

This area extends one to two stories below the street level.

(See Appendix)
Apparently, this is not the first time such a "mishap" has occurred.

Approximately 10 years ago, some captured Soviet ordinance, including
rockets with high-explosive warheads, wound up stored at FBI headquarters in Washington, D.C.(See Appendix)
Apparently, this is not the first time such a "mishap" has occurred.

Approximately 10 years ago, some captured Soviet ordinance, including
rockets with high-explosive warheads, wound up stored at FBI headquarters in Washington, D.C.

There was a subsequent fire, and the
exploding ordinance caused more than a little consternation among firefighters, especially when one rocket took off and blasted a two-foot
diameter hole in a cinder block wall.

When the story leaked out, the ATF reacted by removing more than 30 pounds of explosives from their
offices down the street.[118]
In Allen's video, Cash makes the assertion that the massive internal damage to the building was the result of secondary explosions caused
by these illegally stored explosives.

The ordinance, which included percussion caps for C-4 (and C-4 itself), had fallen from their ninth floor
storage area after the initial truck blast, Cash suggests, to one of the lower floors, where it detonated, causing massive internal damage.

According to Cash's experts, although C-4 is relatively safe to handle, it can be set off with 3500 p.s.i.

of pressure.

General Partin disagrees with Cash's analysis, explaining: "For anything to have tumbled down from up there and done the increased
damage is technically impossible… If something had fallen after that section had collapsed and caused an explosion that brought down
[column] B-3, the thing would not have cropped the way it did.

If you look up there at the top left hand side, you don't see anything up there
that would indicate that you had a big blow-out at the top.

If it had, it wouldn't of had anything to do with the column collapsing down below
— they're too far away."
I asked Partin if C-4 could explode due to the increased air pressure resulting from the truck blast, from the weight of falling debris, or simply
by falling eight or nine stories.

"Look," said Partin, "C-4 is kinda' tough to get to go; ammonium nitrate is even tougher.If it had, it wouldn't of had anything to do with the column collapsing down below
— they're too far away."
I asked Partin if C-4 could explode due to the increased air pressure resulting from the truck blast, from the weight of falling debris, or simply
by falling eight or nine stories.

"Look," said Partin, "C-4 is kinda' tough to get to go; ammonium nitrate is even tougher.

It takes a real intense shock wave to get that kind of
explosive to go." Partin then added, "I thought I explained it to Cash, but I guess he's persisting with his story."
Why Cash would persist with his story while largely side-stepping Partin's analysis is curious.

Yet if the ATF were responsible for the
secondary explosion, it would seem they would have reason to lie.[119] [Not only were they storing explosives illegally in a public building
containing a day-care center, but almost the entire contingent of approximately 13 agents was absent on the day of the bombing (more on
this later).]
Was the ATF in fact responsible, knowingly or unknowingly, for the explosion that destroyed the Murrah building?

Consider the following
article which appeared in the June 5, 1995 issue of Newsweek:
For the past year, the ATF and the Army Corps of Engineers have been blowing up car bombs at the White Sands Proving
Ground in New Mexico.

The project, code-named Dipole Might, is designed to create a computer model to unravel terrorist car-
and truck-bomb attacks.

By coincidence, a ATF agent assigned to Dipole Might, happened to be in Oklahoma City on April
19th, working at the Federal Courthouse, which stands across the street from the Murrah Building.

He saw the devastation
and called the ATF office in Dallas.

The Murrah Building had just been hit by 'ANFO' (ammonium material) bomb of at least
several thousand pounds, he reported.

Within minutes, explosives agents trained under Dipole Might were dispatched to the
scene.

They identified the type and size of the bomb almost immediately.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Within minutes, explosives agents trained under Dipole Might were dispatched to the
scene. They identified the type and size of the bomb almost immediately. Just how this agent (Harry Eberhardt) was able to immediately ascertain the building had been blown up by an ANFO bomb, when no
forensic analysis had yet been conducted, is unclear. When Phil O'Halloran, a freelance journalist, attempted to ask the ATF Public
Relations Bureau why a Dipole Might expert just happened to be in the courthouse at that moment, and how he could immediately have

--- PAGE BREAK ---known the exact nature of the bomb, O'Halloran, rather than given a rational explanation, was accused of attacking the agency and was
promised a fax of agency views on Right-wing conspiracists (which never arrived).[120]
It is also unclear why was the Sheriff's Bomb Squad was in the parking lot between the Murrah Building and the Federal Courthouse at 7:45
that morning.

The Bomb Squad denies being there.

But Norma Smith and other Federal Courthouse employees recall seeing the Bomb
Squad's distinctive white truck.

"We did wonder what it was doing in our parking lot," recalled Smith.

"Jokingly, I said, 'Well, I guess we'll find
out soon enough.'"[121]
Oklahoma City attorney Daniel J.

Adomitis told the Forth Worth Star-Telegram he also saw the Bomb Squad there that morning.

"As I was
passing the back side of the County Courthouse, I noticed a truck with a trailer and the truck said 'Bomb Disposal.' I remember thinking as I
passed that , 'Gee, I wonder if they had a bomb threat at the county courthouse?'"[122]
Was the bomb squad alerted that something was in the works?

Not according to the ever-controvertful Lester Martz.

"I have not come
across any information that any kind of bomb unit was at the building prior to the bombing," announced Martz with a straight face at the
same time he lauded the heroism of Luke Franey, the ATF agent who supposedly "karate-kicked" his way through three walls.[123]
What is certain is that the Murrah Building had a bomb threat one week prior to the 19th.

Michael Hinton remembers looking out the window
of his YMCA room a week before and seeing about 200-300 people gathered outside.

The incident didn't jog his memory until the local TV
networks announced on the morning of the blast that the Federal Building had received a threat just a week before.[124]
Nurse Toni Garret recalled talking to several people who said there had been bomb threats two weeks prior to the bombing.Michael Hinton remembers looking out the window
of his YMCA room a week before and seeing about 200-300 people gathered outside.

The incident didn't jog his memory until the local TV
networks announced on the morning of the blast that the Federal Building had received a threat just a week before.[124]
Nurse Toni Garret recalled talking to several people who said there had been bomb threats two weeks prior to the bombing.

"The FBI and
the ATF knew that these bomb threats were real, and they did nothing about it."
Terrorism expert Dr.

Randall Heather confirmed these reports, adding, "I know that there had been a threat phoned in to the FBI last week,
but I don't know what the nature of that was."[125]
According to the Oklahoma City Fire Department, the FBI phoned in a warning on April 14, almost a week before the bombing.

Assistant Fire
Chief Charles Gaines told Glenn Wilburn, who lost two grandsons in the blast, that there was never any warning.

The grieving grandfather
then walked down the hall to Assistant Chief Dispatcher Harvey Weathers office.

Weathers told Wilburn in no uncertain terms that the Fire
Department had indeed received a warning on April 14.

Relating Gaines' apparent loss of memory to Weathers, he replied, "Well, you asked
me and I told you.

I'm not going to lie for anybody.…"[126]
[Of course, one person perfectly willing to lie for everybody was FBI SAC Bob Ricks.] When asked during a press conference if the FBI had
received a warning, Ricks said, "The FBI in Oklahoma City has not received any threats to indicate that a bombing was about to take place."
Interesting play on words.

Was Ricks surreptitiously suggesting that one of the other FBI offices had received a warning?

Or was there
simply no reason for the FBI to receive a warning because they were in charge of the bombing from the beginning?

The transparent stories of the ATF and FBI are strikingly familiar to those propounded in the wake of the 1993 World Trade Center bombing.Or was there
simply no reason for the FBI to receive a warning because they were in charge of the bombing from the beginning?

The transparent stories of the ATF and FBI are strikingly familiar to those propounded in the wake of the 1993 World Trade Center bombing.

In that case, the FBI had one of its own informants — former Egyptian Army Colonel Emad Eli Salem — inside the group responsible for the
bombing.

According to Salem, who made secret tapes of his conversations with his FBI handler, Nancy Floyd, her supervisor refused to let
Salem substitute a harmless powder for the real explosive.

The agent then pulled Salem off the case.

Soon afterwards, the bomb blew up,
killing six people and injuring almost a 1,000 more.[127]
It also seems that the "coincidence" of the ATF's Dipole Might tests were uncannily similar to the May 24, 1990 bombing of Earth First!

activist Judi Bari.

The FBI claimed that Bari and her companion Daryl Cherney, who were on their way to a peaceful protest rally, had
inadvertently blown themselves up with their own pipe-bomb.

After Bari sued the FBI for false arrest and civil rights violations, she found out
though discovery that the FBI ran a "bomb school" at Eureka College of the Redwoods in April of 1990 for both FBI and local police.

The
classes included blowing up cars with pipe bombs, ostensibly to demonstrate the tactics used by terrorists (the same reason cited in the
ATF's case).

The instructor for this "school of terrorism" was none other than Frank Doyle Jr., the FBI bomb squad expert who showed up at
the scene of Bari's car bombing one month later.

According to Freedom of Information Act records, Project Dipole Might was initiated under the authorization of Clinton's National Security
Council.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The instructor for this "school of terrorism" was none other than Frank Doyle Jr., the FBI bomb squad expert who showed up at
the scene of Bari's car bombing one month later. According to Freedom of Information Act records, Project Dipole Might was initiated under the authorization of Clinton's National Security
Council. One of the stated purposes of the project was to produce computer models of bombings to "be displayed in a courtroom to aid in
the prosecution of defendants." The Justice Department used the video tapes shot at White Sands during McVeigh's trial to "prove" that an
ANFO bomb blew up the building. As Lawrence Myers, writing in Media Bypass magazine, asked:
Why the National Security Council would fund such an ATF project, despite the absolute rarity of the crime, has not been
explained.… Nor has it been explained as to what specific threat assessment information the government had when it decided
to engage in such a project, just a few months before a Ryder Truck laden with ammonium nitrate fertilizer exploded in front of
the Murrah Building.[128]
As Myers points out, the last-known case of a truck-bomb exploding in the U.S. was in 1970, when an ANFO bomb exploded in front of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ploded in front of
the Murrah Building.[128]
As Myers points out, the last-known case of a truck-bomb exploding in the U.S. was in 1970, when an ANFO bomb exploded in front of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Army Math lab at the University of Wisconsin in Madison. Why then, would the National Security Council suddenly feel the need for detailed
information regarding ANFO truck-bomb attacks?
Was the ATF expecting such a bombing? Were they in fact responsible for blast or the secondary damage to the building? Or was the
building wired for demolition as part of a larger plot?
["I'm firmly convinced that the ATF is guilty of an awful lot of things," said Bud, our ex-Green Beret. "I mean, if you look at what the ATF and
the FBI did to Randy Weaver (and at Waco), it's just awful. They've gone hog wild and have [become] a power unto themselves."
Asked if he thought a rogue group or special unit within the military/intelligence community could or would commit such an act, Bud replied
"It wouldn't really stun me."]
Next | Previous | Contents | Text Version
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---2
"The Face of Terror"
"Before the Government tries to convict someone, they try first to demonize him."
— Trial lawyer Gerry Spence
On May 1st, a stunned America was introduced to "The Face of Terror." The steely-eyed mug of Timothy James McVeigh, superimposed
over the limp, bloody body of a tiny dead child, stared coldly out at us from the cover of Time magazine.

Suddenly, there was no longer any doubt who had bombed the Murrah Building.

As John Doe No.

1 was led from the Noble County
Courthouse in handcuffs and leg irons, the scene was something akin to a medieval script.

"Baby Killer!" the crowd screamed.

"Burn him!

Burn him!"
In the pages that followed, Time and others would set out to "reveal the paranoid life and times of accused bomber Timothy McVeigh and his
Right-wing associates."[129] With the ink barely dry on the indictments, the national news media quickly began pumping out story after story
focusing on the trivial banalities of McVeigh's life, attempting to reinforce the official allegations of his guilt.

While the New York Times set the
overall tone based on "leaks" from federal law enforcement sources, self-styled experts came crawling out of the woodwork.

"In deeply disturbing ways, his is a portrait of his generation," quipped Dale Russak and Serge Kovaleski, two sociologists moonlighting for
the Washington Post.[130]
"…his tortured path — is a psychological portrait of his deterioration…." John Kifner of the New York Times announced with the authority of
a Freudian analyst.

"First there was McVeigh's own stunted personality and immediate frustrations.

He was never able to overcome a sense
of abandonment by his mother…."[131]
"Not making the Special Forces was something that was very hard for him to deal with," said an FBI agent training for his Ph.D.

in
psychology.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He was never able to overcome a sense
of abandonment by his mother…."[131]
"Not making the Special Forces was something that was very hard for him to deal with," said an FBI agent training for his Ph.D. in
psychology. "In his mind, much of his life has been one of thinking that he is a kind of Special Forces of his own."[132]
Finally: "He was the quiet one," said McVeigh's former 10th grade English teacher Coleen Conner, throwing a bit of adolescent psychology
on the situation. "A lot of the quiet ones are the ones who have ended up doing scary things…."[133]
There it was — trial by media. Timothy McVeigh must be guilty, after all, they put his face on the cover of Time magazine.[134]
[Time. As journalist Jon Rappaport put it, "the home of faintly patronizing stories that go nowhere." Like the carefully manufactured image of
Lee Harvey Oswald, the media would construct a menagerie reality of Timothy James McVeigh, suitable for public consumption.]
Fortunately, in the avalanche of articles that would follow, small hints of reality would occasionally seep through the mire. "That just doesn't ring true to me, as to the person I knew," said Sheffield Anderson, a correctional officer who had gone through basic
training with McVeigh and served with him in the Gulf. "In that picture of him coming out of the courthouse, he looks like a real mean guy. But I didn't sense anything out of the ordinary. McVeigh was a rational type guy, a thinking type person. The bombing thing is totally contrary
to the person I knew."[135]
"The Timothy McVeigh I talked with didn't seem like a baby killer," said former Army Colonel David Hackworth about his Newsweek interview
with McVeigh.[136]
During an interview on Prime Time Live, Lana Padilla, Terry Nichols ex-wife, told Diane Sawyer, "It's not the same person. I mean, you
know…"
Sawyer: "The stony face."
Padilla: "No." [137]

--- PAGE BREAK ---"It became obvious during the hour-long discussion that Timothy McVeigh is neither a monster nor a madman," wrote Lawrence Myers, who
interviewed McVeigh for Media Bypass magazine.

"He left the impression that he is a man with strong convictions and a sense of honor."[138]
So just who is Timothy James McVeigh?

Is he a hardened killer as the press and federal authorities have made him out to be?

Or is he an
ordinary man who became caught up in a complicated web of intrigue and deception?

"Timmy"
Timothy James McVeigh was born in Pendelton, New York on April 23, 1968, a small working class town of 5,000 people just outside of
Buffalo.

Tim was the second child of Bill McVeigh, an auto worker, and Mildred, a travel agent.

The elder McVeigh, 55, coached Little
League and ran bingo night at the local catholic church, spending his free time golfing, or putzing in his garden.

A heavily wooded rural area,
young Tim spent his time hiking or playing sports with the neighborhood boys.

"He lived a few houses down from me, said boyhood friend Keith Maurer.

"We played hockey, baseball and just about every other sport in
the neighborhood.

He wasn't the best athlete in the bunch, but he showed up to play every day and he always played hard."
The bright and inventive youngster also spent his time engaging in novel activities such as setting up a haunted house in his basement,
where he charged admission, or holding weekend casino fairs, where he acted as the dealer.

"He was very advanced for our age, "Maurer said.

"I remember saying to myself: I wouldn't have thought of that."
Pat Waugh, a neighbor, said "I used to think to myself, that kid is going to go somewhere just because he's such a mover and shaker.

I
pictured him growing up to be a salesman, sort of a shyster."
When Tim's mom moved out in June of 1984, the outgoing young McVeigh became more reserved, as he and his sisters, Patty and Jennifer,
attempted to deal with the trauma of the breakup."I remember saying to myself: I wouldn't have thought of that."
Pat Waugh, a neighbor, said "I used to think to myself, that kid is going to go somewhere just because he's such a mover and shaker.

I
pictured him growing up to be a salesman, sort of a shyster."
When Tim's mom moved out in June of 1984, the outgoing young McVeigh became more reserved, as he and his sisters, Patty and Jennifer,
attempted to deal with the trauma of the breakup.

Reverend Paul Belzer of the Good shepherd Roman Catholic Church in Pendelton knew
the family for 20 years.

"People asked me, wasn't Tim crushed?

But he didn't seem to be.

He lived in the same house, had the same friends.

Yeah, he'd have to miss his mother, but so many of the anchors were there."
Yanya Panepento, a classmate of Tim's recalled, He was a quiet boy.

He kept to himself.

He didn't seem like he was a trouble maker or
anything like that."
Yet, nine months after the bombing, the Times John Kifner would write, "As commonplace as this seems, criminologists say, these traits are
often the stuff of serial killers, terrorists and other solitary murderers."
To the armchair psychoanalysts of the mainstream/tabloid media, the breakup would be the first of two major events — the second being his
initial failure to make the Special Forces — that would profoundly and adversely affect the young McVeigh's personality.

The first indications
of this came when reporters discovered in his high school yearbook that Tim had been voted "most talkative" by his senior class.

"The only thing I can remember is that he was very quite and polite," recalled Cecelia Matyjas, who taught 10th grade geometry.

"He didn't
cause any problems in class.

He seemed to be cooperative and attentive.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"He didn't
cause any problems in class. He seemed to be cooperative and attentive. He was on the track team and the cross-country team, so he was
able to get along with others."
Brandon Stickney, a journalist contracted to produce an unauthorized biography of McVeigh for Prometheus Books, said "Tim was not the
most talkative out of his class of 194 students, but he was by no means introverted. He was certainly an outgoing young man who had many
friends and acquaintances."
Yet none of these easy to check facts were ever mentioned in the volumous articles which appeared in the Times. Kifner, the Times
"resident analyst," proclaimed with surety, "He was never able to overcome a sense of abandonment by his mother, who left the family when
he was a boy; nor could he find a home outside the Army."
Backing up Kifner was John Douglas of the FBI's Psychological Profile Unit, who claimed McVeigh was "asocial, asexual, a loner, withdrawn,
from a family with problems, strong feelings of inadequacy from early in life, an underachiever."
"I think it's a bunch of psychobable if you ask me, if you want to know the truth," said Jennifer, Tim's younger sister. "We were free to live
with who we wanted. We could visit the other parent whenever we wanted. There was no bitterness between my parents."
"There's nothing there, added McVeigh himself, responding to the media's analysis of him in a July 3rd interview with Newsweek. Apparently, Douglas and the so-called journalists from the New York Times never bothered to check on the fact that Tim had many friends,
including several girlfriends later in life, was close to his Father and his sister Jennifer, and was a Regents Scholar. Not to be hamstrung by such minor details [as checking on facts], the Times and the Post quickly jumped on the idea that Tim was interested

--- PAGE BREAK ---in firearms.

"In a region of hunting enthusiasts, it caused little stir when Tim, at 10, became interested in guns.

But a close relative said that
the family saw this as a bid for attention by a boy who didn't know how else to ask for it."
"He had a semiautomatic BB gun that could fire 15 rounds with the pull of a trigger," added the Post.

"Other boys had only single-shot
varieties.

Tim used to show them at school how he held it, posing police-style with hands clasped together.

During boring classes, when
other students doodled, he drew guns."
In fact, Tim's father did buy him a .22-caliber rifle, which the young McVeigh would use for target practice in the woods behind his home.

Yet
apparently Tim was not the young blood-thirsty adventurer the media made him out to be.

"I remember starting to hunt at age 11," said his
friend Keith Maurer, "and Tim never had any interest in this."
McVeigh was later able to indulge in his interests in firearms as a security guard for Burke Armored, where he worked for a year or so in
1987.

Jeff Camp, McVeigh's co-worker, noted that he had a keen interest in guns, although he didn't find it unusual since most full-time
security guards and law enforcement personnel owned an assortment of firearms, he said.

One story eagerly circulated amongst the press is that McVeigh showed up at Burke one day with a huge Desert Eagle pistol and
bandoleers slung in an "X" across his chest.

"He came to work looking like Rambo," recalled Camp.

"It looked like World War III."
Yet McVeigh laughs off the tale, stating that he and some other employees were simply playing a joke on their supervisor, who was sending
them on a high profile assignment for the day.

Apparently, their supervisor was not amused.

According to the Post, McVeigh also worked as a gun salesman at a sporting goods store in Lockport.

"Guns were the entire focal point of the 27-year-old Mr.

McVeigh's life," wrote the Times' Kifner."Guns were the entire focal point of the 27-year-old Mr.

McVeigh's life," wrote the Times' Kifner.

"This obsession with weapons — a form of power — is an overcompensation for deep-rooted feelings of inadequacy," added the FBI's
Douglas, attempting to drive another nail into McVeigh's coffin.

One must wonder if an interest in stamp collecting or bird watching — other legitimate hobbies — could be construed as a "bid for attention."
The author — much more of a "trouble maker" in his formative years than Timothy McVeigh — personally remembers his own interest in
guns, and even military armor.

Like motorcycles, fast cars or other macho symbols, such interests pass as one matures.

Yet federal
authorities, with the backing of the corporate-owned media, attempted to make this a cornerstone of their psuedo-psychological case against
McVeigh.

He was "obsessed with guns," ergo, he is a mad bomber.

I doubt if all the gun enthusiasts in the country would be pleased to know
they are, by association, being implicated as mad bombers.

Not to be deterred, Post reporters discovered that young Tim had stockpiled food, camping equipment and weapons in case of a disaster
"…in case of a nuclear attack or the Communists took over the country," said an anonymous neighbor in the Post.

"Perhaps it made sense
that a young boy often forced to fend for himself would fantasize about fighting the world all alone," mused the Post.

Fighting the world?

Or
developing common sense at a young age?

In his Media Bypass interview, McVeigh recalled that one of his most vivid memories was the
winter blizzard of 1977, which dumped 15 feet of snow on Pendelton, stranding his mother miles away, and knocking out power and phone
lines for days.

The young, inventive McVeigh responded by helping his father store necessities, even recommending that the older McVeigh
purchase a generator.In his Media Bypass interview, McVeigh recalled that one of his most vivid memories was the
winter blizzard of 1977, which dumped 15 feet of snow on Pendelton, stranding his mother miles away, and knocking out power and phone
lines for days.

The young, inventive McVeigh responded by helping his father store necessities, even recommending that the older McVeigh
purchase a generator.

Apparently the armchair psychoanalysts of the mainstream press felt this indicative of early creeping paranoia, rather than the natural
combination of the active imagination and common sense inherent in a remarkable nine-year old boy.

If the youngster was concerned about
Communists, one only need ask where such fears were incubated.

The Post, keeping with the propaganda of Timothy McVeigh as underachiever, was quoted as saying "Tim's high-school yearbook entry in
1986 listed no organized activities (he omitted the track team), rather: 'staying away from school, losing sleep, finding it in school.'"
Yet even the Post admitted that Tim's guidance counselor, Harold Smith, said that he had not missed a day of classes from seventh through
twelfth grade.

Far from being an underachiever, his record indicates a young man with remarkable discipline.

Justin Gertner, who knew McVeigh since second grade recalls, "he hung around with the intelligently elite at Starpoint.

Tim was in the
Regent's program in our school for advanced placement students who planned on attending college.

He also created and ran our computer
bulletin board system."
In fact, McVeigh excelled in computers, taking every available computer class in high school.

He even designed his own computer program.

"That was the age when there was no software to speak of, and it wasn't user friendly," said a teacher who asked to remain anonymous,
"But Tim and some other kids went out and did this….

In a way, that was fairly advanced.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"That was the age when there was no software to speak of, and it wasn't user friendly," said a teacher who asked to remain anonymous,
"But Tim and some other kids went out and did this…. In a way, that was fairly advanced. This demonstrates his bright mind and his ability."
This bright mind and ability led McVeigh to Bryant & Stratton Business College in Williamsville, N.Y. to study advanced COBOL and
FORTRAN programming languages. In spite of his abilities, opportunities for decent employment were uncertain in Buffalo in the mid-1980s. Buffalo, like the rest of the Rust Belt, was experiencing the worst of economic trends. Several steel and auto plants had shut down, and two
major banks failed, throwing thousands of white-collar workers out of jobs and causing downturns in real-estate, advertising, law and other

--- PAGE BREAK ---fields.[139]
"There are no jobs around here unless you want to work for $6 an hour or less at a McDonald's or Wendy's," said Bill McVeigh.

"It's rough for
anybody looking for work."
McVeigh apparently did not feel comfortable that his auto-worker father was paying for most of his college tuition.

So in December 1987, he
took a job with Burke Armored Truck (now known as Armored Services of America) in Cheektowaga, near Buffalo.

"He was a very alert guard." said Jeff Camp, McVeigh's co-worker.

"He worked a lot of overtime and was polite with our customers."
McVeigh was also moody, ranging from intense to quiet.

"If someone was driving badly, cutting us off or interfering with our schedule, he
could get pretty mad," added Camp.

"His face would turn red and he would yell and scream inside the truck, although he calmed down pretty
fast." (Similar to the way the author drives.) Camp also described an incident where a woman had hit their truck.

Although the woman was
upset, McVeigh calmed her down and told her not to worry, that there was no damage to the truck, and that he would even report it as their
fault, which it wasn't.[140]
McVeigh worked at Burke from April of 1987 till May of 1988.

By the time he was 19, McVeigh had built up a substantial savings account and
he and a friend, David Darlak, acquired 10 acres of land for $7,000 at a hunting and camping retreat north of Olean, N.Y.

The two young
men bought the land as an investment, and to use for camping and for target practice.[141] Reported the Post:
"Robert Morgan, who lives nearby, said his father Charlie once called the state police to complain about all the gunfire.

'My
dad turned him in," he said.

"One day it sounded like a war out there.

Sometimes he'd come down during the week,
sometimes the weekend.

He had on hunting clothes.Sometimes he'd come down during the week,
sometimes the weekend.

He had on hunting clothes.

Camouflage.'"[142]
While the press made much out of the fact that McVeigh and his friends used the land for target practice, it should be noted that McVeigh
was law-abiding and did not have a criminal record.

By the Spring of 1988, the young security guard felt he was going nowhere.

He was working in a relatively low-wage job while listening to the
fate of those who had been laid-off while working other jobs.

Tim's father listened with concern as Tim vented his frustration, complaining
that he was unemployable except at jobs that paid "no money." One night Bill McVeigh and a friend from the auto plant suggested that the
younger McVeigh enter the service.

"Bill and I had both been in the service," the friend said, "and one night we said to Tim, 'That's what you ought to do: go in the service.' A
week later, he had joined."
"It happened in a split second," said Tim's co-worker Jeff Camp.

"He didn't tell anyone he was joining.

He just came to work one day and
said he was going in the Army.[143] I never saw a guy who wanted to go in the Army that bad.

I asked him why the Army, and he said 'You
get to shoot.' He always wanted to carry an M-16."[144]
Keith Maurer said, "I couldn't see him joining the military.

He had a lot of options.

He was very smart.

I didn't see the military as the one he
needed to take."
[But to McVeigh, who saw his career options in economically depressed Upstate New York as bleak, the Army made perfect sense.] The
Army held the possibility of travel and adventure for a boy from a small town.

In the Army, he could choose his specialty, indulging his
interest in firearms or computers.

On May 24, McVeigh drove the 25 miles to the Army recruiting office in Buffalo, and signed up for a three-year hitch.

"In a couple of days he
was gone," said Camp.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On May 24, McVeigh drove the 25 miles to the Army recruiting office in Buffalo, and signed up for a three-year hitch. "In a couple of days he
was gone," said Camp. Sergeant Mac
McVeigh arrived at Fort Benning, Georgia on May 30, and was assigned to Echo Company, 4th Battalion, 36th Infantry Regiment, 2nd
Training Brigade. The unit was a COHORT unit, an acronym for "Cohesion Operational Readiness and Training." In a COHORT unit,
soldiers were supposed to stay together for their entire three-year enlistment period. The COHORT concept originated in 1980, in an attempt
to correct the problem of sending in raw green recruits for those who had been killed in battle. The Army discovered that many new
replacements had difficulty adjusting to a new unit in the heat of battle, resulting in a higher number of casualties. Moreover, Pentagon
studies from the Vietnam War era suggested that soldiers who had developed bonds of friendship were more likely to perform courageously. Unfortunately, the Army soon developed a new problem: many of the soldiers became sick of each other after three years, resulting in
soldiers committing suicide or going AWOL. Although McVeigh originally wanted to try out for Army Ranger School, he didn't want to wait for an available opening, and decided to join
the infantry immediately. As he sound found out, he had been misled by the Army recruiter. Once in the COHORT unit, it was not possible
for him to enter Army Ranger School. Yet the disappointed young recruit quickly made the best of the situation, scoring a high 126 points on
his General Technical test score, putting him in the top 10 percentile among new recruits.

--- PAGE BREAK ---"McVeigh was really motivated to be a good soldier and performed well at everything expected of him," said assistant platoon leader Glen
"Tex" Edwards.

"You could load that boy up with 140 pounds of gear and he would carry it all day on the march without complaining.

He was
thin as a rail but he never fell out of formation," said Edwards, recalling the hot Georgia summer of 1988.

" It was the worst time of the year
to go through the course, but it did not seem to bother McVeigh one bit."
Although McVeigh didn't have many close friends during basic training, one person he would develop a close friendship with was Terry
Nichols.

Nichols, 13 years McVeigh's senior, was promoted to platoon leader due to his age and maturity.

Despite their age difference
however, the two men bonded, sharing similar interests.

"Terry and Tim in boot camp went together like magnets," said Robin Littleton.

By the end of basic training, McVeigh was promoted to private E-2, having managed to score higher than anyone in his battalion on his mid-
cycle and end-of-cycle testing.

"Any test, he'd ace it," said David Dilly.

"He knew exactly what the Army wanted.

It was going to be an easy
life for him."
On August 25, 1988, McVeigh was awarded a certificate by his commanding officer, then in September the unit was shipped out to Fort
Riley, Kansas, where McVeigh was assigned to the 2nd Battalion, First Infantry Division, part of the "Dagger Brigade" of the famous "Big
Red One" that made the assault on Normandy during WWII.

While McVeigh was assigned to Charlie Company, Nichols went to Bravo
Company.

A mechanized infantry unit, 2nd Battalion was equipped with M-2 Bradley Armored vehicles, a more sophisticated version of the famous M-
113 Armored Personnel Carrier used during the Vietnam War.

In addition to ferrying troops, the aluminum Bradley has a turret-mounted
25mm cannon, a 7.62mm machine gun and anti-tank missiles.A mechanized infantry unit, 2nd Battalion was equipped with M-2 Bradley Armored vehicles, a more sophisticated version of the famous M-
113 Armored Personnel Carrier used during the Vietnam War.

In addition to ferrying troops, the aluminum Bradley has a turret-mounted
25mm cannon, a 7.62mm machine gun and anti-tank missiles.

McVeigh was the gunner on one of four Bradleys attached to Charlie
Company's First Platoon.

Naturally, he scored higher than anyone else in the battalion.

In 1989, his commander selected him as gunner on
the "Division Display Vehicle," used to demonstrate the M-2 system for Pentagon officials and visiting dignitaries.

"He was without a doubt the best soldier I have ever trained with," said Staff Sergeant Albert Warnement, McVeigh's supervisor at Fort Riley.

He was motivated and very interested in learning everything he could about being a professional soldier."[145]
"As far as soldiering, he never did anything wrong," said Todd Reiger, assigned to McVeigh's Bradley.

"He was always on time.

He never got
into trouble.

He was perfect.

I thought he would stay in the Army all his life.

He was always volunteering for stuff that the rest of us wouldn't
want to do, guard duties, classes on the weekend."[146]
McVeigh studied every conceivable Army manual, including the Ranger Handbook, the Special Forces Handbook, and the Improvised
Munitions Handbook.

But press reports [portrayed] McVeigh as a mad bomber:
McVeigh's love of guns and explosives stood out even in the Army, where gun lovers abound.

In the first weeks of basic
training, when soldiers learn to make explosives, recalled platoon mate Fritz Curnutte, McVeigh boasted to fellow soldiers that
he already knew how to make a powerful bomb using a bottle, then told them how to make a Molotov cocktail.[147]
According to Warnement, such knowledge is not unusual for the more serious soldiers, who routinely studied manuals on survival, evasion,
resistance and escape, and improvised munitions.But press reports [portrayed] McVeigh as a mad bomber:
McVeigh's love of guns and explosives stood out even in the Army, where gun lovers abound.

In the first weeks of basic
training, when soldiers learn to make explosives, recalled platoon mate Fritz Curnutte, McVeigh boasted to fellow soldiers that
he already knew how to make a powerful bomb using a bottle, then told them how to make a Molotov cocktail.[147]
According to Warnement, such knowledge is not unusual for the more serious soldiers, who routinely studied manuals on survival, evasion,
resistance and escape, and improvised munitions.

"You have to remember," said Warnement, "at that time, we were training to fight the
Russians in Western Europe and it was expected the Red Army would probably break through our lines almost immediately.

We were
encouraged to learn how to improvise.

Our survivability on the battlefield would likely depend on our skills in unconventional warfare."[148]
Although McVeigh's military record makes no mention of formal demolitions training, in her book, By Blood Betrayed, Lana Padilla calls
McVeigh a "former Army demolitions expert."[149] But Sheffield Anderson, who served with McVeigh since basic training said "He had the
same training that the rest of the outfit had."[150]
The only thing that differentiated McVeigh from the rest of the outfit was his dedication and commitment to the military.

"He played the
military 24 hours a day, seven days a week," said Curnutte.

"All of us thought it was silly.

When they'd call for down time, we'd rest, and he'd
throw on a rucksack and walk around the post with it."
This "silliness" led to McVeigh making sergeant ahead of the rest of his unit.

"It was unusual to have sergeant stripes so soon," said Reiger.

"The rest of us in the Cohort [unit] were specialists," a non-supervisory rank similar to corporal.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"It was unusual to have sergeant stripes so soon," said Reiger. "The rest of us in the Cohort [unit] were specialists," a non-supervisory rank similar to corporal. In fact, after the bombing, when McVeigh's records and test scores were shown to a master sergeant without revealing his identity, he stated
that the subject "would make a great infantry officer, tanker, artillery officer or combat engineer." His electronic aptitude, said another official,
qualified him for "repairing satellite communications."[151] "He has a very high IQ," said a federal source familiar with the suspect's military
record.[152] In fact, McVeigh was rated among the top 5 percent in combat arms. McVeigh rented a three-bedroom house in the spring of 1991 in Herrington with Corporal John Kelso and Sergeant Rick Cerney. But the
arrangement was not a comfortable one for McVeigh, and he soon moved into another house which he shared with Sgt. Royal Wilcher, who
served with McVeigh in the Bradley.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Times quoted members of the McVeigh's unit claiming that he had no close friends.

"He kept to himself," said Robert Handa.

"He was a
dedicated soldier.

He loved being a soldier.

I didn't.

So after duty hours he'd stay in the barracks while everybody else took off, go out to
town.

I never saw him go anywhere.

He always had a highly pressed uniform." Reiger recalls that McVeigh had a TV and a VCR and stayed
in and watched movies, or occasionally went bowling.

"The whole thing is," said John Kelso, who shared a house off-base with McVeigh and fellow soldier Richard Cerney, "he couldn't have a
good time."
"He was very shy of women — almost embarrassed," said Anderson.

"It didn't seem he was gay.

He was just awkward." McVeigh disputed
this analysis in his April 15th Time interview, stating:
"I don't think there is any way to narrow my personality down and label it as one thing or another.

I'm just like anyone else.

Movies I enjoy, comedies, sci fi.

The big misconception is that I'm a loner.

Well, I believe in having my own space.

But that in
no way means I'm a loner.

I like women, social life…."
McVeigh became friends with bombing suspect Michael Fortier while stationed at Fort Riley.

He and Fortier would occasionally go shooting
together at a friend's farm near Tuttle Creek Lake, and stop by and visit Terry Nichols at his house near the base.

The press was quick to pick up on McVeigh owning lots of guns he kept hidden around his house.

According to Wilcher, "He had a couple in
the kitchen, a couple in the living room under the couch.

I think there was one in the bathroom, behind the towels.

As you go up the steps
there was a little ledge and he kept one in there too, a .38 revolver." "I don't know if he was paranoid or what," added Wilcher.

"Or maybe he
had some friends that were after him.As you go up the steps
there was a little ledge and he kept one in there too, a .38 revolver." "I don't know if he was paranoid or what," added Wilcher.

"Or maybe he
had some friends that were after him.

I don't know."[153]
According to an account in USA Today and the Times, McVeigh and Nichols, who by now were pretty far along in their "anti-government"
beliefs, attempted to recruit other military personnel for a militia that Nichols was purportedly starting.

Nichols reportedly told at least one
fellow soldier that he'd be back to Fort Riley after his discharge to recruit new men, and McVeigh's co-worker at Burns Security, Carl Lebron,
would later tell the FBI that McVeigh was always trying to "recruit him into an undescribed group.…"[154]
According to Dave Dilly, one of McVeigh's roommates, McVeigh rented a storage locker in Junction City, stocked with weapons, military
meals (MREs), and a 100-gallon jug of water — in case of disaster or a Communist attack.[155]
"He was halfway there when I knew him," said Dilly, referring to McVeigh's Patriot beliefs.

During McVeigh's tenure at Burns Security,
McVeigh would inundate his co-workers with Patriot literature, such as the Spotlight, articles and videos on Ruby Ridge and Waco, and
books such as Detaxing America.

For his part, McVeigh says, "If you had to label what I think, then I would say I am closest to the views of the Patriot movement," McVeigh
told the London Sunday Times.

"For a long time, I thought it was best not to talk about my political views, he added, "but millions share them,
and I believe it is gravely wrong that I should allow the government to try and crucify me just for believing what I do."
Interestingly, McVeigh would tell his friend Carl Lebron, who shared some of McVeigh's beliefs, "All the reading you do is just a hobby.

You
stamp your feet, but you're not doing anything."
Another issue the media focused on were race problems in Charlie Company, and with McVeigh in particular."For a long time, I thought it was best not to talk about my political views, he added, "but millions share them,
and I believe it is gravely wrong that I should allow the government to try and crucify me just for believing what I do."
Interestingly, McVeigh would tell his friend Carl Lebron, who shared some of McVeigh's beliefs, "All the reading you do is just a hobby.

You
stamp your feet, but you're not doing anything."
Another issue the media focused on were race problems in Charlie Company, and with McVeigh in particular.

Regier told the Post that
McVeigh was criticized for assigning undesirable work to black soldiers, making black specialists sweep out the motor pool, work that would
have ordinarily gone to privates.

Other soldiers said he made derogatory remarks about blacks.

"It was pretty well known, pretty much
throughout the platoon, that he was making the black specialists do that work," said Regier.

"He was a racist.

When he talked he'd mention
those words, like nigger.

You pretty much knew he was a racist." The black soldiers complained to a company commander and McVeigh
was reprimanded, the only time he ever got into trouble according to Regier.[156]
Dilly said that "Race was an issue, like everywhere in America, but not one that affected anyone's promotion.

McVeigh picked the best man
for the job."
Yet the McCurtain Gazette discovered that McVeigh held membership in the Ku Klux Klan.

Apparently, he boasted that it was personally
approved by Thom Robb, the KKK's national chaplain.

"He was a very racist person," said Wilcher.

"Charlie Company as a whole had a problem with race," said Captain Terry Guild, who served briefly as McVeigh's platoon commander after
the Gulf War.

"There was graffiti on the walls of the barracks' bathroom: 'Nigger' or 'Honky, Get Out.' They were mild incidents.

If a problem
was identified, a leader in Charlie Company wouldn't let it happen again if he saw it.

But it was definitely a problem in the company.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If a problem
was identified, a leader in Charlie Company wouldn't let it happen again if he saw it. But it was definitely a problem in the company. And his
platoon had some of the most serious race problems. It was pretty bad."
In spite of such interpersonal or racial difficulties, most of the platoon held McVeigh in high esteem for his soldiering abilities. "He could
command soldiers of his own rank and they respected him," said Barner. "When it came to soldiering, McVeigh knew what he was doing."

--- PAGE BREAK ---"If we ever went to war," said Edwards, "every one of us wanted to go to war with McVeigh." [157]
During the summer of 1989, after returning from a week-long orientation session in Heidelberg with the West German Army, or Bundeswehr,
McVeigh decided to try out for the Army Special Forces.

To the young sergeant who had long desired to be a member of the Army's elite,
the Special Forces provided the chance.

It also provided McVeigh an opportunity to graduate from the COHORT unit.

Yet the physical
requirements to even qualify for the Special Forces are among the toughest in the military.

Requirements include swimming 50 meters with
full gear; 42 push-ups in two minutes; 52 sit-ups in two minutes; and running two miles in less than 15 minutes 54 seconds.

To pass the
grueling tests, McVeigh began training vigorously in the summer of 1989, working out constantly, and forcing himself to march 10 miles with
100 pound packs.

By the summer of 1990, he had passed the Special Forces physical fitness test, and was ordered to report to Fort Bragg,
NC on November 17 to begin the Special Forces Assessment and Selection Course (SFAS).

Towards the end of 1990, McVeigh reinlisted
for another four years.

[158]
Yet McVeigh's dream of becoming a Green Beret would have to wait.

On November 8th, with the conflict in the Persian Gulf coming to a
head, the Pentagon canceled all leaves and training assignments.

McVeigh's unit was activated for deployment.

Although he was the
consummate military man, the gung-ho soldier, McVeigh was against the decision to go to war.

"McVeigh did not think the United States had
any business or interest in Kuwait," said Warnement, "but he was a good soldier.

He knew it was his duty to go where he was told, and he
went." He was promoted to sergeant on February 1, 1991.[159]
Unlike the steely-eyed killer the press have painted him to be, McVeigh was as scared as the rest of the platoon."McVeigh did not think the United States had
any business or interest in Kuwait," said Warnement, "but he was a good soldier.

He knew it was his duty to go where he was told, and he
went." He was promoted to sergeant on February 1, 1991.[159]
Unlike the steely-eyed killer the press have painted him to be, McVeigh was as scared as the rest of the platoon.

"The night before the
ground war kicked off, he was saying he was scared because we were going to be part of the first wave," Anderson recalled.

"He was scared
we weren't going to come out of it.

Maybe we would get shot, blown up.

It wasn't cowardly.

He was just concerned.

I was feeling the same
way, but most people didn't express it."[160]
On February 24, 1990, the 2nd Battalion was ordered across the southern Iraqi desert to punch a hole in Iraqi defenses — a line of dug-in
infantry supported by tanks and artillery.

McVeigh's platoon was attached to the "Ironhorse" tank company, and McVeigh's Bradley was the
lead track in the platoon.

McVeigh, the "top gun," took out an enemy tank on the first day with a TOW missile.

The "Ironhorse" protected units clearing the trenches.

Using tanks and trucks equipped with plows, the U.S.

forces would follow behind the
Bradleys, burying the Iraqis dead or alive, to create a smooth crossing point for the infantry and avoid having to engage the enemy in hand-
to-hand combat.

McVeigh's moment of glory came when his platoon encountered a dug-in enemy machine-gun emplacement and came under fire.

McVeigh
brought his 25mm cannon to bear on the chest of an enemy soldier 1,000 yards away, and took his head off with one shot.

He followed up
with a similar shot, which was followed by the raising of a white flag and the raising of more than 60 hands into the air.McVeigh
brought his 25mm cannon to bear on the chest of an enemy soldier 1,000 yards away, and took his head off with one shot.

He followed up
with a similar shot, which was followed by the raising of a white flag and the raising of more than 60 hands into the air.

For his role in the battle, McVeigh was awarded an Army Commendation Medal which read in part: "He inspired other members of his squad
and platoon by destroying an enemy machine-gun emplacement, killing two Iraqi soldiers and forcing the surrender of 30 others from dug-in
positions." McVeigh also earned a Commendation medal with an upgrade for valor, two Army Achievement medals, and the Bronze Star "for
flawless devotion to duty."
This "flawless devotion to duty" resulted in McVeigh's unit being invited to provide personal security for General "Stormin' Norman"
Schwarzkopf.

A much-hackneyed phrase attributed to Sergeant James Ives, which the media like to play over and over again was, "If he was given a
mission and a target, it's gone." Yet Roger Barnett, who served in McVeigh's Bradley, told the Times that McVeigh never expressed any
desire to kill troops who were surrendering and never seemed bloodthirsty in any way.[161]
[Yet the Times' preordained slant on McVeigh was clearly evident.

While others in his outfit "served" during the Gulf War, McVeigh "killed
Iraqis." [162]]
One story which appeared in Media Bypass [but predictably never made it into the mainstream press,] recounts how McVeigh saved an
accident victim's life on a lonely stretch of highway.

The man had been ejected from his overturned car and lay semi-conscious and
bleeding.

A passing semi had stopped but was unable to find him as he lay in the darkness 50 yards away.

McVeigh, who was on his way to
his home town of Pendelton, had recently finished a 46-hour medical aid course at Fort Riley.

Against regulations, he had taken his Combat
Lifesaver Pack with him on the 1200-mile drive.--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh, who was on his way to
his home town of Pendelton, had recently finished a 46-hour medical aid course at Fort Riley. Against regulations, he had taken his Combat
Lifesaver Pack with him on the 1200-mile drive. As he came upon the scene, McVeigh saw that an EMS (Emergency Medical Service) crew
had not yet arrived. Trained in night vision techniques, McVeigh the soldier quickly spotted the injured motorist in the grass along the median
strip. Following is an excerpt from the Media Bypass article:
The victim recalls that the soldier was confident, quiet and efficient. To centralize his circulation, he elevated the man's
undamaged limbs and warned him to be calm to avoid going into shock. He checked his pulse and flashed a small penlight
across his pupils. The man, who only moments earlier was convinced he was going to die, shivered in the dark and started
laughing. He told the tall young stranger he was never going to buy another Chevy Blazer again. The soldier smiled as he rolled up the victim's right sleeve and inserted the needle to start a saline IV into his veins. "You've

--- PAGE BREAK ---lost a lot of blood and you risk going into shock.

This is an IV to help stabilize you and keep your fluids going.

Relax.

You'll be
fine," he told him.

He placed the clear plastic IV bag under the man's hip and checked his pulse again.

In the distance, an ambulance siren screamed over the sound of the truck engines as Timothy James McVeigh quickly packed
up his Army issue trauma kit and disappeared into the night.

The responding EMS crew told the state police officer who
arrived at the accident minutes later that they had never come upon such a potentially deadly crash to find a severely injured
man relaxed and laughing, neatly bandaged with an IV dangling from his arm.[163]
In a flurry of articles, mainstream media painted McVeigh as a psychotic, attention-seeking loner with a grudge against the government and
a hatred of humanity.

A man with "a stunted personality," who led a "tortured path," "obsessed with weapons" and with "deep-rooted feelings
of inadequacy." When the press couldn't find evidence of overt violence or hostility, his noted politeness and manners suddenly became
evidence his of his psychosis.

"It is a personality that a Seattle forensic psychiatrist, Kenneth Muscatel, has described as the "Smerdyakov
Syndrome," announced the Times, "after the scorned half-brother in Dostoyevsky's Brothers Karamazov who listens to the other brothers
inveigh against their father until, finally, he commits patricide."[164]
McVeigh was painted as a sociopath when Lana Padilla, in her book, By Blood Betrayed, hinting that McVeigh may have been responsible
for the death of 26-month-old Jason Torres Nichols — Terry and Marife's son — who accidentally suffocated to death in a plastic bag in
November of 1993.[165] Yet Padilla included a photo in her book of McVeigh laughing and playing with the little boy.A man with "a stunted personality," who led a "tortured path," "obsessed with weapons" and with "deep-rooted feelings
of inadequacy." When the press couldn't find evidence of overt violence or hostility, his noted politeness and manners suddenly became
evidence his of his psychosis.

"It is a personality that a Seattle forensic psychiatrist, Kenneth Muscatel, has described as the "Smerdyakov
Syndrome," announced the Times, "after the scorned half-brother in Dostoyevsky's Brothers Karamazov who listens to the other brothers
inveigh against their father until, finally, he commits patricide."[164]
McVeigh was painted as a sociopath when Lana Padilla, in her book, By Blood Betrayed, hinting that McVeigh may have been responsible
for the death of 26-month-old Jason Torres Nichols — Terry and Marife's son — who accidentally suffocated to death in a plastic bag in
November of 1993.[165] Yet Padilla included a photo in her book of McVeigh laughing and playing with the little boy.

And according to Terry
Nichols, McVeigh had tried to revive the infant for nearly half an hour, and had called the paramedics — a response apparently out-of-
character with the actions of a deranged sociopathic killer.[166]
Captain Jesus Rodriguez, who commanded McVeigh during Desert Storm, described him as a friend who was "really compassionate" and
"really cared" when Rodriguez's brother-in-law died in an accident.[167]
Further evidence of McVeigh's humanity can be found in a letter he wrote to the Lockport Union-Sun & Journal on March 10, 1992: (See
appendix for full text)
To buy your meat in a store seems so innocent, but have you ever seen or thought how it comes to be wrapped up so neatly
in cellophane?

First, cattle live their entire lives penned up in cramped quarters, never allowed to roam freely, bred for one purpose when
their time has come.And according to Terry
Nichols, McVeigh had tried to revive the infant for nearly half an hour, and had called the paramedics — a response apparently out-of-
character with the actions of a deranged sociopathic killer.[166]
Captain Jesus Rodriguez, who commanded McVeigh during Desert Storm, described him as a friend who was "really compassionate" and
"really cared" when Rodriguez's brother-in-law died in an accident.[167]
Further evidence of McVeigh's humanity can be found in a letter he wrote to the Lockport Union-Sun & Journal on March 10, 1992: (See
appendix for full text)
To buy your meat in a store seems so innocent, but have you ever seen or thought how it comes to be wrapped up so neatly
in cellophane?

First, cattle live their entire lives penned up in cramped quarters, never allowed to roam freely, bred for one purpose when
their time has come.

The technique that I have personally seen is to take cattle, line them up side by side with their heads and necks protruding
over a low fence, and walk from one end to the other, slitting their throats with either machete or power saw.

Unable to run or
move, they are left there until they bleed to death, standing up.

Would you rather die while living happily or die while leading a miserable life?

You tell me which is more "humane."
Does a "growing percentage of the public" have any pity or respect for any of the animals which are butchered and then sold
in the store?

Or is it just so conveniently "clean" that a double standard is allowed?

The mainstream press twisted the context of McVeigh's letter.

In his [book], A Force Upon the Plain, author Kenneth Stern writes: "McVeigh
said he thought a human being was, by nature, 'a hunter, a predator.' He also asked: 'Is civil war imminent?The mainstream press twisted the context of McVeigh's letter.

In his [book], A Force Upon the Plain, author Kenneth Stern writes: "McVeigh
said he thought a human being was, by nature, 'a hunter, a predator.' He also asked: 'Is civil war imminent?

Do we have to shed blood to
reform the current system?'"[168] Stern takes two unrelated letters written by McVeigh, then craftily combines them to suggest that the
humane killing of animals is actually part and parcel of McVeigh's bloodthirsty desire to kill human beings.[169]
Reality paints a much different picture of Timothy James McVeigh however.

In February of 1996, Ron Rice and Carol Moore of the American
Board of Forensic Examiners were asked to produce a profile of McVeigh's personality based on a handwriting analysis.[170] Both Rice and
Moore characterized McVeigh as an introverted person — what they term an "Apollonian" personality — "a steady, unemotional, organized
individual who [is] not devoid of emotion/passion, but more apt to value reason over passion." Like Sheffield Anderson, who described
McVeigh as a "thinking type person," the examiners stated that McVeigh was "head-oriented." "They tend to be distrustful of feeling in the
belief that following one's feelings can lead to trouble," the report stated.

"Rarely, will he allow his emotional expressions to be directed at
another person out of fear of hurting them…."
The report concluded with the observation that Timothy McVeigh "is a military man… his heart and soul belongs to the military of the U.S.

Government.

In a non-military environment, McVeigh will not undertake any form of overt hostility that will be harmful to others or dangerous
to himself….

It is not logical that he would undertake any action against our government in which others would be hurt or killed.

To do so
would violate everything he stands for."[171]
In April of 1991, McVeigh put his heart and soul into his long-awaited dream of becoming a Green Beret.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is not logical that he would undertake any action against our government in which others would be hurt or killed. To do so
would violate everything he stands for."[171]
In April of 1991, McVeigh put his heart and soul into his long-awaited dream of becoming a Green Beret. On March 28 he reported to Camp
McCall, the Special Forces Assessment and Selection (SFAS) training facility west of Fort Bragg, for the grueling 21-day assessment
course. But McVeigh, who had kept himself in top shape by doing 400 push-ups a day and marching around the post with a 100 pound pack

--- PAGE BREAK ---was now out of shape and he knew it.

The Bradley gunner who had served in the Persian Gulf for four months was also drained from the
stress of combat.

As the recruits stood at attention, the instructor asked several of the recently returned war veterans if they wanted to return to their unit to get
back in shape.

One of the soldiers yelled that they were ready, so out of a sense of gung-ho pride, nobody backed out.

The first day of testing was devoted to psychological screening.

McVeigh claims he had no problem with the psychological tests, which
included the Adult Personality Inventory, the Minnesota Multiple Phase Personality Test, and a sentence completion exam designed by Army
psychologists.

The second day of tests began with an obstacle course which McVeigh passed with ease.

After lunch, the recruits were led on a high-speed
march with 50 pound rucksacks.

Yet new boots tore into McVeigh's feet during the five mile march, and with the worst yet to come, he and
another recruit, David Whitmyer, decided to drop out.

McVeigh signed a Voluntary/Involuntary Withdrawal from the SFAS school.

His single
sentence explanation read: "I am not physically ready, and the rucksack march hurt more than it should."[172]
The mainstream press jumped on his initial failure to make the Special Forces.

He was "unable to face the failure" stated the New York
Times.

"He washed out on the second day."[173]
"There were no second chances," claimed the Washington Post.

"His spirit was broken."[174]
These reports suggested that McVeigh had failed the psychological screening tests.

"Military officials said that preliminary psychological
screening had shown him to be unfit," lauded the ever-wise voice of the New York Times."His spirit was broken."[174]
These reports suggested that McVeigh had failed the psychological screening tests.

"Military officials said that preliminary psychological
screening had shown him to be unfit," lauded the ever-wise voice of the New York Times.

"[He] saw his cherished hope of becoming a
Green Beret shattered by psychological tests."[175] "It was apparently a blow so crushing that he quit the Army and went into a psychic
tailspin."[176]
Media pundits quickly backed up their armchair analyses' with statements from several of McVeigh's former buddies.

"Anyone who puts all that effort into something and doesn't get it would be mentally crushed," said Roger Barnett, the driver of McVeigh's
Bradley.

"He wasn't the same McVeigh.

He didn't go at things the way he normally did….

He didn't have the same drive.

He didn't have his
heart in the military anymore."[177]
"He always wanted to do better than everyone," said Captain Terry Guild, "and that (Green Berets) was his way of trying to do it.

He took a
lot of flak.

He was really down on himself."[178]
McVeigh claimed "That's a bunch of bunk," in response to the allegations.

"Any realist knows that if you develop blisters on the second
day… you're not going to make it."[179] [Still, the self-styled psychoanalysts of the mainstream press made much of his disappointment,
asserting knowingly that it was the crux of McVeigh's "burgeoning torment."]
[Apparently, the "psychojournalists" at the Times had never bothered to check with officials at the SFAS school.

"McVeigh dropped out of the
course on the second day," said Colonel Ken McGraw, Information Officer at the Special Operations Command at Fort Bragg.

"His
psychological test work would not have even been graded yet."]
According to McVeigh's attorney Stephen Jones, his Army records indicate that his SFAS psychological tests weren't graded until April of
1995."McVeigh dropped out of the
course on the second day," said Colonel Ken McGraw, Information Officer at the Special Operations Command at Fort Bragg.

"His
psychological test work would not have even been graded yet."]
According to McVeigh's attorney Stephen Jones, his Army records indicate that his SFAS psychological tests weren't graded until April of
1995.

The "military official" who leaked the story about McVeigh's "psychological test failure" turned out to be none other than FBI Agent
John R.

Hersley, who testified to this repeatedly during the Federal Grand Jury hearings.

Apparently, Hersley never told the grand jurors that
he was moonlighting as an Army psychologist.

Although McVeigh may have been genuinely disappointed by his initial failure, he added that the school's commander had invited the
decorated war veteran to try out again whenever he felt he was ready.

It seems McVeigh was not too disappointed to score a perfect 1,000
points during a Bradley gunner competition six months later at Fort Riley, earning him another Army commendation and the honor of the
division's "Top Gun," a rare achievement.

An Army evaluation also rated him "among the best" in leadership potential and an "inspiration to
young soldiers."[180]
Yet in spite of McVeigh's achievements, "a bit of doubt started to surface" in his mind about a potential for a career in the military.[181]
Although a friend said "I swear to God he could have been Sergeant Major of the Army — he was that good of a soldier," McVeigh
apparently was having second thoughts.

Most of these, his Army buddies said, stemmed from the military's downsizing then in progress.

He
also confided to his friend Dave Dilly that without being a Green Beret, the Army wouldn't be worth the effort.

"I think he felt he got a raw
deal, and wanted out," said Littleton.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He
also confided to his friend Dave Dilly that without being a Green Beret, the Army wouldn't be worth the effort. "I think he felt he got a raw
deal, and wanted out," said Littleton. Given McVeigh's achievements — his quick rise to sergeant, his medals of commendation, the distinction of being "Top Gun," and the
extremely high praise of his superiors, one has to wonder what his real motives were. It seems highly unlikely that given the massive effort
he put into his military career, he would take an early out on such presumptive pretenses. McVeigh was a spit and polish soldier with a top

--- PAGE BREAK ---notch record.

He was totally devoted to the military.

He had served in combat, earning several medals.

If anything he was due for his next
promotion.

The commander of the Special Forces school had even invited him to try out again in a few months.

As Sheffield Anderson said,
"He seemed destined for a brilliant career in the military."
These observations were backed up by McVeigh's sister Jennifer.

"I thought it was going to be his career.

He was definitely a career military
type.

That was his life, you know.

His life revolved around that."
It hardly seems likely that the ambitious soldier who had recently signed on for another four year hitch would opt out so easily.

Yet, on
December 31, 1991, Sergeant McVeigh took an early discharge from the Army, and went back to his home town of Pendleton, NY.

The Manchurian Candidate
To fulfill his military obligation, McVeigh signed on with the Army National Guard in Buffalo, where he landed a job as a security guard with
Burns International Security.

McVeigh was assigned to the night shift, guarding the grounds of Calspan Research, a defense contractor that
conducts classified research in advanced aerospace rocketry and electronic warfare.

In a manner mirroring his conduct in the service, McVeigh became the consummate security guard.

Calspan spokesman Al Salandra told
reporters that McVeigh was "a model employee." Yet according to media accounts, McVeigh had lost his confidence… and his cool.

"Timmy was a good guard," said former Burns supervisor Linda Haner-Mele.

"He was "always there prompt, clean and neat.

His only quirk,"
according to Mele, "was that he couldn't deal with people.

If someone didn't cooperate with him, he would start yelling at them, become
verbally aggressive.

He could be set off easily.If someone didn't cooperate with him, he would start yelling at them, become
verbally aggressive.

He could be set off easily.

According to an article in the Post, co-workers at a Niagara Falls convention center where he was assigned described him as "emotionally
spent, veering from passivity to volcanic anger." An old friend said he looked "like things were really weighing on him."[182]
"Timmy just wasn't the type of person who could initiate action," said Mele.

"He was very good if you said, 'Tim watch this door — don't let
anyone through.' The Tim I knew couldn't have masterminded something like this and carried it out himself.

It would have had to have been
someone who said: 'Tim, this is what you do.

You drive the truck….'"
Mele's account directly contradicts the testimony of Sergeant Chris Barner and former Private Ray Jimboy, both of whom served with
McVeigh at Fort Riley, and claimed that he was a natural leader.[183] Backing up Jimboy was McVeigh's friend and Calspan co-worker, Carl
Lebron, who described McVeigh as "intelligent and engaging — the sort of person who could be a leader."[184]
Mele's testimony also contradicts McVeigh's service record, which rated him "among the best" in leadership potential and an "inspiration to
young soldiers."[185] "He had a lot of leadership ability inside himself," said Barner….

He had a lot of self confidence."
Apparently, "Something happened to Tim McVeigh between the time he left the Army and now," said Captain Terry Guild.

"He didn't really carry himself like he came out of the military," said Mele.

"He didn't stand tall with his shoulders back.

He kind of slumped
over." She recalled him as silent, expressionless, with lightness eyes, but subject to explosive fits of temper.

"That guy didn't have an
expression 99 percent of the time," she added.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He kind of slumped
over." She recalled him as silent, expressionless, with lightness eyes, but subject to explosive fits of temper. "That guy didn't have an
expression 99 percent of the time," she added. "He was cold."[186]
Colonel David Hackworth, an Army veteran who interviewed McVeigh for Newsweek, concluded that McVeigh was suffering from a "postwar
hangover." "I've seen countless veterans, including myself, stumble home after the high-noon excitement of the killing fields, missing their
battle buddies and the unique dangers and sense of purpose," wrote Hackworth. "Many lose themselves forever."[187]
Although such symptoms may be seen as a delayed reaction syndrome resulting from the stress of battle, they are also common symptoms
of mind-control. The subject of mind-control or hypnosis often seems emotionally spent, as though he had been through a harrowing ordeal. While visiting friends in Decker, Michigan, McVeigh complained that the Army had implanted him with a miniature subcutaneous transmitter,
so that they could keep track of him.[188] He complained that it left an unexplained scar on his buttocks and was painful to sit on.[189]
To the public, unfamiliar with the bewildering lexicon of government mind-control research, such a claim may appear as the obvious rantings
of a paranoiac. But is it? Miniaturized telemetrics have been part of an ongoing project by the military and various intelligence agencies to test the effectiveness of
tracking soldiers on the battlefield. The miniature implantable telemetric device was declassified long ago. As far back as 1968, Dr. Stuart
Mackay, in his textbook entitled Bio-Medical Telemetry, reported, "Among the many telemetry instruments being used today, are miniature
radio transmitters that can be swallowed, carried externally, or surgically implanted in man or animal. They permit the simultaneous study of
behavior and physiological functioning.…"[190]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Dr.

Carl Sanders, one of the developers of the Intelligence Manned Interface (IMI) biochip, maintains, "We used this with military personnel
in the Iraq War where they were actually tracked using this particular type of device."[191]
It is also interesting to note that the Calspan Advanced Technology Center in Buffalo (Calspan ATC), where McVeigh worked, is engaged in
microscopic electronic engineering of the kind applicable to telemetrics.[192] Calspan was founded in 1946 as Cornell Aeronautical
Laboratory, which included the "Fund for the Study of Human Ecology," a CIA conduit for mind-control experiments by émigré Nazi scientists
[and others under the direction of CIA Doctors Sidney Gottlieb, Ewen Cameron, and Louis Jolyn West].

According to mind-control researcher Alex Constantine, "Calspan places much research emphasis on bioengineering and artificial
intelligence (Calspan pioneered in the field in the 1950s)." In his article, "The Good Soldier," Constantine states:
Human tracking and monitoring technology are well within Calspan's sphere of pursuits.

The company is instrumental in
REDCAP, an Air Force electronic warfare system that winds through every Department of Defense facility in the country.

A
Pentagon release explains that REDCAP "is used to evaluate the effectiveness of electronic-combat hardware, techniques,
tactics and concepts." The system "includes closed-loop radar and data links at RF manned data fusion and weapons control
posts." One Patriot computer news board reported that a disembodied, rumbling, low-frequency hum had been heard across
the country the week of the bombing.

Past hums in Taos, NM, Eugene and Medford, OR, Timmons, Ontario and Bristol, UK
were most definitely (despite specious official denials) attuned to the brain's auditory pathways….

The Air Force is among Calspan's leading clients, and Eglin AFB has farmed key personnel to the company.Past hums in Taos, NM, Eugene and Medford, OR, Timmons, Ontario and Bristol, UK
were most definitely (despite specious official denials) attuned to the brain's auditory pathways….

The Air Force is among Calspan's leading clients, and Eglin AFB has farmed key personnel to the company.

The grating irony
— recalling McVeigh's contention he'd been implanted with a telemetry chip — is that the Instrumentation Technology Branch
of Eglin Air Force Base is currently engaged in the tracking of mammals with subminiature telemetry devices.

According to an
Air Force press release, the biotelemetry chip transmits on the upper S-band (2318 to 2398 MHz), with up to 120 digital
channels.

There is nothing secret about the biotelemetry chip.

Ads for commercial [albeit somewhat simpler] versions of the device have appeared in
national publications.

Time magazine ran an ad for an implantable pet transceiver in its June 26, 1995 issue — ironically enough — opposite
an article about a militia leader who was warning about the coming New World Order.

While monitoring animals has been an unclassified
scientific pursuit for decades, the monitoring of humans has been a highly classified project which is but a subset of the Pentagon's
"nonlethal" arsenal.

As Constantine notes, "the dystopian implications were explored by Defense News for March 20, 1995:
Naval Research Lab Attempts To Meld Neurons And Chips: Studies May Produce Army of "Zombies."
Future battles could be waged with genetically engineered organisms, such as rodents, whose minds are controlled by
computer chips engineered with living brain cells....

The research, called Hippocampal Neuron Patterning, grows live neurons
on computer chips.

"This technology that alters neurons could potentially be used on people to create zombie armies,"
Lawrence Korb, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, said.The research, called Hippocampal Neuron Patterning, grows live neurons
on computer chips.

"This technology that alters neurons could potentially be used on people to create zombie armies,"
Lawrence Korb, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, said.

It's conceivable, given the current state of the electronic mind-control art, a biocybernetic Oz over the black budget rainbow,
that McVeigh had been drawn into an experimental project, that the device was the real McCoy….[193]
The Defense Department newsletter may have been discussing is the successor to the "Stimoceiver," developed in the late 1950s by Dr.

Joseph Delgado and funded by the CIA and the Office of Naval Research.

The Stimoceiver is a tiny transceiver implanted in the head of a
control subject, which can then be used to modify emotions and control behavior.

According to Delgado, "Radio Stimulation of different points in the amygdala and hippocampus [areas of the brain] in the four patients
produced a variety of effects, including pleasant sensations, elation, deep, thoughtful concentration, odd feelings, super relaxation, colored
visions, and other responses....

One of the possibilities with brain transmitters is to influence people so that they confirm with the political
system.

Autonomic and somatic functions, individual and social behavior, emotional and mental reactions may be invoked, maintained,
modified, or inhibited, both in animals and in man, by stimulation of specific cerebral structures.

Physical control of many brain functions is a
demonstrated fact.

It is even possible to follow intentions, the development of thought and visual experiences."[194]
As Constantine points out, the military has a long and sordid history of using enlisted men and unwitting civilians for its nefarious
experiments, ranging from radiation, poison gas, drugs and mind-control, to spraying entire U.S.

cities with bacteriological viruses to test
their effectiveness.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is even possible to follow intentions, the development of thought and visual experiences."[194]
As Constantine points out, the military has a long and sordid history of using enlisted men and unwitting civilians for its nefarious
experiments, ranging from radiation, poison gas, drugs and mind-control, to spraying entire U.S. cities with bacteriological viruses to test
their effectiveness. The most recent example involves the use of experimental vaccines tested on Gulf War veterans who are currently
experiencing bizarre symptoms, not the least of which is death. When attorneys representing the former soldiers requested their military
medical files, they discovered there was no record of the vaccines ever being administered.[195]
Timothy McVeigh may have unkowningly been an Army/CIA guinea pig involved in a classified telemetric/mind-control project — a
"Manchurian Candidate."
Recent history is replete with cases of individuals who calmly walk into a restaurant, schoolyard, or post office and inexplicably begin
shooting large numbers of people, as though they were in a trance. What appear like gruesome but happenstance events to the casual
observer raises red flags to those familiar with CIA "sleeper" mind-control experiments. Such cases may be indicative of mind-control

--- PAGE BREAK ---experiments gone horribly wrong.

A recent case occurred in Tasmania, where Martin Bryant calmly walked around a tourist site in May of 1996 methodically shooting and
killing over 35 people.

Interestingly, Bryant was in possession of an assault rifle that had been handed in to police in Victoria as part of a gun
amnesty program, but mysteriously wound up in Bryant's hands before the massacre.[196]
[An anti-social loner, Bryant had also recently returned from a solitary two-week trip to the U.S., ostensibly to visit "Disneyland." Australian
Customs agents noticed he carried no luggage, and was acting strangely.

They took him to the hospital to be examined as a possible drug
courier, but found nothing.

Had Bryant actually visited Disneyland, or had he visited a different type of playground — one inhabited by the
mind-control masters of the CIA?

In the wake of the massacre, Australia underwent wholesale gun confiscation of its citizenry.

Not surprisingly, Australia and New Zealand
have long served as a playground for the CIA, who reportedly played a major role in the overthrow of Australian Prime Minister Gough
Whitlam, directed from the CIA's super-secret Pine Gap facility.

It has also been reported that the CIA has been testing subliminal TV
transmissions to influence the outcome of elections.[197]]
As in Bryant's case, many of these bizarre killers meekly surrender to authorities after their sprees.

When he was stopped by State Trooper
Charles Hanger for a missing license plate, McVeigh was carrying a loaded Glock 9mm pistol.

Although he could have easily shot and killed
the officer, McVeigh informed him that he was carrying a concealed weapon, then meekly handed himself over for arrest.

Why does a man
who has just allegedly killed 169 innocent people, balk at killing a cop on a lonely stretch of highway?Although he could have easily shot and killed
the officer, McVeigh informed him that he was carrying a concealed weapon, then meekly handed himself over for arrest.

Why does a man
who has just allegedly killed 169 innocent people, balk at killing a cop on a lonely stretch of highway?

[This suggests that either McVeigh
was innocent, was acting under orders by some branch of the government, or was under some form of mind-control.]
After McVeigh's arrest in Noble County, Assistant Attorney General Mark Gibson stated, "There stood a polite young man who gave polite,
cooperative answers to every question.

It was like the dutiful soldier," Gibson said.

"Emotions don't come into play, right and wrong don't
come into play.

What happens next doesn't come into play… his mood was so level, it was unnatural.

I looked at him and realized I felt no
repulsion or fear.

It was like there was an absence of feeling.

He exuded nothing."
Charles Hanger, the officer who arrested McVeigh, related his account to Gibson, who told the Times, "And when he grabbed his gun and
there was no reaction, no shock, that didn't seem right, either."[198]
This "absence of feeling" among a man who had just allegedly committed a heinous crime may well have been indicative of a
psychologically controlled agent — or "sleeper" agent — a person trained to carry out a preconceived order upon command.

Such an
individual could conceivably carry out a horrendous crime, then have no recollection of the event.

Far from the stuff of spy novels or
conspiracy theories, sleeper agents have been developed and used by intelligence agencies for decades.

[The CIA's interest in mind control originally dates back to WWII when the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), under Stanley Lovell,
developed the idea of hypnotizing German prisoners to re-infiltrate the Third Reich and assassinate Adolph Hitler.Far from the stuff of spy novels or
conspiracy theories, sleeper agents have been developed and used by intelligence agencies for decades.

[The CIA's interest in mind control originally dates back to WWII when the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), under Stanley Lovell,
developed the idea of hypnotizing German prisoners to re-infiltrate the Third Reich and assassinate Adolph Hitler.

After the war, the OSS, re-
formed as the CIA, brought Nazi doctors and scientists to work for them under the cover of Operation PAPERCLIP.

Some of these included
war criminals spirited away through Nazi-Vatican "Ratlines" under the aegis of Operation OMEGA, conveniently missing their day in court at
the Nuremberg War Crimes Tribunal.

Their colleagues wound up in Central and South America, drained from the best of Nazi blood under
Operation VAMPIRE.]
The CIA's plunge into the netherworld of mind-control began in 1950 with Project BLUEBIRD, authorized by Allen Dulles after it was
discovered that recently released Korean War prisoners had been subjected to hypnosis.

In 1952, BLUEBIRD was re-named Operation
ARTICHOKE, under the authority of Deputy CIA Director Richard Helms, and coordinated by CIA Security Officer Shefield Edwards.

[By the late 1950s, the military was well on its way to investigating the potential for "brainwashing," a term coined by the CIA's Edward
Hunter to explain the experience of American POWs in Korea.

In 1958 the Rand Corporation produced a report for the Air Force entitled
"The Use of Hypnosis in Intelligence and Related Military Situations," stating that "In defense applications, subjects can ce specifically
selected by a criterion of hypnotizability, and subsequently trained in accordance with their anticipated military function..."[199]]
Taking the Hippocratic Oath on behalf of the CIA for ARTICHOKE was Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

[By the late 1950s, the military was well on its way to investigating the potential for "brainwashing," a term coined by the CIA's Edward
Hunter to explain the experience of American POWs in Korea. In 1958 the Rand Corporation produced a report for the Air Force entitled
"The Use of Hypnosis in Intelligence and Related Military Situations," stating that "In defense applications, subjects can ce specifically
selected by a criterion of hypnotizability, and subsequently trained in accordance with their anticipated military function..."[199]]
Taking the Hippocratic Oath on behalf of the CIA for ARTICHOKE was Dr. Sidney Gottlieb, mind-control emeritus of the CIA's Technical
Services Division (TSS), the real-life counterpart to the mythical "Q-Branch" of Ian Fleming fame. TSS was engaged developing the usual
James Bond spy toys — miniature cameras, shooting fountain pens, and, under the tutelage of Dr. Gottlieb, poisons that could kill in
seconds, leaving no trace. With Operation ARTICHOKE however, the CIA broadened its horizons into the realm of psychological warfare. ARTICHOKE was one of the CIA's later-day attempts to create an electronically-controlled Manchurian Candidate. In the 1950s, under the code name MKULTRA, the CIA set up safe houses in San Francisco and other cities where they performed
experiments on unwitting subjects using LSD and other drugs. In 1960, Edwards recruited ex-FBI agent Robert Maheu, who approached
Mob bosses Sam Giancana and John Rosselli to form CIA hit-teams to assassinate foreign leaders using the techniques acquired by
Gottlieb's TSS. [The first on their list was Cuban leader Fidel Castro, who they planned to assassinate by poisoning his food and even his
cigars. The work of Gottlieb and his CIA associates can be traced directly back to Nazi war criminals such as Dr. Joseph Mengele of
Auschwitz.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---By 1963, reported the Senate Intelligence Committee, the number of operations and subjects had increased substantially.

But as far back as
1960, TSS officials, working along with the Counterintelligence staff, had expanded their hypnosis programs to coincide with their MKULTRA
experiments.

According to John Marks in his book The Search for the Manchurian Candidate, "the Counterintelligence program had three
goals: (1) to induce hypnosis very rapidly in unwitting subjects; (2) to create durable amnesia; and (3) to implant durable and operationally
useful posthypnotic suggestion."
By 1966, MKULTRA had spawned Operation MKSEARCH, the use of biological, chemical, and radiological substances to induce
psychological and physiological changes in the CIA's victims.

MKSEARCH spawned Operations OFTEN and CHICKWIT, using biological,
chemical, and radiological substances to induce psychological and physiological changes.

Operations THIRD CHANCE and DERBY HAT
involved the Army's Military Intelligence Group's (M.I.G.) surreptitious dosing of victims in Europe and the Far East.

MKDELTA, an offshoot
of MKULTRA, involved spraying massive doses of LSD and other drugs by the Army over areas inhabited by Viet Cong.[200]
[The preeminent don of the CIA's psychological warfare program was Dr.

Louis Jolyn West.

As part of his MKULTRA experiments, West
decided to send an elephant at the Oklahoma City Zoo on an LSD trip.

Apparently, the poor creature did not appreciate the effects of Dr.

West's Magical Mystery Tour.

It died several hours later.

A close associate of Drs.

Cameron and Gottlieb, West studied the use of drugs as "adjuncts to interpersonal manipulation or assault," and
was among one of the pioneers of remote electronic brain experimentation, including telemetric brain implants on unwitting subjects.A close associate of Drs.

Cameron and Gottlieb, West studied the use of drugs as "adjuncts to interpersonal manipulation or assault," and
was among one of the pioneers of remote electronic brain experimentation, including telemetric brain implants on unwitting subjects.

West's good friend, Aldous Huxley, suggested that he hypnotize his subjects before administering LSD, in order to give them post-hypnotic
suggestions which would orient the drug-induced experience in a "desired direction."
Interestingly, West was the psychiatrist who examined Jack Ruby, the assassin of Lee Harvey Oswald.

Ruby's assertion that an ultra-Right-
wing cabal was responsible for JFK's murder, and his refusal to admit insanity, led West to conclude that he was paranoid and mentally ill.

West placed Ruby on anti-depressants, which did little to modify his claims of conspiracy.

He died of cancer two years later, claiming to the
end that he had been injected with cancerous biological material.

West also examined Sirhan Sirhan, a controlled hypo-patsy who allegedly killed Robert F.

Kennedy.

Currently chairman of UCLA's
Neuropsychiatric Institute, West headed the American Psychological Association (APA) trauma response team that rushed to Oklahoma City
in the wake of the disaster.

I interviewed Dr.

West by phone.

While confirming that he had indeed traveled to Oklahoma City with his team, the eminent psychiatrist
made a curious "Freudian Slip." When asked if he had examined McVeigh, he said, "No, I haven't been asked to do that.

I think his lawyer
wouldn't want someone he didn't trus… pick."[201]
West nevertheless told me that someone from the FBI's Behavioral Sciences unit would have interviewed McVeigh.

In fact the FBI's
Behavioral Sciences unit did interview the prisoner.I think his lawyer
wouldn't want someone he didn't trus… pick."[201]
West nevertheless told me that someone from the FBI's Behavioral Sciences unit would have interviewed McVeigh.

In fact the FBI's
Behavioral Sciences unit did interview the prisoner.

John Douglas of the FBI's Psychological Profile Unit was later quoted in the Times as
saying, "This is an easily controlled and manipulated personality." What Douglas is unwittingly confirming is that McVeigh was perfect
material for the CIA's psychological mind-control program.

By the late 1950s, many German or Eastern European émigrés brought to work in the U.S.

had been farmed out to universities such as
Cornell, UCLA, and Stanford… and to people like Dr.

Ewen Cameron and Dr.

Jolyn West.[202]
In the wake of the 1965 Watts riot, West proposed to then California Governor Ronald Reagan a "Center for the Study and Reduction of
Violence," which was to have included a psychosurgery unit for performing lobotomies, and a seven-day-a-week, around-the-clock electro-
shock room.

Associates of Dr.

Cameron's, employed at the time in Nazi-run detention centers in South America, would be called on to
perform lobotomies on unsuspecting patients, with the full approval of Governor Reagan.[203]
One of the more brazen of the emerging coterie of brainwashing enthusiasts, Cameron received his funding through the Rockefeller and
Gerschickter Foundations, which was channeled into the innocuous sounding Society for the Investigation of Human Ecology at Cornell.

Cameron performed hundreds of lobotomies and electroshock treatments at the behest of the CIA on unwitting patients in prisons and
mental hospitals, and at his beloved Allen Memorial Institute in Montreal.[204]
It is interesting to note that McVeigh claimed he was subjected to psychological torture while in prison.[205] He was placed in a cell with a
guard watching him around the clock, who wasn't allowed to speak to him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cameron's, employed at the time in Nazi-run detention centers in South America, would be called on to
perform lobotomies on unsuspecting patients, with the full approval of Governor Reagan.[203]
One of the more brazen of the emerging coterie of brainwashing enthusiasts, Cameron received his funding through the Rockefeller and
Gerschickter Foundations, which was channeled into the innocuous sounding Society for the Investigation of Human Ecology at Cornell. Cameron performed hundreds of lobotomies and electroshock treatments at the behest of the CIA on unwitting patients in prisons and
mental hospitals, and at his beloved Allen Memorial Institute in Montreal.[204]
It is interesting to note that McVeigh claimed he was subjected to psychological torture while in prison.[205] He was placed in a cell with a
guard watching him around the clock, who wasn't allowed to speak to him. The lights in his cell were kept on 24-hours-a-day, depriving him
of sleep — a standard technique designed to break down a subject's psychological barriers. Eventually, McVeigh called in a psychiatrist to
help treat his anxiety — a psychiatrist, perhaps, trained by Dr. Cameron.]
CIA psychiatrist Dr. Ewen Cameron was also the progenitor of "psychic driving," a technique whereby the psychiatrist or controller
repeatedly plays back selected words or phrases to break down a person's psychological barriers and open up his unconscious.[206] Such
techniques would be eagerly incorporated into the CIA's program for creating Manchurian Candidates — programmed hypno-killers who
could be unleashed at the behest of the Agency to kill upon command. An account of the discussion surrounding the creation of a
Manchurian Candidate is revealed by JFK researcher Dick Russell in his book, The Man Who Knew Too Much:

--- PAGE BREAK ---In 1968, Dr.

Joseph L.

Bern of Virginia Polytechnic Institute questioned authorities on hypnosis about whether the creation of
a "Manchurian Candidate" was really feasible.

As Author Bowart recounted one expert's response to Dr.

Bernd: "I would say
that a highly skilled hypnotist, working with a highly susceptible subject, could possibly persuade the subject to kill another
human…" Another believed it was even possible, through posthypnotic suggestion, to make a subject unable to recall such an
act: "There could be a conspiracy, but a conspiracy of which the principal was unaware."[207]
This "psychic driving" appears to have impacted Sirhan Sirhan.

Charles McQuiston, a former Army intelligence officer who did a
Psychological Stress Evaluation of voice recordings of Sirhan, said, "I believe Sirhan was brainwashed under hypnosis by the constant
repetition of words like, 'You are nobody, you're nothing, the American dream is gone'.… Somebody implanted an idea, kill RFK, and under
hypnosis the brainwashed Sirhan accepted it."[208] The accused assassin insisted that he couldn't recall even the murder.

CIA contract agent Colonel William Bishop explained to Russell some of the rudiments of the CIA's mind-control operations:
"There were any number of psychological or emotional factors involved in peoples' selection.

Antisocial behavior patterns,
paranoia or the rudiments of paranoia, and so on.

But when they are successful with this programming — or, for lack of a
better term, indoctrination — they could take John Doe and get this man to kill George and Jane Smith.

He will be given all the
pertinent information as to their location, daily habits, etc.

Then there is a mental block put on this mission in his mind.He will be given all the
pertinent information as to their location, daily habits, etc.

Then there is a mental block put on this mission in his mind.

He
remembers nothing about it."[209]
On March 3, 1964, CIA Director John McCone sent a memo to Secret Service chief James Rowley stating that after his surgery at the
hospital in Minsk, [Russia], Oswald might have been "chemically or electronically 'controlled'… a sleeper agent.

Subject spent 11 days
hospitalized for a minor ailment which should have required no more than three days hospitalization at best."[210]
Even J.

Edgar Hoover told the Warren Commission, "Information came to me indicating that there is an espionage training school outside of
Minsk — I don't know whether it is true — that he [Oswald] was trained at that school to come back to this country to become what they call
a 'sleeper,' that is, a man who will remain dormant for three or four years and in case of international hostilities rise up and be used."[211]
[According to JFK researchers Art Ford and Lincoln Lawrence in their book, Were We Controlled?, Lee Harvey Oswald was a programmed
assassin with a malfunctioning electrical implant in his brain.[212] Herman Kimsey, A veteran Army counterintelligence operative and former
CIA official, told JFK researcher Hugh MacDonald, "Oswald was programmed to kill….

Then the mechanism went on the blink and Oswald
became a dangerous toy without direction."[213]]
The CIA's interest in producing the perfect programmed assassin took a new bent, when in 1965, the Agency, in cooperation with the DoD,
set up a secret program for studying the effects of electromagnetic radiation, or microwave (EM) weapons at the Army's Advanced Research
Projects Agency (ARPA) at the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research.Edgar Hoover told the Warren Commission, "Information came to me indicating that there is an espionage training school outside of
Minsk — I don't know whether it is true — that he [Oswald] was trained at that school to come back to this country to become what they call
a 'sleeper,' that is, a man who will remain dormant for three or four years and in case of international hostilities rise up and be used."[211]
[According to JFK researchers Art Ford and Lincoln Lawrence in their book, Were We Controlled?, Lee Harvey Oswald was a programmed
assassin with a malfunctioning electrical implant in his brain.[212] Herman Kimsey, A veteran Army counterintelligence operative and former
CIA official, told JFK researcher Hugh MacDonald, "Oswald was programmed to kill….

Then the mechanism went on the blink and Oswald
became a dangerous toy without direction."[213]]
The CIA's interest in producing the perfect programmed assassin took a new bent, when in 1965, the Agency, in cooperation with the DoD,
set up a secret program for studying the effects of electromagnetic radiation, or microwave (EM) weapons at the Army's Advanced Research
Projects Agency (ARPA) at the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research.

The project was inspired by the Soviets, who had been dousing the
American Embassy in Moscow with a lethal dose of microwaves, causing many of its personnel to die from cancer.[214]
Yet causing degenerative diseases was not the main goal of the DoD/CIA EM weapons research, code named PANDORA.

The spooks were
interested in the effects of microwaves on controlling a person's behavior.

By 1973, both the Americans and the Soviets were far along in
their mind-control applications, using technology such as pulsed microwave audiograms and acoustical telemetry to create voices in a
subject's mind, or erase his mind completely.[215]]
Causing degenerative diseases was not the main goal of the DoD/CIA EM weapons research, code named PANDORA.The spooks were
interested in the effects of microwaves on controlling a person's behavior.

By 1973, both the Americans and the Soviets were far along in
their mind-control applications, using technology such as pulsed microwave audiograms and acoustical telemetry to create voices in a
subject's mind, or erase his mind completely.[215]]
Causing degenerative diseases was not the main goal of the DoD/CIA EM weapons research, code named PANDORA.

The spooks were
interested in the effects of microwaves on controlling a person's behavior.

By 1973, both the Americans and the Soviets were far along in
their mind-control applications, using technology such as pulsed microwave audiograms and acoustical telemetry to create voices in a
subject's mind, or erase his mind completely.[216] With the advent of EM technology, scientists could bypass the need for electrodes
implanted in the brain, and control their subjects directly.

Lawrence described a technology called RHIC-EDOM, or "Radio Hypnotic
Intracerebral Control and Electronic Dissolution of Memory." According to Lawrence:
It is the ultra-sophisticated application of post-hypnotic suggestion triggered at will by radio transmission.

It is a recurring state,
re-induced automatically at intervals by the same radio control.

An individual is brought under hypnosis.

This can be done
either with his knowledge — or without it — by use of narco-hypnosis, which can be brought into play under many guises.

He
is then programmed to perform certain actions and maintain certain attitudes upon radio signal.

Lawrence went on to state that "through the use of radio-waves and ultra-sonic signal tones… It in effect blocks memory of the moment."[217]
"Such a device has obvious applications in covert operations designed to drive a target crazy with 'voices' or deliver undetected instructions
to a programmed assassin," states Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He
is then programmed to perform certain actions and maintain certain attitudes upon radio signal. Lawrence went on to state that "through the use of radio-waves and ultra-sonic signal tones… It in effect blocks memory of the moment."[217]
"Such a device has obvious applications in covert operations designed to drive a target crazy with 'voices' or deliver undetected instructions
to a programmed assassin," states Dr. Robert Becker.[218]
Thane Eugene Cesar, a reported accomplice in the murder of Robert Kennedy, held a vaguely-defined job at Lockheed, a CIA/PANDORA
contractor. Retired Lockheed engineer Jim Yoder told former FBI agent William Turner that Cesar worked floating assignments in an "off-
limits" area operated by the CIA.[219] The parallel is strikingly similar to that of Timothy McVeigh, who worked at Calspan, another high-tech

--- PAGE BREAK ---military contractor engaged in top-secret telemetric work.

The preeminent don of CIA's psychological warfare program (MKULTRA), Dr.

Louis Jolyon "Jolly" West, sent an Oklahoma City Zoo
elephant careening on a massive LSD trip, triggering its death hours later.

Studying the use of drugs as "adjuncts to interpersonal
manipulation or assault," Jolly West was among the pioneers of remote electronic brain experimentation on unwitting subjects.

Aldous
Huxley passed on the idea to West that he hypnotize subjects before administering LSD, orienting drug-induced experience toward a
"desired direction."
West was given the job of examining Jack Ruby, Lee Harvey Oswald's killer.

Ruby's refusal to admit insanity, and his belief that a right-wing
cabal was responsible for JFK's murder, led West to conclude Ruby was mentally ill, the proper candidate for anti-depressants.

Ruby died of
cancer two years after the exam, claiming to have been injected with malignant biological material.

West also examined Sirhan Sirhan, [who
may have been] a hypno-patsy jailed for murdering Robert Kennedy.

On March 31, less than three weeks before the bombing, McVeigh appeared at the Imperial Motel in Kingman.

For the next 12 days,
according to owner Helmut Hofer, he just sat there, emerging only for meals or to pay his bill.

He had no visitors, made few phone calls, and
barely disturbed the furnishings.

No one ever heard his television, and his car never moved from its spot outside.[220]
"That's the funny thing," said Hofer.

"He didn't go out.

He didn't make phone calls.

He didn't do anything.

He just sat up there and brooded."
["He always had been a brooder…" added the Times, throwing a bit of instant psychoanalysis on the situation.[221]]
To Earline Roberts, the housekeeper at the Oak Cliff rooming house where Oswald stayed just prior to the assassination, "Mr.He didn't do anything.

He just sat up there and brooded."
["He always had been a brooder…" added the Times, throwing a bit of instant psychoanalysis on the situation.[221]]
To Earline Roberts, the housekeeper at the Oak Cliff rooming house where Oswald stayed just prior to the assassination, "Mr.

Lee" probably
seemed like a brooder too, staying in his room, having no visitors and never socializing.[222]
Yet it is unlikely that McVeigh simply rented a room at the Imperial for 12 days to brood.

Like Oswald, McVeigh was probably told to wait
somewhere until he was contacted.

Perhaps it was a pre-arranged date; perhaps he was waiting for a phone call; or perhaps McVeigh was
simply put on ice, waiting to be activated by some sort of signal.

It is possible McVeigh's anger at the Federal Government was stoked by a
more mysterious enemy, one that he couldn't see or feel… but hear.

One of the most famous documented cases of "hearing voices" was that of Dennis Sweeny, the student activist who shot and killed his
mentor Allard Lowenstein.

Lowenstein, who marched in the 1964 Freedom Summer in Mississippi, had campaigned for Robert Kennedy and
Adlai Stevenson, and ran the National Student Association before the CIA took over.

Lowenstein, who was also friends with CIA
propagandist William F.

Buckley, had attempted to prove that a great conspiracy was responsible for the deaths of Martin Luther King and
the Kennedys.

(At the time he was assassinated, he was helping Ted Kennedy win the 1980 presidential election.)[223]
One fine day, Sweeny calmly walked into the middle of Rockefeller Center and pumped seven bullets into his mentor.

He then sat down, lit a
cigarette, and waited for the police to arrive.

"Sweeny claimed that the CIA, with Lowenstein's help, had implanted a telemetric chip in his
head 15 years earlier, and had made his life an unbearable torment.He then sat down, lit a
cigarette, and waited for the police to arrive.

"Sweeny claimed that the CIA, with Lowenstein's help, had implanted a telemetric chip in his
head 15 years earlier, and had made his life an unbearable torment.

Voices were transmitted through his dental work, he said, and he
attempted to silence them by filing down his false teeth.

Sweeny blamed CIA "controllers" for his uncle's heart attack and the assassination
of San Francisco mayor George Moscone."[224]
Moscone and City Supervisor Harvey Milk met their deaths at the hands the infamous "Twinkie" assassin — former City Supervisor Dan
White.

White earned the curious title due his attorney's novel defense — that his client was under the influence of a heavy dose of sugar at
the time of the murders.

More likely, White was under the influence of a heavy dose of hypnosis.

Like McVeigh, White had been in the military, serving a tour of duty in Vietnam.

After leaving the police department in 1972, White took an
extended vacation since known as White's "missing year."
"He broke all contact with friends and family.

He kept no records of the trip, purchased no travel tickets, did not use a credit card.

He later
accounted for his mystery year by explaining that he'd worked a stint as a security guard in Alaska."
White subsequently moved back to San Francisco, where joined the Fire Department.

Like McVeigh, White's work record was untarnished,
though like the enigmatic soldier, he was known to erupt in embarrassing temper tantrums.

As Constantine writes in The Good Soldier:
While campaigning for the Board of Supervisors, he spoke as if he was "programmed," according to local labor leader Stan Smith.

During
Board sessions, he was known to slip into spells of silence punctuated by goose-stepping walks around the Supervisors' chambers.[225]
One of the more recent cases of murder by suggestion was the assassination of Naval Commander Edward J.

Higgins.--- PAGE BREAK ---

During
Board sessions, he was known to slip into spells of silence punctuated by goose-stepping walks around the Supervisors' chambers.[225]
One of the more recent cases of murder by suggestion was the assassination of Naval Commander Edward J. Higgins. Higgins was shot
five times in the Pentagon parking lot by Carl Campbell, who claimed that the CIA had implanted a microchip in him that controlled his mind. [226]
To those who believe that such electronically-manipulated scenarios are the stuff of fantasy, they should take note that no less than three
support groups currently exist in the U.S. to deal with the trauma of military and intelligence agency brainwashing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Yet the hypnosis and drugging of adults is not by far the worst example of the CIA's nefarious efforts at developing programmed assassins.

Other efforts involve the use of children, programmed while they are still young (See the "Finders" case), and the use of cults, often run by
former military and intelligence officers.

The use of cults provides a convenient cover for experiments that could not otherwise be conducted
out in the open.

Any resultant behavioral anomalies can then simply be attributed to the peculiarities of the "cult."[227]
One program for the recruitment of programmed operatives is called Operation OPEN EYES.

According to a former Navy Intelligence officer
and SEAL team leader attached to the CIA, "Clear Eyes" are the programmed victims of OPEN EYES.

The operation involves canvassing
the country for individuals who have few close friends or relatives.

They are then put under a progressive series of gradually intensified
hypnosis, where the subject's personality is "overwritten."
At level four, diverse programs can be written or overwritten into the brain.

Any command is accepted at this level.

At that level you can give
the test subject a complete personality, history and make him/her believe anything the program requires for the accomplishment of any
desired project.

He is then given a new life in a new state and town.

Driver's license, car, bank account, passport, credit cards, B.C., and all
the small things, such as photos of his family (that don't really exist).

Subject and patient (one and the same) has now an agenda (that he
believes is his own) and is prepared for level five hypnosis.

At this stage, very carefully a code work or sequence of numbers or a voice
imprint is etched into his brain.

That is commonly known and referred to as the trigger that will activate subject to action.At this stage, very carefully a code work or sequence of numbers or a voice
imprint is etched into his brain.

That is commonly known and referred to as the trigger that will activate subject to action.

He then lives a very normal and sometimes useful life, until subject is required to perform the program implanted/written into level four
hypnosis at the point of activating the trigger, subject is beyond recall.

That's why a level five person can only be approached after his/her
operation.

There is no actual recall in the subconscious program of any of the hypnosis.

If an act of violence had been perpetrated, subject
will not be able to associate with the deed.

Only shrinks trained in this particular form of sub mental behavior will find any tracks leading to
post level one or two mind-control.

I have personally witnessed level one to five programming, and was myself subject of level three programming.

Due to the fact that subject has such high IQ (preferably around 130-140 subject is very quick to learn anything fed to him/her.

All major
patriot groups, and normal workers and workers in big [government contract] corporations have at least one or more "sleepers" attached to
them.

Now it must be clear to you the various levels used by the intel community to get their job done.

Remember Jonestown?

It was one of ours
that went sour because a Clear Eyes was in the group.

When he began firing on the runway, it all self destructed.

The man (Congressman
Leo Ryan) who was killed, knew it was a government operation.

Clear Eyes was accidentally — through a lone sequence — activated!

There
was no way to stop the killings.

They were all programmed to at least level three, the culties themselves.

There were only three deaths
attributable to cyanide, the rest died of gunfire.

Now you know a little more about our line of work.There were only three deaths
attributable to cyanide, the rest died of gunfire.

Now you know a little more about our line of work.

I am glad I am out of it.[228]
An ex-CIA agent interviewed by researcher Jim Keith claims to have knowledge of biological warfare testing and "special medical and Psy-
ops (psychological operations) facilities at Fort Riley," where Timothy McVeigh was stationed.

(Recall that McVeigh took a Psy-ops course at
Ft.

Riley) This agent stated that experimentation is conducted "in collaboration with the whole range of intelligence agencies, FBI, CIA, NSA,
the works." The agent also told Keith that he had witnessed special psychological operations performed on the crew of the Pueblo naval
vessel at Fort Riley, and at Fort Benning, Georgia (where did his basic training), prior to the ship's capture under mysterious circumstances
by the North Koreans.

Fort Benning is also home to the notorious School of the America's, where the CIA and the Special Forces have
trained Latin American death squad leaders for over three decades.

Fort Riley was also home to a mysterious plague of murders and
shootings right around the time of the Oklahoma City bombing.

On March 2, 1995, PFC Maurice Wilford shot three officers with a 12-gauge
shotgun before turning the gun on himself.

On April 6, Brian Soutenburg was found dead in his quarters after an apparent suicide.[229]
Is it possible these incidents were the result of some psychological testing or experiment gone awry?

Given the Army's opprobrious history
of psychological research and covert experiments on its own personnel, it is not inconceivable.

The incidents seem indicative of the shooting
death of Commander Edward J.

Higgins by Carl Campbell, who claimed he was implanted with a microchip.

[It is interesting to note that] after his arrest, McVeigh was taken to Tinker Air Force Base.

Why he would be taken to a military installation is
unclear.

Perhaps Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Why he would be taken to a military installation is
unclear. Perhaps Dr. West was on hand, waiting to see whether McVeigh's microchip was still snug. Was Timothy McVeigh in fact
manipulated through the use of a subcutaneous transceiver, implanted in him without his knowledge? Was he a "sleeper agent,"
programmed to do a dirty deed and have no memory of it afterwards? Interestingly, Richard Condon's classic play, The Manchurian
Candidate made its debut in Oklahoma City exactly one year after the bombing. It is possible the real Manchurian candidate made his debut
on April 19, 1995. Given the long and sordid history of Pentagon/CIA mind-control operations, such a scenario is certainly possible.[230]
What's also possible is that McVeigh was simply lied to. Someone — whom McVeigh thought was working for the government, gave him a
cover story — convinced him that he was on an important, top secret mission. McVeigh's seeming indifference upon his arrest may simply
have been indicative of his understanding that he was working for this agency, had simply delivered a truck as he was told, and had not, in
fact, killed anyone. [It is possible that] McVeigh was concerned about military cut-backs when he quit the Army in December of 1991. It is possible that his
increased job duties were the reason he quit the National Guard in June of 1992. It is also possible, highly probable in fact, that he was
secretly offered a more lucrative career — one that promised more excitement, adventure, and money… in the intelligence services.

--- PAGE BREAK ---To the intelligence community, Timothy McVeigh would have been exactly what they were looking for — a top-notch but impressionable
young soldier who is patriotic and gung-ho to a fault.

A taciturn individual who follows orders without hesitation, and who knows when to
keep his mouth shut, a prerequisite of any good intelligence operative.

According to former CIA agent Victor Marchetti, the CIA currently does its most "fruitful" recruiting in the armed forces.[231] Intelligence
agencies regularly recruit from the military, and military files are routinely reviewed for potential candidates — those who have proven their
willingness and ability to kill on command and without hesitation — those whose combat training and proficiency with weapons make them
excellent candidates for field operations.

McVeigh had already taken the Psychological Operations (PSYOPS) Course while he was at Fort
Riley.

Whether he knew it or not, McVeigh was well on his was way to a career in covert intelligence.

An intelligence agency wouldn't have to
search hard for a man like McVeigh.

His above-average military record, and the fact that he was a candidate for the Special Forces, would
have made him a natural choice.

Especially his try-out for Special Forces.

The Special Forces were created as the covert military arm of the
Central Intelligence Agency.

According to Lt.

Colonel Daniel Marvin (Ret.), "almost all of the independent operations within the Green Berets
were run by the CIA"[232]
Moreover, McVeigh was just beginning to espouse militia-type views.

This observation, and the fact that he was racist, would have made him
a perfect operative to infiltrate any far right-wing or white supremacist group.

Likewise it would have made him the perfect patsy to implicate
in connection with any right-wing group.

[As Dave Dilly told the Post, "The militias really recruit, and he's exactly what they're looking for.… They could catch him easy.Likewise it would have made him the perfect patsy to implicate
in connection with any right-wing group.

[As Dave Dilly told the Post, "The militias really recruit, and he's exactly what they're looking for.… They could catch him easy.

He had all the
same interests as them; they're just a little more fanatical."
What Dilly is describing to the letter, although he is unaware of it, is the modus operandi of the intelligence community.

If McVeigh was
recruited by one of the intelligence branches, it is possible that he was recruited by someone posing as a militia member.

As far as fanatics
go, there is no one group of people more fanatical than the "lunatic fringe" of the intelligence community.

In short, McVeigh] possessed all
the qualities that would have made him an excellent undercover operative… and a perfect fall-guy.

In May of 1992, McVeigh was promoted to lieutenant at Burns Security, and wrote his National Guard commander that his civilian job
required his presence.

"But the letter was real vague," said his commander.

"It didn't say just what this new job was." Approximately nine
months later, when McVeigh was going to be promoted to supervisor, he suddenly quit, saying that he had "more pressing matters to attend
to."
Just what these "pressing matters" were is not exactly clear.

According to co-worker Carl Lebron, McVeigh told him he was leaving to take a
civilian position with the Army in Kentucky painting trucks.

He later told Lebron that he became privy to a top-secret project at Calspan called
"Project Norstar," which, according to McVeigh, involved bringing drugs into the country via miniature submarine.

He told his friend that he
was afraid that those responsible for Project Norstar were "coming after him," and he had to leave.He later told Lebron that he became privy to a top-secret project at Calspan called
"Project Norstar," which, according to McVeigh, involved bringing drugs into the country via miniature submarine.

He told his friend that he
was afraid that those responsible for Project Norstar were "coming after him," and he had to leave.

While this explanation may strike one as bizarre, McVeigh wrote his sister Jennifer while he was still in the Army telling her that he had been
picked for a highly specialized Special Forces Covert Tactical Unit (CTU) that was involved in illegal activities.

The letter was introduced to
the Federal Grand Jury.

According to former grand juror Hoppy Heidelberg, these illegal activities included "protecting drug shipments,
eliminating the competition, and population control." While all the details of the letter aren't clear, Heidelberg said that there were five to six
duties in all, and that the group was comprised of ten men.

Such units are nothing new.

During the Vietnam War, CIA Director William Colby and Saigon Station Chief Ted Shackley (who also ran a
massive heroin smuggling operation) created what they called Provincial Reconnaissance Units (PRUs), which would capture, torture, and
kill suspected Viet Cong leaders.[233]
Former Army CID investigator Gene Wheaton also described a covert unit created by the highly secretive NRO (National Reconnaissance
Office), which used assassination and torture to eliminate so-called enemies of the state.

In 1985, Wheaton was approached by "security
consultants" to Vice President Bush's "Task Force on Combating Terrorism" who were working for USMC Lt.

Colonel Oliver North (who
served under Shackley in Vietnam) and Associate Deputy FBI Director Oliver "Buck" Revell.

"They wanted me to help create a 'death squad'
that would have White House deniability to assassinate people they would identify as 'terrorists,'" said Wheaton.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Colonel Oliver North (who
served under Shackley in Vietnam) and Associate Deputy FBI Director Oliver "Buck" Revell. "They wanted me to help create a 'death squad'
that would have White House deniability to assassinate people they would identify as 'terrorists,'" said Wheaton. Code-named "Zeta Diogenes" in the USAF subset, this secret project, according to Wheaton, "was created in a rage by the covert
intelligence leadership after the failed Bay-of-Pigs operation against Cuba in 1961." Wheaton claims the program continues to the present
day.[234]
Anyone who prefers to think that agencies of the U.S. government are above assassinating U.S. citizens, not to mention senior U.S. officials
where expedient, may wish to bear in mind the following testimony given by Colonel Daniel Marvin, a highly decorated Special Forces
Vietnam veteran. While going through Special Forces training at Fort Bragg in 1964, Marvin's group was asked if any members would like to
volunteer to take special assassination training on behalf of the CIA, eliminating Americans overseas who posed "national security risks."
About six people, himself included, volunteered. "The CIA had agents there all the time at Fort Bragg, in the Special Warfare Center Headquarters," said Marvin. "My commanding officer,

--- PAGE BREAK ---Colonel C.W.

Patton, called me up to his office one day in the first week… and he said, "Dan, go out and meet the 'Company' man standing
there underneath the pine trees, waiting to talk to you."
Ironically, Marvin had been motivated to join the Special Forces by the death of President Kennedy, who had conferred upon the unit their
distinctive and coveted green berets.

Marvin began his assassination training in the Spring of 1964.

"…during one of the coffee breaks, I
overheard one of the [CIA] instructors say to the other one, 'Well, it went pretty well in Dallas.

Didn't it?'"
Marvin said his group was shown "16 millimeter moving pictures that we assumed were taken by the CIA of the assassination, on the ground
there at Dallas.… We were told that there were actually four shooters.

There was one on the roof of the lower part of the Book Depository,
and there was one shooter who was in front of and to the right of the vehicle.

And I'm not sure whether it was on the Grassy Knoll area that
they were speaking of, or, as some people have reported, [a shooter firing] out of a manhole to the right-front of the vehicle."
He also added that there were two additional snipers with spotters stationed on the routes that the motorcade would have used to travel to
the hospital.

If the spotter determined that Kennedy had survived, he was to finish him off.

["They used the assassination of President Kennedy as a prime example of how to develop the strategy for the assassination of a world
leader as a conspiracy, while making it look like some 'lone nut' did it.…
"The stronger a patriot you are, the more important it is to you that you do whatever is necessary for your flag, for your country," he adds.

"It
makes you the most susceptible type of person for this kind of training.

You are the ultimate warrior.

You're out there to do for your country
what nobody else is willing to do.You are the ultimate warrior.

You're out there to do for your country
what nobody else is willing to do.

I had no qualms about it at all."]
Marvin claimed his "assassination" training was reserved solely for citizens outside the United States, not on U.S.

soil.

"The Mafia lists were
the ones being used [to kill Americans] in the continental United States," said Marvin.

"We were being used overseas." That was, until he
was asked to kill an American Naval officer — Lt.

Commander William Bruce Pitzer, the X-ray technician who filmed the Kennedy autopsy,
"as he was, supposedly, a traitor, about to give secrets to the enemy.

It turned out that these 'secrets' were the photos of the real autopsy of
President John F.

Kennedy.

And the 'enemy' was us!"[235]
When he found out that his assignment was to be conducted in the U.S., he refused.

"…that wasn't my mission," said Marvin.

"When I took
my training, I volunteered to do this kind of thing overseas where it could be covered, as far as the family goes.

I had a wife and three
children.

If I were to accept that mission to kill Commander Pitzer right here in the United States, I would have been dropped from the rolls
immediately as a deserter so that it would cover me for taking off and taking care of that mission.…"[236][237]
Such a "cover" tactic appears to closely parallel that of Timothy McVeigh, who "dropped out" of Special Forces training before embarking on
his bewildering and mysterious journey (ala: Dan White) prior to the bombing.

Still another, more well-documented reference to such illegal operations is made by Wall Street Journal reporter Jonathan Kwitny in his best-
selling book, The Crimes of Patriots.If I were to accept that mission to kill Commander Pitzer right here in the United States, I would have been dropped from the rolls
immediately as a deserter so that it would cover me for taking off and taking care of that mission.…"[236][237]
Such a "cover" tactic appears to closely parallel that of Timothy McVeigh, who "dropped out" of Special Forces training before embarking on
his bewildering and mysterious journey (ala: Dan White) prior to the bombing.

Still another, more well-documented reference to such illegal operations is made by Wall Street Journal reporter Jonathan Kwitny in his best-
selling book, The Crimes of Patriots.

Kwitny describes how rogue CIA agents Edwin Wilson (who reported to Shackley) and Frank Terpil
were not only illegally selling huge quantities of C-4 plastic explosives and sophisticated assassination gear to the Libyans, but were actually
hiring anti-Castro Cubans from Shackley's old JM/WAVE program, and U.S.

Green Berets to assassinate Qaddafi's political opponents
abroad.

(See Chapter 14)
Some U.S.

Army men were literally lured away from the doorway of Fort Bragg, their North Carolina training post.

The GIs
were given every reason to believe that the operation summoning them was being carried out with the full backing of the
CIA.…[238]
Could this be the same group McVeigh claims he was recruited for?

Considering the allegations of the Federal Government against
McVeigh, the fact that he was chosen for such a clandestine and blatantly illegal government-sponsored operation is highly revealing.

According to Heidelberg's account of the letter, McVeigh turned them down.

"They picked him because he was gung-ho," said Heidelberg.

"But they misjudged him.

He was gung-ho, but in a sincere way.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"But they misjudged him. He was gung-ho, but in a sincere way. He really loved his country."[239]
In another version of the story reported by Ted Gunderson, an intelligence informant indicated that McVeigh was "trained to work for the CIA
in their illegal drug operations," then "became disenchanted with the government, and voiced his displeasure." At that point he was sent to
Fort Riley for discharge, at which point John Doe 2 "was planted on him" and "orchestrated the bombing." According to Gundersen's
informant, McVeigh was a victim of the CIA's mind-control project, Project MONARCH.[240]
Whether McVeigh turned down this illegal covert operations group, or worked for them for a short time, it is highly likely that he was working
in some fashion for the government. There is simply no logical explanation for his giving up a hard-earned and brilliant military career, then
subsequently quitting his security guard job on the eve of his promotion to take a job painting old army trucks, or go tooling around the
country in a beat-up car hawking used firearms and militia paraphernalia. If McVeigh was recruited, his "opting out" of the military was most likely a cover story for that recruitment. Former Pentagon counter-
intelligence officer Robert Gambert told Kennedy assassination researcher Dick Russell of the mysterious activities of his cousin Richard

--- PAGE BREAK ---Case Nagell, "Dick played the role of a disgruntled ex-Army officer….

he was really still operational, in an undercover capacity, for the Army
Intelligence….

They're not gonna' trust anybody who's active military or a friendly retiree.

They're gonna trust somebody who's going around
griping against the military, against the intelligence operations, against the government…."[241]
After McVeigh's mysterious departure from the Army, his friend Robin Littleton received a strange letter from him.

On it was illustrated a
cartoon depicting a skull and crossbones with the caption "so many victims, so little time."[242] Whether he meant it as a joke, or whether it
contained a hidden message, is unclear.

But considering the letter he wrote to Jennifer regarding the CTU, its implications are unsettling.

A patriotic soldier like Timothy McVeigh didn't have a lot of reasons to gripe against the government.

But, said the Post: "McVeigh was by
now railing at virtually every aspect of American government, and at least beginning to consider a violent solution, as reflected in letters he
wrote to the Lockport Union-Sun & Journal in February and March 1992, (entitled 'America Faces Problems.')"[243]
Crime is out of control.

Criminals have no fear of punishment.

Prisons are overcrowded so they know they will not be
imprisoned long.

This breeds more crime, in an escalating cyclic pattern.

Taxes are a joke.

Regardless of what a political candidate "promises," they will increase.

More taxes are always the answer to
government mismanagement.

They mess up, we suffer.

Taxes are reaching cataclysmic levels, with no slowdown in sight.

The "American Dream" of the middle class has all but disappeared, substituted with people struggling just to buy next week's
groceries.

Heaven forbid the car breaks down!

Politicians are further eroding the "American Dream" by passing laws which are supposed to be a "quick fix," when all they are
really designed for is to get the official re-elected.Heaven forbid the car breaks down!

Politicians are further eroding the "American Dream" by passing laws which are supposed to be a "quick fix," when all they are
really designed for is to get the official re-elected.

These laws tend to "dilute" a problem for a while, until the problem comes
roaring back in a worsened form (much like a strain of bacteria will alter itself to defeat a known medication).

Politicians are out of control.

Their yearly salaries are more than an average person will see in a lifetime.

They have been
entrusted with the power to regulate their own salaries and have grossly violated that trust to live in their own luxury.

Racism on the rise?

You had better believe it!

Is this America's frustrations venting themselves?

Is it a valid frustration?

Who
is to blame for the mess?

At a point when the world has seen Communism falter as an imperfect system to manage people;
democracy seems to be headed down the same road.

No one is seeing the "big" picture.

Maybe we have to combine ideologies to achieve the perfect utopian government.

Remember, government-sponsored health
care was a Communist idea.

Should only the rich be allowed to live long?

Does that say that because a person is poor, he is a
lesser human being; and doesn't deserve to live as long, because he doesn't wear a tie to work?

What is it going to take to open up the eyes of our elected officials?

America is in serious decline!

We have no proverbial tea to dump; should we instead sink a ship full of Japanese imports?

Is a Civil War imminent?

Do we
have to shed blood to reform the current system?

I hope it doesn't come to that!

But it might.

Naturally, an ordinary gripe letter written by a person with above-average intelligence and political awareness was turned into a
manifestation of suppressed frustrations with attendant violent overtones by the psychojournalists of the mainstream press.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But it might. Naturally, an ordinary gripe letter written by a person with above-average intelligence and political awareness was turned into a
manifestation of suppressed frustrations with attendant violent overtones by the psychojournalists of the mainstream press. Yet, if McVeigh
was under the influence of some form of mind-control, it is possible the letter, and the one to Littleton, might have been the beginnings of a
plan to "sheep-dip" McVeigh as a disgruntled ex-military man.[244]
It is also possible that McVeigh, tasked with the responsibility of infiltrating the Militia Movement, became genuinely enamored with its ideals
and precepts. Whether or not this is true, McVeigh's letter to the Lockport Union-Sun & Journal and to Robin Littleton were two more nails
the government and the press would use to drive into McVeigh's coffin. But the major nails in McVeigh's coffin were yet to come. The Man Who Didn't Exist
In September of 1992 McVeigh sold his property in Olean, NY, and in early 1993 traveled to Kingman, Arizona to visit his old Army friend
Michael Fortier. Apparently McVeigh's father didn't approve of Tim's letters in the local paper. A friend of McVeigh's father told the Post that
one of the reasons McVeigh left was because "he wanted to be somewhere he could talk about what he really believed."
In Kingman, a rugged high-desert town where anti-government sentiments run strong, McVeigh would find like-minded souls. "Arizona is still
gun-on-the-hip territory, rugged individuals who don't like the government in their business," said Marilyn Hart, manager of the Canyon West
Mobile Park. After spending a brief time living with Fortier at his trailer home on East McVicar Road, McVeigh rented a trailer at Canyon West where he

--- PAGE BREAK ---lived from June to September of 1993, for $250-a-month.

The Times, the Post, Time and Newsweek all reported that McVeigh was a belligerent beer-drinking, loud music-playing slob who stayed at
the Canyon West Mobile Park and was subsequently evicted.

According to the Times:
Residents of the Canyon West Mobile Park drew a picture of an arrogant loner who worked as a security guard for a now-defunct trucking
company, lived with his pregnant girlfriend, expressed deep anger against the Federal Government and often caused trouble for his
neighbors.

"He drank a lot of beer and threw out the cans, and I always had to pick them up," Bob Rangin, owner of the park, was quoted as
saying.

He said he had frequent fights with Mr.

McVeigh, who often wore Army fatigues, over such things as loud rock music coming from his
trailer and a dog he kept in violation of his lease.[245]
"Just about any free time, he'd be walking down there, or across the railroad tracks and firing his guns," said Marilyn Hart, nodding at the
landscape of canyons and mesas around the Canyon West trailer park here that is one of the last known addresses of the man arrested for
bombing the Oklahoma City Federal Building.

"He just plain didn't care.

Didn't matter the time of day or night, he'd be out there shooting."
"Basically he just had a poor attitude, a chip on the shoulder kind of thing," said Rob Rangin, the owner of the trailer park.

"He was very
cocky.

He looked like he was ready to get in a fight pretty easy.

I'll tell you, I was a little afraid of him and I'm not afraid of too many people.

Mr.

McVeigh brought in a big brown dog in defiance of the camp regulations and left a wrecked car parked by his trailer, Mr.

Rangin said,
and even a nearly totally deaf neighbor, Clyde Smith, complained about the music.

Finally, said Mr.

Rangin, "he piled up so many violations,
I asked him to leave."
"When he did, the trailer was a disaster," he said.Finally, said Mr.

Rangin, "he piled up so many violations,
I asked him to leave."
"When he did, the trailer was a disaster," he said.

"It was trashed."[246]
Yet these accounts of McVeigh in the Times' on April 23 and 24 are totally contrary to their accounts on May 4 and December 31, which
describe him as a compulsive neat-freak, highly disciplined, respectful of his elders, and courteous to a fault.

Friends and acquaintances
interviewed also claimed that McVeigh was extremely quiet, never drank, and never had a date, much less a pregnant girlfriend.

Yet on April 23, the Post described how McVeigh played loud music, terrorized his neighbors, and was evicted from the park.

Then on July
2, the Post wrote:
When he moved into the Canyon West trailer park outside Kingman in 1993, his first act was to wash the dirty curtains and dust, vacuum
and scrub the entire trailer spotless, said owner Bob Rangin, who so liked McVeigh that he offered to lower the rent to keep the ex-soldier
from moving.

The Post also ran an interview with neighbor Jack Gohn, who said McVeigh was so "quiet, polite and neat and clean" that "if I had a
daughter in that age bracket, I would have introduced them."[247]
Said Marilyn Hart of Timothy McVeigh: "He was very quiet, very polite, very courteous, very neat, very clean, quiet, obeyed all the park rules.

He worked on the trailer, did some painting, he did some cleaning on it, he bought new furniture, things like that."[248]
In fact, what the Times was reporting on was not Timothy McVeigh at all, but a completely different man!

According to Hart, the mix-up came
when reporters from the Times were given information about Dave Heiden, who also was just out of the service, and had lived in trailer #19
(McVeigh lived in trailer #11).

"They thought it was the man who lived down below," said Hart.

"He was a slob.

But he was not Tim McVeigh.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"He was a slob. But he was not Tim McVeigh. The other guy took his guns out across the way and fired them all the time, he got drunk and got up on top of the trailer and did all kinds of
noisy things…."
According to Hart, after the man's girlfriend gave birth he sobered up. "Now they're married, the baby was born, he's straightened up his life,"
said Hart. "He straightened up his act, and he doesn't act that way any more at all."
Rangin called authors Kifner and McFadden of the Times to correct them. "I tried to tell them that wasn't McVeigh," said Rangin. "I called
that fellow at the Times who came down here, and told him they got the wrong guy…"[249]
According to the Times, it was a "clearly embarrassed" Mr. Rangin who had made the mistake, wrote the Times on April 25: He added that
the man he incorrectly recalled as Tim McVeigh "was like you would think" a suspect in a mass killing might be.[250]
This is clearly interesting considering that for days the Times had been painting McVeigh as a pathological, asexual neat freak who was
extremely polite. These traits, the Times' psychobabblists claimed, were indicators of a mass killer. The Times then claimed on the very next day that McVeigh was a belligerent slob with a pregnant girlfriend, and all of a sudden, these were
the characteristics of a mass killer. Obviously, to a propaganda screed like the New York Times, it didn't matter what McVeigh's actual
personality really was.

--- PAGE BREAK ---While in Kingman, McVeigh worked at different jobs through an agency called Allied Forces.

"He did a number of jobs that way," said Hart.

"He was a security guard, he did a number of different jobs.

But he always went to his job, did them well… any of the people who worked
with him said he didn't act odd, you know, it was totally out of character."[251]
McVeigh worked for a time at True Value Hardware, on Stockton Hill Road, a job that Fortier helped him get.

Paul Shuffler, the store owner,
said McVeigh "was a young and clean looking person so I gave him a job." According to Shuffler, "If he was a radical around here, I would
have noticed it pretty quick and I would have fired him.

Radicals don't last long around here because they just make a mess of things."[252]
McVeigh also worked for a spell at State Security.

The Times interview with co-worker Fred Burkett took a slightly different slant, painting his
co-worker McVeigh as an arrogant, gun-toting loner.

"He had a very dry personality," Burkett told the Times.

"He was not very outgoing, not
talkative and not really that friendly.

He wasn't a person that mingled.

He was a kind of by yourself kind of person, a loner."
Once, Burkett went with McVeigh on a target-shooting course in the desert, where McVeigh "pretty much went crazy," Burkett said.

After
running through the course, picking off targets with a Glock .45, McVeigh began "emptying clips on pretty much anything — trees, rocks,
whatever happened to be there."[253]
"Other than that, Mr.

Burkett said, "he seemed pretty much normal." "The only thing he ever indicated was that he didn't care much for the
United States Government and how they ran things," Mr.

Burkett said.

"He didn't care much for authority and especially when it concerned
the government."
Yet authorities have speculated that McVeigh's interests went beyond mere dissatisfaction with the Federal Government.Burkett said.

"He didn't care much for authority and especially when it concerned
the government."
Yet authorities have speculated that McVeigh's interests went beyond mere dissatisfaction with the Federal Government.

According to Carl
Lebron, McVeigh once brought him a newsletter from the Ku Klux Klan.[254] McVeigh was also fond of a book called the Turner Diaries.

Written by former physics professor and neo-Nazi William Pierce, the Turner Diaries was a fictionalized account of a white supremacist
uprising against the ZOG (Zionist Occupational Government).

The book, exceedingly violent and racist in tone, is a fictionalized account of
the overthrow of the Federal Government — which by that time had become the "Jewish-liberal-democratic-equalitarian plague" — by a
Right-wing paramilitary group called the "Organization," which then goes on to murder and segregate Jews and other "non-whites." The
protagonists also blow up FBI headquarters with a truck-bomb.

The Turner Diaries was found on Timothy McVeigh upon his arrest.

The book became the blueprint for a neo-Nazi group called The Order, which terrorized the Midwest in the early to mid '80s with a string of
murders and bank robberies.

Authorities have speculated that McVeigh, who carried the book with him constantly and sold it at gun shows,
was inspired by its screed to commit his terrible act of violence.

Yet McVeigh dismisses such suggestions as gibberish.

"I bought the book
out of the publication that advertised the book as a gun-rights book.

That's why I bought it; that's why I read it."[255]
In Kingman, McVeigh made friends with an ex-marine named Walter "Mac" McCarty."I bought the book
out of the publication that advertised the book as a gun-rights book.

That's why I bought it; that's why I read it."[255]
In Kingman, McVeigh made friends with an ex-marine named Walter "Mac" McCarty.

McVeigh apparently sought out the 72-year-old
McCarty for discussions in which he tried to make sense of the actions of the Federal Government at Ruby Ridge and Waco, and such
issues as the United Nations, the Second Amendment, and the "New World Order."
"I gathered that he was following the Right-wing, survivalist, paramilitary-type philosophy," McCarty said.

"I also got the sense that he was
searching for meaning and acceptance."[256]
McVeigh and Fortier also took handgun classes from McCarty during the summer of 1994, which is odd considering that the two men,
McVeigh especially, were extremely proficient in the use of firearms.

"Believe me, the one thing he did not need was firearms training, "said
Fred Burkett, McVeigh's co-worked at State Security.

"He was very good and we were impressed with his actions."[257]
McCarty himself was apparently suspicious of McVeigh's motives.

"They wanted to hear certain things from me to see if they could get me
involved," said McCarty.

"They definitely liked what they heard.

We were on the same page about the problems of America."
Why would McVeigh, the consummate firearms expert, bother taking a course in handguns?

Perhaps to be around like-minded individuals or
as a harmless diversion.

It is also possible, like the Lee Harvey Oswald impostor seen at the Texas rifle range, McVeigh was being sheep-
dipped.

"I know brainwashing when I see it, McCarty said.

"Those two boys had really gotten a good case of it." Perhaps McCarty was being
more literal than he realized.[258]
After the August 1994 passage of the Omnibus Crime Bill outlawing certain types of semi-automatic weapons, "McVeigh's demons finally
became unbearable," claimed the Times.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"I know brainwashing when I see it, McCarty said. "Those two boys had really gotten a good case of it." Perhaps McCarty was being
more literal than he realized.[258]
After the August 1994 passage of the Omnibus Crime Bill outlawing certain types of semi-automatic weapons, "McVeigh's demons finally
became unbearable," claimed the Times. "What will it take?" wrote McVeigh to Fortier, expressing his exasperation.[259]
It is possible that McVeigh had some contact with a local militia while in Kingman. According to reporter Mark Schafer of the Arizona
Republic, Fortier, who worked at True Value, knew Jack Oliphant, the elderly patron of the Arizona Patriots, an extreme Right-wing
paramilitary group. Oliphant had been caught in 1986 planning to blow up the Hoover Dam, the IRS and a local Synagogue. After the FBI
raid, Oliphant was sentenced to four years in jail, and the Arizona Patriots went underground. It is reported that Fortier, who sported a "Don't
Tread on Me" flag outside his trailer-home, was friendly with some of the Arizona Patriots, including Oliphant. According to federal authorities, McVeigh also left a note addressed to "S.C." on a utility pole near Kingman seeking "fighters not talkers." It

--- PAGE BREAK ---has been speculated that "S.C." is actually Steven Colbern, who lived in the nearby town of Oatman, and was friends with McVeigh.

(See
Chapter 5)
But federal authorities became very interested when they learned that a small explosion, related to a home-made bomb, had slightly
damaged a house down the road from the trailer park.

That house was owned by Frosty McPeak, a friend of McVeigh's who had hired him in
1993 to do security work at a local shelter.

When McPeak's girlfriend was arrested in Las Vegas on a bad credit charge, Clark Vollmer, a
paraplegic drug dealer in Kingman, helped bail her out.

In February of '95, Vollmer had asked McPeak to ferry some drugs.

He refused.

On
February 21, a bomb exploded outside McPeak's home.

When he went to Vollmer's house to confront him, he found Timothy McVeigh,
along with another man he didn't recognize.[260]
According to Mohave County Sheriff Joe Cook, the explosion "wasn't really a big deal" and probably wasn't related to the explosion in
Oklahoma City.[261]
What does Marilyn Hart think about McVeigh's connection to the local militias?

"I probably do know several people who are militia," said
Hart.

"But they don't advertise it, and they're not kooks.

To me, McVeigh didn't have the money.

The two other guys, Rosencrans and
Fortier, went to school with our children, and neither of them have money either.

And it took a good amount of money to pull this off.

"
"Obsessed With Waco"
Whether or not McVeigh's "demons" became "unbearable" after the passage of the Omnibus Crime Bill, his anger, along with that of millions
of others, would be justified by the governments' massacre of 86 innocent men, women and children at the Branch Davidian Seventh Day
Adventist Church near Waco the following April.

The ostensible purpose of the ATF's raid was to inspect the premises for illegal weapons."
"Obsessed With Waco"
Whether or not McVeigh's "demons" became "unbearable" after the passage of the Omnibus Crime Bill, his anger, along with that of millions
of others, would be justified by the governments' massacre of 86 innocent men, women and children at the Branch Davidian Seventh Day
Adventist Church near Waco the following April.

The ostensible purpose of the ATF's raid was to inspect the premises for illegal weapons.

Although the Davidians, who were licensed gun dealers, had invited the ATF to inspect their weapons, the agency declined; they were more
interested in staging a show raid to impress the public and increase their budgetary allowance.

In fact, the raid was code-named "Show
Time."
On February 28, 1993, without a proper warrant and without identifying themselves, over 100 agents stormed the Church compound.

Residents who answered the door were immediately fired upon.

At least one ATF helicopter began strafing the building, firing into the roof.

For the next hour, ATF agents fired thousands of rounds into the compound.

Many church members, including women, children and the
elderly, were killed by gunfire as they lay huddled in fear, the women attempting to cover the children with their bodies.

Church members
repeatedly begged the 911 operator to stop the raid.

In the ensuing battle, four ATF agents were killed, although there is evidence that
indicates they were killed by "friendly fire."
Several days later, the FBI took over.

Almost immediately, they began psychologically harassing the Church members with loud noises.

For
over a month and a half, the Davidians were tormented by the sounds of dying animals, religious chants, loud music, and their own voices.

Their electricity was cut off, and milk and other supplies necessary for young chidden was not allowed into the compound.

Bright lights were
shined on residents 24 hours-a-day, and armored vehicles began circling the compound, while flash-bang grenades were thrown into the
courtyard.Their electricity was cut off, and milk and other supplies necessary for young chidden was not allowed into the compound.

Bright lights were
shined on residents 24 hours-a-day, and armored vehicles began circling the compound, while flash-bang grenades were thrown into the
courtyard.

The media was kept at bay, fed propagandizing stories by FBI spokesmen that painted the Davidians as crazed cultists with desires for
apocalyptic self-destruction — dangerous wackos who stockpiled machine-guns and who abused their children.

The mass media happily
obliged, feeding these images to a gullible public.[262]
After a 51-day standoff, the newly appointed Attorney General, Janet Reno, approved an FBI plan to assault the compound with a highly
volatile form of tear-gas, proven deadly to children, who she was ostensibly trying to protect from "abuse." On April 19, tanks from the Texas
National Guard and the Army's Joint Task Force Six, in violation of the Posse Comitatus Act forbidding the use of military force against
private citizens, stormed the compound, firing hundreds of CS gas ferret rounds into the buildings.

The tanks also rammed the buildings
repeatedly, knocking holes in them, the official explanation being so that the residents could more easily escape.

Instead, what it did was
cause the buildings to collapse, killing dozens as they lay crouched in fear.

Kerosene lanterns knocked over by the tank ramming ignited the
highly flammable CS gas, and the holes created a flue effect through the buildings, caused by 30 mile and hour winds.

Immediately the
compound became a fiery inferno.

While some residents managed to escape, most were trapped inside, exphyxiated by the gas, crushed by falling debris, or burned alive.

Some who tried to escape were shot by FBI snipers.

One unarmed man who tried to enter the compound to be with his family was shot six
times, then left lying in a field while prairie dogs picked at his bones.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some who tried to escape were shot by FBI snipers. One unarmed man who tried to enter the compound to be with his family was shot six
times, then left lying in a field while prairie dogs picked at his bones. During the final siege, which lasted for six hours, firetrucks were
purposefully kept away. Bradley M-2 armored vehicles fitted with plows pushed in the still standing walls, burying those still trapped inside. A
concrete vault where approximately 30 people had sought refuge was blasted open with demolition charges, killing most of the people inside. When it was all over, the fire department was allowed inside the compound to pump water on the smoldering debris. Out of approximately
100 Church members, 86 perished, including 27 children. No FBI agent was injured. The remaining 11 Church members were put on trial for
attempted murder of federal agents. During the trial, government prosecutors repeatedly withheld, altered, and destroyed evidence. The
government even cut off electricity to the morgue, preventing autopsies on the bodies. The judge, recently under scrutiny by the "Justice" Department, also refused to allow the testimony of critical witnesses. Although the jury
found all 11 innocent, the judge reversed the verdict. Nine Davidians were imprisoned for attempting to defend their families. Some received

--- PAGE BREAK ---sentences up to 40 years.

While "General" Reno, in a symbolic gesture of public reconciliation, took "full responsibility" for the actions of the FBI, she never resigned or
served time.

In fact, Larry Potts, who led the raid on behalf of the FBI, was promoted.

The assault would be compared to the massacre of the Jews in Warsaw by the Nazis during WWII.

A bunch of religious fanatics.

Who'd
complain?

Who'd care?

Yet the government didn't count on the fact that a lot of people would care.

Millions in fact.

The murder of the Branch
Davidians would indeed become a wake-up call for a citizenry concerned about an increasingly tyrannical, lawless government.

A
government that would murder its own citizens with impunity, in fact with zeal.

A government that would lie to its citizens, and be accountable
to no one.[263]
In March of 1993, Timothy McVeigh traveled from Kingman to Waco to observe the 51-day standoff.

He was photographed by the FBI along
with others protesting the siege on the road outside the compound, selling bumper stickers out of his car.

Like Lee Harvey Oswald, who was
photographed at the Cuban embassy in Mexico (a claim made by the government, but never substantiated), the photo of McVeigh would be
added proof of his far-Right-wing associations.

A day and a half later, McVeigh drove to Decker, Michigan to be with his old Army buddy, Terry Nichols.

The Nichols family sat with McVeigh
in their living room as they watched M-2 Bradley assault vehicles storm the compound.

On April 19, they watched as the Branch Davidian
Church burnt to the ground.

"Tim did not say a word," said James Nichols, who watched the compound burn to the ground along with Tim
and his brother.

"We stood there and watched the live television footage as the church burned and crumbled… we couldn't believe it."[264]
McVeigh, who the Justice Department claimed was "particularly agitated about the conduct of the Federal Government in Waco," had a right
to be."Tim did not say a word," said James Nichols, who watched the compound burn to the ground along with Tim
and his brother.

"We stood there and watched the live television footage as the church burned and crumbled… we couldn't believe it."[264]
McVeigh, who the Justice Department claimed was "particularly agitated about the conduct of the Federal Government in Waco," had a right
to be.

McVeigh had offered his life to serve in the military, and now had seen that very same military massacring its own citizens.

He could
see the Green Berets from the Army's Joint Task Force Six advising the FBI, and had watched while Bradley armored vehicles — the same
vehicles he had served in — gassed and bulldozed the citizens of a country he had sworn to defend.

The Federal Building was blown up on April 19, the two year anniversary of the Waco conflagration.

Like millions of other citizens, McVeigh
was angry about the deadly raid.

He was particularly incensed about the participation of the Army's Joint Task Force Six, and about the
deployment of the Seventh Light Infantry during the Los Angeles riots in 1992, and the United Nations command over American soldiers in
Somalia, his former Army friend Staff Sergeant Albert Warnement told the Times.

"He thought the Federal Government was getting too
much power.

He thought the ATF was out of control."[265]
"I saw a localized police state," McVeigh told the London Sunday Times, "[and] was angry at how this had come about."[266]
"Their (the FBI's) actions in Waco, Texas were wrong.

And I'm not fixated on it...." he told Newsweek.

"It disturbed him," said Burkett.

"It was wrong, and he was mad about it.

He was flat out mad.

He said the government wasn't worth the
powder to blow it to hell."[267]
Perhaps rather coincidentally, McVeigh's sister Jennifer said that during her brother's November '94 visit to the McVeigh family home in
Lockport, he confided that he had been driving around with 1,000 pounds of explosives.He was flat out mad.

He said the government wasn't worth the
powder to blow it to hell."[267]
Perhaps rather coincidentally, McVeigh's sister Jennifer said that during her brother's November '94 visit to the McVeigh family home in
Lockport, he confided that he had been driving around with 1,000 pounds of explosives.

During his trial Prosecutor Beth Wilkinson asked
Jennifer if she had questioned her brother about why he was carrying so much.

"I don't think I wanted to know," she said.[268]
Just what was McVeigh doing driving around with explosives, and where did he acquire them?

Were these explosives part of the batch of
ammonium nitrate Terry Nichols had allegedly purchased from the Mid-Kansas Co-op on October 20, or perhaps the Dynamite and Tovex
the government alleged Nichols stole from the Martin Marietta rock quarry in September?

Obviously this, and McVeigh's expression of anger at the Federal Government, would become the foundation of their case against him.

In a
letter Tim wrote to Jennifer, he is highly critical of the ATF.

The anonymous letter, which was sent to the federal agency, was accompanied
by a note that read: "All you tyrannical motherfuckers will swing in the wind one day for your treasonous actions against the Constitution and
the United States." It concluded with the words, "Die, you spineless cowardice bastards."[269]
"He was very angry," recalled Jennifer McVeigh during her brother's trial.

"He thought the government gassed and murdered the people
there."
Jennifer also claimed her brother also wrote a letter to the American Legion saying that ATF agents "are a bunch of fascist tyrants." He
identified himself in the letter as a member of the "citizens' militia." He also sent his sister literature on the standoff at Ruby Ridge, the
Constitution, and even a copy of the Turner Diaries.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The anonymous letter, which was sent to the federal agency, was accompanied
by a note that read: "All you tyrannical motherfuckers will swing in the wind one day for your treasonous actions against the Constitution and
the United States." It concluded with the words, "Die, you spineless cowardice bastards."[269]
"He was very angry," recalled Jennifer McVeigh during her brother's trial. "He thought the government gassed and murdered the people
there."
Jennifer also claimed her brother also wrote a letter to the American Legion saying that ATF agents "are a bunch of fascist tyrants." He
identified himself in the letter as a member of the "citizens' militia." He also sent his sister literature on the standoff at Ruby Ridge, the
Constitution, and even a copy of the Turner Diaries. [270]
By the Spring of 1995, he told Jennifer not to send any more letters to him after May 1 because "G-men might get them." Then he sent her a
letter saying, "Something big is going to happen in the month of the Bull." He did not explain what that meant, but Jennifer looked in her
astrology book and saw that the "month of the Bull" was April. McVeigh also advised her to extend her Spring break — which began on April

--- PAGE BREAK ---8 — a bit longer than the planned two weeks, and instructed her to burn the letter.[271]
For McVeigh's part, he wrote that this "expression of rage" the government claimed was so key, was nothing more than "…part of my
contribution to defense of freedom, this call to arms.… I intend to become more active in the future.

I would rather fight with pencil lead than
bullet lead.

We can win this war in voting booth.

If we have to fight in the streets, I would not be so sure….

All too often in the past, we gutsy
gun owners have lost the battle because we have failed to fight.

The Brady Bill could have been defeated in Congress if gun owners had
become more involved in electing officials and communicating to those officials what was expected to them.… Start your defense today.

Stamps are cheaper than bullets and can be more effective."
This letter, found by authorities in McVeigh's car, speaks of a man committed to fighting for freedom as many Americans have, in the "voting
booth," and with pen and paper.

Yet lead prosecutor Joseph Hartzler would read this letter, along with quotes such as this one: "My whole
mindset has shifted… from the intellectual to the animal," into evidence at McVeigh's trial, in an attempt to prove that Timothy McVeigh was
committed to violence.

Like Lee Harvey Oswald, who was upset about the Cuban Bay of Pigs invasion and American foreign policy in general, a view he expressed
to his friends in Dallas, McVeigh was upset about the government's foreign policy, a view he expressed to his friends here.

"He wasn't happy
about Somalia," that if we could put the United States under basically UN command and send them to Somalia to disarm their citizens, then
why couldn't they come do the same thing in the United States?" Sergeant Warnement said.

McVeigh was also reportedly angry over the killings of Sammy and Vicki Weaver, who were killed by federal agents at their cabin in Ruby
Ridge, Idaho in August of 1992."He wasn't happy
about Somalia," that if we could put the United States under basically UN command and send them to Somalia to disarm their citizens, then
why couldn't they come do the same thing in the United States?" Sergeant Warnement said.

McVeigh was also reportedly angry over the killings of Sammy and Vicki Weaver, who were killed by federal agents at their cabin in Ruby
Ridge, Idaho in August of 1992.

Randy Weaver had become a fugitive wanted on a minor weapons violation.

During the stand-off, U.S.

Marshals had shot 14-year-old Sammy Weaver in the back, and had shot Vicki Weaver, Randy's wife, in the face as she stood at the cabin
door holding her infant daughter.

McVeigh had traveled to Ruby Ridge and came back convinced that federal agents intentionally killed the
Weavers.

Although his anger over Waco and Ruby Ridge hardly implicates McVeigh in the destruction of the Federal Building, the government would
make this one of the cornerstones of it case.

The press naturally jumped on the bandwagon.

When Jane Pauley of NBC's Dateline
interviewed Jennifer McVeigh about her thoughts on Waco, she said, "The way I saw it, the Davidians were just a group of people who had
their own way of living, perhaps different from the mainstream.

But they were never really harming anybody.

And to bring in all those tanks
and things like that to people who are just minding their own business, not harming anybody, I just — I don't think that's right."
But the dead, burned children at Waco were not what the producers at Dateline wanted the public to see.

Immediately after Jennifer's
statement, they cut to an image of the bombed-out day care center inside the Murrah Building.And to bring in all those tanks
and things like that to people who are just minding their own business, not harming anybody, I just — I don't think that's right."
But the dead, burned children at Waco were not what the producers at Dateline wanted the public to see.

Immediately after Jennifer's
statement, they cut to an image of the bombed-out day care center inside the Murrah Building.

"We… We've been hoping this wouldn't be
the case," said the live voice of an unidentified rescue worker, "but it is the case, there was a day-care inside the building."
Time ran a page dedicated to the Waco theory, stating, "The date of last week's bombing and the anniversary of the apocalyptic fire (notice
they don't say government massacre) at the Branch Davidian compound in Waco — has only gained in infamy, intricately bound as it is to
the mythologies of homegrown zealots like McVeigh."[272]
Sheep-Dipped
It would appear that the seed that gave root to McVeigh's "homegrown zeal" was incubated in a U.S.

government hothouse and fertilized by
a heaping dose of intelligence agency fanaticism.

After Waco, with the emergence of the Militia Movement, the stage would be set, the die would be cast — for Timothy McVeigh to be poured
into like a miniature lead soldier.

While the FBI and the press admitted that McVeigh didn't actually belong to any organized militia
organization, "there was considerable evidence that he sympathized with and espoused their beliefs," wrote the Times.

He voiced their ideas in conversations, he wrote letters expressing them, he read their literature and attended their meetings.

And he lived,
worked and traded weapons in areas where the paramilitary groups enjoy considerable support…[273]
Like Lee Harvey Oswald, who appeared to be an avid Communist, distributing leaflets on behalf of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee,
McVeigh would play the part of an avowed Right-winger, distributing literature about taxes, the Second Amendment, Waco and Ruby Ridge.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He voiced their ideas in conversations, he wrote letters expressing them, he read their literature and attended their meetings. And he lived,
worked and traded weapons in areas where the paramilitary groups enjoy considerable support…[273]
Like Lee Harvey Oswald, who appeared to be an avid Communist, distributing leaflets on behalf of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee,
McVeigh would play the part of an avowed Right-winger, distributing literature about taxes, the Second Amendment, Waco and Ruby Ridge. Like Oswald, who left behind a diary widely believed to be a CIA forgery, McVeigh was purported to have similarly documented his own
extremist position. According to the Times:
Law enforcement officials say McVeigh left behind a large body of writings about his ideological leanings, including extensive tracts in letters
to friends and relatives, that describe his belief in the constitutional principles that he adamantly maintained allowed him to carry firearms
and live without any restraints from the government. Prosecutors are likely to use such documents to establish his motive at a trial.[274]
Like Oswald, McVeigh's departure from the military was under somewhat mysterious circumstances. And like Oswald, an ex-Marine with a
top-secret security clearance who appeared to "defect" to the Soviet Union, McVeigh would appear to be a "disgruntled" ex-Army sergeant
who happened to "drift" into the fringes of the far-Right.[275]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Yet, like Oswald, who lived and worked amongst the bastions of the far-Right in Dallas while purporting to be a Marxist, McVeigh would not
seem to be the extreme Right-wing fanatic he's been made out to be.

In a letter to his hometown newspaper in February, 1992, he wrote:
At a point when the world has seen Communism falter as an imperfect system to manage people; democracy seems to be headed down the
same road….

Maybe we have to combine ideologies to achieve the perfect utopian government.

Remember, government-sponsored health
care was a Communist idea….

Obviously, such views are anathema to the far-Right, who see any attempt to socialize society as a major step towards the great one-world
Communist conspiracy.

It is possible that McVeigh was more progressive than his Right-wing associates.

It is also possible that McVeigh
was being sheep-dipped as a militant Right-winger.

After Waco, McVeigh traveled to Michigan, staying for a time with Terry Nichols.

He worked on Nichols' farm, and went hunting and target
practicing.

Neighbors recall how McVeigh and Nichols made and detonated small homemade bombs.

Paul Izydorek, a neighbor, recalls
"When they were around, they'd get different guns and play and shoot and stuff." On at least one occasion, Izydorek heard blasts at the farm
and noticed Terry Nichols and a man he thought was McVeigh.

"I'd seen them playing around with different household items that you can
make blow up.

Just small stuff.

Just outside in the yard, blowing away."[276]
Nichols' brother James also admitted to the FBI that McVeigh and Terry made and exploded "bottle bombs" at his farm, using brake fluid,
gasoline, and diesel fuel, and that he sometimes participated.[277]
In his interview with Newsweek, McVeigh dispelled the myth that his bomb making was a precursor to more deadly acts.

"It would amount to
firecrackers.Just outside in the yard, blowing away."[276]
Nichols' brother James also admitted to the FBI that McVeigh and Terry made and exploded "bottle bombs" at his farm, using brake fluid,
gasoline, and diesel fuel, and that he sometimes participated.[277]
In his interview with Newsweek, McVeigh dispelled the myth that his bomb making was a precursor to more deadly acts.

"It would amount to
firecrackers.

It was like popping a paper bag," said McVeigh, who had also experimented with small explosives on his land in Olean, NY
prior to entering the Army.

Yet a relative also told the FBI that James Nichols kept a large supply of ammonium nitrate fertilizer on the farm — the very substance
federal authorities accused the suspects of using to manufacture their alleged truck-bomb, a fact that would become yet another linchpin in
the government's case against the two men.

While in Michigan, McVeigh also started working the gun shows.

From April of 1993 to March of 1995, McVeigh would travel from Kingman,
Arizona to Decker, Michigan, and across the U.S., attending militia meetings and working the gun show circuit.

A gun collector interviewed
by the Times said that he had encountered McVeigh in gun shows ranging from Florida to Oklahoma to Nevada.

"At the S.O.F.

(Soldier of
Fortune) convention he was kind of wandering around," said the gun collector, who requested anonymity, "like he was trying to meet people,
maybe make converts.

He could make ten friends at a show, just by his manner and demeanor.

He's polite, he doesn't interrupt."
"McVeigh traveled around the country in a rattletrap car," wrote the Times' Kifner, "his camouflage fatigues clean and pressed, his only
companion a well-thumbed copy of the venomous apocalyptic novel, The Turner Diaries."
Yet it would seem McVeigh is not the asexual, sociopathic loner that the press — the New York Times in particular — has made him out to
be.He could make ten friends at a show, just by his manner and demeanor.

He's polite, he doesn't interrupt."
"McVeigh traveled around the country in a rattletrap car," wrote the Times' Kifner, "his camouflage fatigues clean and pressed, his only
companion a well-thumbed copy of the venomous apocalyptic novel, The Turner Diaries."
Yet it would seem McVeigh is not the asexual, sociopathic loner that the press — the New York Times in particular — has made him out to
be.

Had Kifner read the May 5th edition of Newsweek, he would have discovered that McVeigh had more than an old book for a companion.

Newsweek reported that a Kansas private investigator had tracked down an old [platonic] girlfriend of McVeigh's — most likely Catina
Lawson of Herrington, Kansas — attempting to convince her to sell her story to a news agency.[278]
Robert Jerlow, an Oklahoma City private investigator, was also tracking down a girlfriend of McVeigh's in Las Vegas.[279] And CNN indicated
that authorities had discovered a letter in the glove compartment to an old girlfriend.[280]
Yet McVeigh's gypsy-like travels across the country in an old beat-up car were slightly more then unusual.

He traveled widely with no visible
means of support, other than trading and selling guns and military paraphernalia.

Yet acquaintances and other witnesses recall he always
had wads of cash on him.

Upon his arrest, McVeigh had $2,000 on him.

He reportedly had thousands more stashed away.

He also traveled
without luggage, making his car and occasional cheap motels his only home.

"He lived in his car," said the gun dealer quoted in the Times.

"Whatever he owned it was in that car."[281]
According to his sister Jennifer, his closest confidant, "…half the time we didn't know where he was.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"He lived in his car," said the gun dealer quoted in the Times. "Whatever he owned it was in that car."[281]
According to his sister Jennifer, his closest confidant, "…half the time we didn't know where he was. Half the time he wouldn't even tell us
where he was living."[282]
Again, one has to ask why McVeigh would voluntarily give up a promising military career to go careening around the country hawking used
military surplus in an old car. McVeigh used the name "Tim Tuttle" while working the gun shows, claiming that the alias was necessary to protect him from people who
didn't share his political views.[283] There is another possible reason McVeigh may have used an alias however.

--- PAGE BREAK ---At one gun show in Phoenix, an undercover detective reported that McVeigh had been attempting to sell a flare gun which he claimed could
be converted into a rocket launcher.

According to Bill Fitzgerald of the Maricopa County Attorney's office in Phoenix, McVeigh "took a shell
apart and showed that the interior could be removed and another package put in that could shoot down an ATF helicopter." He also was
reportedly handing out copies of the name and address of Lon Horiuchi, the FBI sniper who shot and killed Vicki Weaver, and selling caps
with the letters 'ATF' surrounded by bullet holes.[284]
"He had come to see himself as a soldier in his own strange war against the United States," wrote the Times.

McVeigh's mother told an
acquaintance after visiting with him in her home state of Florida that he was "totally changed," and observed, "it was like he traded one Army
for another one."[285]
While it is highly possible that McVeigh, like many people, genuinely disliked the ATF and FBI, it is also possible he used such high-profile
anti-government tactics as a ruse while working undercover.

While such behavior might appear extreme, it is a classic agent provocateur
technique.

The ATF routinely works undercover at gun shows, searching for people selling illegal firearms.

Who better to lure and entrap
unwary victims than a gun dealer claiming to be virulently anti-ATF.

It is also possible that McVeigh was working undercover for another
agency.

In an illuminating series of phone calls to Representative Charles Key, an anonymous source stated that McVeigh was present at several
meetings with ATF and DEA agents in the days immediately preceding the bombing.

The meetings took place in Oklahoma City at different
locations.

The ostensible purpose of the meetings were to provide McVeigh with further instructions, and to facilitate a payoff.The meetings took place in Oklahoma City at different
locations.

The ostensible purpose of the meetings were to provide McVeigh with further instructions, and to facilitate a payoff.

David Hall of KPOC-TV uncovered information that McVeigh had met with local ATF agent Alex McCauley in a McDonalds the night before
the bombing.

The ATF agent was seen handing McVeigh an envelope.

(See Chapter 9)
CNN would cast a pale over this [largely unknown] information by reporting in June of 1995 that McVeigh had been under surveillance by an
undercover operative at an Arizona gun show two years prior to the bombing.

This fact was reinforced when the Anti-Defamation League of B'Nai B'Rith (ADL) reported that McVeigh ran an ad for a "rocket
launcher" (actually a flare gun) in the far-Right Spotlight newspaper on August 9, 1993.

In fact, the ad didn't appear until the next week,
August 16.

McVeigh had originally paid to have the advertisement run on the 9th.

Not being aware of the Spotlight's impending scheduling
conflict, however, the ADL reported that the ad had run one week before it actually did.

This subsumes that the ADL, long known for its
spying and intelligence-gathering activities, had McVeigh under surveillance as well.[286]
Interestingly, McVeigh's young friend, Catina Lawson, recalled a strange man who often showed up at summer parties the high-schoolers
threw.

The soldiers from nearby Ft.

Riley would attend the gatherings looking to meet girls, and McVeigh and his friends Michael Brescia and
Andy Strassmeir (who lived at the white separatist compound in Southeast Oklahoma known as Elohim City), would often attend.[287]
Yet the man Catina described was neither a high-schooler nor a soldier.

This mysterious character in his late 30s to mid-40s, who often wore
a suit and a tie and drove a red sports car, was was apparently not there to pick up girls.Riley would attend the gatherings looking to meet girls, and McVeigh and his friends Michael Brescia and
Andy Strassmeir (who lived at the white separatist compound in Southeast Oklahoma known as Elohim City), would often attend.[287]
Yet the man Catina described was neither a high-schooler nor a soldier.

This mysterious character in his late 30s to mid-40s, who often wore
a suit and a tie and drove a red sports car, was was apparently not there to pick up girls.

As Connie Smith, Catina's mother told me, "The
man did not interact with anyone else… he stayed off… he never interacted with anybody else," only McVeigh.

Barbara Whittenberg, who owned the Sante Fe Trail Diner in Herrington, Kansas, also remembered the man.

The restaurant owner recalled
that he would come in with McVeigh and Terry Nichols, who lived nearby.

She didn't know where he was from, and had never seen him
before.

Was McVeigh an informant?

Was he working for two different agencies?

Numerous Kennedy researchers have uncovered evidence that
Oswald was an FBI informant at the same time he was being sheep-dipped by the CIA for his role in the JFK assassination.

According to
former District Attorney (later federal judge) Jim Garrison:
Oswald appears to have been extensively manipulated by the CIA for a long time prior to the assassination and may well have believed he
was working for the government.

Oswald was also a confidential informant, a job that provided additional control over him and may have
given him a reason to believe he was actually penetrating a plot to assassinate the president.[288]
Situations where a person is working for two law-enforcement or intelligence agencies at the same time are not uncommon.

What is uncommon is for a man like McVeigh to give up a promising military career to hawk used duffel bags from an old car.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Oswald was also a confidential informant, a job that provided additional control over him and may have
given him a reason to believe he was actually penetrating a plot to assassinate the president.[288]
Situations where a person is working for two law-enforcement or intelligence agencies at the same time are not uncommon. What is uncommon is for a man like McVeigh to give up a promising military career to hawk used duffel bags from an old car. But then again,
in the twilight netherworld of intelligence operations, things aren't always what they appear.[289]
While in Michigan, McVeigh also began tuning in to the Voice of America and Radio Free America on his shortwave. He was drawn to
personalities like Chuck Harder, Jack McLamb, and Mark Koernke, all conveying an anti-federalist, anti-New World Order message. "He
sent me a lot of newsletters and stuff from those groups he was involved in," said Warnement, then stationed in Germany. "There were
newsletters from Bo Gritz's group, some other odd newsletters, some from the Patriots; then he sent that videotape 'The Big Lie' about
Waco."[290]

--- PAGE BREAK ---McVeigh also began attending militia meetings.

According to Michigan Militia member Eric Maloney, McVeigh was present at a truck-stop
near Detroit for a January 25, 1995 meeting of approximately 70 members of the Oakland County Six Brigade.

Members had obtained
photographs of T-72 tanks and other Russian vehicles en route via railway flatcars to Camp Grayling, an Air National Guard base in northern
Michigan.

Although the captured Iraqi tanks were for target practice, the militiamen interpreted the equipment as proof positive of a UN plan
to disarm American citizens and declare martial law.

According to Maloney and militia member Joseph Ditzhazy, a plot was hatched to attack the base by Mark Koernke, a high-profile militia
spokesman known to his radio listeners as "Mark from Michigan." According to Maloney, Koernke said, "We can either take them out now
while we're still able to, or wait until the sons of bitches are rolling down the street…" Three days later, about 20 members met at a farm near
Leonard to discuss plans for the attack.

According to Maloney, McVeigh was one of 13 who volunteered for the assault.

"McVeigh was
there," recalled Maloney on ABC's Prime Time Live.

"My wife sat next to him.

He was very attentive, very interested in being involved in that
operation, volunteered his services."
The plan never came off.

Ditzhazy and Maloney alerted State Police, who then contacted federal authorities.

When the plot was made
public, the Michigan Militia issued a press release stating that the plan was the brainchild of Koernke, working alongside a group of renegade
members.

Others who attended the meetings said that it was actually Maloney who pushed the plan, and had to be dissuaded from going
through with it.

Interestingly, Maloney was to provide weapons training for several of the attackers, and Ditzhazy, who made audio-tapes of
the meetings, is a former military intelligence officer.Others who attended the meetings said that it was actually Maloney who pushed the plan, and had to be dissuaded from going
through with it.

Interestingly, Maloney was to provide weapons training for several of the attackers, and Ditzhazy, who made audio-tapes of
the meetings, is a former military intelligence officer.

When the FBI was contacted about Ditzhazy's claim that the plot was hatched by
McVeigh and others, the FBI refused comment.[291]
What is also interesting is that Koernke himself is a former Army intelligence officer.

Koernke, a veteran of the 70th Army Reserve Division in
Livonia, Michigan, refers to himself as an "intelligence analyst" and "counterintelligence coordinator" with a "top-secret clearance." He also
purports to have trained two "special-warfare" brigades that trained Army personnel in "foreign warfare and tactics." While his claims may be
exaggerated, Koernke did attend the Army's intelligence school at Fort Huachuca, Arizona.

He returned to Michigan an E-5 specialist with a
G-2 (security) section of a peacetime Reserve unit.[292]
Koernke quickly rose to become one of the most sought after speakers on the Patriot circuit, leading off seminars in over 40 states.

His
video, America in Peril, sounds apocalyptic warnings of the coming New World Order, including plans by the Council of Foreign Relations,
the Trilateral Commission, and the Bilderbergers to dominate and enslave America — with of course, a little help from Russian troops,
Nepalese Gurkhas, and L.A.

street gangs.[293] It would seem that Koernke is employing a time-tested technique of intelligence PSYOP
disinformation.

While purporting to rail against what may be genuine plans of a New World Order cabal, Koernke slips in just enough
ridiculous disinformation to discredit his thesis, and by association, anyone who supports it.

After the bombing, the media put Koernke in its spotlight.While purporting to rail against what may be genuine plans of a New World Order cabal, Koernke slips in just enough
ridiculous disinformation to discredit his thesis, and by association, anyone who supports it.

After the bombing, the media put Koernke in its spotlight.

Koernke has boasted freely to friends that he was once employed as a
"provocateur." He didn't say exactly for whom.

In his tape, Koernke is shown holding an AK-47 and a cord of rope, stating: "Now, I did some
basic math the other day, not New World Order math, and I found that using the old-style math you can get about four politicians for about
120 foot of rope.

And, by the way, DuPont made this.

It is very fitting that one of the New World Order crowd should provide us with the
resources to liberate our nation.…"
While the author personally has no qualms about stringing up the DuPonts, the Rockefellers and many other icons of the military-industrial-
establishment, Koernke's rant smacks of the classic art of propaganda — that of the agent provocateur.

Many in the Militia movement have
accused him of just that.[294]*
On September 8, 1994, Fowerville, Michigan police stopped a car that contained three men in camouflage and black face paint, armed with
three 9mm semiautomatics, a .357 Magnum, an assortment of assault rifles, and 7,000 rounds of ammunition.

The men claimed to be
Koernke's bodyguards.

Ken Kirkland, an official of the St.

Lucia County, Florida Militia said that McVeigh was acting as Koernke's bodyguard at a March 1994
meeting.

Kirkland recalled a bodyguard in Army camouflage clothes resembling McVeigh who introduced himself as "Tim" and was "really
upset about Waco."[295]
Koernke and McVeigh both deny this.

As McVeigh told Newsweek "…I was never to one of their meetings, either."[296]
Was Koernke's "bodyguard" actually Tim McVeigh?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kirkland recalled a bodyguard in Army camouflage clothes resembling McVeigh who introduced himself as "Tim" and was "really
upset about Waco."[295]
Koernke and McVeigh both deny this. As McVeigh told Newsweek "…I was never to one of their meetings, either."[296]
Was Koernke's "bodyguard" actually Tim McVeigh? In the September, 1995 issue of Soldier of Fortune, an ATF agent — the spitting image
of Tim McVeigh — is seen accompanying ATF Agent Robert Rodriquez to the trial of the Branch Davidians. Was this in fact the "McVeigh"
who accompanied Koernke? Given both mens' mysterious backgrounds, their curious intersections in Florida and Michigan, and the Camp Grayling and Fowerville
incidents, it is highly likely that we are looking at two agent provocateurs. Other evidence of McVeigh's apparent employment as an agent provocateur would surface later. In a statement he made to Newsweek in
response to a question about Reno and Clinton asking for the death penalty, McVeigh said: "I thought it was awfully hypocritical, especially
because in some ways the government was responsible for doing it. I thought she was playing both sides of the fence." One must wonder

--- PAGE BREAK ---just how McVeigh knows that "in some ways" the government was "responsible for doing it."
McVeigh's own insurrectionist tendencies began coming to fruition towards the end of 1993, according to authorities, when McVeigh
informed his sister that he was part of an anti-government group that was robbing banks.

This startling revelation came in the form of three
$100 bills he sent to Jennifer in a letter dated December 24, 1993.

The money was part of the proceeds from a bank heist.

As Jennifer told
the FBI on May 2, 1995:
"He had been involved in a bank robbery but did not provide any further details concerning the robbery.

He advised me that he had not
actually participated in the robbery itself, but was somehow involved in the planning or setting up of this robbery.

Although he did not identify
the participants by name, he stated that 'they' had committed the robbery.

His purpose for relating this information to me was to request that
I exchange some of my own money for what I recall to be approximately three (3) $100.00 bills.

"He explained that this money was from the bank robbery and he wished to circulate this money through me.

To the best of my recollection, I
then gave my brother what I recall to be approximately $300.00 of my personal cash, in exchange for 3 $100.00 bills, which I deposited
within the next several days in an account at the Unit No.

1 Federal credit Union, Lockport, New York."
Jennifer also recalled Tim stating, "Persons who rob banks may not be criminals at all.

He implied Jews are running the country and a large
degree of control is exercised by the Free Masons.

Banks are the real thieves and the income tax is illegal."[297]
Was Timothy McVeigh in fact a bank robber?

If so, it is possible he was inspired by the Turner Diaries.

The protagonists in that novel finance
their overthrow of the "Zionist Occupational Government" by robbing banks and armored cars.If so, it is possible he was inspired by the Turner Diaries.

The protagonists in that novel finance
their overthrow of the "Zionist Occupational Government" by robbing banks and armored cars.

As previously discussed, the book became a
real life inspiration for Robert Matthew's Order, also known as "The Silent Brotherhood," which was engaged in heists of banks and armored
cars throughout the Midwest during the 1980s.

The Order was part of the white Aryan supremacist community that sought to establish an all-
white homeland in the Northwest.

In December of 1984, Mathews was killed in a shoot-out with the FBI and police, and the Order disintegrated.

Yet the white supremacist
movement lived on, in such guises as the Aryan Nations, White Aryan Resistance (WAR), and a new, as yet unheard of group — the Aryan
Republican Army, whose members are believed to be direct descendants of the Order.

It was to this last group that Timothy McVeigh would be drawn, at a rural white separatist religious community in southeast Oklahoma called
Elohim City.

It was there that McVeigh would meet such self-styled revolutionaries as Peter "Commander Pedro" Langan, who, along with
Scott Stedeford, Kevin McCarthy, and the late Richard Guthrie, would go on to rob over 22 banks across the Midwest, collecting a total of
$250,000.

In a recruitment video obtained by the McCurtain Gazette, Langan appears in a disguise, explaining the goals of the ARA — the overthrow of
the Federal Government, and the subsequent execution of all Jews and the deportation of all non-whites from the U.S.

In the tape, made only a few months before the Oklahoma City bombing, Langan says, "Federal buildings may have to be bombed and
civilian loss of life is regrettable but expected."[298]
According to ATF informant Carol Howe, interviewed by Gazette reporter J.D.

Cash, both McVeigh and Fortier had visited Elohim City, as
had Langan, Guthrie, Stedeford and McCarthy.In the tape, made only a few months before the Oklahoma City bombing, Langan says, "Federal buildings may have to be bombed and
civilian loss of life is regrettable but expected."[298]
According to ATF informant Carol Howe, interviewed by Gazette reporter J.D.

Cash, both McVeigh and Fortier had visited Elohim City, as
had Langan, Guthrie, Stedeford and McCarthy.

A secret recording made by the informant apparently reveals discussions between Andreas
Strassmeir, Elohim City's chief of security (also suspected of being an informant), and various ARA members, discussing plans to blow up
federal buildings.

While it is not known if McVeigh was intimately involved with the ARA bank robbers, he was seen with Strassmeir and ARA
associate Michael Brescia at parties in Kansas, and at a bar in Tulsa shortly before the bombing.

McVeigh had also called Elohim City
looking for Strassmeir the day after he reserved the Ryder truck allegedly used in the bombing.

In the Fall on 1994, McVeigh and Terry Nichols allegedly began hoarding ammonium nitrate and diesel fuel.

By mid-October, the pair had,
according to official accounts, managed to stockpile approximately 4,000 pounds of fertilizer, which they stashed in storage lockers from
Kansas to Arizona.[299]
Like Mohammed Salemeh, a World Trade Center bombing suspect arrested when he attempted to retrieve his truck rental deposit, McVeigh
would be linked to the bombing by the first in a chain of damning evidence — his thumbprint on a fertilizer receipt found in Terry Nichols'
home; inquires about bomb-making materials made on his calling-card; and the paperwork used to rent the Ryder truck itself.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the Fall on 1994, McVeigh and Terry Nichols allegedly began hoarding ammonium nitrate and diesel fuel. By mid-October, the pair had,
according to official accounts, managed to stockpile approximately 4,000 pounds of fertilizer, which they stashed in storage lockers from
Kansas to Arizona.[299]
Like Mohammed Salemeh, a World Trade Center bombing suspect arrested when he attempted to retrieve his truck rental deposit, McVeigh
would be linked to the bombing by the first in a chain of damning evidence — his thumbprint on a fertilizer receipt found in Terry Nichols'
home; inquires about bomb-making materials made on his calling-card; and the paperwork used to rent the Ryder truck itself. Like Salemeh's rental receipt which had traces of ANFO on it, McVeigh's clothes would allegedly contain traces of a detonator cord known
as PDTN.[300] Like the World Trade Center bombers who stockpiled bomb-making equipment in rented storage lockers in New Jersey,
McVeigh and Nichols would store their ammonium nitrate in rented lockers in Kansas and Arizona. And like the World Trade Center bombers
who called commercial chemical companies requesting bomb-making materials, McVeigh would implicate himself by using a traceable
phone card to make his purchases. The most damming evidence linking McVeigh to the crime would be the witness sightings placing him at the Murrah Building just before the
bombing, following the Ryder truck, then speeding away in his yellow Mercury several minutes before the blast.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Yet the most curious evidence implicating McVeigh in the bombing came from witnesses who say he cased the building on December 16,
when he and Michael Fortier drove through Oklahoma City en route to Kansas, then again approximately one and a half weeks before the
bombing.

Danielle Wise Hunt, who operated the Stars and Stripes Child Development Center in the Murrah Building, told the FBI that on December
16, a clean-cut man wearing camouflage fatigues approached her, seeking to place his two children in the day care center.

Hunt told agents
that the man didn't ask typical parent-type questions, but instead wanted to know about the day-care center's security.

Hunt thought he might
be a potential kidnapper.

Later, after seeing his face on TV, she recognized the man as Timothy McVeigh.[301]
If the man was indeed Timothy McVeigh, it is curious why he would later claim he was unaware of the day-care center in the building.

If
McVeigh was so upset about the deaths of innocent children at Waco, why would he knowingly bomb a building containing innocent children
as an act of revenge?

Yet this "act of revenge" is precisely what the government claims motived him.

Such an act could only be the result of a deranged man.

Yet
McVeigh is anything but deranged.

In his July 3rd Newsweek interview, he said, "For two days, in the cell, we could hear news reports; and
of course everyone, including myself, was horrified at the deaths of the children.

And you know, that was the No.

1 focal point of the media at
the time, too, obviously — the deaths of the children.

It's a very tragic thing."
Perhaps "deranged" isn't the proper word; perhaps "controlled" would be more appropriate.

After his arrest, McVeigh was shown
photographs of the dead children.

He claimed to have no emotional reaction.

Again, this could very well be indicative of a psychologically-
controlled individual.

There is another strong possibility.Again, this could very well be indicative of a psychologically-
controlled individual.

There is another strong possibility.

The man whom witnesses say is Timothy McVeigh may not have been Timothy McVeigh at all.

"Lee Harvey" McVeigh
As previously discussed, McVeigh, along with his friends Andreas Strassmeir, Mike Fortier, and Michael Brescia attended parties in
Herrington, Kansas in the Summer of '92.

Catina Lawson was actually good friends with McVeigh, and her roommate, Lindsey Johnson,
dated Michael Brescia.

Lawson's accounts are well documented.[302]
Yet calling card records obtained by the Rocky Mountain News indicate that each call charged to the card during 1992 originated within
western New York, where McVeigh was working as a security guard for Burns International Security.

There appears to be little time he could
have gone to Kansas to party with teen-agers.

Dr.

Paul Heath, the VA psychologist who worked in the Murrah Building and survived the blast, spoke to an individual named "McVeigh" late
one Friday afternoon, a week and a half before the bombing.

In an interview with the author, he described in vivid detail his encounter with
"McVeigh" and two other men, one of whom appears to be one of the elusive John Doe 2s.

"I've narrowed this to probably a Friday [April 7], at around three o'clock," recalls Heath.

"A bell rang in the outer office of room 522.

No one
answered, so I went out to the waiting room….

A man came in with two others to apply for a job.

One other was American-Indian looking, the
other was Caucasian.

A male individual was standing there, and I introduced myself as Dr.

Heath, 'how can I help you?' and this individual
said 'my name is something' and I don't remember what his first name was, but he told me his last name was McVeigh.

"So I said 'can I help you?' and he said 'well, we're here looking for work.' and I said 'what kind of work are we looking for?' He said 'we are
looking for construction work.' And I said, 'well Mr.Heath, 'how can I help you?' and this individual
said 'my name is something' and I don't remember what his first name was, but he told me his last name was McVeigh.

"So I said 'can I help you?' and he said 'well, we're here looking for work.' and I said 'what kind of work are we looking for?' He said 'we are
looking for construction work.' And I said, 'well Mr.

Birmbaum, the gentleman who is the job counselor for the state jobs office, is not here.'
And this individual — I asked him if I could go back and get the job openings from the job counselor's desk — and he said 'no, that won't be
necessary.' So I said, 'well, I'm very familiar with the area, and I could give you some job leads,' and I began to tell him about job leads, and
began to give him some names and some different projects, and I said 'would you like me to get you the phone book; I could get you the
state jobs offices.' He said, 'no, that won't be necessary.'
"And about somewhere along in this conversation, the man who was sitting on the east wall, directly behind the man who named himself as
McVeigh, came up behind the man, and said 'can I use your phone?' I would describe him as vanilla, 5'7" or 5'9", mid-30's.

[Then] the third
party who was in the office, looked directly at me, made eye contact with me, and… I got the impression that this individual's nationality was
Native American, or half-Native American or half-Mexican American or a foreign national.

He was handsome — at one time my mind said
maybe he was from South America.

"I… continued to talk to Mr.

McVeigh and I said, 'Mr.

McVeigh, did you take anything in high school that would be beneficial for me to know
about so I could refer you to a different type of job?' And he said, 'well, probably not.' And I said, 'well, where did you go to high school?' And
he either said up north or New York.--- PAGE BREAK ---

McVeigh and I said, 'Mr. McVeigh, did you take anything in high school that would be beneficial for me to know
about so I could refer you to a different type of job?' And he said, 'well, probably not.' And I said, 'well, where did you go to high school?' And
he either said up north or New York. And then I said, 'Where are you living?' And he said, 'Well, I've been living in Kansas.' So then I said,
'Do you happen to be a member of the McVay family from Cussing, Oklahoma?' …he said, 'Well Dr. Heath, how do they spell their name?'
'Well I assume, M-c-V-a-y.' And he took his finger, and he kind of put it in my face and said, 'Well Dr. Heath,' in kind of a boisterous way, 'Dr. Heath, you remember this. My name is McVeigh, but you don't spell it M-c-V-a-y….'"[303]
What Dr. Heath was describing appears to have been Timothy McVeigh and his co-conspirators casing the Murrah Building. As the press

--- PAGE BREAK ---reported, the men went floor-to-floor, asking job-related questions and picking up applications.

Yet if McVeigh had already cased the building
on December 16, as reported by Danielle Hunt, why would he need to case it again?

Moreover, if McVeigh wanted to case the building, why would he do it in such a conspicuous manner?

Why would he go from floor-to-floor
asking about job openings, then pretend not to be interested in following them up?

And… if McVeigh was planning on committing such a
horrific crime, why would he make it a point to tell people his name, saying to Dr.

Heath, "You remember this… My name is McVeigh."
Former Federal Grand Juror Hoppy Heidelberg concurs.

"Why would McVeigh walk around the building before the blast telling people his
name?"[304]
If McVeigh was keen on informing people of his identity before committing the crime, he apparently was on a roll.

On Saturday, April 8,
McVeigh and friends Andreas Strassmeir and Michael Brescia — both living at Elohim City at the time — were seen at Lady Godiva's
topless bar in Tulsa, Oklahoma.

According to a security camera videotape obtained by J.D.

Cash of the McCurtain Gazette, and Trish Wood
of CBC, McVeigh's boasts were the topic of discussion among the dancers that night.

In the tape, one of the girls named Tara is overheard
relating the conversation to another girl in the dressing room:
"...he goes, 'I'm a very smart man.' I said, you are?

And he goes, 'Yes, you're going to find an (inaudible) and they're going to hurt you real
bad.' I was, like, 'Oh really?' And he goes, 'Yes, and you're going to remember me on April 19, 1995.

You're going to remember me for the
rest of your life.'
Laughing, she replies, "Oh, really?"
"Yes you will," McVeigh says.[305]
The sighting of McVeigh in Tulsa on April 8, along with an older, pale yellow Ryder truck that appeared to be privately-owned, directly
contradicts the testimony of the maid at the Imperial Motel who says McVeigh was there each day.And he goes, 'Yes, you're going to find an (inaudible) and they're going to hurt you real
bad.' I was, like, 'Oh really?' And he goes, 'Yes, and you're going to remember me on April 19, 1995.

You're going to remember me for the
rest of your life.'
Laughing, she replies, "Oh, really?"
"Yes you will," McVeigh says.[305]
The sighting of McVeigh in Tulsa on April 8, along with an older, pale yellow Ryder truck that appeared to be privately-owned, directly
contradicts the testimony of the maid at the Imperial Motel who says McVeigh was there each day.

However, phone records indicate that McVeigh made a steady series of calls up until April 7, which suddenly resumed again on the 11th.

Could McVeigh have flown to Oklahoma to pick up the old Ryder truck, then have flown back to Kingman several days later?

As J.D.

Cash
notes in the September 25, 1996 McCurtain Gazette:
It is not merely idle speculation that McVeigh flew to eastern Oklahoma or western Arkansas to pick up the second truck.

Records
subpoenaed by the government indicate McVeigh may have made such a trip to Fort Smith, Ark., between March 31 and April 14, 1995.

Curiously, an employee of the airport taxi service in Fort Smith could not elaborate on why the taxi firm's records for that period were seized
by federal agents working on what the government calls the "OKBOMB" case.

If McVeigh actually did fly from Arizona to Arkansas, then drive the truck to Kansas, then fly back to Arizona again, he apparently was a very
busy man.

Witness accounts and phone records put him in Oklahoma City on the 7th, in Tulsa on the 8th, in Kansas from the 10th to the
14th (although he's supposed to be in Kingman on the 11th and 12th), then back in Oklahoma City on the 14th, 15th and 16th (when he's
supposedly in Kansas) then in Kansas on the 17th and 18th (when he's also seen in Oklahoma City), and finally in Oklahoma City on the
19th, the day of the bombing.If McVeigh actually did fly from Arizona to Arkansas, then drive the truck to Kansas, then fly back to Arizona again, he apparently was a very
busy man.

Witness accounts and phone records put him in Oklahoma City on the 7th, in Tulsa on the 8th, in Kansas from the 10th to the
14th (although he's supposed to be in Kingman on the 11th and 12th), then back in Oklahoma City on the 14th, 15th and 16th (when he's
supposedly in Kansas) then in Kansas on the 17th and 18th (when he's also seen in Oklahoma City), and finally in Oklahoma City on the
19th, the day of the bombing.

While McVeigh was supposedly seen at Terry Nichols' house in Herrington, Kansas on the 13th, witness David Snider saw his car in
Oklahoma City.

A Bricktown warehouse worker, Snider remembers seeing McVeigh's distinctive yellow Mercury whiz past around 2:30 p.m.,
not far from downtown.

Snider is certain it was the same battered yellow Mercury driven by McVeigh.

"I was standing there with my friend,
who does auto bodywork," said Snider, "when the car went past.

I turned to him and said, 'My Mom used to have a car just like that… It
looks like homeboy needs a primer job.'" Snider said the car had an Oklahoma tag, as witness Gary Lewis later reported, not an Arizona tag
as the FBI claims.

On Thursday, April 13, a federal employee in the Murrah Building saw two men, one of whom she later identified as McVeigh.

She was riding
the elevator when it stopped at the second floor.

When the doors opened, there were two men in janitorial smocks waiting to get on.

She
didn't recognize the men as any of the regular janitors, and thought it odd that they turned away when she looked in their direction.

On Monday, April 17, janitors Katherine Woodly and Martin Johnson, who were working the 5-9 p.m.

shift, saw McVeigh and his companion
again.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On Monday, April 17, janitors Katherine Woodly and Martin Johnson, who were working the 5-9 p.m. shift, saw McVeigh and his companion
again. Martin said McVeigh spoke to him about a job, and the man who resembled John Doe 2 nodded to Woodly.[306]
That same day, or possibly the following day, Debbie Nakanashi, an employee at the Post Office across from the Murrah Building, saw the
pair when they stopped by and asked where they might find federal job applications. It was Nakanashi who provided the description for the
well-known profile sketch of John Doe 2 in the baseball cap. Craig Freeman, a retired Air Force master sergeant who works in the same office as Dr. Heath, was one of the people who saw McVeigh in
Oklahoma when he was supposedly in Kansas. Freeman recalls sharing the elevator with a man who resembled McVeigh on Friday, April
14. "The guy was tall… What struck me is his hair was cut real low. I thought he was a skinhead." Freeman, who is black, said 'Hey man,
how's it going?' "And he looked at me like he was just disgusted with me being there. Most people in the building speak to each other, you

--- PAGE BREAK ---know, so I spoke to this guy, and he looked at me like… pure hate."
About a week and a half before the bombing, a HUD employee named Joan was riding the elevator with a man she described as Timothy
McVeigh.

What struck her was the man's strict military demeanor.

He stared straight ahead making no eye-contact or conversation.

"He
won't last long in this building," Joan thought to herself.[307]
The Friday before the bombing, when Craig Freeman walked out of the building to mail his taxes, he saw an individual he believes to have
been Terry Nichols, "because he looked just like the picture of him," said Freeman.

"He was standing there, he had a blue plaid shirt on.

He
was standing in the front of the building — he was just standing there, looking kind of confused.

You know, how somebody looks when
they're nervous."
Was the man in the elevator Freeman was describing actually Timothy McVeigh?

According to phone records obtained from the Dreamland
Motel, McVeigh made several phone calls from his room on the morning of Friday, April 14.

Is it still possible that McVeigh drove down to
Oklahoma City in the afternoon?

If he did, he would had to have been back in Kansas by early next morning.

Barbara Whittenberg, owner of the Santa Fe Trail Diner in
Herrington, remembers serving breakfast to Nichols, McVeigh, and John Doe 2 around 6:00 a.m.

on Saturday.

"I asked them why they had a Ryder truck outside," said Whittenberg.

"I wasn't being nosy, I just wondered if Terry Nichols was moving.

My
sister was moving here, and she needed to find a place.

Well, the guy who they haven't arrested yet — John Doe #2 — he blurted out that
they were going to Oklahoma.

When that happened, it was like someone threw ice water on the conversation… McVeigh and Nichols just
stared at the guy"[308]
A dancer in Junction City, Kansas had the same experience as Whittenberg, when four of the suspects stopped by the Hollywood Supper
Club around 10:30 that evening.Well, the guy who they haven't arrested yet — John Doe #2 — he blurted out that
they were going to Oklahoma.

When that happened, it was like someone threw ice water on the conversation… McVeigh and Nichols just
stared at the guy"[308]
A dancer in Junction City, Kansas had the same experience as Whittenberg, when four of the suspects stopped by the Hollywood Supper
Club around 10:30 that evening.

The dancer, who we'll call Sherrie, definitely recognized two of the men as McVeigh and Nichols.

"The only reason I really remember it," said Sherrie, "is just because I had a conversation with one of them about Oklahoma, and my
husband's family is from Oklahoma.

He said they were planing a trip down there, and he said — I think it was for hunting or something.…
then one of them kind of gave him a look, and they changed the subject.…"
Sherrie also said one of the men, who was quiet and sat in the corner, appeared to be Middle-Eastern.

The other was Hispanic or part
Hispanic, and was friendly.

When he mentioned Oklahoma, Nichols shot him a hard look.[309]
Additionally, while the records at Elliott's Body Shop indicate that "Bob Kling" rented his truck on April 17, Barbara Whittenberg saw the truck
outside her restaurant on the 15th.

Later that day she saw it at Geary State Fishing Lake, along with three people and a light-colored car,
possibly a Thunderbird, with Arizona tags.[310]
Backing up Whittenberg is Lee McGowan, owner of the Dreamland Motel in Junction City, where McVeigh stayed from April 14 to April 17.

McGowan told the FBI that McVeigh was in possession of his truck the day before "Kling" allegedly rented his.

She remembered the day
clearly because it was Easter Sunday.

McGowan's son, Eric, as well as motel resident David King and his mother, also stated that they saw McVeigh driving an older faded yellow
Ryder truck at the motel around 4 p.m.--- PAGE BREAK ---

She remembered the day
clearly because it was Easter Sunday. McGowan's son, Eric, as well as motel resident David King and his mother, also stated that they saw McVeigh driving an older faded yellow
Ryder truck at the motel around 4 p.m. on April 16.[311]
Yet McGowan's testimony contradicts that of Phyliss Kingsley and Linda Kuhlman, who worked at the Hi-Way Grill in Newcastle, just south
of Oklahoma City. The two women saw McVeigh and three companions around 6:00 p.m. on April 16, when they stopped in the restaurant
and ordered hamburgers and fries to go. The two women distinctly recall the Ryder truck pulling into the restaurant at SW 104th and
Portland, accompanied by a white Chevy long-bed pick-up, and an older, darker, possibly blue pick-up, which may have belonged to Terry
Nichols. Accompanying McVeigh was a short, stocky, handsome man, of either Mexican or American Indian descent. The man closely
resembled the FBI sketch of John Doe 2, they said.[312]
According to the FBI, this was the same day that McVeigh called Nichols from a pay phone at Tim's Amoco in Herrington, Kansas at 3:08 p. m., and asked him to drive him to Oklahoma City. It would have been impossible for McVeigh and Nichols to drive from Junction City to
Oklahoma City in less than four hours. Reports soon surfaced that "McVeigh" had stayed at a motel south of downtown Oklahoma City on the night of the 18th. Witnesses recall
seeing a yellow Ryder truck, and two companions. They recall that "McVeigh" gave them a "go to hell look" as he pulled away. Later that morning, at 8:35 a.m., Tulsa banker Kyle Hunt was driving to an appointment when he came upon the Ryder truck at Main and
Broadway, trailed by a yellow Mercury. "…for some reason I thought they were out of state, moving and lost in downtown Oklahoma City,"
said Hunt. "I felt sorry for them and then when I pulled up beside them, I got that cold icy stare from a guy that had a real short GI
haircut…."[313]te, moving and lost in downtown Oklahoma City,"
said Hunt. "I felt sorry for them and then when I pulled up beside them, I got that cold icy stare from a guy that had a real short GI
haircut…."[313]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Hunt described the driver of the Mercury as Timothy McVeigh.

"He gave me that icy, go-to-hell look," said Hunt.

"It kind of unnerved me."
While Hunt didn't see the occupants of the truck, he did recall two passengers in the Mercury.

The rear occupant, said Hunt, had long hair,
similar to the suspect Phyliss Kingsley and Linda Kuhlman saw on Sunday at the Hi-Way Grill south of the city.

Around the same time as Hunt saw this convoy, David Snider, a warehouse worker in Bricktown, a few blocks southeast of downtown, saw a
heavily loaded Ryder truck with two men inside, slowly making its way towards him.

Snider had been expecting a delivery that morning, and
explained that people sometimes get lost because the loading dock is on a different street than the warehouse.

The time was 8:35 a.m.

Thinking the truck was his delivery, Snider waved them down.

Snider, who by now was gesticulating wildly, became frustrated as the two
men, staring at him, continued on their way.

While he never received his delivery, Snider did get a good look at the truck, and the two men.

The truck appeared to be an older model with
a cab overhang, not the newer version the FBI claimed was destroyed in the bombing.

Snider described the driver as a barrel-chested, dark-skinned male with long, straight black hair, parted in the middle, wearing a thin small
mustache.

The man, who was also wearing tear-drop style sunglasses and a dark shirt, was of American Indian or Hispanic decent.

(See
sketch) "I lived in New Mexico for years," said Snider; "I know the look." The passenger, wearing a white T-shirt, Snider said, was Timothy
McVeigh.

"He looked at me like 'who the hell are you?' — real attitude," recalls Snider, and began yelling profanities at the loading-dock worker.

Snider, who was not in a great mood that morning to begin with, yelled back, "Fuck you, you skin-head motherfucker!"
Snider and Hunt weren't the only individuals who saw McVeigh and the Ryder truck that morning."He looked at me like 'who the hell are you?' — real attitude," recalls Snider, and began yelling profanities at the loading-dock worker.

Snider, who was not in a great mood that morning to begin with, yelled back, "Fuck you, you skin-head motherfucker!"
Snider and Hunt weren't the only individuals who saw McVeigh and the Ryder truck that morning.

At 8:40 a.m., Mike Moroz and Brian
Marshall were busy at work at Johnny's Tire Store on 10th and Hudson, when a yellow Ryder truck pulled in looking for directions to the
Murrah Building.

The driver, who Moroz later identified as Timothy McVeigh, was wearing a white T-shirt and a black ball cap on backwards.

Moroz caught a glimpse of the passenger — a stocky man with dark curly hair, a tattoo on his upper left arm, and a ball cap worn similar to
McVeigh's.

The passenger, said Moroz, stared straight ahead, never turning to look in his direction.[314]
Moroz then proceeded to give directions to McVeigh, whom he described as polite, friendly, and relaxed — quite interesting considering that
McVeigh is supposedly minutes away from murdering 169 people.

After thanking Moroz, McVeigh got back in the truck, sat there for a few
minutes, then took off in the direction of the Federal Building.

At approximately the same time as McVeigh was seen driving the Mercury by Kyle Hunt, and seen as a passenger in the Ryder truck by
David Snider, and seen driving the Ryder truck by Mike Moroz, he was then seen driving the Mercury by attorney James Linehan.

As previously discussed, Linehan, a Midwest City attorney, was stopped at a red light at the northwest corner of 4th and Robinson, one
block from the Murrah Building.

Late for an appointment, Linehan looked at his watch.

It read 8:38 a.m.

When he looked back up, he noticed
a pale yellow Mercury stopped beside him.

While he could not positively I.D.

the driver, he described him as having sharp, pointed features,
and smooth pale skin.While he could not positively I.D.

the driver, he described him as having sharp, pointed features,
and smooth pale skin.

A second later, the Mercury driver gunned his engine, ran the red light, and disappeared into the underground parking garage of the Murrah
Building.

Is it possible these witnesses are describing are two different people?

In Snider's account, the driver is an American Indian or Hispanic man
with long, straight black hair, wearing sunglasses.

The passenger is McVeigh.

Neither one is wearing a ball cap.

The time is 8:35 a.m.

In
Moroz's account, the driver is McVeigh, while the passenger is a stocky man with short curly hair.

Both men are wearing ball caps on
backwards.

The time is 8:40 a.m.

Snider and Moroz both saw a Ryder truck containing Timothy McVeigh, yet with completely different companions.

While Snider was yelling
at McVeigh in the Ryder truck in Bricktown, Hunt was watching the truck being trailed by McVeigh in the Mercury several blocks away.

A few
minutes later, Linehan watched as the Mercury drove into the Murrah Building garage.

Moreover, each witness saw these convoys at approximately the same time.

It is possible that the heavily loaded truck seen by Snider could
have made it from 25 East California in Bricktown to 10th and Hudson in five minutes.

But in order to do so, they would have had to drop off
one man, pick up another, exchange places in the truck, and put on ball caps.

Then they would have to drive a distance of approximately 25
blocks — during morning rush hour traffic.

Possible, but not too likely.

Is it possible one of these witnesses has his story wrong?

Well, if he does, he has it really wrong.

How could an apparently credible
witnesses mistake a short-curly-haired man with a black ball cap for a long-straight-haired man with tear-drop sunglasses?

One who is
clearly the passenger, the other who is clearly the driver?--- PAGE BREAK ---

How could an apparently credible
witnesses mistake a short-curly-haired man with a black ball cap for a long-straight-haired man with tear-drop sunglasses? One who is
clearly the passenger, the other who is clearly the driver? In numerous interviews with the author and other journalists, Snider went into
great detail about his encounter, and never wavered. In a taped interview with Mike Moroz, he struck me as a sincere, sober, young man. Both Linehan and Hunt are solid, professional people. It
is not likely that these witnesses are relaying inaccurate information. "Their stories really seem to check out," said video producer Chuck Allen, who interviewed many witnesses. "They go into great depth and

--- PAGE BREAK ---detail about all this.

If you ever meet these guys, you'll know their stories are very strong — very believable."[315]
Researchers have also questioned why McVeigh, who had supposedly been to the Murrah Building at least three times — once on
December 16, again a week and a half before the bombing, then again on April 14 — would need to ask directions to it when he was only six
blocks away.

But according to Moroz, who has helped more than a few lost travelers, the number of one-way streets in the downtown area
often confuses people.

"A lot of people get lost down here, even people who live here, he said"[316]
Finally, HUD employee Germaine Johnston was walking through an alley approximately two blocks from the Murrah Building about 15
minutes after the blast, when she ran into McVeigh and another man.

"They were just standing there watching," said Johnston.

McVeigh then asked the dazed passerby "Was anyone killed?" When Johnston answered that numerous people had been killed, including
many children, McVeigh's expression suddenly turned sad.

He and his companion then got up and left.[317][318]
Mike Moroz was eventually called in to identify McVeigh in a photo line-up.

Yet he was never called to testify before the Federal Grand Jury.

Snider was initially interviewed by two FBI agents, including Weldon Kennedy and Rob Ricks [of Waco fame], but was never brought in to a
line-up or called to testify before the Federal Grand Jury.

Considering he had close and sustained contact with "McVeigh" and several of his associates, Dr.

Heath should have been a key
prosecution witness.

Yet the FBI never called Dr.

Heath in to identify McVeigh in a line-up.

Nor was Dr.

Heath ever called before the Federal
Grand Jury.

Nor was Freeman ever called in to see a line-up, or before the grand jury.

Linehan, Hunt, Johnston, and numerous other
witnesses were likewise never called.Nor was Freeman ever called in to see a line-up, or before the grand jury.

Linehan, Hunt, Johnston, and numerous other
witnesses were likewise never called.

On May 10, the Los Angeles Times reported, "Investigators said authorities theorize that John Doe 2 could be two people, and that McVeigh
and his alleged conspirators could have used different men to accompany him in order to serve as 'decoys' and confuse investigators trying
to trace his movements."[319]
The Los Angeles Times report, which would tend to account for the two different trucks, only gives half the story.

What they aren't saying is
that not only were there at least two John Doe 2s — there apparently were two "Timothy McVeighs." One was probably a double.

The use of doubles in espionage work is not new.

In fact, the use of impostors, look-alikes and doubles was well-documented in the JFK and
Martin Luther King assassinations.

Like the "Lee Harvey Oswald" who was seen filing out numerous job applications in New Orleans, "McVeigh" was seen going floor-to-floor in
the Federal Building in Oklahoma.

Except that the "Oswald" who filled out job applications listed his height as 5' 9", while the real Oswald's
height was 5' 11."
According to employees at Elliott's Body Shop in Junction City, the "McVeigh" (alias "Kling") who rented the truck on April 17 was of medium
build, 5' 10" to 5' 11" and weighed 180-185 pounds.

Elliott's employee Tom Kessinger stated on his FBI FD-383 report that the man had a
"rough" complexion with "acne."[320] (See Appendix)
The only problem is, Timothy McVeigh is 6' 2," weighs 160 pounds, and has a totally clear complexion.

Another shop employee, Vicki
Beemer, said the man had a deformed chin, unlike the real McVeigh.[321]
Nevertheless, federal prosecutors would claim that a "little curlicue" on the "K" in "Kling's" signature was indicative of McVeigh's handwriting.Elliott's employee Tom Kessinger stated on his FBI FD-383 report that the man had a
"rough" complexion with "acne."[320] (See Appendix)
The only problem is, Timothy McVeigh is 6' 2," weighs 160 pounds, and has a totally clear complexion.

Another shop employee, Vicki
Beemer, said the man had a deformed chin, unlike the real McVeigh.[321]
Nevertheless, federal prosecutors would claim that a "little curlicue" on the "K" in "Kling's" signature was indicative of McVeigh's handwriting.

Yet if McVeigh was the same person who rented the truck at Elliott's on the 17th, why didn't he also use an alias while signing the motel
register?

While the "McVeigh" who rented the truck listed his name as "Bob Kling," 428 Malt Drive, Redfield, SD, the "McVeigh" who
checked into the Dreamland, right down the street, signed his name as "Tim McVeigh," and listed his address as 3616 North Van Dyke
Road, Decker, Michigan, the home of James Nichols.[322]
If McVeigh was planning on committing such a heinous crime, certainly he would not leave such a blatantly incriminating trail of evidence.

This makes about as much sense as McVeigh going from floor-to-floor in the Murrah Building filling out job applications and announcing his
name.

Or telling a dancer in Tulsa, "You're going to remember me on April 19th."
These preposterous scenes were practically identical to those of all-time patsy Lee Harvey Oswald.

In early November of 1963, a "Lee
Harvey Oswald" applied for a job as a parking lot attendant at the Southland Hotel.

During his interview with the manager, he asked if there
was a good view of downtown Dallas from the hotel.[323]
On January 20, 1961, two men, one representing himself as "Lee Harvey Oswald," walked into the Bolton Ford dealership in New Orleans
and requested a bid for 10 pick-up trucks, ostensibly for the Friends of Democratic Cuba Committee.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In early November of 1963, a "Lee
Harvey Oswald" applied for a job as a parking lot attendant at the Southland Hotel. During his interview with the manager, he asked if there
was a good view of downtown Dallas from the hotel.[323]
On January 20, 1961, two men, one representing himself as "Lee Harvey Oswald," walked into the Bolton Ford dealership in New Orleans
and requested a bid for 10 pick-up trucks, ostensibly for the Friends of Democratic Cuba Committee. The only problem was, Lee Harvey
Oswald was in Russia at the time.[324]
Then in September of 1963, a man purporting to be "Lee Harvey Oswald" showed up at the Mexican Consulate in New Orleans. According

--- PAGE BREAK ---to Mrs.

Fenella Farrington, "Oswald" said, "What do you have to do to take firearms or a gun into Mexico?"
A "Lee Harvey Oswald" subsequently phoned, then showed up at the Soviet embassy in Mexico City, speaking with a trade consultant who
was allegedly a member of the KGB's "liquid affairs" bureau (hit squad).

The CIA later turned over to the Warren Commission a surveillance
snapshot of a man they claimed was Oswald at the Soviet embassy.

The man looked nothing like Oswald.

On April 17, 1995, a "Bob Kling" showed up at Elliott's Body Shop in Junction City, Kansas and rented a Ryder truck.

Yet according to
surveillance footage taken from a nearby McDonalds, McVeigh was sitting in the restaurant eating a hamburger at the time.

He was wearing
completely different clothes than those ascribed to "Kling."
Yet the FBI contends that McVeigh left the restaurant 20 minutes before the truck was rented, walked the 1.3 miles to Elliott's — a fifteen-
minute walk — in a light rain, then showed up at Elliott's nice and dry, wearing completely different clothes.

In November of 1963, a "Lee Oswald" walked into the downtown Lincoln Mercury dealership in Dallas announcing his intention to buy a
Mercury Comet.

According to the salesman, Albert Bogard, "Mr.

Oswald" took him on a wild test drive, speeding along at 60 to 70 miles an
hour.

After he was told the amount of the down payment, another salesman, Eugene Wilson, heard "Oswald" say, "Maybe I'm going to have
to go back to Russia to buy a car."
During the Warren Commission hearings, salesman Frank Pizzo described the customer as 5' 8" tall.

When the Warren Commission showed
Pizzo a photo of Oswald taken after his arrest, he said, "I have to say that he is not the one…"[325]
After the bombing in Oklahoma City, ATF informant Carol Howe told the FBI that she recognized the two men on the FBI's original wanted
posters as Peter Ward and Michael Brescia — two Elohim City residents.After he was told the amount of the down payment, another salesman, Eugene Wilson, heard "Oswald" say, "Maybe I'm going to have
to go back to Russia to buy a car."
During the Warren Commission hearings, salesman Frank Pizzo described the customer as 5' 8" tall.

When the Warren Commission showed
Pizzo a photo of Oswald taken after his arrest, he said, "I have to say that he is not the one…"[325]
After the bombing in Oklahoma City, ATF informant Carol Howe told the FBI that she recognized the two men on the FBI's original wanted
posters as Peter Ward and Michael Brescia — two Elohim City residents.

She said that neither man was Tim McVeigh.[326]
In early November of 1963, Mrs.

Lovell Penn of Dallas found three men firing a rifle on her property.

After they left, she found a spent
cartridge bearing the name "Mannlicher-Carcanno," the rifle that the Warren Commission claimed Oswald used to perform his historic feat of
marksmanship in Dealy Plaza.

As District Attorney Jim Garrison later noted, "These scenes were about as subtle as roaches trying to sneak across a white rug."
No less subtle were the scenes and events leading up to the Oklahoma City bombing.

It is highly possible that the man Dr.

Heath saw in the
Murrah Building a week and-a-half before the bombing was not Timothy McVeigh at all, but a double.

The scenario of Timothy McVeigh —
the alleged "lone nut" bomber — going from floor-to-floor in the target building announcing his name while leaving a paper trail is beyond
credulity.

Like Oswald, who repeatedly telephoned, then appeared at the Soviet embassy in Mexico, McVeigh would telephone Elohim City — a white
separatist compound — just before the bombing, asking to speak to Andy Strassmeir.

Like Oswald, who left behind a diary of his "Left-leaning" writings, McVeigh purportedly left intentions of his plans to bomb other targets in
the glove compartment of his car — a car which could be easily recognized and traced to him.Like Oswald, who repeatedly telephoned, then appeared at the Soviet embassy in Mexico, McVeigh would telephone Elohim City — a white
separatist compound — just before the bombing, asking to speak to Andy Strassmeir.

Like Oswald, who left behind a diary of his "Left-leaning" writings, McVeigh purportedly left intentions of his plans to bomb other targets in
the glove compartment of his car — a car which could be easily recognized and traced to him.

Like Oswald who, after purportedly killing the president of the United States, walked into a movie house without paying, purposely attracting
the attention of the police, McVeigh would speed down the highway at 80 miles an hour without a license plate, purposefully attracting the
attention of the Highway Patrol.

He would then meekly hand himself over for arrest, not even attempting to draw his Glock 9mm pistol on the
approaching cop, whom he could have easily shot and killed.

Like the Mannlicher-Carcanno rifle which Oswald purportedly bought from a mail-order supply house, and the Mannlicher-Carcanno
cartridge found by Mrs.

Penn, McVeigh would leave a business card from Paulsen's Military Surplus with a notation to pick up more TNT in
the police cruiser after his arrest.[327]
As Jim Garrison noted, "Some of these scenes were so preposterous only the most gullible could swallow them."
Like Oswald, who was led out of the Dallas Police Department and immediately shot by Jack Ruby, McVeigh would be led out of the Noble
County Courthouse in a bright orange jumpsuit, without a bullet-proof vest, paraded before an angry crowd on the verge of violence.

Finally, like James Earl Ray, who was accused of killing Martin Luther King, Jr., we are left pondering the significance of two similar vehicles,
both apparently tied to the crime.

Ray had owned a white Ford Mustang, which was seen speeding away after the assassination.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Finally, like James Earl Ray, who was accused of killing Martin Luther King, Jr., we are left pondering the significance of two similar vehicles,
both apparently tied to the crime. Ray had owned a white Ford Mustang, which was seen speeding away after the assassination. Yet
another white Mustang was seen parked in front of Jim's Grill in Memphis, near where Ray had his car parked. The two cars were almost
identical, except for two things: While Ray was wearing a suit on April 4, 1968, the driver of the other Mustang was wearing a dark blue
windbreaker; while Ray's car had Alabama plates, the other car had Arkansas plates.[328]
One is reminded of the contradictory testimony of David Snider and Mike Moroz, who saw two Ryder trucks on the morning of April 19, but
with different occupants. Another interesting parallel is that while McVeigh's Mercury reportedly had Arizona tags, a white Oklahoma tag was

--- PAGE BREAK ---trucks on the morning of April 19, but
with different occupants. Another interesting parallel is that while McVeigh's Mercury reportedly had Arizona tags, a white Oklahoma tag was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

seen by Gary Lewis dangling from one bolt as the car sped away from the scene.
In spite of the numerous discrepancies, it seemed that by a convenient string of associations, a carefully placed trail of evidence, and a
carefully planned and executed operation, Timothy McVeigh was implicated as prime suspect number one in the plot to blow up the Alfred P.
Murrah Building.
Like Lee Harvey Oswald, who was declared the "lone assassin" within weeks, Timothy McVeigh would be declared — along with Terry
Nichols — the "lone bomber" within days. On the indictments, the Justice Department would gratuitously add, "with others unknown." Yet
these "others unknown" would fade from official memory as the so-called "Justice" Department withdrew the John Doe 2 sketch and the
subsequent reward offer.
After his arrest, Lee Harvey Oswald announced to the television cameras, "I'm a patsy!"
After his arrest, Timothy McVeigh told the London Sunday Times he was "set up" for the bombing by the FBI because of his extreme political
views.[329]
Never since the frame-up of Lee Harvey Oswald has the media gone out of its way to portray a suspect as dangerous and malignant. While
the mainstream press took their cues from the FBI, they contradicted their own journalistic common sense. The government and their
mainstream media lap dogs have based their theories of Timothy McVeigh upon the flimsiest of pretenses, while ignoring the more obvious
facts. The mainstream press, willing to take the Federal Government's word as gospel, has succumbed, and perpetrated, the most obvious
propaganda. In so doing, they have violated every principal of thorough and honest journalism, and have become nothing but a willing tool of
the corporate/intelligence establishment.
As Stephen Jones said, "Before this investigation is all over with, the government will have Tim McVeigh standing next to Lee Harvey
Oswald."[330]
Yet unlike Oswald, who was summarily executed by mob-connected police officer Jack Ruby, McVeigh has quietly and safely settled into his
newfound circumstances. As the drama of his trial(s) unfold in a daily display of evidence and witnesses, Timothy McVeigh may truly believe
that justice will prevail.
Next | Previous | Contents | Text Version
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.comtrial(s) unfold in a daily display of evidence and witnesses, Timothy McVeigh may truly believe
that justice will prevail.
Next | Previous | Contents | Text Version
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---3
Terry Nichols: "Non-Resident Alien"
The image of Timothy McVeigh — the stone-faced killer — would fade in the wake of court appearances and media interviews, as Stephen
Jones sought to portray his smiling and chiding client as the simple boy next door.

The enigmatic figure of Terry Nichols, however, would haunt public perception, as his attorney jealously guarded the mysterious, brooding
figure from prying eyes.

It was the older, quiet, bespectacled Nichols, some theorized, who was the "brains" behind the bombing, guiding his young friend in the
sinister and deadly plot.

Nichols' ex-wife, Lana Padilla, doesn't agree.

"I believe that Terry bought his home, brought his family there… truly, truly… wanted to have a
family and just get on with his life.

I just don't think this man could have done this… I just don't think with any knowledge he could have done
this."[331]
Neighbors Bob and Sandy Papovich, long-time friends, wrote the press that Terry Nichols is a "kind, gentle, generous man absolutely
incapable of violence." As Papovich told the author, "I've known Terry for over 15 years, and I've never heard this man utter the word "hell"
or "damn".… Terry doesn't want to hurt anybody.… And all these people want me to believe that this man is capable of murdering hundreds
of innocent people.

It ain't possible."[332]
Terry Nichols told Federal Public Defender Steve Gradert, "Heck, I've got kids, too," in response to the bombing.[333] A peaceful person,
Nichols reportedly loved children, including his son Josh, whom he maintained a close relationship with.

One day, the astute thirteen-year-
old told his mother he had to call the FBI.

He was frantic.

"I've got to tell them!"
"What do you got to tell them, Padilla asked?"
"I've got to tell them that my dad wouldn't do that.

He loves children."I've got to tell them!"
"What do you got to tell them, Padilla asked?"
"I've got to tell them that my dad wouldn't do that.

He loves children.

He wouldn't do that to those children."[334]
Yet the press would paint Terry Nichols with the same broad brush that they had used to paint Timothy McVeigh — focusing on the fact that
Nichols came from a broken home, had dropped out of college, worked a series of odd jobs, and was anti-government.

Like McVeigh, the
media, anti-militia activists, and scores of pseudo-experts would do their best to cast Nichols in the same extremist mold — a man,
authorities claimed — capable of killing 169 innocent people
The third of four children, Terry Nichols grew up on a farm near Lapeer, Michigan.

His father, Robert — quiet and soft-spoken — labored
hard on the family's 160-acre farm.

Like his son, he also worked a series of odd jobs, doing construction, selling encyclopedias, and putting
in shifts at the Pontiac and Buick plants, in an effort to keep the family afloat in a county where farming had become less and less
prosperous.

His mother Joyce was a sharp contrast.

Hard-drinking, often violent with explosive fits of temper, she had once rammed Robert's tractor with
her car, and had threatened the local sheriff with a chain-saw.

After 24 years of difficult marriage, the couple finally divorced.

Padilla said
Terry took it hard.[335]
Nichols dreamed of going to medical school but his grades weren't good enough for most pre-med programs.

He enrolled at Central
Michigan University, but after his parents' divorce in 1974, he dropped out at the request of his mother, who needed help on the family farm
in Decker.

However, Nichols told friends he would never be a farmer.[336]
Yet, like McVeigh, Nichols was an intelligent man.

He passed a difficult test for a securities license with a minimum of study and preparation,
but told friends he was bored with college, which he found no more challenging than high-school.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, Nichols told friends he would never be a farmer.[336]
Yet, like McVeigh, Nichols was an intelligent man. He passed a difficult test for a securities license with a minimum of study and preparation,
but told friends he was bored with college, which he found no more challenging than high-school. While in Decker, Nichols met his first wife, Lana Padilla, and they married in 1981. Two years later, they had a baby boy, Joshua. Shortly
thereafter, Padilla's sister Kelli married Terry's brother James, and the four lived together at James's Decker, Michigan farmhouse.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Not satisfied with farm life, Nichols tried a number of different occupations.

He delved into penny stocks, went on to sell insurance and real
estate, managed a grain elevator, and worked occasionally as a carpenter.

Nothing held his interest.

"No matter what he tried to do, every time he tried to break away, he ended up back on the farm trying to help his mother and James," said
Padilla.[337]
While Padilla devoted time to building her real estate career, Nichols cooked, cleaned house, and cared for the kids.

Yet he grew
increasingly restless and depressed.

"Terry got real down on life," said his father.

"He didn't care what he had done….

He lost his vitality."[338]
One afternoon Padilla brought home pamphlets from the local Army recruiting office, and laid them out on the table.

When she came back,
the pamphlets were gone.

Like many men uncertain about their future, Nichols decided to try a career in the military.

"He was just searching for a career, something he enjoyed," Nichols' friend Sandy Papovich told the Dallas Morning News.

"He thought he
would like it."[339]
It was an unusual career move for a 32-year-old man with children.

Yet Nichols hoped he would be able to rise quickly through the ranks,
and Padilla thought the experience would strengthen Terry and save their marriage.

On May 24, 1988, Nichols was assigned to Fort Benning, Georgia for basic training.

"He said the government had made it impossible for him
to make a living as a farmer," recalled assistant platoon leader Glen "Tex" Edwards.

He hated the United States government.

I thought it
strange that a 32-year-old man would be complaining about the government, yet was now employed by the government.

Nichols told me he
signed up to pull his 20 years and get a retirement pension."[340]
Because of his age and maturity, Nichols was quickly made platoon leader.I thought it
strange that a 32-year-old man would be complaining about the government, yet was now employed by the government.

Nichols told me he
signed up to pull his 20 years and get a retirement pension."[340]
Because of his age and maturity, Nichols was quickly made platoon leader.

The obvious discrepancy in years earned him the nickname "Old
Man."
"The drill sergeant said that because Nichols was older than the rest of us, he would hopefully be more mature and able to lead the younger
guys in the unit.

He also had some college background and came into the Army as a PFC," said Edwards.[341]
It was at Fort Benning that Nichols would meet Timothy McVeigh.

The two men had enlisted on the same day.

According to an account in
the Post:
William "Dave" Dilly, who was McVeigh's roommate for about a year in the service, said McVeigh and Nichols "hit it off from the start, like
Terry was his big brother.

Tim was real frail and unsure of himself.

Terry was the oldest guy and real sure of himself."
But the two men found they had a lot in common.

McVeigh too came from a broken, blue-collar home and had an abiding interest in firearms
and far-right politics.

Both men fancied themselves as survivalists, and both loved to spend time on the rifle range.

Both were looking for
lifetime careers in the service.

They quickly became friends.[342]
Another one of their friends was Michael Fortier, who joined Nichols and McVeigh at Fort Riley.

The three would spend free time together,
going fishing, shooting, and sharing their political beliefs.

Yet while McVeigh would rise quickly through the ranks, Nichols' Army career stalled.

It seemed his platoon leadership status had been
rescinded due to a prank he and McVeigh had pulled.

Around the same time, Padilla filed for divorce, and made plans to move her real estate business to Las Vegas.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It seemed his platoon leadership status had been
rescinded due to a prank he and McVeigh had pulled. Around the same time, Padilla filed for divorce, and made plans to move her real estate business to Las Vegas. On May 15, 1989, after 11
months in the service, Nichols put in for a hardship discharge due to a "family emergency" that was never publicly explained. Yet it
apparently had nothing to do with his divorce. He told Padilla it was to take care of his son Josh. As Padilla later wrote, Nichols already had
Josh with him at Fort Riley, where the pair lived in a house off-base. As Padilla wrote in her book, By Blood Betrayed:
I've always wondered just why he was released, less than a year after enlisting, and have always been told it was because he had to take
care of Josh. But this theory never washed with me because he'd had Josh with him all along. I really believe that Josh was just a
convenient excuse and that Terry had become disillusioned with the Army because he believed he would never rise through the ranks.[343]
Perhaps Nichols' "hardship discharge" was similar to Lee Harvey Oswald's "hardship discharge" from the Marines that never was explained. And that of Thomas Martinez, the FBI infiltrator into the Silent Brotherhood (The Order), who was given an honorable discharge during basic
training, which was never explained.[344]
Even more interesting is the parallel to McVeigh's discharge after "failing" his Special Forces try-out in April of 1991. McVeigh's sudden and

--- PAGE BREAK ---mysterious departure from the Army, like Nichols', was never fully explained.

As suggested previously, McVeigh's sudden decision leave a
brilliant military career behind may have resulted from his being "sheep-dipped" as an intelligence operative.

Yet mainstream media psychojournalists insisted that Nichols' departure from the Army was nothing more than the inevitable result of a
consistent string of life-long failures.

Glen "Tex" Edwards put a slightly different spin on the matter.

Edwards said that shortly before he left the Army, Nichols invited him to be
part of a "private army" he said he was creating.

"He told me he would be coming back to Fort Riley to start his own military organization,"
recalled Edwards.

"He said he could get any kind of weapon and any equipment he wanted."
Nichols also said he intended to recruit McVeigh, Fortier, and others.

"I can't remember the name of his organization, but he seemed pretty
serious about it," Edwards said, adding that he reported Nichols' offer to the FBI shortly after the bombing.

In spite of the flamboyant tales about recruiting a private army, Nichols returned to his old life in Michigan, working for a time as a carpenter,
then moving back to the farmhouse in Decker.

In spite of his short career in the Army, or perhaps because of it, Nichols developed a deep
distrust of the Federal Government.

It was a feeling that was shared by his brother James, who, as a farmer, had suffered through the worst of the floods of the late '70s and
early '80s, and blamed the Federal Government for failing to provide adequate disaster relief.

Nichols, along with his Sanilac country
neighbors, witnessed dozens of farm foreclosures as a result.

It was the Federal Government's policies that led to the rise of such far-Right
groups as the American Agricultural Movement and the anti-tax Posse Comitatus.Nichols, along with his Sanilac country
neighbors, witnessed dozens of farm foreclosures as a result.

It was the Federal Government's policies that led to the rise of such far-Right
groups as the American Agricultural Movement and the anti-tax Posse Comitatus.

As the Post writes:
Many residents around Decker said they share Terry and James's angry politics, but are less vocal because they fear government
retribution.

"Much of what the Nichols brothers believe is not that different or radical from what lots of people around here think," said local
truck driver Jack Bean.

"We feel our liberties and freedoms are being chipped away at and we want all this authority off our backs.

The
difference between the Nichols and others in this community is that they are just not afraid to say what they think, to challenge what is
wrong."[345]
In spite of their differences, Terry and James had a lot in common.

Both were fathers, had married sisters, and had suffered through difficult
divorces.

Both shared an ideological distrust of the Federal Government.

James studied the Constitution, Black's Law Dictionary and the Uniform Commercial Codes.

He read the works of Jefferson and Paine and
was particularly inspired by Jefferson's maxim, "The tree of liberty must be refreshed from time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants."
Perhaps not coincidentally, this passage was discovered in McVeigh's car upon his arrest.

It would later be read into evidence at his trial.

Both Terry and James also held a view shared by many beleaguered farmers: that the Federal Reserve was not empowered to coin money,
and that U.S.

currency printed after 1930, when the nation went into debt, was valueless.

Following the advice of financial books that warned
of an imminent crash, the brothers put their money into precious metals such as silver and gold.

Yet their activities took still more dramatic turns.Following the advice of financial books that warned
of an imminent crash, the brothers put their money into precious metals such as silver and gold.

Yet their activities took still more dramatic turns.

In 1990 James tried to renounce his citizenship, and plastered his car with anti-government
and Second Amendment bumper stickers.

Terry purchased a pick-up truck and decided not to register it, instead, making his own tag and placing it on front.

Both men renounced their
driver's licenses.

In March of 1994, Terry sent a dramatic affidavit to the Evergreen Township claiming himself to be a "Non-Resident Alien" private citizen not
bound by the laws of the U.S.

government.

(See Appendix) He also renounced his voting rights due to "…total corruption in the entire
political system from the local government on up through and including the president of the United States of America, George Bush."[346]
While he may have been right in principle, his activity was not condoned by the local authorities.

In 1992, Chase Manhattan Bank went after
Nichols for racking up $17,860 in unpaid credit card debts.

The largely out-of-work farmer had spent over $35,000, using Chase and First
Deposit National Bank cards, on farm equipment, personal effects, and airline tickets.

He attempted to pay off the debts with his own "Certified Fractional Reserve Check," a bogus check distributed widely among farmers by a
group called Family Farm Preservation.

He signed the check, "Explicitly reserving all my rights, Terry L.

Nichols." He then sent the bank a
letter retroactively revoking his signature from the credit card contract.

"There are two sides to that man, maybe many more," said Dennis Reid, a Sandusky, Mich., lawyer who has observed Nichols and his
brother, James, during court proceedings in Michigan.

"Jim to me I really expect is kind of a sissy.

He was always shaking when he'd go into
the courtroom and spout off," attorney Dennis Reid said.

"Terry seemed to be more level-headed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He was always shaking when he'd go into
the courtroom and spout off," attorney Dennis Reid said. "Terry seemed to be more level-headed. He was still saying things that were
strange, but he was certainly more cold and more calculating."[347]
Terry definitely didn't seem "level-headed" when he went to court to answer the lawsuit by Chase. He refused to come before the bench,
shouting to Judge Donald Teeple from the back of the room that the court had no jurisdiction over him. During the hearing, the bitter and

--- PAGE BREAK ---sarcastic defendant accused the bank of fraud.

"They knowingly and willingly know how to make credit out of nothing and make interest on it
and actually steal people's hard earned money," he told the Judge.

"They gave me valueless nothing for something they want to take from
me that has value.

That's not right, is it?"
He claimed to have determined that the bank's business was based upon "fraud and misrepresentation, collusion, color of law, conspiracy,
enticement, inducement, seduction, duress, coercion, mistake [and] bankruptcy," and he filed a counterclaim against First Deposit and its
attorneys for $50,000 or 14,200 ounces of silver.

Nichols charged the bank with "mental and emotional damage, loss of happiness and the
unjust destroying of credit history… by wanton acts when no probable cause existed."[348]
The judge was not impressed.

He accused Nichols of playing with words and ordered him to pay the debt.

Nichols didn't pay.

When FBI agents questioned Lana Padilla after Nichols' arrest, they asked her a curious question: Did Nichols ever dye his hair?

The
Bureau had been investigating a string of bank robberies throughout the Midwest.

One of the robbers had dyed his hair, and was Nichols
height and weight.

The group, known as the Midwest Bank Bandits, had robbed over a quarter-of-a-million dollars from more than 22 banks between January,
1994 and December, 1995 in a spree that took them across six states, including Kansas.

The bandits were tied to a group of men who made
their temporary home at Elohim City, a far-Right religious compound in Southeastern Oklahoma.

McVeigh and his friend Michael Fortier
were known to have visited the compound.

Some of the men were also seen in Kansas with the bombing defendants.

(See Chapter 4)
If the FBI's question came as a shock to Padilla, she would turn pale when she opened her ex-husband's storage locker on December 15,
1994, and discovered wigs, masks, and pantyhose.

The Mid-West Bank Bandits had worn masks.(See Chapter 4)
If the FBI's question came as a shock to Padilla, she would turn pale when she opened her ex-husband's storage locker on December 15,
1994, and discovered wigs, masks, and pantyhose.

The Mid-West Bank Bandits had worn masks.

Could Nichols have been robbing banks?

"Not the Terry I knew," said Padilla.

"I was just speculating, but everything that has come out about
that side of Terry was a total… maybe I just turned my face and never noticed it, never wanted to notice it, but… I never thought of him… of
course I never would have thought of him sleeping with a gun under him either."[349]
Yet considering Nichols' hatred of banks and his rallying cry against the monetary system, it would not be too far-fetched a scenario.

Such
speculation is bolstered by the fact that McVeigh sent his sister a letter in December of '93 informing her that he was part of a group that had
been robbing banks.

Although he himself didn't admit to taking part in any of the robberies, he asked her to "launder" three $100 bills that
"they" had stolen.

McVeigh returned to Decker, Michigan in the Spring of 1993 to see his old Army friend Nichols.

Just back from Waco, where he had
witnessed the carnage inflicted upon the Branch Davidians, McVeigh was instilled with a new sense of urgency and rage.

At the Nichols
farm, he would find like-minded souls who shared his frustration.

By the Fall of '93, McVeigh was living at the farmhouse, helping with the chores, and reportedly urging the Nichols brothers onto more
militant activities.

The men practiced target shooting and setting off small bombs on the property.

"You know how little boys like to play with things that blow up?" recalled [neighbor Phil] Morawski.

"That was what they were like.

And
everything they mixed out there in the cornfields seemed to work."
The government would focus heavily on this activity later on.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"That was what they were like. And
everything they mixed out there in the cornfields seemed to work."
The government would focus heavily on this activity later on. According to Michigan Militia members, the Nichols brothers also began attending meetings, but the militia found their rhetoric too strong. Michigan Militia member John Simpson recalled: "Terry came to one of our meetings and wanted to talk about a tax revolt, having to have a
drivers license and eliminating the government. We did not believe in his tactics — particularly the stuff about a revolt."[350] James reportedly
talked about the "necessity" of taking on police officers, judges and lawyers. Apparently, McVeigh accompanied Nichols to some of the
meetings. According to Time magazine, McVeigh and the Nichols brothers went on to organize their own militia:
…the three men formed their own cell of the "Patriots," a self-styled paramilitary group that James Nichols had been affiliated with since
1992 when he began attending meetings in a nearby town. The trio decided to recruit members and establish other cells around the area,
but determined that for security reasons no unit should grow larger than eight members.[351]
If this account is accurate, it would tend to jive with what Nichols told Army buddy Glen "Tex" Edwards about "recruiting" his own private
army. Perhaps one of Nichols' recruits was Craig O'Shea, who lived just off Highway 77 in Herrington. A friend of Nichols who was kicked
out of the service, O'Shea used to work for Barbara Whittenberg, who owns the Sante Fe Trail Diner in Herrington. Whittenberg described
O'Shea as a "demolitions expert," and said she saw him occasionally with Nichols. "He's a very violent man," said Whittenberg, who said
O'Shea had once threatened to kill her and her husband.[352]
In March of '94, Nichols took a job at the Donahue ranch in Marion, Kansas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Co-worker Tim Donahue recalled that Nichols worked long hours, sometimes six days a week, without complaint and appeared to enjoy his
job, which he did well.

Nichols would grouse about taxes and the government conspiring to seize people's firearms.

One day when Nichols
and Donahue were talking about the use of fertilizer in farming, Nichols mentioned that he knew how to make a bomb.[353]
Four months later, in August of '94, Nichols gave Donahue 30 days notice.

His dream of setting up a private army metamorphosized into
simply supplying that army.

He told Donahue he was going into the army surplus business with a friend.

On September 30, that friend —
Timothy McVeigh — showed up to help him pack.

It was during this period that his ex-wife began picking up strange signals from her former husband.

Earlier in the month, he had called her from Kansas.

"He was very upset," she said.

"He was very emphatic.

He talked about Waco and that
shooting at the White House (where a Colorado Springs man fired a gun toward the White House).

He said, 'You know, that guy wasn't all
wrong.

There's going to be some civil unrest in this country.'"[354]
During one of his frequent visits to Padilla's house in Las Vegas, Nichols displayed his Glock .45.

"I never knew him to carry a gun," Padilla
told the Denver Post.

"He liked guns and collected them, but this was new.

He acted like he was afraid for his life.

He slept with it on."[355]
Traveling the gun show circuit with McVeigh, Nichols was now a virtual nomad, living out of his pick-up.

His few remaining possessions were
stored in a locker in Las Vegas.

He also told Padilla that he was he was switching the beneficiary of his life insurance policy from her to his
new wife, Marife.

A 17-year-old Filipino mail-order bride, Marife Torres met Nichols through Paradise Shelton Tours, of Scottsdale, Arizona.He also told Padilla that he was he was switching the beneficiary of his life insurance policy from her to his
new wife, Marife.

A 17-year-old Filipino mail-order bride, Marife Torres met Nichols through Paradise Shelton Tours, of Scottsdale, Arizona.

The young woman
looked forward to leaving her life of poverty in Cebu City, Philippines, where the unemployment rate often topped 40 percent.

After a year of
exchanging heartfelt letters, they married on November 20, 1990 in a small restaurant in Cebu City.

Yet it took over four months of
bureaucratic hassles and red tape to arrange Marife's entry into the U.S.

"That one episode soured Terry on government," his father recalled.

"He originally told me it would take six weeks for her to come here… but
it was red tape, red tape, red tape."
At first the newlyweds tried life on the Decker farm, where Jason, Marife's son by a former boyfriend, was born on September 21, 1991.

Yet
Marife found herself "working like a maid," cooking and cleaning for "three husbands," Terry, James, and Tim, who often stayed at the
house.

She wrote her friend Vilma Eulenberg that she thought the place was haunted, and resented McVeigh, who she thought was a bad
influence on her husband.

The couple eventually moved to warm, sunny Las Vegas, but Marife missed her Philippine home.

To accommodate his new wife, Nichols
moved to Cebu City.

But the noise, heat and smog was too much for him, and in mid-1993, after barely a month in the Philippines, they
moved back to the States, shuttling back and forth between Michigan and Nevada.

Nicole, their first common child, was born on August 1, 1993.

Two months later, on November 22, tragedy struck, when 26-month-old Jason accidentally suffocated to death in a plastic bag.

While Marife
wondered if Terry was capable of killing a child, Padilla assured her he was not, then hinted darkly in her book that McVeigh may have been
responsible for the death.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Two months later, on November 22, tragedy struck, when 26-month-old Jason accidentally suffocated to death in a plastic bag. While Marife
wondered if Terry was capable of killing a child, Padilla assured her he was not, then hinted darkly in her book that McVeigh may have been
responsible for the death. She neglected to mention the fact that McVeigh and James had tried to revive the youngster for nearly half-an-
hour, then called the paramedics. A month later, the couple moved to Las Vegas, where they rented a condominium for $550 a month. It was during this period that Marife
began traveling to the Philippines to finish her physical therapy degree. According to Padilla, Terry also traveled to the Philippines about four
times a year over a four year period. She wrote that he sometimes traveled to Cebu City without taking Marife, whom he occasionally left
behind. "Sometimes he went when Marife was in Kansas. It didn't make sense, but I never asked why."[356]
Padilla subsequently told me in July of 1996, "I have not known him to leave her here and just go to the Philippines. If he made a trip by
himself, it was because she was already there."[357]
Whichever account is true, Nichols did travel to Cebu City in late November to meet with "potential business partners." According to Padilla,
Nichols was making arrangements to bring back "butterflies."
"One time he brought back butterflies — little butterflies that they make over there — he brought them back here to sell."[358]
Butterflies. Curious merchandise for a man trying to set himself up in the military surplus business.[359]*

--- PAGE BREAK ---Then on November 22, 1994 Nichols made a final visit to the Philippines to visit Marife.

His parting words to Josh left the 12-year old
convinced he was never going to see his dad again.

As he got into the car with Padilla after dropping his father off at the airport, he started
crying.

"What's the matter?" Padilla asked.

"I'm never going to see my dad again.

I'm never going to see my dad again."
"Of course you will," Padilla said reassuringly.

"He's gone to the Philippines a lot of times.

You know he always comes back."
"This time is different," he blurted through big tears.[360]
Nichols called his ex-wife from Los Angeles several hours later.

"Had a little excitement at the airport after you left," he said, laughing.

He
told Padilla that airport security had stopped him for trying to sneak a pair of stun guns through the metal detector.

They called the cop on
duty who ran Nichols' name through the computer.

Although he had several outstanding traffic warrants, the police let him continue on his
way.

Just why was Nichols attempting to carry stun guns on an international flight?

According to Bob Papovich, Terry was afraid of the high crime
rate in poverty-stricken Cebu City.

He also said that Nichols was afraid of Marife's ex-boyfriend.

Jason, her son by this man, had died while
in Nichols' custody.

The ex-boyfriend had allegedly threatened to kill him should he return.

Yet Padilla doesn't think the story is credible.

"I think it's something they dreamed up," she said.

Yet upon his return he told Padilla that he
could get "killed down there" and he was never going back.[361]
Obviously, somebody was out to hurt Terry Nichols, possibly kill him.

When he departed for Cebu City, he left a mysterious package for his
ex-wife, saying, "If I'm not back in 60 days, open it and follow the instructions." At first, Padilla did as she was told.

But her instincts
eventually took over.When he departed for Cebu City, he left a mysterious package for his
ex-wife, saying, "If I'm not back in 60 days, open it and follow the instructions." At first, Padilla did as she was told.

But her instincts
eventually took over.

"I was uneasy about his warning, and Josh's, 'I'll never see my dad again' kept echoing in my brain."[362]
Padilla had secured the package in her office safe.

Now she slipped quietly into the conference room, opened the lock, and laid the
mysterious brown paper bag on the table.

It stared ominously back at her.

As she ripped it open, nearly a dozen keys slid out onto the table.

She didn't recognize any of them.

There was Terry's life insurance policy with a note saying he had changed the beneficiary from her to Marife, and two handwritten lists
saying "Read and Do Immediately." One of the lists directed her to a storage locker in Las Vegas:
All items in storage are for Joshua.

The round items are his when he turns 21, all else now.…
The note also instructed her to remove a small plastic bag taped behind a utensil drawer in Nichols' kitchen:
All items in plastic bag are to be sent to Marife, for Nicole, if for any reason my life insurance doesn't pay her.

Otherwise, half goes to Josh
and half to Marife.

She removed a letter to McVeigh's sister, Jennifer.

Inside the letter to Jennifer was another one stamped and addressed to McVeigh:
Tim:
If you should receive this letter, then clear everything out of CG 37 by 01 Feb 95 or pay to keep it longer, under Ted Parker of Decker.

This
letter has been written & sealed before I left (21 Nov 94) and being mailed by Lana as per my instructions to her in writing.

This is all she
knows.

It would be a good idea to write or call her to verify things.

[address redacted] Just ask for Lana (card enclosed).

Your on your own.

Go for it!!

Terry
Also Liquidate 40
At the bottom it read, "As far as I know, this letter would be for the purpose of my death."
"Why would he write that letter?" asked Padilla.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Go for it!! Terry
Also Liquidate 40
At the bottom it read, "As far as I know, this letter would be for the purpose of my death."
"Why would he write that letter?" asked Padilla. "He has been there so many times. Never — ever, has he written a letter like that. Never —
ever."[363]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Two weeks later, on December 15, Padilla and her oldest son, Barry, drove to Nichols' apartment.

Following Nichols' instructions, Barry
reached behind the kitchen drawer and pulled out a plastic bag.

It was crammed full of twenties and hundreds — a total of $20,000 cash.

Already in a state of shock, the pair drove to the AAAABCO storage facility and nervously fumbled with the lock.

They were stunned when
they opened the door.

…there were wigs, masks, panty hose, freeze-dried food, and various gold coins (obviously the "round" objects for Josh), along with gold
bars and silver bullion stacked neatly in boxes.

There were also some small green stones that appeared to be jade.

I estimated at least
$60,000 street value in precious metals![364]
There was also a large ring with what appeared to be safe deposit box keys.

Two months later, on January 16, Nichols returned from the Philippines, alive and well.

"Where's the package?" he asked Padilla.

"I opened it," she stated boldly.

"Why?!" he exclaimed.

"You betrayed my trust.

I told you not to open it for sixty days."
"Because I was frightened.

I thought something terrible had happened to you.

I thought you were dead.

And where did you get all that
money?"
The couple then argued over finances, but Nichols wouldn't explain the mysterious letters, or where he had gotten the cash, the gold, and
the safe deposit box keys.

She didn't ask about the wigs, the masks, and the pantyhose, and he didn't tell her.

But she was worried
nonetheless.

"I think those letters were written because there is somebody bigger than any of us will ever know involved in this," said Padilla.

"Why did he
change his beneficiary on his life insurance?

It wasn't because her boyfriend might take a pot-shot at him… and then he said in that letter not
to say a word to Josh until it's all taken care of… what the hell is he talking about?"Why did he
change his beneficiary on his life insurance?

It wasn't because her boyfriend might take a pot-shot at him… and then he said in that letter not
to say a word to Josh until it's all taken care of… what the hell is he talking about?

It isn't the boyfriend."[365]
If the boyfriend story is untrue, perhaps Nichols' "butterfly" partners were out to get him.

Or perhaps it was someone else, someone bigger and more dangerous.

Such players aren't hard to come by in Cebu City, home to a
number of terrorists groups such as the Liberation Army of the Philippines, the Communist Huk, and the Abu Sayyaf, an organization with
close ties to the Mujahadeen and World Trade Center bomber Ramzi Yousef.

Was Nichols meeting with terrorists in the Philippines?

Incredibly, FBI 302 reports and investigations conducted by McVeigh's defense team
indicate that Yousef, Abdul Hakim Murad, Wali Khan Amin Shah, and several other terrorists met in Davao, on the Island of Mindanao, in
late 1992 or early 1993, to discuss the Oklahoma City bombing plot.

One of the men at the meeting, recalled an Abu Sayyaf leader, introduced himself as "a farmer."[366]
When the "farmer" returned from his November, 1994 trip, and discovered that Padilla had opened the package and read the letter, he
turned "white as a ghost," then immediately began making a series of desperate calls to a boarding house in Cebu City.

Curiously, Nichols would call his party, have a brief 34-second conversation, then hang up and immediately redial the number 14
consecutive times, letting it ring each time.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One of the men at the meeting, recalled an Abu Sayyaf leader, introduced himself as "a farmer."[366]
When the "farmer" returned from his November, 1994 trip, and discovered that Padilla had opened the package and read the letter, he
turned "white as a ghost," then immediately began making a series of desperate calls to a boarding house in Cebu City. Curiously, Nichols would call his party, have a brief 34-second conversation, then hang up and immediately redial the number 14
consecutive times, letting it ring each time. This he repeated on January 31, with nine calls and one 14-minute conversation; then on
February 14 he placed 22 calls within a 40-minute time-period, with one 23-minute conversation; then on the 28th he made 31 calls within
three hours, with no conversations; then finally on March 7 and 14 he made two calls, speaking 24 minutes each.[367]
Since Nichols didn't time-out these consecutive calls (as one would tend to do if there was no answer or the line were busy), but made one
call right after the other, is it possible he was sending some sort of signal or code?[368]
Helen Malaluan, who runs the boarding house, told me Nichols was probably trying to reach Marife, who she said was staying there at the
time. Her brother Ernesto also said that boarders from the island of Mindanao often stayed at the house. The Abu Sayyaf, coincidentally, is
headquartered in Mindanao. Was Nichols using Marife to send a message to someone else? In February of '95, Terry and Marife moved to Herrington, Kansas, where Nichols purchased a modest home for $25,000. "We all thought he was just a little bit different," Herrington real estate agent Georgia Rucker said. "We had to pry any information out of
him."[369]
In Herrington, Nichols appeared to settle down. He attended army surplus auctions at nearby Fort Riley and tried to make a living selling

--- PAGE BREAK ---army surplus gear.

"He spent the morning of April 19, around Herrington, picking up business cards, registering his truck with the state, and calling on a couple
of local shops, asking about their interest in buying government surplus," said Padilla.

"Those are not the actions of a guilty man."[370]
But are they?

On September 30, the same day that Nichols quit the Donahue ranch, someone using the name "Mike Havens" purchased 40 50-pound
bags of ammonium nitrate from the Mid-Kansas Co-op in McPhearson.

Although employees never positively identified Nichols as the
customer, a receipt with McVeigh's fingerprint was found in Nichols' home.

The FBI asserts that the fertilizer was kept in a storage shed in
nearby Herrington, rented by Nichols under the alias "Shawn Rivers."[371]
Then, that same weekend, 299 dynamite sticks, 544 blasting caps, detonator cord, and a quantity of an explosive called Tovex were stolen
from the Martin Marietta Aggregates rock quarry just north of Marion.

Marion County Sheriff Ed Davies testified at McVeigh's trial that he
found metal shavings and tumblers on the ground in front of the magazines.

FBI Agent James Cadigal, an FBI firearms and tool marks
identification specialist, said that a drill bit in Nichols' home matched the signature of the hole drilled into the lock.

Finally, Lori Fortier, Michael Fortier's wife, testified that McVeigh told them that he and Nichols had broken into the quarry.[372]
On October 18, 1994, 40 additional 50-pound bags of ammonium nitrate were purchased from the Mid-Kansas Co-op by "Havens." Havens
was reportedly driving a dark-colored pickup with a light-colored camper top — the kind owned by Terry Nichols.FBI Agent James Cadigal, an FBI firearms and tool marks
identification specialist, said that a drill bit in Nichols' home matched the signature of the hole drilled into the lock.

Finally, Lori Fortier, Michael Fortier's wife, testified that McVeigh told them that he and Nichols had broken into the quarry.[372]
On October 18, 1994, 40 additional 50-pound bags of ammonium nitrate were purchased from the Mid-Kansas Co-op by "Havens." Havens
was reportedly driving a dark-colored pickup with a light-colored camper top — the kind owned by Terry Nichols.

(Another version of the
story has a red trailer attached to the truck, which didn't appear to be Nichols') The FBI believed the fertilizer was stored in a locker in
Council Grove — number 40 — rented the previous day by "Joe Kyle." This apparently was the "liquidate 40" that Nichols referred to in his
mysterious note to McVeigh.

Jennifer McVeigh later testified that when her brother visited Lockport in November of '94, he confided to her that he had been driving
around with 1,000 pounds of explosives.

Could these "explosives" have been the ammonium nitrate purchased at the Mid-Kansas Co-op?

Then on November 5, 1994, several masked men robbed gun dealer Roger Moore.

The 60-year-old Moore was surprised by two men
carrying shotguns, wearing camouflage fatigues and black ski masks, who bound him with duct tape.

They proceeded to ransack his house,
making off with a large collection of weapons, plus a number of gold and silver bars, and a safe deposit box key.

Interestingly, Moore (AKA: Bob Anderson) knew McVeigh, who once stayed at his house.

Moore had met McVeigh at a gun show in Florida
in 1995.

For his part, McVeigh had a solid alibi.

He was in Kent, Ohio on November 5, at a gun show.For his part, McVeigh had a solid alibi.

He was in Kent, Ohio on November 5, at a gun show.

Yet after the bombing, Fortier reportedly told
the FBI that McVeigh called him after the robbery and said, "Nichols got Bob!" Some of the guns were later pawned by Fortier at the behest
of McVeigh, according to the FBI, which contends that the proceeds were used to finance the bombing.

Interestingly, Nichols was seen in Sedalia, Missouri on February 10 and 11, the same weekend that gun dealer William Mueller was robbed.

Mueller's Tilly, Arkansas home, 150 miles south of Sedalia, was burglarized of $40,000 worth of silver coins, gun parts, survival gear, and 30
cases of ammunition.

What makes this even more interesting is that Nichols had checked into the Motel Memory the evening of February 10, after a long drive
from Kansas, telling owner Phillip Shaw he was there for the gun show.

Yet Nichols had missed the first day of the two-day show.

The next morning, while Nichols was apparently at the show, Shaw's wife Betty opened his room and saw dozens of boxes of ammunition
scattered across the floor.

The presence of such a large quantity of ammunition puzzled local investigators, who knew there was too small a
profit margin in legally-purchased ammo for gun show dealers to bother messing with it.

Moreover, if Nichols had planned on selling the
ammunition, why had he left so much of it in his room?

Tragically, Mueller, his wife, and their 8-year-old daughter, Sarah, were found murdered on June 28, 1996.

Their bodies were by pulled from
the Illinois Bayou after a fisherman discovered a portion of a leg.

The family had been handcuffed, their heads covered with plastic bags
wrapped with duct tape.

They were found in 20 feet of water, tied to a heavy rock.

Unaccounted for was some $50,000 the Arkansas Gazette reported the Muellers were believed to have received only days before they
disappeared.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They were found in 20 feet of water, tied to a heavy rock. Unaccounted for was some $50,000 the Arkansas Gazette reported the Muellers were believed to have received only days before they
disappeared. While Timothy McVeigh had known Roger Moore, his friend Michael Brescia, and his friend and roommate Andy Strassmeir had met Bill
Mueller at a Fort Smith, Arkansas gun show earlier that year. As reported in the McCurtain Gazette:
…Mueller then told [Gene] Wergis that he remembered the two because he believed they might be connected with his home's burglary — or
even the ATF. Wergis also reported that Mueller showed him a spiral notebook where the exhibitor had gone so far — so great was his

--- PAGE BREAK ---concern — as to write down the two men's names.[373]
Both Brescia and Strassmeir, who also knew McVeigh, lived at Elohim City, the white separatist compound near Muldrow, Oklahoma.

Two
other part-time residents of Elohim City, 24 year-old Chevie Kehoe and his brother Cheyne, opened fired on police during a traffic stop in
February of '97.

The pair was indicted by a Federal Grand Jury in Little Rock on murder, racketeering and conspiracy charges, stemming
from the Mueller murder.

Guns stolen from the Muellers wound up at a Spokane, Washington motel.

The manager told the FBI that he is 75 percent certain that
McVeigh visited his motel in late '94 or early '95 when Chevie Kehoe was living there.

He said that Kehoe showed up 45 minutes before the
April 19 bombing with a request to watch CNN, and seemed elated when he learned of the tragedy.[374]
Michael Brescia was later arrested for his alleged role in the robbery of a Madison, Wisconsin bank — part of the string of robberies
committed by the Mid-West Bank Bandits.

As previously mentioned, some of the robbers made their temporary homes at Elohim City.

After the bombing, the FBI questioned Padilla about the items found in Nichols' home and storage lockers.

Among those items were large
quantities of ammunition and a safe deposit box key belonging to Roger Moore.

As of this writing it is not known whether the FBI traced the
ammo to Mueller.

Also found in Nichols' home, according to ATF Agent Larry Tongate, were 33 firearms, five roles of 60-foot Primadet detonator cord, non-
electric blasting caps, containers of ammonium nitrate, a fuel-meter, and four 55-gallon blue and white plastic drums.

Not exactly the everyday stuff of an ordinary guy from a small town in Kansas.

Similar items were found in James Nichols' farm, including blasting caps, safety fuses, ammonium nitrate, and diesel fuel.

Nichols, who was
taken into custody the same day as his brother, denied any wrongdoing, and authorities dropped all charges.Similar items were found in James Nichols' farm, including blasting caps, safety fuses, ammonium nitrate, and diesel fuel.

Nichols, who was
taken into custody the same day as his brother, denied any wrongdoing, and authorities dropped all charges.

As for his brother, he
commented, "My gut feeling.

I didn't do anything.

He didn't do anything." When asked by a reporter, "How about Timothy McVeigh?

he
replied, "I want to see some facts."
Yet the facts against Terry seemed to be piling up.

On April 15, 1995, Barbara Whittenberg served breakfast to three men at the Sante Fe Trail Diner: Terry Nichols, Tim McVeigh, and a third
man with dark features.

She also recalled seeing a Ryder truck outside, and asked the men where they were headed.

Suddenly, she said, it
was "as if ice water was thrown on the conversation."[375]
The men left before 7:00 a.m.

Later that afternoon, as Whittenberg and her son were driving to nearby Junction City, they saw the truck
parked at Geary State Fishing Lake — where authorities originally claimed the bomb was mixed.

The truck was still there when they drove
past around 3:00 or 4:00 p.m.

Whittenberg's son recalled seeing three men along with what he described as a Thunderbird with Arizona tags.

Later that day Nichols visited a Conoco station in Manhattan, Kansas, and a Coastal Mart in Junction City, and bought over 30 gallons of
diesel fuel.

Nichols' pick-up has a diesel motor, according to his brother, and Nichols' had been a regular diesel customer for over two
months prior to the bombing, according to Shan Woods of Klepper Oil Co., purchasing between $20 to $30 worth of diesel fuel "two or three
times a week." Receipts were again found in his home.[376]
The next day, Nichols purchased an additional 21 gallons from the Junction City Conoco station.

Then, on the evening of April 17, 1995, a Ryder truck was seen parked behind Nichols Herrington home.Nichols' pick-up has a diesel motor, according to his brother, and Nichols' had been a regular diesel customer for over two
months prior to the bombing, according to Shan Woods of Klepper Oil Co., purchasing between $20 to $30 worth of diesel fuel "two or three
times a week." Receipts were again found in his home.[376]
The next day, Nichols purchased an additional 21 gallons from the Junction City Conoco station.

Then, on the evening of April 17, 1995, a Ryder truck was seen parked behind Nichols Herrington home.

A Ryder truck was seen that same
week backed up to a storage shed that Nichols rented.

On the morning of the 18th, several witnesses again saw the Ryder truck parked at Geary Lake.

Parked next to appeared to be Nichols' pick-
up.

When the FBI subsequently inspected the area, they allegedly recovered bits of ammonium nitrate and strands of detonator cord, and
saw signs of diesel fuel.

That same day, or possibly the day before, a convoy pulled in for gas at the Easy Mart in Newkirk, 100 miles north of Oklahoma City.

It was
a Ryder truck accompanied by a blue pick-up with a camper top.

Manager Jerri-Lynn Backhous recalled seeing three men.

The passenger in
the pick-up was dark skinned with black hair, average height, and had a "real muscular build," she said.

He was wearing a t-shirt and sun-
glasses, and "looked just like the John Doe 2 sketch."[377]
Backhous also saw a reflection of the person in the Ryder truck.

He was a short man with close cropped, dark hair and glasses, she said.

Employee Dorinda J.

"Wendy" Hermes waited on the third man — Terry Lynn Nichols — who came into the store and bought food for the
others.

Hermes particularly recalled Nichols' pick-up.

"It caught me funny because it had street tires on it, but it was all muddy," she said.[378]
But perhaps most interesting was the recollection of Nichols' son Josh, who accompanied McVeigh and his father on the ride back to Kansas
that Sunday.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hermes particularly recalled Nichols' pick-up. "It caught me funny because it had street tires on it, but it was all muddy," she said.[378]
But perhaps most interesting was the recollection of Nichols' son Josh, who accompanied McVeigh and his father on the ride back to Kansas
that Sunday. McVeigh asserts that he called Nichols from Oklahoma City because his car had broken down, and asked Nichols to pick him

--- PAGE BREAK ---igh and his father on the ride back to Kansas
that Sunday. McVeigh asserts that he called Nichols from Oklahoma City because his car had broken down, and asked Nichols to pick him

--- PAGE BREAK ---

up. On the way back, according to Josh, McVeigh made his infamously cryptic remark: "Something big is going to happen."
Nichols reportedly asked him, What, are you going to rob a bank?"
"Something big is going to happen," McVeigh stoically replied.
A curious statement. If McVeigh and Nichols had conspired to bomb the Murrah Building, wouldn't Nichols already know that "something big"
was going to happen?
Or was the statement invented by Nichols to exculpate himself from the plot in the eyes of investigators? Given the fact that the statement
was relayed to the FBI by Nichols' 12-year-old son, this seems unlikely.
And if Nichols was involved in the plot, there is evidence that in November of '94 he wanted out. Among the documents prosecutors handed
over to the defense is testimony from Lori Fortier that McVeigh began to solicit help from her husband because Nichols was "expressing
reluctance."
It should be noted however that the FBI and the "Justice" Department is infamous for framing people, and they brought enormous pressure
on the Fortiers, threatening them with knowledge of a terrorist plot, weapons violations and other charges if they did not testify against
Nichols and McVeigh. Federal prosecutors subsequently coached Lori Fortier heavily before McVeigh's trial, having her practice her
testimony in two mock trials.
Yet if Nichols had no involvement in the plot, what was he doing with large quantities of ammonium nitrate, blasting caps, detonator cord,
and a collection of 55-gallon drums? Why the purchases of diesel fuel? Were these items planted by the FBI?
If Nichols was involved in the bombing, why didn't he make any attempt to hide or dispose of these incriminating items before April 19, or
even by the 22nd? Why would a man,who had allegedly just blown up a building, killing 169 people, plainly leave a receipt for the so-called
bomb ingredient in his kitchen drawer?
In fact, Nichols didn't attempt to hide any of these items, before he casually walked into the local police station on April 22, after hearing his
name on TV. Such do not seem like the actions of an intelligent, calculating, cold-blooded killer.
But, then there were the mysterious trips to the Philippines. Those trips, and Nichols' clandestine meetings with some mysterious players in
Las Vegas, would begin to intrigue a handful of journalists and investigators, as the Oklahoma City bombing plot took them down an even
darker and more insidious road.
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.comVegas, would begin to intrigue a handful of journalists and investigators, as the Oklahoma City bombing plot took them down an even
darker and more insidious road.
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---4
Millar's Rent-A-Nazi
Authorities have postulated that McVeigh's "obsession with Waco," and Nichols' hatred of the Federal Government were the driving forces
that led them to bomb the Federal Building.

Their alleged association with militias and other paramilitary groups, authorities claimed, was the
key influence that guided them along their sinister path to their final, vicious act of revenge.

These numerous pseudo-experts also theorized that McVeigh himself was inspired by the Turner Diaries, written by former physics
professor William Pierce.

In this fictionalized account of white race-warriors' overthrow of the Zionist Occupational Government (ZOG), the
"heroes" demolish the FBI building in Washington, D.C.

with a fertilizer bomb at precisely 9:00 a.m.

The idea for bombing a federal facility is hardly new.

In the mid-1970s Oklahoma resident Harawese Moore was convicted of planting an
incendiary device outside both the Federal Courthouse and the Alfred P.

Murrah Building — a case, coincidentally, defended by Stephen
Jones.

In 1983, members of the Covenant, Sword and the Arm of the Lord (CSA), a white supremacist group based in northern Arkansas, planned
to truck-bomb the Alfred P.

Murrah Building.

In 1988, former CSA leader James Ellison turned states' evidence and testified that CSA
member Richard Wayne Snell and others had participated in the plot.

Snell was bitter toward the government, Ellison claimed, because the
IRS and FBI had seized his property.

Other defendants included Richard Girnt Butler, chief of the Aryan Nations; Robert E.Snell was bitter toward the government, Ellison claimed, because the
IRS and FBI had seized his property.

Other defendants included Richard Girnt Butler, chief of the Aryan Nations; Robert E.

Miles, a former Ku Klux Klansman; and Louis Beam,
Jr., former Grand Dragon of the Texas Ku Klux Klan, and Aryan Nations "Ambassador at Large" — who led a campaign of terror against
Vietnamese-American fisherman.[379]
Ellison, who fancied himself "King James," was surrounded at his CSA compound near the Missouri-Arkansas border on the prophetic date
of April 19 (ten years to the day of the Oklahoma City bombing), leading to a four-day standoff against 200 heavily-armed agents.

Ellison
later testified at his sedition trial that at Snell's request, he had cased several buildings, including the Alfred P.

Murrah Building.

"He took me to some of the buildings and asked me to go in the building and check the building out," Ellison said.

According to his testimony,
rocket launchers were to be "placed in a trailer or a van so that it could be driven up to a given spot, parked there, and a timed detonation
device could be triggered so that the driver could walk away and leave the vehicle set in position and he would have time to clear the area
before any of the rockets launched."[380]
Ellison would later deny this.

Yet on October 22, 1996, the Canadian Broadcasting Company (CBC) played a clip of Ellison, where the
former CSA leader admitted his involvement in the plot:
Ellison: ...Wayne Snell had been...

had made a trip to Oklahoma City, and Wayne came back and told me about different buildings that he
had seen, wanted to know if I would look at them with him sometime.

And Steve talked to me and gave me a description of these buildings
and asked me to design a rocket launcher that could be used to destroy these buildings from a distance...

heavy, large buildings.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And Steve talked to me and gave me a description of these buildings
and asked me to design a rocket launcher that could be used to destroy these buildings from a distance... heavy, large buildings. In the CBC piece, former CSA member Kerry Noble states: "I still look at things like this and realize how close we were, and, you know, that
this could have been me having done this." The reformed Noble, now a critic of the militant extreme-Right, spoke openly about the plot with
CBC's Trish Wood:
Noble: It was one of the targets that we had talked about at [the] CSA in '83. The day it happened, as soon as I heard it on the news, I said,
the Right-wing's done it — they finally took that step. Noble explained that the Murrah Building was a target because it was a low security complex that housed many different federal agencies. He said the plotters thought it would have more effect on the country "than if you did a building, say, in New York City or something."[381]
Wood: Do you think — and I know this is a guess — that Snell or Ellison told [Reverend Robert] Millar about the early plans to blow up the
Murrah Building in Oklahoma City?

--- PAGE BREAK ---Noble: …I think that probably Millar knew that something major was going to happen.

Now, whether he knew the exact details, chances are
he probably did not, because he would not want to know specific details at first.

But I think he knew something major was going to happen.

Ellison later settled at Elohim City at the behest of Millar, who claims to disavow the bombing.

"If I knew something like that was taking place
then or today," said the Christian Identity minister, "I'd do everything I could do to prevent it and, if necessary, call in government agents to
help stop it."
While all 14 defendants in the original 1983 bombing plot were acquitted, Snell was executed on the ever-prophetic date of April 19, 1995,
the very day that the Murrah Building was bombed.

Snell was convicted of killing a black state trooper in 1984, and a pawn shop owner he
thought was Jewish.

While under arrest, Snell called himself a "prisoner of war," precisely what authorities claimed McVeigh said.

Before his death, Snell had time to watch scenes from the bombing on his jail-room TV.

Millar, who was with the 64-year-old Snell during his
final hours, said he was appalled at the destruction.

Yet according to Arkansas prison official Alan Ables, "Snell chuckled and laughed as he
watched television coverage of the Oklahoma City disaster."
Both Millar and Snell's wife contend that the convicted murderer was saddened by the bombing.

Yet Noble thinks McVeigh was in some way
inspired by Snell.

Wood: Did you ever think that it was a coincidence that Tim McVeigh — if, in fact, he did it — chose that building?

Noble: No, I don't think it's any coincidence.

When you bring that into account with the declaration of war that we made, the pressure that
the older leaders of the groups are putting on the younger followers to do something in a major way before they die — no, it's no coincidence.

Wood: How would McVeigh have known about the earlier plans for the Murrah Building?When you bring that into account with the declaration of war that we made, the pressure that
the older leaders of the groups are putting on the younger followers to do something in a major way before they die — no, it's no coincidence.

Wood: How would McVeigh have known about the earlier plans for the Murrah Building?

Noble: It's very feasible and likely that he would have kept in communication with certain people and said...

you know, then if somebody
said, well, what would you recommend as a starting place — it's very likely he could have said, well, this is what we had picked out.

Interestingly, Ables told the Denver Post, "Snell repeatedly predicted that there would be a bombing or an explosion the day of his death."
Ables: A few days before the execution I began to hear things from the director, the wardens, just talk in the office, that strange things were
going on, Snell was talking strangely, he was, you know, making statements that were a little scary… catastrophic events, things were going
to happen.

This date, April 19th, was going to be something that the governor would regret perhaps.

Snell's parting words before leaving this Earth were, "Look over your shoulder, Governor, justice is coming.

I wouldn't trade places with you
or any of your cronies.

Hell has victory.

I am at peace."
Wood: Are those the ravings of a man about to be executed or are they the comments of a man with a plan?

Noble: I think a man with a plan, I think a man who is taking the satisfaction that his death may mean something after all and that it may be
the catalyst that puts somebody over the line to do what he himself didn't get the chance to do.[382]
A similar bomb plot surfaced a year after the Oklahoma City bombing, when Richard Ray Lampley, 65, his wife Cecilia, and friend John
Baird were convicted of a plot to bomb the ADL office in Houston, the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) in Montgomery, and various gay
bars and abortion clinics.I am at peace."
Wood: Are those the ravings of a man about to be executed or are they the comments of a man with a plan?

Noble: I think a man with a plan, I think a man who is taking the satisfaction that his death may mean something after all and that it may be
the catalyst that puts somebody over the line to do what he himself didn't get the chance to do.[382]
A similar bomb plot surfaced a year after the Oklahoma City bombing, when Richard Ray Lampley, 65, his wife Cecilia, and friend John
Baird were convicted of a plot to bomb the ADL office in Houston, the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) in Montgomery, and various gay
bars and abortion clinics.

Lampley made his intentions known at one of Dennis Mahon's WAR meetings.

A former Grand Imperial Dragon of
the KKK, and number three man in WAR, the Tulsan was a frequent visitor to Lampley's place, and to Elohim City.

A self-proclaimed "Prophet of God," Lampley claims he was entrapped by Richard Schrum, an FBI informant.

Schrum was sent by the
Bureau to infiltrate the Oklahoma white separatist compound, but when he found nothing illegal there, he infiltrated Lampley's group instead.

According to defense attorneys, it was Schrum who ran the militia cell to which Lampley belonged, and threatened to leave when it appeared
Lampley was wavering.

"If anyone formed any kind of conspiracy, it was Richard Schrum," defense lawyer Mark Green said.--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to defense attorneys, it was Schrum who ran the militia cell to which Lampley belonged, and threatened to leave when it appeared
Lampley was wavering. "If anyone formed any kind of conspiracy, it was Richard Schrum," defense lawyer Mark Green said. Defense
attorney Warren Gotcher backed up Green, stating "This conspiracy to build a bomb is totally on the orders of Richard Schrum." Schrum told
Lampley that he had a brother in the Special Forces at Fort Bragg, NC, who would provide logistic support when the "New World Order"
invasion came.[383]
The bomb, a mixture of homemade C-4, was supposed to tested at Elohim City.[384]
Whatever the reality of that case, it provides a unique insight into the characters and players of the white supremacist community of
Southeastern Oklahoma — a community that drew to it like a magnet some of the key players of the Oklahoma City bombing conspiracy. Led by the 71-year-old Millar, Elohim City (Hebrew for "City of God") is a 1,100-acre Christian Identity compound near Muldrow, Oklahoma. Founded in 1973 by the Canadian-born Mennonite, the community is home to approximately 90 residents, about half of whom are direct

--- PAGE BREAK ---descendants of Millar.

Christian Identity adherents believe that white Anglo-Saxons, not Jews, are God's chosen people, being descendants of the 12 lost tribes of
Israel, and that America, not Israel, is the Promised Land.

This sanctified doctrine also holds that Jews are the spawn of Satan, and non-
whites are a "pre-Adamic," sub-species.

Only whites are the "true sovereign citizens" of the Republic, and all others are "Fourteenth Amendment citizens" — the creation of an
illegitimate "ZOG." Believers of this odd mix of theology not only believe that the end times are near, but that a great messiah will arise to
lead these "holy warriors" in a terrible final battle against the evil ZOG.

Those who monitor Right-wing extremist groups say Millar is probably the most influential Christian Identity leader in the Great Plains.[385] As
Millar explained it:
"We are opposed to governmental misuse of tax money.… We are opposed to some of the actions of government.

We're not anti-
government...

Our people are all self-employed, and we all pay taxes.… "We are racist," Millar said, "but we aren't anti-Semitic.

I think it's
better for races and cultures...

to have relationships within their own ethnic group.

That doesn't mean isolationism, but it means
separatism."[386]
Yet the group does maintain connections to white supremacist and neo-Nazi organizations, including WAR, the somewhat defunct CSA, and
the violent but largely disbanded Order.

The Christian Identity adherents also formed alliances with Richard Butler, Christian Identity
"minister," and head of the Aryan Nations in Hayden Lake, Idaho.

The Hayden Lake compound served as a nexus for white supremacist
groups from all over the country, including the KKK, Posse Comitatus, William Pierce's National Alliance, and Robert Mathews' Order.The Christian Identity adherents also formed alliances with Richard Butler, Christian Identity
"minister," and head of the Aryan Nations in Hayden Lake, Idaho.

The Hayden Lake compound served as a nexus for white supremacist
groups from all over the country, including the KKK, Posse Comitatus, William Pierce's National Alliance, and Robert Mathews' Order.

It was
Mathews' group, inspired by Pierce's Turner Diaries, that went on to commit a string of bank robberies, counterfeiting, bombings, and murder
throughout the Mid- and Northwest in the 1980s.[387]
Amassing between $2 and $4 million from robberies and heists of armored cars, the group distributed the proceeds amongst the white
supremacist movement.

They also purchased land in northern Idaho for paramilitary training, but moved to northern Arkansas, linking up
with the CSA when they found the harsh climate unsuitable for their purposes.

The Order's exploits came to an end in November of '84, when Mathews died in a shoot-out with police and federal agents on Whidby Island
off the coast of Washington.

It's members who managed to escape fled across the country, integrating themselves into different white
supremacist groups, or went underground altogether.

Richard Lee Guthrie, Jr., the son of a CIA employee, who was discharged from the Navy for painting a swastika on the side of a ship and
threatening superiors, his childhood friend Peter K.

Langan, and Shawn Kenny, went on to form the nucleus of a group known as the
Midwest Bank Bandits.

The group stole more than $250,000 from 22 banks between January of '94 and December of '95 in a spree that led
them across Ohio, Wisconsin, Iowa, Nebraska, Kansas, and Missouri.

The four-member group would often wear FBI jackets agents to taunt
the Bureau, and create diversions to foil police, including leaving behind inert pipe-bombs to slow pursuit.The group stole more than $250,000 from 22 banks between January of '94 and December of '95 in a spree that led
them across Ohio, Wisconsin, Iowa, Nebraska, Kansas, and Missouri.

The four-member group would often wear FBI jackets agents to taunt
the Bureau, and create diversions to foil police, including leaving behind inert pipe-bombs to slow pursuit.

The bandits even had a macabre
sense of humor, wearing a Santa Claus suit during a hold-up around Christmas, and an Easter basket with a gold painted pipe-bomb left
inside a bank in Des Moines.

"Wild Bill" Guthrie also admitted to a West Virginia sheriff that he had helped Butler's Aryan Nations raise another quarter million dollars
through fraud.

Both Guthrie and Langan were regular visitors to the Hayden Lake compound.

The seeds for the mens' dalliance with the paramilitary extreme-Right was sown in 1991, when Shawn Kenny, a friend of Langan and
Guthrie, began discussing their plans to further the "cause."
Interestingly, the Secret Service recruited Langan as an informant in August of 1993 to keep an eye on his friend Guthrie, who had made
threats against the lives of Presidents Clinton and Bush.

Langan was released from his Georgia jail cell (where he was serving time for
robbing a Pizza Hut with Guthrie) and set up in a house in Ohio, where he was to assist the Secret Service in locating his old friend.

The
deal soon went sour.

Secret Service Agent Dick Rathnell summed up the fiasco this way: "Our main interest was to find if there was an interest to harm the
President or overthrow the government....

We didn't know they were these bank robbers."[388]
Langan went south on the Secret Service six weeks later, and soon located his old friend Guthrie.

The two set themselves up in a safehouse
in Pittsburg, Kansas, from which they were alleged to have launched their notorious crime spree.

In November of '94, Mark Thomas, the local Aryan Nations representative, united the two with others of their kind.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The two set themselves up in a safehouse
in Pittsburg, Kansas, from which they were alleged to have launched their notorious crime spree. In November of '94, Mark Thomas, the local Aryan Nations representative, united the two with others of their kind. Thomas' farm, located
rather appropriately next to a toxic waste dump, has been the site of skin-head and neo-Nazi rallies such as White Pride Day and the annual
Hitler Youth Festival, where participants enjoyed such wholesome activities as pagan rituals and cross burnings. Thomas introduced the pair to Pennsylvania native Scott Stedeford, a rock musician and artist, and Kevin McCarthy, a bassist in a white-
power band named "Day of the Sword." Thomas was instrumental in helping the men form an alliance which they would call the Aryan

--- PAGE BREAK ---Republican Army (ARA).

Taking the moniker of "Commander Pedro," Langan became the group's leader.

According to testimony provided by Kenny at Stedeford's
trial, Langan boasted that the gang was modeled after The Order.

"Learn from Bob [Mathews]," Langan is heard saying on a home-made recruitment video.

"Learn from his mistakes.

Study your enemy.

Study his methods."[389]
The Pennsylvania Posse Comitatus leader would also introduce Stedeford and McCarthy to Michael Brescia, a Philadelphia native and rock
musician who would go on to form a speed metal band with McCarthy and Stedeford, called "Cyanide." The rock 'n roll bank robbers decided
to recruit the 24-year-old La Salle University student after planning the heist of a large bank in Madison, Wisconsin, which the trio robbed on
August 30, 1995.

The three men came to know "Grandpa Millar" at Elohim City courtesy of Thomas, and Brescia was soon engaged to Millar's granddaughter,
Ester.

Brescia wound up living at the reclusive compound for two years.

It was there that he would meet his new roommate, Andreas Karl
Strassmeir, the mysterious German who settled there in 1991.

It was also at Elohim City that Brescia would meet Timothy McVeigh.

As ATF
informant Carol Elizabeth Howe recalled:
"Sometime before Christmas [of 1994] a lot of guys showed up at EC (Elohim City).

One that I recall was Tim [McVeigh], who I only knew as
Tim Tuttle.

He was there with a guy who used the name Fontaine, a person I now recognize as Mike Fortier."
Referring to McVeigh, she said, "I never even spoke to him.

He was considered a 'good soldier' by the members of the ARA, but not a
leader; he was just someone you sent out on jobs, because he was reliable."[390]
Were McVeigh and Nichols involved in bank robberies?

Had the robberies financed the bombing?

It was a question that has disturbed
Nichols' ex-wife Lana Padilla, who discovered masks, nylon stockings, and wigs in her former spouse's storage locker.Had the robberies financed the bombing?

It was a question that has disturbed
Nichols' ex-wife Lana Padilla, who discovered masks, nylon stockings, and wigs in her former spouse's storage locker.

Nichols was known
as a vehement critic of the banking system, had been on the losing end of a large credit card lawsuit, and had declared the Federal Reserve
corrupt.

McVeigh himself sent his sister Jennifer three $100 bills, telling her they were the proceeds from a bank robbery.

While there was no proof
that the pair had actually participated, authorities would ponder the significance of the associations.

As the Gazette writes:
A reliable source familiar with the investigation confirmed that admitted co-conspirator Michael Fortier told the FBI that ex-army buddy Tim
McVeigh said in February 1995 that he (McVeigh) was going to Colorado to join "The Order."[391]
Interestingly, what is not known is just where McVeigh was on the days immediately before and immediately after 11 of the robberies.

What is known is that Brescia, Strassmeir, and McVeigh became friends, attending gun shows, traveling the white supremacist circuit, and
crashing high-school parties in Kansas, not far from Terry Nichols' house.

Neighbors recalled seeing men who fit the general description of
McVeigh and John Doe 2 at Nichols' Herrington home.

For his part, Strassmeir claims he'd "never been in Kansas," then admitted, "…well, once, driving through."[392]
Catina Lawson's roommate, Lindsay Johnson, dated Brescia, and Lawson was close friends with McVeigh.

Both she and Lawson recalled
seeing Strassmeir, Brescia, McVeigh and Fortier at the Kansas parties around the Summer of '92.

The young women allegedly referred to
the handsome young Brescia as "Mike Breezy."
It is Brescia, some investigators claim, who is the mysterious John Doe 2 originally sought by the FBI.

Bombing victim Glenn Wilburn, along
with investigator J.D.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The young women allegedly referred to
the handsome young Brescia as "Mike Breezy."
It is Brescia, some investigators claim, who is the mysterious John Doe 2 originally sought by the FBI. Bombing victim Glenn Wilburn, along
with investigator J.D. Cash, learned of Brescia's relationship to Strassmeir and McVeigh after talking to people at Elohim City and others in
the white supremacist underground. The family filed a $30 million lawsuit against McVeigh, which includes Strassmeir, and named Brescia
as John Doe 2. Robert Millar insists that Brescia, who is engaged to Millar's granddaughter, is not John Doe 2, but simply a "cleancut, college type boy."[393]
Yet several witnesses in Kansas claimed that Brescia closely matches the FBI's wanted sketch. Like John Doe 2, Brescia has a tattoo on his
left arm. Curiously though, Brescia's tattoo is circular — a cross inside a wheel — the emblem of the Aryan Nations. The tattoo seen by Mike
Moroz and other witnesses on John Doe 2 more closely resembled a dragon, an anchor, or a snake. But then again, according to numerous
witnesses, there is more than one John Doe 2. While Brescia's connection to Elohim City centered around his relationship with Ester, it was Strassmeir who was his roommate. A German
national, the 38-year-old Strassmeir is the son of Günter Strassmeir, former Parliamentary Secretary of State to German Chancellor Helmut
Kohl. Strassmeir's uncle is in the German parliament, and his brother Alexander sits on the Berlin City Council. Like Langan, Strassmeir's
father also reportedly has connections to the CIA.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Andreas served as a lieutenant in the German Panzer Grenadiers (the equivalent of our Special Forces), had formal military intelligence
training, and did a stint as a liaison officer with the Welsh Guards.

He told the London Sunday Telegraph that part of his work was to detect
infiltration by Warsaw Pact agents, and then feed them disinformation.

"If we caught a guy, we'd offer him amnesty.

We'd turn him and use
him to feed false information back to the Warsaw Pact."[394] While Strassmeir would not admit it, it is reported that he is an agent for the
German national anti-terrorist police, the GSG-9.[395]
"Andy the German," as he became known, arrived in the U.S.

in May of 1991, without being documented by the INS (Immigration and
Naturalization Service), and lived on a credit card provided by sources unknown.

He soon became Elohim City's Director of Security.[396]
According to Strassmeir, his path crossed McVeigh's at a Tulsa gun show in April of '93.

Strassmeir stopped by McVeigh's table and bought
a few military souvenirs and discussed events at Waco.

He then gave McVeigh his card bearing the inscription "Elohim City." In an interview
in Soldier of Fortune, Strassmeir professed never to of heard of McVeigh, though he later recanted his story for the Telegraph..

"I met the
guy once at a gun show," he said.

"We spoke for five minutes, that's all."[397]
It would seem the relationship goes deeper than that however.

Strassmeir reportedly met McVeigh again at the first anniversary of the Waco
massacre in April of '94.

And according to journalist William Jasper, sources close to the investigation revealed that McVeigh visited Elohim
City on at least 20 occasions.

Traffic records show McVeigh was stopped for speeding on October 12, 1993, two miles north of Cederville,
Arkansas, less than 10 miles from Elohim City, on a remote road leading to the compound.

ATF informant Carol Howe also recalled seeing
McVeigh and Fortier at Elohim City during the winter of '94.Traffic records show McVeigh was stopped for speeding on October 12, 1993, two miles north of Cederville,
Arkansas, less than 10 miles from Elohim City, on a remote road leading to the compound.

ATF informant Carol Howe also recalled seeing
McVeigh and Fortier at Elohim City during the winter of '94.

Yet possibly the most revealing connection surfaced in the form of two phone calls, one placed by McVeigh from the Imperial Motel in
Kingman, Arizona to Strassmeir on April 5, just two weeks before the bombing.

It was just minutes after McVeigh had allegedly called
Junction City to reserve the Ryder truck.

According to Millar's daughter-in-law Joan, who answered the phone, the caller asked to speak to
"Andy." Andy wasn't in.

McVeigh left a message saying, "Tell Andy I'll be coming through."
Robert Millar, Elohim City's "spiritual leader," claimed ignorance of McVeigh or the phone call.[398] He later recanted his story.

Then one day before the bombing, McVeigh called Strassmeir's U.S.

attorney, Kirk Lyons, looking for Andy.

Not finding him there, he
engaged Lyon's assistant, Dave Holloway, in a 15-minute conversation about Waco, Lyons claims, and the need to "send a message to the
government." It seemed McVeigh also needed to send a message to Strassmeir.

For his part Strassmeir claims McVeigh never visited Elohim City.

"I don't know why McVeigh was trying to contact me," he said.

Catina Lawson, who was close friends with McVeigh for two years, remembers seeing Strassmeir at the Junction City parties.

"He was just
someone you'd see every once in a while," said Lawson, who, along with friends, would meet and party with the soldiers from nearby Fort
Riley.

"He was tall, skinny and pale, with crooked teeth and sunken eyes surrounded by dark circles.

And he had this accent.…"[399]
Larry Wild and his wife Kathy also recall seeing Strassmeir on one of their fishing trips to Cameron Springs Lake, near Fort Riley."He was tall, skinny and pale, with crooked teeth and sunken eyes surrounded by dark circles.

And he had this accent.…"[399]
Larry Wild and his wife Kathy also recall seeing Strassmeir on one of their fishing trips to Cameron Springs Lake, near Fort Riley.

The Wilds
remember seeing Strassmeir with two other men with an old Ryder truck one week before the bombing.

Just who those two other men were
they couldn't say.

Wild did recall speaking with Strassmeir though.

"I said, 'Your dialect is really different.

Are you a soldier?' He said, 'No.' I
said, 'Do you work for the government?' He just kind of laughed."
Yet still more witnesses recall seeing the two men together.

At least five dancers recall seeing McVeigh, Nichols, Brescia, and Strassmeir at
Lady Godiva's, a strip joint in Tulsa, which the men visited on April 8, 1995.

In an interview with CBC's Trish Wood, the dancers, who wish to
remain anonymous, were "positive" of Strassmeir and McVeigh's presence just eleven days before the bombing:
Wood: You saw this man in here?

Unidentified: Yes.

Wood: And how do you remember?

What makes you remember seeing him in here that night?

Unidentified: From one of the girls.

I just heard her say something about a couple of guys, there were a couple of weird guys, she wanted
somebody to go sit with them.

As discussed earlier, McVeigh bragged to one of the girls that "something big" was going to happen.

"On April 19, 1995, you'll remember me
for the rest of your life," McVeigh said.[400]
Also present that night was an old, faded Ryder truck, seen by the bouncer.

The truck appeared to be privately-owned, adding further proof
that at least two trucks were used in the bombing.

It was this truck which was seen by witnesses at Geary State Park, several days before
authorities allege that McVeigh rented his.

J.D.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was this truck which was seen by witnesses at Geary State Park, several days before
authorities allege that McVeigh rented his. J.D. Cash speculates that McVeigh flew to Fort Smith from his motel room in Kingman on April 7
to pick up the truck and meet his comrades, then the men stopped by Tulsa on their way back to Kansas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---If they stopped by Tulsa, maybe it was to check out the Indian Territory Gun Show.

It also might have been to meet Dennis Mahon.

The
WAR official, National Socialist Alliance (NSA) leader, and former KKK Imperial Grand Dragon traveled frequently to the reclusive compound
where he kept a trailer, "to visit and fellowship and do some target shooting and military maneuvers," he said.

Mahon was close friends with
Brescia and Strassmeir, both of whom he "loved like brothers."[401]
In what may seem like an even more bizarre twist, Mahon claims he was funded by the Iraqis during the Gulf War.

Like Order leader Robert
Mathews, who was reportedly offered funding by the Syrians, Mahon received $100 a month, for a total of $4,800, from the Iraqis to stir up
opposition to the Bush/UN-imposed sanctions.

Mahon, operator of the Dial-a-Racist hot line, also produced several videotapes which he
distributed to public access stations, expressing his dissenting view on the U.S.

policy.[402]
Mahon started receiving Iraqi funds shortly after he began holding anti-war rallies, he said.

"…it's coming from the same zip code where the
Iraqi Embassy is, but they don't say it's from the Iraqi Embassy."[403]
Jeff Steinberg, an investigator for the LaRouche Foundation, says such a scenario is not at all unusual.

"This kind of stuff happened all the
time," says Steinberg.

"In the '70s, they had people who's job it was to show up at every sort of Left-wing rally."
Yet why would the Iraqis give money to an avowed white supremacist like Mahon?

"Hatred of the Jews," says Stienberg.

"Some low-level
person at the embassy gives it out to these guys, and you'd be surprised at who they give it to — they're not that bright."[404]
In McVeigh's Petition for Writ of Mandamus, filed one week before McVeigh's trial, Stephen Jones made note of the fact that three members
of the American Agricultural Movement also met with Iraqi officials."Hatred of the Jews," says Stienberg.

"Some low-level
person at the embassy gives it out to these guys, and you'd be surprised at who they give it to — they're not that bright."[404]
In McVeigh's Petition for Writ of Mandamus, filed one week before McVeigh's trial, Stephen Jones made note of the fact that three members
of the American Agricultural Movement also met with Iraqi officials.

Their purpose was to work with the Iraqis to negotiate a peaceful
withdraw from Kuwait.

"We wanted to get a dialogue going and stop a shooting war," said one member.

"As Americans, that's what we tried
to do."[405]
Yet it seemed the meeting between the farmers and the Iraqi ambassador wasn't the only meeting that took place.

Jones stated that Terry
Nichols, who he refers to only as "Suspect I," made calls to two Kansas-based Posse Comitatus members — David Oliphant and Buddy
Snead.

Like Nichols, Snead is married to a Filipino woman.

It is not known whether he met her through the same mail-order bride service as
Nichols.[406]
A CIA source contacted by Jones indicated that two members of the Posse Comitatus (it is not known who) visited with an Iraqi diplomat in
New York City around the same general time.

While the author was unable to locate these two individuals to confirm the story, it is possible
they met with the diplomat to express their horror over Bush's "Desert Massacre."
It is also possible that the Iraqis viewed the meeting as an opportunity to strengthen their ties to the white supremacist movement.

As will be
seen, collaboration between Arab states, Mid-East terrorists, and neo-Nazis is a long and well-documented one.

Unfortunately for Dennis Mahon, the Iraqis severed their ties with him after the bombing.

"…they cut me off, a month after the bombing —
bastards!"[407]
It is also likely that Mahon, who traveled to Germany to recruit young skinheads for the KKK, may have met up with Michael Kühnen.Unfortunately for Dennis Mahon, the Iraqis severed their ties with him after the bombing.

"…they cut me off, a month after the bombing —
bastards!"[407]
It is also likely that Mahon, who traveled to Germany to recruit young skinheads for the KKK, may have met up with Michael Kühnen.

A
prominent neo-Nazi, Kühnen formed the Anti-Zionist League, which preached hatred of Jews, and sought to form a common bond between
Nazis and their Arab brethren.

Kühnen also negotiated with the Iraqis, providing them with 200 German, American and British skinheads to
fight alongside Iraqi troops.

There is reportedly a videotape of these storm troopers in S.S.

uniforms being greeted by Iraqi Information
Minister Abdel Lateef Jassem.[408]
Kühnen's successor, a name named Hubner, has connections to Kirk Lyons, Andreas Strassmeir's North Carolina-based attorney.

Lyons
also spoke with Hubner at meetings of the group "Deutsche Alternative." Like Mahon, Lyons traveled the German white supremacist circuit.

Strassmeir and Mahon were close friends, until Mahon and his brother Dennis reportedly called Germany with orders to kill Strassmeir.

Another friend of Mahon's is Gary Lauck of Lincoln, Nebraska.

The leader of the neo-Nazi National Socialist Worker's Party, Lauck wrote a
20-page manifesto entitled, "Strategy, Propaganda and Organization," about integrating worldwide extremist groups into a tight network, and
"military education with terrorist aims." Lauck has reportedly had frequent contact with Arab terrorist groups according to McVeigh's defense
counsel.

Finally, there is the Libyan government, widely reported to have funded both the Irish Republican Army (IRA) and U.S.

citizens, including a
Chicago street gang called the El Rukns — convicted of conspiracy to commit terrorist acts throughout the U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Finally, there is the Libyan government, widely reported to have funded both the Irish Republican Army (IRA) and U.S. citizens, including a
Chicago street gang called the El Rukns — convicted of conspiracy to commit terrorist acts throughout the U.S. "Upon hearing that Louis Farrakhan had received $5 million from the Libyan government, the leader of the El Rukns actively sought
sponsorship from Libya in exchange to an in-kind amount of money. Members of the El Rukns actually traveled to Libya to meet with military
official of the Libyan government."[409]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam (NOI, or "Black Muslims"), carries forth a unique historical precedent.

His predecessor, Elijah
Muhammad, invited American Nazi Party leader George Lincoln Rockwell to address an NOI rally on June 25, 1961 in Washington, D.C.

There is a photo of Rockwell's Nazis in full regalia (including Swastika arm bands) seated in the front row, with the Black Muslims seated
directly behind them.[410]
Rockwell appeared at an NOI rally in Chicago one year later, where he announced, "Elijah Muhammad is to the so-called Negro what
Adolph Hitler was to the German people.…"
In September of 1985, the NOI invited Tom Metzger, former Grand Dragon of the KKK and current leader of WAR to its forum in Ingelwood,
California, and accepted a small financial contribution from the notorious white supremacist.

Metzger declared that his alliance with the NOI
was a "logical one: They want their territory and that's exactly what we want for them and for ourselves.

They speak against the Jews and
the oppressors in Washington."[411]
It therefore comes as no surprise that Libya funded the NOI to the tune of $5 million dollars.

The motive behind Arab funding of Western
racist and dissident groups was — and is — to forment revolution and destabilize the "Great Satan." Just as Libyan President Muammar al-
Qaddafi serves as the inspiration behind many militant Black Muslims, so the IRA served as the spiritual inspiration behind the Aryan
Republican Army, the group founded by Richard Guthrie and Peter Langan, which included Michael Brescia.They speak against the Jews and
the oppressors in Washington."[411]
It therefore comes as no surprise that Libya funded the NOI to the tune of $5 million dollars.

The motive behind Arab funding of Western
racist and dissident groups was — and is — to forment revolution and destabilize the "Great Satan." Just as Libyan President Muammar al-
Qaddafi serves as the inspiration behind many militant Black Muslims, so the IRA served as the spiritual inspiration behind the Aryan
Republican Army, the group founded by Richard Guthrie and Peter Langan, which included Michael Brescia.

As Stephen Jones eloquently states, "These people are targeted because their ideological compass is preset against the Federal
Government.… Although the white supremacist community are diametrically opposed to that of Black Muslims, it is a well known fact that
both share a common hatred for the Federal Government."
When the ARA was eventually disbanded, the FBI discovered an IRA terrorist manual called the "Green Book," literature on Ireland, Gaelic
language tapes, Semtex explosives, a shoulder-fired rocket launcher, and 11 pipe bombs.[412] Semtex is normally used by Mid-East
terrorists, usually being supplied by Russia, China and North Korea.

It seems the connection goes deeper.

Dennis Mahon claims he actually provided advice to the IRA, encouraging them to murder "top British
officers and police officials" but avoid killing civilians.

That statement ties-in to others Mahon has made, including the idea of blowing up the
Oklahoma Federal Building at night, when no one was around, and other methods which "are legitimate to save your nation."
It seems the IRA may have returned the favor.

According to Carol Howe, the outlawed Irish resistance group supplied the detonator used in
the Oklahoma City bombing.

The author is not quite sure why the bombers would need to go to the IRA for a detonator, or exactly how such
a connection would be arranged, but it seems rather dubious.According to Carol Howe, the outlawed Irish resistance group supplied the detonator used in
the Oklahoma City bombing.

The author is not quite sure why the bombers would need to go to the IRA for a detonator, or exactly how such
a connection would be arranged, but it seems rather dubious.

Sinn Fein (the political arm of the IRA) President Gerry Adams called the claim
"preposterous rubbish."[413]
It may seem even more preposterous in light of the fact that Adams had won the political favoritism of President Clinton, having been the
guest of honor at a recent White House reception.

Yet Howe alleged that Andreas Strassmeir was the key link between the ARA and the IRA.

Interestingly, the Dublin Sunday Times reported
on July 13, 1997 that Strassmeir has indeed associated with Sinn Fein:
Strassmeir moved to Dublin last February and is living in an apartment in the city owned by George Maybury, general secretary of the
association of Garda Sergeants and Inspectors.

He has been working on construction sites and has attended Sinn Fein meetings and social
events.[414]
Furthermore, federal informant Cary Gagan, who met with Jones after the bombing, told the author he met with an IRA bomb expert while in
Mexico City, who instructed him on the use of timers.

Gagan claims to have been deeply immersed in the Middle Eastern cell involved in the
bombing.

(See Chapter 5)
When FOX News reporter Rita Cosby asked Robert Millar if there was any Middle Eastern connection to Elohim City, he answered, "No, not
that I can even dream of." Strassmeir likewise denied any Middle Eastern connection to the bombing in an interview with the author.[415] As
of this writing, former ABC 20/20 investigator Roger Charles was checking a lead that Middle Eastern individuals were indeed trained at
Elohim City.

It has not yet been confirmed.

Just what Andreas Strassmeir was doing in the U.S.

is not altogether clear.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Just what Andreas Strassmeir was doing in the U.S. is not altogether clear. In a five-part interview in the Telegraph, Strassmeir said that he
came to the U.S. in 1989 to work on a "special assignment" for the Justice Department. "I discussed the job when I was in Washington. I
was hoping to work for the operations section of the DEA," he explained. "It never worked out."
The former German intelligence officer was recommended for these positions by Vincent Petruskie, a retired U.S. Air Force colonel. Strassmeir told attorney Mike Johnston, who flew to Berlin to interview him, that Petruskie is "a former CIA guy who my father had known
since he (Petruskie) was stationed in Berlin during the Cold War."
In an interview with New American editor William Jasper, Petruski denied any CIA connections:

--- PAGE BREAK ---As for the CIA connection, "That's totally wrong," insisted Petruskie.

"I'm a retired Air Force officer, that's all." According to Petruskie, he was
a special agent for the Air Force Office of Special Investigation (OSI), and retired as a colonel after serving from 1954 to 1975.

Was he a
friend of Andreas' father?

"I've never met his father; we've only spoken over the phone."[416]
How had Petruskie come to know the younger Strassmeir?

Andreas arrived in the late 1980s with some other German lads for the
reenactment of the Battle of Gettysburg.

The German visitors had authentic period uniforms, rifles, bayonets, etc.

and an amazingly detailed
knowledge of the battle.

But they apparently had not done their homework concerning economic realities of contemporary America and so
were short of cash for living accommodations and had no credit cards with which to rent a vehicle.

That is when a mutual friend put them in
touch with Petruskie, who put them up for a while at his home.

Strassmeir was "a mixed-up kid, a very immature 34-year-old when he came over here," recalled Petruskie.

"Andy wanted to work for the U.

S.

government — DEA, Justice — undercover.

[He] thought his background with military and German government would help.

I explained
he'd need a green card, education, and set him down with some people in Washington who explained that it wasn't that simple.

I think he
went down to South Carolina and then to Texas to go to school."[417]
In an interview with the Oklahoma Gazette, Petruski once again attempted to distance himself from Strassmeir.

"This kid is what we would
call a putz," he said.

An interesting description for a former intelligence officer and lieutenant in the elite Panzer Grenadiers.[418]
Petruski also claims that Strassmeir's job with the DEA "fell through." Is one seriously supposed to accept the premise that a man with
Strassmeir's background, influence, and connections came to the U.S.

on the off-chance of finding a job with the DEA?An interesting description for a former intelligence officer and lieutenant in the elite Panzer Grenadiers.[418]
Petruski also claims that Strassmeir's job with the DEA "fell through." Is one seriously supposed to accept the premise that a man with
Strassmeir's background, influence, and connections came to the U.S.

on the off-chance of finding a job with the DEA?

That he traveled all
this way to run around playing toy soldier for a couple days?

And that Petruski just "happened" to meet him at a battle reenactment at
Gettysburg?

More likely, Gettysburg was a necessary cover-story to infiltrate Strassmeir into the country.

Appearing to be a military enthusiast makes it
easier to infiltrate the extreme-Right.

And Petruski's tale about his DEA job falling through is a "limited hang-out," just enough information
revealed to satisfy nosy journalists, with enough disinformation mixed in to steer them away from "unapproved" areas.

And while Petruski
said that Strassmeir never got a job with the DEA, he never said he didn't get a job with the ATF, FBI, or CIA.[419]
With his cover-story firmly in place, Strassmeir then "drifted" into the far-Right circles of the lunatic fringe, stopping long enough to pick an
ordinary job as a computer salesman to further enhance his image as an innocent drifter.

"Andy the German" was now ready to infiltrate the neo-Nazi cliques of the far-Right.

With his German background and accent, it was easy to
convince white supremacists of his legitimacy.

In 1991 he settled in Elohim City, where he established himself as Chief of Security and
weapons training.

According to a report from the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation (OSBI), Strassmeir trained platoon-sized groups consisting of 30 to
40 individuals from throughout the U.S.

every three months at the reclusive compound.According to a report from the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation (OSBI), Strassmeir trained platoon-sized groups consisting of 30 to
40 individuals from throughout the U.S.

every three months at the reclusive compound.

According to a law enforcement source interviewed
by the McCurtain Gazette, they consisted primarily of members from the Aryan Nations, and included Timothy McVeigh.[420] As the Gazette
reported:
"Strassmeir went out and replaced all our deer rifles with assault weapons," said [resident Zara] Patterson.

"Next, he wanted us to start
doing illegal stuff… a lot of illegal stuff.

I kept telling Andy that we were defensive here, and we didn't want any problems from the law.

During the mid-'80s, we had a standoff with the feds.

I told him to keep us out of trouble."[421]
Was Strassmeir attempting to infiltrate Elohim City?

"If the agent penetrates the group," Strassmeir said in an interview with the author, "the
first thing they do is try to sell them weapons." When asked if that wasn't exactly what he did, he replied, "I just advised them about
weapons, as an experienced soldier.

That's what I did for years and years.

I was an infantry man — I just gave advice.

But, I always obeyed
the law." He then admitted that he "didn't know the law.

I'd have to consult my lawyer."
According to information obtained by the Telegraph, Strassmeir infiltrated the Texas Light Infantry militia between 1988 and 1989, and set up
some illegal gun purchases.

They soon suspected that Strassmeir was a ATF informant.

When some members followed him to a federal
building one night, they observed him entering it using the building's combination key-pad.[422]
ATF agent Angela Finley-Graham, the agent who supervised ATF informant Carol Howe, had aerial surveillance photos of Strassmeir with
an assault weapon, and photos of concrete bunkers at Elohim City.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They soon suspected that Strassmeir was a ATF informant. When some members followed him to a federal
building one night, they observed him entering it using the building's combination key-pad.[422]
ATF agent Angela Finley-Graham, the agent who supervised ATF informant Carol Howe, had aerial surveillance photos of Strassmeir with
an assault weapon, and photos of concrete bunkers at Elohim City. In fact, in 1992, some 960 yards of concrete were transported to the
compound, presumably for bunkers and weapons storage facilities.[423]
Law enforcement officials also received reports that the compound was believed to be generating income through the sale of illegal drugs. A
source familiar with the community told me that Bruce Millar, Robert Millar's son, was supposedly "strung out" on Methamphetimines. Speed
is a highly popular drug among the neo-Nazi crowd, and was in fact invented by the Nazis during WWII to bolster the fighting ability of their

--- PAGE BREAK ---front-line troops.

Several weeks before the bombing, in mid-February, the Tulsa office of the ATF passed on information to the Oklahoma Highway Patrolman
Ken Stafford, who put out a BOLO (Be On The Lookout For) on Strassmeir:
ANDREAS STRASSMEIR, W/M, 5/17/59, heavy German accent.

Black Hair/ Blue Eyes.

1" scar on chin, wears cammo fatigues.

Possible
Tennessee driver's license.

Came to USA in 5/91, passport was good until 8/91.

He never left the country.

INS says he does not have an
extension of his VISA.

Possibly in blue Chevy, late model, tag BXH 346 (not on file), usually has someone driving him.

Carries a .45 auto
pistol at all times.

He is an illegal alien, ATF wants to be notified if he is stopped and has the gun on him.

They will file the charges.

Contact:
Agent Angela Finley, ATF.

Office: 918-581-7731 (or) Pager: 918-672-2755.

What's odd is that the BOLO was for an INS violation, not exactly the jurisdiction of the ATF.

Moreover, according to a Tulsa police
intelligence source, the INS was told not to make any effort to focus on visa violations due to manpower shortages.

The McCurtain Gazette, which uncovered the BOLO, thinks it was put out by the ATF to provide cover for Strassmeir — an aid for his
extraction from Elohim City.

The OHP subsequently typed up the BOLO, which was eventually "leaked" to various sources, including the
residents of the rural community.

According to Glenn Wilburn, the BOLO was circulated with the stipulation that Strassmeir not be arrested.

[424]
Curiously, when Finley-Graham attempted to get a warrant for Strassmeir's arrest, she was stonewalled by the INS.According to Glenn Wilburn, the BOLO was circulated with the stipulation that Strassmeir not be arrested.

[424]
Curiously, when Finley-Graham attempted to get a warrant for Strassmeir's arrest, she was stonewalled by the INS.

A Tulsa police
intelligence source told me that Finley "was out to get the whole place." This fact was confirmed by information obtained by McVeigh's
defense counsel during discovery.[425]
This is also interesting in light of the fact that the INS and ATF had originally planned a joint raid on the compound — a plan which suddenly
came to a halt in late February of '95.

As one INS memo stated:
Investigation pending — no arrest or warrant as of yet — Northeastern Oklahoma — request participation.

Raid — next month.[426]
It seems the ATF and INS weren't the only ones interested in Elohim City.

As a report of Finley-Graham's dated February 28 states:
On 22 February 1995, this agent met with OHP Trooper Ken Stafford to exchange certain information regarding this investigation.

Trooper
Stafford indicated that the FBI also had an ongoing investigation regarding Elohim City.

On this same date, RAC David Roberts met with the
United States Attorney for the Northern Judicial District of Oklahoma, Steve Lewis, to discuss this investigation.

On February 23, 1995 RAC David Roberts was contacted by FBI supervisor, Marty Webber, who stated that FBI Special Agent in Charge,
Bob Ricks, would be available during the week of February 27 through March 03, 1995 to meet with ATF Special Agent in Charge, Lester
Martz.

RAC Roberts then contacted Dallas Division to request SAC Martz meet with SAC Ricks to discuss the investigation of Elohim City.

[427]
As an interesting historical precedent, [former] FBI agent James Rodgers had developed a massive FBI raid on Elohim City in 1988, but it
was called off for reasons that have never been made clear.

One month before the bombing Howe got "fed up" with Elohim City and the ATF's attitude towards the investigation.[427]
As an interesting historical precedent, [former] FBI agent James Rodgers had developed a massive FBI raid on Elohim City in 1988, but it
was called off for reasons that have never been made clear.

One month before the bombing Howe got "fed up" with Elohim City and the ATF's attitude towards the investigation.

"Angie hadn't made any
arrests either," Howe told the Gazette, "and that was frustrating, so I quit going out there...

until after the building got blown up!"[428][429]
Three days after the bombing, the ATF's Washington headquarters pulled the Tulsa office off the case, and the FBI requested them to turn
over all their files on Elohim City.

The question is, just who was Strassmeir reporting to?

The CIA?

The Tulsa ATF office, which has jurisdiction over Elohim City, may not have
been informed if Strassmeir were reporting to a higher authority, a different agency, or was a confidential informant (CI) on a national level.

Strassmeir's cover-story that his Justice Department job "never worked out" also smacks of McVeigh's story that his try-out for the Special
Forces didn't work out due to a "blister." Perhaps Strassmeir — a seven-year German Army veteran — failed his indoctrination due to a
"nose-bleed."
In spite of his vehement denials, Strassmeir practically admitted to the Telegraph that he was an undercover agent.

"The Right-wing in the U.

S.

is incredibly easy to penetrate if you know how to talk to them," he told the Telegraph.

"Of course it's easier for a foreigner with an accent;
nobody would ever suspect a German of working for the Federal Government."
This certainly appears to be no ordinary slip of the tongue.

How would Strassmeir know the extreme-Right is "incredibly easy to penetrate"
unless he had penetrated them?

His statement that 'nobody would ever suspect a German' is practically an admission that he was doing so.

On February 28, 1992 Strassmeir was arrested and his car impounded by the OHP for driving without a license.--- PAGE BREAK ---

His statement that 'nobody would ever suspect a German' is practically an admission that he was doing so. On February 28, 1992 Strassmeir was arrested and his car impounded by the OHP for driving without a license. When the police opened his

--- PAGE BREAK ---briefcase, they found a number of documents, including some in German.

There were statements from foreign bank accounts, false identity
papers, and a copy of The Terrorist Handbook.

According to the tow-truck driver, Kenny Pence, Strassmeir soon brought heavy pressure to bear.

"Boy, we caught hell over that one," he
said.

"The phone calls came in from the State Department, the Governor's office, and someone called and said he had diplomatic
immunity.…"[430]
According to Strassmeir, the entirety of the story amounts to a pair of cops who were out to harass him and his friend Peter Ward (recall that
Howe identified Ward as John Doe #1).

Interestingly, federal prosecutors filed a motion requesting that Judge Matsch block efforts by
McVeigh's defense team who was seeking government files on Strassmeir's activities.

It was eventually revealed to Jones through discovery
that Strassmeir held a tourist Visa with the designation "A O".

Neither Jones nor Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, who reported extensively on
Strassmeir, could learn what the designation meant.

The INS denied any knowledge of its meaning.

Curiously, the entries, which appeared
on all of Strassmeir's INS files, suddenly vanished in March of 1996.

Somebody had earased them.[431]
All told, these are strange circumstances for a former German intelligence officer — the politically well-connected son to a top aide in
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's government.

It seems unlikely that this ordinary "computer salesman" and "neo-Nazi" with diplomatic immunity,
backed up by the State Department and the Justice Department, brought federal pressure to bear in order to have a minor traffic violation
cleared.

More likely, Strassmeir was in danger of having his cover blown by unsuspecting law enforcement agents.

The situation had to be corrected,
and quickly.More likely, Strassmeir was in danger of having his cover blown by unsuspecting law enforcement agents.

The situation had to be corrected,
and quickly.

After the bombing, with the increasing attention of investigators, and his cover almost blown, Strassmeir fled to Germany, taking a circuitous
route through Mexico and Paris — a route commonly used by spies.

Strassmeir's attorney, Kirk Lyons, detailed his client's escape, stating
that it was aided by Germany's vaunted counter-terrorism unit, GSG-9, the equivalent of our Delta Force.

Curious that GSG-9 would assist in
Strassmeir's retreat.

Were they helping one of their own?[432]
To help maintain his cover, the Justice Department questioned Strassmeir in North Carolina at his attorneys office, then called him in Berlin
to ask about his alleged ties to McVeigh.

"The FBI asked where I was on the day of the bombing," he told the Telegraph..

"They wanted to
help debunk the rumors spread about me."[433]
Why the FBI would be in the business of debunking rumors, unless it is about them, is unclear.

In this case, since any ties between
Strassmeir and the Justice Department would lead directly back to the them, it seems that is exactly what they are trying to do.[434]*
If Strassmeir had any ties to McVeigh, or to McVeigh's companions, or to those who had planned the 1983 bombing of the Murrah Building,
the Justice Department should have served him with a grand jury subpoena or a warrant.

Yet all the FBI did was call Strassmeir on the
phone to "debunk the rumors" spread about him.

As one law enforcement officer told the McCurtain Gazette, "We found the axle from the truck that led to Junction City and McVeigh.

Our
Highway Patrolman arrested McVeigh.

And that arrest led to Terry Nichols and Mike Fortier… Since then, nothing in this investigation has
accomplished anything.

But we're told by the Bureau that Strassmeir and his buddies are not important.And that arrest led to Terry Nichols and Mike Fortier… Since then, nothing in this investigation has
accomplished anything.

But we're told by the Bureau that Strassmeir and his buddies are not important.

Bull-shit!"[435]
The Gazette also uncovered an intelligence bulletin issued by the Diplomatic Security Division, Counter Terrorism Unit, of the Department of
State on March 18, 1996 concerning Strassmeir's alleged criminal activities in the U.S.

The cable states that Strassmeir overstayed his visa in 1991 and was known to have been the militia training officer for a white separatist
group called WAR.

Quoting the cable, "He (Strassmeir) has been the subject of several investigations for purchasing weapons, and making the weapons fire on
full automatic.

Strassmeir should not be allowed to return to the U.S."
Yet this cable makes it appear as though the FBI didn't know anything about Strassmeir — who was apparently under the protection of the
State Department.

Was this another cover ploy to protect their informant, or was Strassmeir working for the CIA, who wasn't communicating
with the FBI and ATF?

Interestingly, the FBI would claim they weren't aware of Carol Howe's status as an informant either.

During her July, 1997 trial (the result of
trumped up charges by so-called the Justice Department), FBI agent Pete Rickel told the jury that he spoke to Howe in the Spring of 1996,
when she requested protection, complaining that her cover had been blown.

"We were interested to see if there might be any further
information we could gather about activities involving people at Elohim City who may have been connected with the bombing," said Rickel.

Yet the agent insisted he had no idea of who Howe really was when the FBI raided her home in December of '96.[436]
ATF Agent Angela Finley-Graham likewise claimed she was unaware that an FBI raid was planned on Howe's home.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"We were interested to see if there might be any further
information we could gather about activities involving people at Elohim City who may have been connected with the bombing," said Rickel. Yet the agent insisted he had no idea of who Howe really was when the FBI raided her home in December of '96.[436]
ATF Agent Angela Finley-Graham likewise claimed she was unaware that an FBI raid was planned on Howe's home. Yet as the McCurtain
Gazette reported, this premise was destroyed when FBI Special Agent Chris Peters took the stand:

--- PAGE BREAK ---After explaining his role in the raid on the Howe residence, Peters was asked by defense attorney Clark Brewster during cross-examination
who he was married to.

"Angela [Finley] Graham," Peters replied.[437]
Strassmeir's own cover would finally be blown when the Gazette reported on July 14, 1996, that "a highly-placed source at the FBI has
confirmed that Andreas Carl Strassmeir was a paid government informant sent by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms to infiltrate
Elohim City.…"[438]
For his part, Strassmeir claims he was at work repairing a fence near Elohim City on April 19.

Yet Strassmeir hasn't exactly held tight to his
story.

According to Glenn Wilburn, who has intensively investigated the connection, Strassmeir claimed he stopped working when it started
to rain, then went home and watched the bombing on TV.

When Wilburn checked the weather reports for the area that day, he found that it
hadn't begun to rain until much later.

Strassmeir then claimed the farmer he was working for was George Eaton, a friend of the murdered
Mueller family.

Later, according to Wilburn, Strassmeir stated that he couldn't recall exactly what he was doing until he talked to his attorney,
Kirk Lyons.

"Andy has been damaged," exclaimed Lyons, angrily refuting the allegations against his client.

"Anybody who puts out the lie that he was
linked to the Oklahoma bombing in any way is going to pay for it."[439]
Lyons claims his client had been dragged into the conspiracy by McVeigh's defense team — a ploy, he said, to muddy the waters by painting
a vast conspiracy involving neo-Nazis in Europe and terrorists in the Mideast.

"I call it the Space Alien Elvis Presley theory, and it's been
fueled by nut cases and conspiracy theorists."
Obviously, Lyons himself is no nut case, merely a hardcore racist and neo-Nazi.

The simple "country lawyer" married the sister of a
prominent member of The Order."I call it the Space Alien Elvis Presley theory, and it's been
fueled by nut cases and conspiracy theorists."
Obviously, Lyons himself is no nut case, merely a hardcore racist and neo-Nazi.

The simple "country lawyer" married the sister of a
prominent member of The Order.

The ceremony was performed by Aryan Nations "pastor" Richard Butler at the group's compound in
Hayden Lake.

At the 1988 Aryan Nations World Congress, Lyons suggested forming an ACLU of sorts for the extreme-Right, and attended the annual
event in Hayden Lake as Louis Beam's representative.

Not that Lyons was desperate for clients.

He happily defended the Confederate
Hammer Skinheads of Dallas, the National Socialist Skinheads of Houston, the White Vikings of Chicago, and WAR leader Tom Metzger,
who was accused of inciting the murder of a black student from Ethiopia.

Lyons also defended Holocaust revisionist Ernst Zündel, who
claimed that the Nazi genocide was a Jewish invention, and other so-called "prisoners of conscience."[440]
Lyons was also the guest of honor at the British Nationalist Party in London, where he applauded the Party's stance on white power, and like
William Pierce, predicted a future race war.

The erudite, ever-socially conscious attorney was also quick to defend Louis Beam, the Texas
Grand Dragon of the Ku Klux Klan.

Beam fled to Mexico after being indicted for conspiracy to overthrow the government.

As discussed,
Beam was charged with harassing Vietnamese fishermen along the coast of Texas.[441]
Interestingly, when Terry Reed was in Guadalajara on behalf of the CIA, working with Oliver North's "Enterprise," Beam mysteriously showed
up as his neighbor.

With the help of Lyons, Beam was acquitted after his wife shot and killed a Mexican Federalé.

Lyons has likewise vehemently defended Strassmeir's role in the bombing, and claims he is not a government agent.--- PAGE BREAK ---

With the help of Lyons, Beam was acquitted after his wife shot and killed a Mexican Federalé. Lyons has likewise vehemently defended Strassmeir's role in the bombing, and claims he is not a government agent. Interestingly, Lyons
arranged Strassmeir's stays in Knoxville, Houston, Elohim City, and even Lyon's own home in North Carolina. One thing that can be deduced from all this is that Strassmeir and Lyons aren't very good liars. According to Stephen Jones, Dennis Mahon made statements to the effect of, "If a person wanted to know about the bombing, then they
should talk with Andy Strassmeir because he knows everything."
For his part, Strassmeir claims he's not a government agent. In his Telegraph interview, he states, "I've never worked for any U.S. government agency, and I've not been involved in any intelligence operation since my discharge from the German army in 1988. This family
(the Wilburns) is on a fishing expedition."
Yet in the very same article, Strassmeir admits that the bombing was the result of a government sting gone bad — a sting involving agents of
the ATF. Considering the revealing nature of Strassmeir's information, the article, entitled "Did Agents Bungle U.S. Terror Bomb?" might just
as well have been called "Thank You Andy." As Strassmeir states:
"The ATF had an informant inside this operation. They had advance warning and they bungled it," he said. "What they should have done is
make an arrest while the bomb was still being made instead of waiting till the last moment for a publicity stunt."
Asked if he thought the alleged informant would ever speak out, he replied with passion: "How can he? What happens if it was a sting
operation from the very beginning? What happens if it comes out that the plant was a provocateur? What if he talked and manipulated the

--- PAGE BREAK ---others into it?

What then?

The country couldn't handle it.

The relatives of the victims are going to go crazy, and he's going to be held
responsible for the murder of 168 people.

Of course the informant can't come forward.

He's scared shitless right now." Before and after this
outburst he kept repeating that he was not making veiled references to himself.[442]
When I interviewed Strassmeir, he insisted that he had been quoted out of context.

That statement, he claimed, was made to him by a
former ATF agent.

"He made some hints that the ATF probably knew that this was coming down," said Strassmeir.

The source, he said, was
"pretty reliable," although he was quick to qualify it by stating that he wasn't certain of the information.[443]
Referring to the sting, he said, "What kind of gives me a bad taste, is that all the ATF agents were apparently not in the office during the
blast, all of them." As to just what the sting involved, Strassmeir claimed he didn't know.

But regarding John Doe 2, he said, "For some
reason they don't look for this guy anymore.

That, for some reason, I think is very strange."[444]
If Strassmeir was involved in a sting operation, it may have been to stop the flow of Nazi propaganda emanating from the U.S.

Such
influences have made their presence felt in an unsettling way in Germany in recent years.

It is likely that the FBI requested the assistance of
the Bundeskriminalamt (BKA), the German FBI, and the Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND), the German CIA, to help gather intelligence on
such groups as Michael Kühnen's Anti-Zionist League, and their connections to both Arabs and American neo-Nazis.

FBI Director Louis Freeh had announced a joint U.S.-German intelligence gathering operation on neo-Nazi groups as far back as 1993.

Freeh pledged to work alongside German law-enforcement to stem the spread of Nazism emanating from the United States.FBI Director Louis Freeh had announced a joint U.S.-German intelligence gathering operation on neo-Nazi groups as far back as 1993.

Freeh pledged to work alongside German law-enforcement to stem the spread of Nazism emanating from the United States.

On April 20, 1995, the American National Socialist Worker's Party announced that the Secret Service and ATF had been investigating Gary
Lauck, leader of the domestic NSDAP/AO.

Lauck, who publishes the neo-Nazi newsletter N.S.

Kampruf, had been a major influence in
Germany and was an object of concern among German authorities (German sedition laws forbid the publication of Nazi literature).[445]
It seems that certain information provided by Strassmeir resulted in Lauck's arrest.

With Strassmeir's help, the "Farm Belt Fuhrer" was
arrested in Copenhagen and extradited to Hamburg.

The arrest coincided with major raids by German police of NSDAP/AO cells all over
Germany.

Lauck wasn't the only one beckoning young Germans to join the white supremacist movement.

Research conducted by McVeigh's defense
team indicates that Dennis Mahon traveled to Germany to recruit individuals into the Ku Klux Klan.

A video reportedly shows Mahon in
Germany in full KKK regalia, lighting a cross.

Mahon himself joked that if he was fined the usual 1,000 Deutsche Marks for every time he
gave the Nazi salute, he would owe 10,000,000 Marks.[446]
Only a few weeks before the Oklahoma City bombing, Mahon received a phone call from Lauck.

"Yeah, I got a call from Lauck sometime
before the bombing...

He told me that he was making another trip to Europe.

I told him he was too hot, and he shouldn't go." Shaking his
head, Mahon says now, "He should have listened."
Did the authorities know Lauck was coming?

"Well, I did tell Strassmeir about the trip," said Mahon.

(Or did Mahon tell the government
himself?)
With Lauck's European arrest, the NSDAP noted, "U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Well, I did tell Strassmeir about the trip," said Mahon. (Or did Mahon tell the government
himself?)
With Lauck's European arrest, the NSDAP noted, "U.S. officials have been doing extensive surveillance of Lauck's contemporaries in
Oklahoma, Kansas, Nebraska and north Texas. These surveillance activities were being coordinated out of the OKC offices, according to
our sources."
Interestingly, the newsletter added that "the OKC office of the ATF had plans to serve search warrants 'by the beginning of Summer' on
several well-known white supremacists."
It seems the warrants were never issued.[447]
Interestingly, Lyons told the German magazine Volkstreue: "There are many spies within [the Klan] and most of its best leaders have left the
Klan to do more effective work within the movement.… The man who is mainly responsible for the success of the Klan in Germany —
Dennis Mahon — has left the Klan."
Apparently, Mahon is still concerned enough about his responsibility to the white supremacist movement to have telephoned Germany with
orders to kill Strassmeir. According to a conversation overheard by Cash, "[Mahon] wanted Andreas shot in both kneecaps and a confession
elicited from him, then hold a 30-minute trial and then execute him."[448]
Investigator Jeff Steinberg takes this one step further, believing that Mahon himself may be an ATF operative. He says the ATF had him on a
charge then dropped it. "He may have been turned," said Stienberg. Obviously, Strassmeir wasn't the only informant at Elohim City. Mahon, who knew Guthrie, McCarthy, Stedeford, and Langan, had
introduced his new-found friend Carol Howe to the white separatist community. It was there that the attractive 24-year-old daughter of a
prominent Tulsa businessman would meet Strassmeir. As Howe told the Gazette:

--- PAGE BREAK ---"I kinda had a relationship with him for a while.

We talked about relationships once, and he said he wasn't interested in settling down with a
woman.

All he wanted to do was blow up federal buildings.

It was also at that same meeting that he shoved his hand down my dress and I
thought, well, he was doing something else, but now that I think about it, I think he was feeling for a wire."
Howe also said she overheard Mahon and Strassmeir discuss plans to bomb the Oklahoma City Federal Building.

As Howe related it:
"I started going to as many of their meetings as I could and met a lot of people who were very secretive.

But sometime in November there
was a meeting and Strassmeir and Mahon said it was time to quit talking and go to war, and time to start bombing federal buildings."
"I reported all this to Angie."[449]
According to her attorney, Howe provided telephone numbers, license tags, names, family trees, (including the location and design of
tattoos) drawings of buildings, pictures, and descriptions and lists of individuals who were involved in criminal activity.

In fact, Confidential Informant 53270-183, or CI-183 (whose neo-Nazi handle was "Freya" and "Lady MacBeth") made over 70 reports to
Finley-Graham during 1994-95 time frame.

Finley paid Howe $120-a-week to provide the ATF regular updates on the activities at Elohim
City, and those of Strassmeir and Mahon in particular.

Finley-Graham filed her preliminary ROI (Report of Investigation) on Carol Howe on
August 30, 1994.

Entitled "White Aryan Resistance, W.A.R." It states, in part:
On August 24, 1994 this agent met with CI-183 in the Tulsa ATF Field Office and discussed in great detail the federal firearms and
conspiracy violations of the White Aryan Resistance, "W.A.R."…
W.A.R.

is described breifly as being radical, paramilitary, Neo-nazi, anti-government, and violent.

W.A.R.

has national and international
affiliates to include the KKK and a racist following in Germany.…
W.A.R.W.A.R.

has national and international
affiliates to include the KKK and a racist following in Germany.…
W.A.R.

has several training sites in Oklahoma.

The primary training location is called Elohim City which is in a rural area near the border of
Oklahoma and Arkansas in Adair County, Oklahoma.

The members of the religious organization, The Covenant, Sword and Arm of the Lord
live at Elohim City.

The The Covenant, Sword and Arm of the Lord is a separatist organization that conjointly trains with and exchanges
weapons with W.A.R.…
Regarding statements by Mahon that were secretly videotaped by Howe, Finley-Graham writes:
Mahon has made numerous statements regarding the conversion of firearms into fully automatic weapons, the manufacture and use of
silencers and the manufacture and use of explosive devices.

Mahon has stated both the knowledge and ability to manufacture a range of
explosive devices.

Mahon intends to manufacture and use any or all of the above when he deems necessary.

Mahon and his organization
are preparing for a race war and war with the government in the near future and it is believed that they are rapidly stockpiling weapons.[450]
Mahon responded to Howe's allegations in the Village Voice: "This woman has got some shit on me.

They're lies.

But it's my word against
hers.…"
Some shit indeed.

It was after Mahon and Howe had a romantic falling-out that the 24-year-old Howe switched from being an avowed white supremacist to a
ATF informant.

A temporary protective order was issued against Mahon by a Tulsa court in August of '94 after Howe alleged that Mahon
threatened to "take steps to neutralize me," by breaking her knees if she tried to leave the white supremacist movement.[451]
"I was contacted by Dennis Mahon after I ordered some literature from this group called White Aryan Resistance," Howe told the McCurtain
Gazette.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was after Mahon and Howe had a romantic falling-out that the 24-year-old Howe switched from being an avowed white supremacist to a
ATF informant. A temporary protective order was issued against Mahon by a Tulsa court in August of '94 after Howe alleged that Mahon
threatened to "take steps to neutralize me," by breaking her knees if she tried to leave the white supremacist movement.[451]
"I was contacted by Dennis Mahon after I ordered some literature from this group called White Aryan Resistance," Howe told the McCurtain
Gazette. "He wanted to have a closer relationship than I did, and later he threatened me when I tried to get away from his group.[452]
It was after Howe sought the restraining order that Finley-Graham recruited her into the ATF. Mahon claims it was Howe-the-informant who
advocated most of the violence. Depicting himself as the fall-guy in the affair, he told the press, "They want to drag me into this thing and I
barely remember even meeting Tim McVeigh. It was Strassmeir who was meeting with McVeigh, not me."[453]
Curiously, Mahon later sent a videotape to McVeigh's prison cell expressing his views on the "movement." McVeigh's defense team was
concerned about the video, not knowing whether the intended message "was to encourage the Defendant to 'sacrifice' himself for the
eventual 'justice' of the cause or was a subtle threat intended to remind the Defendant that members of his family were vulnerable."[454]
While Mahon vehemently denied Howe's allegations, the ATF's ROI of January 11, 1995 (three months before the bombing) states, in part:
During the Sabbath meeting, Millar gave a sermon soliciting violence against the US government. He brought forth his soldiers and
instructed them to take whatever action necessary against the US Government. It is understood that ATF is the main enemy of the people at

--- PAGE BREAK ---EC.… He explicitly told 183 that they were preparing to fight a war against the government.…[455]
Howe reported to Finley-Graham that James Ellison also planned to reconstruct the CSA.

Her report also stated that Millar planned to
consolidate his compound with groups in Texas, Missouri, Arkansas and Oklahoma to prepare to fight a war with the government.

Posse
Comitatus members from Pennsylvania allegedly lent a hand by helping Elohim City residents convert their weapons to full automatic.[456]
"These people have the means and the desire to start a terrible war in America," wrote Howe in a letter to her father in August of 1994.

"They must be stopped, one group at a time."[457]
To precipitate that war, Strassmier was apparently willing to procure grenades, C-4 and other explosives.[458]
This is hardly surprising.

In 1979, ATF informant Bernard Butkovich and FBI operative Edward Dawson led a group of KKK and Nazi Party
members on a shooting spree during a parade in Greensboro, North Carolina, which led to the deaths of five members of the Communist
Workers Party.[459]
Interestingly, the Washington Post reported how Butkovich "urged members to buy equipment to convert semi-automatic guns to fully
automatic weapons, and offered to procure explosives (including hand grenades)."
According to the New York Times, witnesses reported that Butkovich, a veteran demolitions expert, also offered "to train them in activities
such as making pipe bombs and fire bombs," and that "the Nazis take weapons to the [Communist] rally in the trunks of their cars."[460]*
With a map of the parade route supplied by Greensboro Police Department Detective Jerry Cooper, Dawson, Butkovich, and their KKK and
neo-Nazi comrades were able to select the most advantageous site for their ambush."They must be stopped, one group at a time."[457]
To precipitate that war, Strassmier was apparently willing to procure grenades, C-4 and other explosives.[458]
This is hardly surprising.

In 1979, ATF informant Bernard Butkovich and FBI operative Edward Dawson led a group of KKK and Nazi Party
members on a shooting spree during a parade in Greensboro, North Carolina, which led to the deaths of five members of the Communist
Workers Party.[459]
Interestingly, the Washington Post reported how Butkovich "urged members to buy equipment to convert semi-automatic guns to fully
automatic weapons, and offered to procure explosives (including hand grenades)."
According to the New York Times, witnesses reported that Butkovich, a veteran demolitions expert, also offered "to train them in activities
such as making pipe bombs and fire bombs," and that "the Nazis take weapons to the [Communist] rally in the trunks of their cars."[460]*
With a map of the parade route supplied by Greensboro Police Department Detective Jerry Cooper, Dawson, Butkovich, and their KKK and
neo-Nazi comrades were able to select the most advantageous site for their ambush.

According to Stephen Jones's appeal brief, Finley-Graham's handwritten notes confirmed a report from Howe that Dennis Mahon had bomb-
making expertise, including allegedly exploding a 500lb ammonium nitrate bomb in Michigan five years earlier.[461]
Howe also told the agents that Strassmeir and Mahon cased the Tulsa IRS building and the Oklahoma City Federal Building in November
and December of 1994, and once during February of '95.

Interestingly, Mahon told reporters that as a "revolutionary," he would indeed blow
up the Federal Building, but do it at night, when no one was around.

Shockingly, most of this information was provided to the ATF before the bombing.[462]
J.D.Interestingly, Mahon told reporters that as a "revolutionary," he would indeed blow
up the Federal Building, but do it at night, when no one was around.

Shockingly, most of this information was provided to the ATF before the bombing.[462]
J.D.

Cash, reporting for the McCurtain Gazette, claimed to have received information from an intermediary that a source at the headquarters
of the Aryan Nations in Hayden Lake, Idaho, said that Mahon was "one of the ring leaders in the group that bombed the Federal Building."
Cash, who interviewed Mahon on numerous occasions by posing as a white supremacist, wrote the following in the Gazette:
And he (Mahon) indicated that the results of the bombing were not as he anticipated.

He felt like this would cause a coming together of
radicals around the country who would begin a campaign of terrorism.

In retrospect, he feels like the IRS building should have been bombed
instead of the Murrah Building and probably should have been bombed at night.

The day care center and the killing of the children was
having a negative effect.

For his part, Mahon claims he has an alibi for the morning of April 19.

Yet Bricktown witness David Snider is sure the driver of the Ryder
truck which slowly made its way past his warehouse that morning was Dennis Mahon.

Although the driver had long hair and was wearing
sunglasses, Snider is adamant.

He showed the Oklahoma County Grand Jury a video showing Mahon wearing the same sunglasses he was
wearing on the morning of the blast.[463] (See drawing)
Mahon, who said he believes there were others involved with McVeigh, told the Daily Oklahoman, "I have never been in downtown
[Oklahoma City].--- PAGE BREAK ---

Although the driver had long hair and was wearing
sunglasses, Snider is adamant. He showed the Oklahoma County Grand Jury a video showing Mahon wearing the same sunglasses he was
wearing on the morning of the blast.[463] (See drawing)
Mahon, who said he believes there were others involved with McVeigh, told the Daily Oklahoman, "I have never been in downtown
[Oklahoma City]. I am squeaky clean."[464]
Interestingly, Mahon also claimed himself to be a make-up artist, and described himself as "the master of all disguises." In a somewhat
startling statement, Mahon told Ambrose Evans-Pritchard of the London Sunday Telegraph:
"I always deliver my bombs in person, in disguise," he said mischievously. "I can look like a Hispanic or even a Negro. I'm the master of
disguise."[465]
Reverend Johnny Lee Clary, a reformed Ku Klux Klansman who also testified before the County Grand Jury, told the Daily Oklahoman:
"There is no mistake that the lips and chin and facial features [of the man Snider saw] is Dennis Mahon in one of those disguises."
"He always bragged he is the master of disguise," said Clary, who claims to be an ordained minister in Tulsa. Mahon "used to dress up like
Mexicans and Orientals or like blacks."[466]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Howe, who was debriefed by the ATF and FBI after the bombing, told agents Blanchard and Finley-Graham that the sketches of the
suspects who rented the Ryder truck appeared to be Elohim City residents [and Mahon and Strassmeir associates] Peter or Sonny Ward.

She also reportedly told the agents, "…no one in the world looks more like the sketch of John Doe 2 than Michael Brescia." Howe's report to
Finley-Graham stated, in part:
SA BLANCHARD and SA ANGIE FINDLEY, ATF, talked with SA FINDLEY's confidential source "CAROL." CAROL stated she believes in
1994, she saw an individual resembling the composite of UNSUB # l in a white separatist paramilitary camp called "Elohm City" (phonetic)
(EC).

This camp is located around Stillwell, Oklahoma.

CAROL knows this person as "PETE." CAROL has seen an individual named
"TONY" resembling the composite of UNSUB # 2.

TONY is PETE's brother, and is not well liked at EC.

TONY would do as his brother
directed however.

When CAROL saw the television pictures of TIMOTHY JAMES MCVEIGH, she said MCVEIGH doesn't look like "PETE." CAROL recalled
that she did see a person who looked like MCVEIGH in a photograph in a photo album she saw at a 1994 Klan Rally.

NBC, putting the official Justice Department spin on the story, claimed Howe's reports contained no specific information regarding the plot.

Yet according to the Gazette, "Howe was routinely polygraphed by the government during the time she was making her monthly reports.

The
government's own documents indicate she passed, 'showing no deception on her part in any polygraph examination.'"[467] As Finley-Graham
testified during Howe's pre-trial hearing:
Brewster: "Now, you were interested in knowing as much as you could about Mr.

Strassmeir, weren't you?"
Graham: "Yes."
Brewster: "What kind of guns he had?"
Graham: "Yes."
Brewster: ''And the kind of threats he made about wanting to blow up federal buildings?The
government's own documents indicate she passed, 'showing no deception on her part in any polygraph examination.'"[467] As Finley-Graham
testified during Howe's pre-trial hearing:
Brewster: "Now, you were interested in knowing as much as you could about Mr.

Strassmeir, weren't you?"
Graham: "Yes."
Brewster: "What kind of guns he had?"
Graham: "Yes."
Brewster: ''And the kind of threats he made about wanting to blow up federal buildings?

You were interested in that, weren't you?"
Graham: "I was interested in anything I could find out about any violation."
Brewster: "And Ms.

Howe told you about Mr.

Strassmeir's threats to blow up federal buildings, didn't she?"
Graham: "In general, yes."
Brewster: "And that was before the Oklahoma City bombing?"
Graham: "Yes."
At the time of this writing, federal authorities were still insisting that Howe's reports contained no specific warnings of any plot to bomb any
federal building.

They also claimed that they were only alerted two days after the bombing, when they debriefed their informant.[468]
Yet seems Howe's reports were specific enough to warn the ATF not to be in the office the day of the bombing.

No ATF employees were
among the 169 killed.

Nevertheless, federal prosecutors still insisted, after Howe went public, that the informant couldn't have had any specific information about
the bombing, because she was "terminated" on March 27, three weeks before the attack.

Also "terminated" it seems, was the ATF's December, 1994 report regarding Howe's activities at Elohim City.

That report, sources told The
New American, contained specific warnings about the pending attack on the Alfred P.

Murrah Building.

Had this report, like so much of the
ATF's evidence concerning their and the FBI's atrocities at Waco, conveniently "disappeared?"
Unfortunately for the ATF, the records which show that Howe remained an active informant until January 9, 1996, hadn't disappeared.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Murrah Building. Had this report, like so much of the
ATF's evidence concerning their and the FBI's atrocities at Waco, conveniently "disappeared?"
Unfortunately for the ATF, the records which show that Howe remained an active informant until January 9, 1996, hadn't disappeared. As
Finley-Graham's ROI of January 31, 1996 states:
It is requested that CI 53270-183 be retained as an active informant. It was requested by the Dallas Division office that this informant be
retained as an active informant for the duration of the Oklahoma City bombing investigation. On April 22, Finley-Graham sent the following memo to Lester Martz, SAC of the Dallas Field office:
This informant is involved with the OKC bomb case which is pending prosecution in Denver and was the key in identifying individuals at

--- PAGE BREAK ---Elohim City, which is tied to the OKC bomb case.[469]
In addition to denying her employment with the ATF, the bureau attempted to claim that Howe was "unstable," her emotional state and her
"loyalty" to the ATF being in question.

Yet once again, the official records, which describe Howe as "stable and capable," contradict these
claims.

As the ATF's ROI of April 22, 1996 notes:
[This agent has] known CI 53270-183 for approximately two years and can assert that this informant has not been overly paranoid or fearful
during undercover operations.

As 24-year ATF veteran Robert Sanders told The New American, "Howe was 'a very good informant.

She is obviously intelligent,
resourceful, cool and convincing under pressure,' and has a good sense for 'the kind of detailed information that is most helpful' to law
enforcement and prosecutors."[470]
Yet the feds would make every attempt to distance themselves from their own informant in the aftermath of the bombing.

Not surprisingly,
this was the same ruse the FBI used in the aftermath of the World Trade Center bombing — pulling undercover operative Emad Salem off
the case two weeks before the tragic attack (which he had also warned them about) then claiming that he was "unreliable."
Yet the FBI reactivated Salem after the bombing, just as they did with Howe, sending her back to Elohim City to gather additional information
on Mahon, Strassmeir, and the others.

Her new contract raised her pay from $25.00 per day to $400.00.

Curiously, neither the ATF nor the FBI offered Howe any protection.

FBI agent Pete Rickel admitted during subsequent court testimony that
Howe had come to him in May of '96 seeking protection, but he had offered none.

In fact, Rickel said he didn't even make a note of their
conversation.

Not only did the FBI fail to protect what the ATF called their "key" witness linking Elohim City to the bombing, but the FBI went one step
further, leaking a confidential report to the press.In fact, Rickel said he didn't even make a note of their
conversation.

Not only did the FBI fail to protect what the ATF called their "key" witness linking Elohim City to the bombing, but the FBI went one step
further, leaking a confidential report to the press.

As Finley-Graham wrote in her April 1, 1996 report:
On March 29, 1996 this agent received a telephone call from S/A Harry Eberhardt.

S/A Eberhardt stated that the identity of CI 53270-183
had been severely compromised.

S/A Eberhardt stated that a report by FBI agent James R.

Blanchard II contained the formal name of CI
53270-183 and enough information to reveal the identity of CI 53270-183 without his/her name being used.

S/A Eberhardt stated that he had
attempted to relay this matter to FBI ASAC Jack McCoy, however ASAC McCoy showed little concern and denied that S/A Blanchard was at
fault.

S/A Eberhardt stated that he became irate because it was apparent that nothing was going to be done in an effort to rectify the problem
or at least provide help for the safety of CI 53270-183.

Finley-Graham "immediately telephoned CI 53270-183 and informed him/her that their name had been disclosed and that he/she should
take every precaution for their safety....

This agent told the CI that anything and everything will be done to insure his/her safety." It seems the
government was fully aware of the danger posed to their informant, as Finley-Graham's report of April 22, 1996 notes:
Individuals who pose immediate danger to CI 53270-183 are: (1) Dennis Mahon, (2) members of Elohim City, and (3) any sympathizer to
McVeigh....

This agent believes that s/he could be in serious danger when associates discover his/her identity.This agent told the CI that anything and everything will be done to insure his/her safety." It seems the
government was fully aware of the danger posed to their informant, as Finley-Graham's report of April 22, 1996 notes:
Individuals who pose immediate danger to CI 53270-183 are: (1) Dennis Mahon, (2) members of Elohim City, and (3) any sympathizer to
McVeigh....

This agent believes that s/he could be in serious danger when associates discover his/her identity.

In fact, one of Finley-Graham's initial reports indicates that Dennis Mahon "stated that he would kill any informant." Mahon subsequently sent
Howe on a "night reconnaissance mission" to a secluded area — straight into the arms of a black gang, whose members pistol-whipped her
and cut her with a knife.

In what looked like a deliberate attempt to rid itself of an embarrassing informant, Howe was provided with no
protection by the government which she had so loyally and courageously served.

When public criticism and liaze a' faire attempts to make Howe "disappear" failed, the government resorted to silencing her on phony,
trumped up charges.

The "Justice" Department found it expeditious to indict Howe just in time for McVeigh's trial, putting her safely behind bars.

The charge?

Compiling a list of bomb ingredients, acquiring photographs of federal offices in Tulsa, and using her home telephone to distribute racist
information — all undercover activities committed on behalf of her employer — the ATF.

Howe was unanimously acquitted.[471]
Attorney Stephen Jones believes that Howe was indicted "for the purposes of 'leverage' against her in order to keep her mouth shut about
what she knows about the activities of Mahon and Strassmeir," and her employer, the ATF.[472] As the reader will soon discover, this is not
be the time the Federal Government would seek to silence and discredit one of its own informants.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Compiling a list of bomb ingredients, acquiring photographs of federal offices in Tulsa, and using her home telephone to distribute racist
information — all undercover activities committed on behalf of her employer — the ATF. Howe was unanimously acquitted.[471]
Attorney Stephen Jones believes that Howe was indicted "for the purposes of 'leverage' against her in order to keep her mouth shut about
what she knows about the activities of Mahon and Strassmeir," and her employer, the ATF.[472] As the reader will soon discover, this is not
be the time the Federal Government would seek to silence and discredit one of its own informants. Perhaps most surprisingly, during a July, 1997 pre-trial hearing for Howe, FBI agent Pete Rickel revealed that "Grandpa" Millar was a
confidential FBI informant! When asked if Millar had been a source of government information or an informant, Rickel replied, "generally,
yes."

--- PAGE BREAK ---It now appeared that there were at least three government informants inside Elohim City — Howe, Strassmeir, and Millar, the later two who
were inciting a war with the Federal Government.

Add to that the probability of Brescia, Mahon, and McVeigh being informants, and Elohim
City begins to look like one great big government-run neo-Nazi training camp.

According to a former government informant interviewed by the Gazette, "It is typical for agencies such as the CIA, FBI and ATF to place
multiple 'moles' inside a place like Elohim City and play one resource off the other, without either one knowing the identity of the other."
Federal law enforcement, even different offices of the same agency, often do not share informants' names unless the mission calls for it.

"The reasons are obvious.

First, there is no way a law enforcement agency is going to risk exposing the life of one of their assets should the
other 'resource' succumb to torture or decide to double-cross the agency.

And, of course, the monitoring of information can best be verified if
neither resource knows who the other is.

That's the only way this game works, and it's the only way it succeeds."
And what of Michael Brescia?

Was he also an informant?

Given the close, often revealing nature of a roommate relationship, it is likely that
an undercover agent would room with another agent, even if nothing more than one might overhear the other talking in his sleep.

Strassmeir himself admitted the difficulty of going "deep cover," and having to keep your guard up 24 hours-a-day.

"If you were an
undercover agent," said Strassmeir, "you have to keep your guard up, you can't get close."
Is that why he roomed with Brescia, so he wouldn't have to maintain his guard?

Not according to Strassmeir: "I would be very surprised if he
(Brescia) was an undercover agent."If you were an
undercover agent," said Strassmeir, "you have to keep your guard up, you can't get close."
Is that why he roomed with Brescia, so he wouldn't have to maintain his guard?

Not according to Strassmeir: "I would be very surprised if he
(Brescia) was an undercover agent.

He's a very honest, straightforward guy."
Strassmeir, along with friends Peter and Sonny Ward, fled Elohim City in August of '95, after McVeigh defense team investigators began
looking into activities at the secretive compound.

Brescia left Elohim City around the same time as Strassmeir, with his fiancé Ester, traveling to Canada, and remaining mostly underground.

He subsequently returned to his parents' house in Philadelphia, where he was actively sought by the media.

Curiously, like his friend Strassmeir, Brescia was completely ignored by federal authorities for his possible role in the bombing.

He was
finally arrested for the Wisconsin bank heist in February of 1997.

Was it a legitimate bust, or did the arrest serve to silence him for his role in
the bombing as the government tried to do with Carol Howe?

Shawn Kenny gave the FBI the tip that led to the arrest of Guthrie, who was apprehended after a high-speed chase outside of Cincinnati in
January of 1997.

He was found dead in his cell in Covington, Kentucky six months later, on July 12, hanged with a bed sheet.

Authorities
quickly ruled his death a suicide.

According to a note found at the scene, Guthrie was apparently feeling guilty over his turncoat attitude, and
didn't want to endanger his family.

"Sometimes it takes something like a suicide to settle a problem," he'd written to his attorney.

"Especially one that's like… mine."[473]
Yet Dennis Mahon told Village Voice reporter James Ridgeway he believes Guthrie was murdered because he had threatened to reveal
information about the proceeds of the loot, which was believed to have gone to the Aryan Nations and other neo-Nazi groups."Sometimes it takes something like a suicide to settle a problem," he'd written to his attorney.

"Especially one that's like… mine."[473]
Yet Dennis Mahon told Village Voice reporter James Ridgeway he believes Guthrie was murdered because he had threatened to reveal
information about the proceeds of the loot, which was believed to have gone to the Aryan Nations and other neo-Nazi groups.

Guthrie was
found dead only a few hours after telling a reporter from the Los Angeles Times that he intended to write a tell-all book that "would go a lot
further into what we were really doing."[474] He was also just days away from appearing before a grand jury.

With Guthrie's help, Stedeford was arrested on May 24 at the Upper Darby recording studio where he worked as a guitarist, and McCarthy
was captured in the Bustleton section of Philadelphia.

Thomas was eventually arrested in conjunction with several robberies as well.[475]
Langan was arrested at his rented house in Columbus, Ohio several days after Guthrie, in a fusillade of bullets fired by over-eager FBI
agents.

The wanted fugitive, who had fired no shots, likened the arrest to an assassination attempt.

Another silencing attempt perhaps?

(The
FBI claimed they were warned that Langan wouldn't be taken alive.)
Ironically, during his trial, the self-styled revolutionary shouted hackneyed phrases such as "Power to the People!" and told the judge that the
ARA's mission was to overthrow the government and "set free the oppressed people of North America." Except, apparently, for Blacks,
Jews, and homosexuals.[476]
Yet eyebrows everywhere raised when Langan showed up in jail with pink-painted toenails and long manicured fingernails.

Langan's lover, a
transsexual named Cherie Roberts, appeared at the trial and exclaimed during a scene with U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(The
FBI claimed they were warned that Langan wouldn't be taken alive.)
Ironically, during his trial, the self-styled revolutionary shouted hackneyed phrases such as "Power to the People!" and told the judge that the
ARA's mission was to overthrow the government and "set free the oppressed people of North America." Except, apparently, for Blacks,
Jews, and homosexuals.[476]
Yet eyebrows everywhere raised when Langan showed up in jail with pink-painted toenails and long manicured fingernails. Langan's lover, a
transsexual named Cherie Roberts, appeared at the trial and exclaimed during a scene with U.S. Marshals, "I can't even talk to my wife!"
Roberts, who met Langan at a Kansas City group called "Crossdressers and Friends," called the neo-macho revolutionary bank robber by
his charmed pet moniker, "Donna."[477]
In a "recruitment" video confiscated during a search of Langan's house, "Donna" appears in a black ski-mask, exhorting potential
revolutionaries to eradicate all non-whites and non-Christians from the country, and eliminate federal "whores."

--- PAGE BREAK ---'s house, "Donna" appears in a black ski-mask, exhorting potential
revolutionaries to eradicate all non-whites and non-Christians from the country, and eliminate federal "whores."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"In solidarity with our Serbian brothers we understand the meaning of ethnic cleansing. To us, it's not a dirty word." Apparently, preoperative
transsexuals were not included in Langan's targeted population group.
The 107-minute propaganda film, entitled "The Aryan Republican Army Presents: The Armed Struggle Underground," plays out like a bad
Monty Python skit. Langan shouts orders in Spanish from behind a desk festooned with hand grenades and bank booty, while his "troops"
goose-step in the background. "Our basic goal is to set up an Aryan Republic on the North American continent," states "Commander
Pedro."[478]
The neo-revolutionaries also expound their philosophy and tactics, which include, not surprisingly… blowing up federal buildings. "We have
endeavored to keep collateral damage and civilian casualties to a minimum," announces their leader, "but as in all wars, some innocents
shall suffer. So be it."
The video was completed in January, 1995, four months before the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Building. Langan, for his part, says he
had nothing to do with the bombing. "Most of my family, my siblings work in federal buildings," he told the Washington Post.[479]
Yet given Langan's connections to Brescia, Strassmeir and Mahon, and their connections to Nichols and McVeigh, and the group's ties to
the violent neo-Nazi underground, it is singularly curious why the FBI hasn't seriously pursued these leads.[480]
Then there is the CSA's 1983 plot to blow up the Oklahoma City Federal Building, and Snell's strangely fortuitous statements about April 19,
1995.
What is even more shocking is why the ATF apparently ignored warnings from it's own informant, Carol Howe. Had they figured they could
ensnare the bombers in a highly publicized bust?
"Elohim City is not a current subject of interest," a law enforcement official in Washington told the Associated Press, almost two years after
the blast.[481]
Was Elohim City of so little interest to authorities because it was a government-infiltrated spook center, kept on hand for contingencies,
much as elements of the KKK were by the FBI's J. Edgar Hoover?
And what of Iraq's connections to Dennis Mahon? Is this a subject of interest? Was it just an innocent business relationship, or, like the
Syrian's offer of funding to Robert Mathews, was it something more?
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.comahon? Is this a subject of interest? Was it just an innocent business relationship, or, like the
Syrian's offer of funding to Robert Mathews, was it something more?
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---5
Teflon Terrorists
In the wake of the bombing, the media was abuzz with reports of a Middle-Eastern connection.

Reporters were reporting claims of Muslim
extremists, and talking heads were talking about a familiar modus operandi.

Then on April 21, less than 48 hours after the bombing, the FBI
announced that they had snared their elusive quarry, an angry white guy named Timothy James McVeigh.

The following day, the Bureau
announced that they had captured angry white guy number two: Terry Lynn Nichols.

The mainstream media, having their information spoon-fed to them by the FBI, quickly launched into in-depth analysis of the two "prime
suspects." All other information quickly became buried in the great collective memory sink hole.

It was as if, with the "capture" of McVeigh
and Nichols, all other information became suddenly irrelevant and obsolete.

The Justice Department waved their magic wand, President
Clinton winked at the Middle-Eastern community, and all the world was set right again.

What remained hidden behind the official curtain of deceit however, were scores of witness accounts, official statements, and expert
opinions regarding a Middle-Eastern connection.

For 48 hours after the bombing, FBI officials and terrorism experts poured forth their
opinions and analyses:
Robert Heibel, a former FBI counter-terrorism expert, said the bombing looked like the work of Middle East terrorists, possibly those
connected with the World Trade Center bombing.[482]
Speaking on CNN, ATF director John Magaw said: "I think any time you have this kind of damage, this kind of explosion, you have to look
there (Middle East terrorists) first."
"This was done with the attempt to inflict as many casualties as possible," said terrorism expert Steven Emerson on CBS Evening News.What remained hidden behind the official curtain of deceit however, were scores of witness accounts, official statements, and expert
opinions regarding a Middle-Eastern connection.

For 48 hours after the bombing, FBI officials and terrorism experts poured forth their
opinions and analyses:
Robert Heibel, a former FBI counter-terrorism expert, said the bombing looked like the work of Middle East terrorists, possibly those
connected with the World Trade Center bombing.[482]
Speaking on CNN, ATF director John Magaw said: "I think any time you have this kind of damage, this kind of explosion, you have to look
there (Middle East terrorists) first."
"This was done with the attempt to inflict as many casualties as possible," said terrorism expert Steven Emerson on CBS Evening News.

"That is a Middle Eastern trait and something that has been, generally, not carried out on this soil until we were rudely awakened to it in
1993."
Former United States Representative Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma (former Chairman of the House Intelligence Committee) told CBS News
that there was "very clear evidence of the involvement of fundamentalist Islamic terrorist groups."[483]
Former FBI counter-terrorism chief Oliver "Buck" Revell told CBS Evening News, "I think it's most likely a Middle East terrorist.

I think the
modus operandi is similar.

They have used this approach."
Ex-CIA counter-terrorism director Vince Cannistraro told the Washington Times, "Right now, it looks professional, and it's got the marks of a
Middle Eastern group."
Avi Lipkin, a former Israeli Defense Intelligence specialist on the Prime Minister's staff, in Oklahoma City at the time of the bombing, told
investigator Craig Roberts, "this is a typical Arab Terrorist type attack."[484]
It was also reported the Israelis gave the Americans a "general warning" concerning the bombing.[485]
CBS News stated that the FBI had received claims of responsibility from at least eight different organizations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I think the
modus operandi is similar. They have used this approach."
Ex-CIA counter-terrorism director Vince Cannistraro told the Washington Times, "Right now, it looks professional, and it's got the marks of a
Middle Eastern group."
Avi Lipkin, a former Israeli Defense Intelligence specialist on the Prime Minister's staff, in Oklahoma City at the time of the bombing, told
investigator Craig Roberts, "this is a typical Arab Terrorist type attack."[484]
It was also reported the Israelis gave the Americans a "general warning" concerning the bombing.[485]
CBS News stated that the FBI had received claims of responsibility from at least eight different organizations. Seven of the claimants were
thought to have Middle Eastern connections:
An FBI communiqué that was circulated Wednesday suggested that the attack was carried out by the Islamic Jihad, an Iranian-backed
Islamic militant group, said a security professional in California who declined to be named… the communiqué suggested the attack was
made in retaliation for the prosecution of Muslim fundamentalists in the bombing of the World Trade Center in February, 1993, said the
source, a non-government security professional.… 'We are currently inclined to suspect the Islamic Jihad as the likely group…'[486]
James Fox, former head of the New York FBI office, told CBS News, "We thought that we would hear from the religious zealots in the future,
that they would be a thorn in our side for years to come."

--- PAGE BREAK ---On July 2nd, shortly after Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman's surrender to U.S.

Immigration authorities, the Egyptian Jama a' Islamiya (the group
implicated in the World Trade Center bombing) issued a statement saying that if the Sheik was prosecuted or extradited to Egypt, they would
begin a world-wide terror campaign against the United States.

On April 21, 1995, the London Telegraph reported: "Israeli anti-terror experts believe the Oklahoma bombing and the 1993 World Trade
Center explosion are linked and that American investigators should focus on Islamic extremists."
The same day, the London Sunday Times carried a report that suggested President Saddam Hussein of Iraq may have been involved in
both the World Trade Center and the Oklahoma City bombings:
Iraq was furious with America last week at its United Nations move to foil efforts to overturn Gulf war economic sanctions… Ramzi Ahmed
Yousef, the recently-captured alleged mastermind of the 1993 attack on the World Trade Center in New York, was directly funded by
Baghdad, according to CIA and FBI documents — and evidence so far developed about the latest bomb indicates some similarities in the
planning.[487]
If those in Baghdad were angry over the brutal and relentless attack on their country by U.S.

forces during the Gulf War, they had additional
reason for anger when President Clinton launched a retaliatory raid against Iraqi intelligence headquarters in Baghdad.

The June 26 Cruise
Missile strike was directed against the complex after an alleged plot was uncovered to assassinate former president, crook, and mass
murderer George Bush during his recent visit to Kuwait.[488] The raid merely destroyed some of the complex, and leveled about a dozen
surrounding homes, killing approximately six civilians.forces during the Gulf War, they had additional
reason for anger when President Clinton launched a retaliatory raid against Iraqi intelligence headquarters in Baghdad.

The June 26 Cruise
Missile strike was directed against the complex after an alleged plot was uncovered to assassinate former president, crook, and mass
murderer George Bush during his recent visit to Kuwait.[488] The raid merely destroyed some of the complex, and leveled about a dozen
surrounding homes, killing approximately six civilians.

Syndicated columnist Charlie Reese called it "high-tech terrorism."
The Net News Service reported the next day that the government-backed Al-Thawra newspaper charged that Clinton had carried out the
attack only to bolster his "eroded popularity and credibility...

domestically." Both Al-Thawra and General Saber Abdul-Aziz Douri, head of the
Iraqi intelligence service, indicated that the Iraqi government had vowed vengeance against the United States.

Backing up Douri's claims was former head of Iraqi military intelligence, General Wafiq al-Sammara'i, who told the London Independent that
the June, 1996 bombing of the U.S.

military housing complex in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, which killed 19 servicemen, "strongly resembled
plans drawn up by a secret Iraqi committee on which he served after the invasion of Kuwait.

He says operations considered by Iraq, but not
carried out at that time due to shortage of reliable agents, included exploding large bombs near buildings where American soldiers were
living."[489]
One month later, the Washington Post reported:
Early on July 6, Col.

Mohammar Qaddafi of Libya issued a warning that President Clinton and the United States had 'blundered' in the recent
missile attack on Baghdad, and that the United States should expect 'a lot more terrorism' in the near future.He says operations considered by Iraq, but not
carried out at that time due to shortage of reliable agents, included exploding large bombs near buildings where American soldiers were
living."[489]
One month later, the Washington Post reported:
Early on July 6, Col.

Mohammar Qaddafi of Libya issued a warning that President Clinton and the United States had 'blundered' in the recent
missile attack on Baghdad, and that the United States should expect 'a lot more terrorism' in the near future.

Qaddafi spoke of increasingly
violent and spectacular acts to be perpetrated expressly for broadcast on the national and international television.[490]
Shortly after the bombing, KFOR, Channel 4 in Oklahoma City received a call from the Nation of Islam, taking credit for the bombing.

Interestingly, the NOI has been directly funded by Libya.

The Post's Jack Anderson added that a direct attack against the U.S.

would be unlikely, and that counter-terrorist analysts feared that the
only viable avenue for Hussein's revenge would be through the use of terrorism.

"A preferable revenge for Iraq would involve having a
'surrogate terrorist' carry out a domestic attack that Hussein could privately take credit for…
According to Dr.

Laurie Mylroie, Ph.D., a Middle East expert at the Center for Security Policy, and an authority on the World Trade Center
bombing, Iraqi agents such as Ramzi Yousef had infiltrated the original World Trade Center cell, resulting in the construction of a more
powerful, sophisticated bomb.

Dr.

Mylroie noted that on September 27, 1994, as Iraqi troops tested American resolve by preparing a new assault against Kuwait, Saddam
Hussein declared: "We will open the storehouses of the universe" against the United States.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dr. Mylroie noted that on September 27, 1994, as Iraqi troops tested American resolve by preparing a new assault against Kuwait, Saddam
Hussein declared: "We will open the storehouses of the universe" against the United States. Two days later, Babil — a newspaper in Iraq
owned by Saddam's son, Uday — amplified, saying: "Does the United States realize the meaning of opening the stores of the world with the
will of Iraqi people?...Does it realize the meaning of every Iraqi becoming a missile that can cross to countries and cities?"[491]
Mylroie notes that there may be other Iraqi intelligence agents at large in this country, known as "sleepers," waiting to carry out far more
deadly acts of revenge against the U.S. One such cell, planted by the Abu Nidal organization, was discovered in 1986. Four of their
Palestinian members were arrested eight years later after one of them murdered the daughter of an FBI agent.[492]
On January 28, 1991, the Washington Post reported:
If Saddam is serious about terrorizing Americans at home, there are several allies he could call on for help. The most dangerous terrorist
Organization in the world, the Abu Nidal organization, now based in Baghdad, has a rudimentary infrastructure of about 50 people in the
United States. All of them, according to FBI sources, are under surveillance.…

--- PAGE BREAK ---"Among the terrorists who are taking or would take orders from Saddam," added the Post, "are Abu Ibrahim, a pioneer bomb maker who
designed the barometric pressure bomb that blew up Pan Am Flight 103, and Ahmed Jibril, who masterminded the Pan Am bombing on a
contract from Iran."[493]
Ironically, U.S.

interventions abroad have permitted the entry into America of extremist and even terrorist organizations that have
subsequently gained footholds in ethnic communities across the country.

Texas and Oklahoma, in fact, are major centers of Islamic activities
in the U.S.

Steven Emerson was quoted on CBS Evening News as saying, "Oklahoma City, I can tell you, is probably considered one of the largest
centers of Islamic radical activity outside the Middle East."[494]
Emerson chronicled the rise of radical Islam in America in a 1994 PBS documentary which showed how fundamentalists had launched a
recruiting campaign across the mid- and southwest.

An Oklahoma City meeting in 1988 was attended by members of Hamas (Islamic
Resistance Movement), Islamic Jihad (Holy War) and the Muslim Brotherhood, each notorious for their sponsorship of terrorism.

The
meeting was held only blocks from the Federal Building.

As Stephen Jones stated in his March 25th Writ of Mandamus:
The Murrah Building was chosen either because of lack of security (i.e.

it was a "soft target"), or because of available resources such as
Iraqi POWs who had been admitted into the United States were located in Oklahoma City, or possibly because the location of the building
was important to American neo-Nazis such as those individuals who supported Richard Snell who was executed in Arkansas on April 19,
1995.…
Secret workshops have reportedly been held in the U.S., where HizbAllah and Hamas members have been taught bomb making techniques
and small arms practice.As Stephen Jones stated in his March 25th Writ of Mandamus:
The Murrah Building was chosen either because of lack of security (i.e.

it was a "soft target"), or because of available resources such as
Iraqi POWs who had been admitted into the United States were located in Oklahoma City, or possibly because the location of the building
was important to American neo-Nazis such as those individuals who supported Richard Snell who was executed in Arkansas on April 19,
1995.…
Secret workshops have reportedly been held in the U.S., where HizbAllah and Hamas members have been taught bomb making techniques
and small arms practice.

HizbAllah, the Iranian-sponsored and Syrian-backed "Party of God," is believed to be behind a series of bombings
in July of 1994 that took 117 lives in Argentina, Panama, and Britain.

HizbAllah is the same Lebanon-based terrorist group that perpetrated
the October 1983 bombing of the U.S.

Marine barracks in Beirut.[495]
The most notorious U.S.

terrorist cell was in Jersey City, led by Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, the group responsible for plotting the
destruction of the UN building and the Holland Tunnel.

Three of Rahman's followers were convicted for bombing the World Trade Center.

One of their leaders, El-Sayyid Nosair, spelled out his plans to terrorize the United States: "We have to thoroughly demoralize the enemies
of God….

by means of destroying and blowing up the towers that constitute the pillars of their civilization such as the tourist attractions they
are so proud of and the high buildings they are so proud of."[496]
Another influential figure in Islamic radical circles — Sheik Mohammad al-Asi, the religious leader of the Islamic Education Center in
Potomac, Maryland, was quoted on PBS as saying:
"If the Americans are placing their forces in the Persian Gulf, we should be creating another war front for the Americans in the Muslim world
— and specifically where American interests are concentrated.One of their leaders, El-Sayyid Nosair, spelled out his plans to terrorize the United States: "We have to thoroughly demoralize the enemies
of God….

by means of destroying and blowing up the towers that constitute the pillars of their civilization such as the tourist attractions they
are so proud of and the high buildings they are so proud of."[496]
Another influential figure in Islamic radical circles — Sheik Mohammad al-Asi, the religious leader of the Islamic Education Center in
Potomac, Maryland, was quoted on PBS as saying:
"If the Americans are placing their forces in the Persian Gulf, we should be creating another war front for the Americans in the Muslim world
— and specifically where American interests are concentrated.

In Egypt, in Turkey, in the Indian subcontinent, just to mention a few.

Strike
against American interests there."
While the Arab underground structure in the U.S.

is generally based on the PLO, not all of its members are Palestinian.

Many may emigrate
from Iran, Iraq, Syria, Sudan, and Libya, the five nations most often connected with terrorism.

According to former Israeli intelligence officer
William Northrop, the original PLO structure shifted in 1991, after the PLO/Israeli peace process began.

As Northrop writes:
The Texas Cell is based in Houston and is supported by several sub-cells, one of which is based in Oklahoma City.

This Texas Cell was tied
into the World Trade Center bombing on 26 February 1993.

The Oklahoma City sub-cell originated with the Palestinian students who were sent from various Arab countries to study Petroleum
Engineering at OU in Norman.

(the current Deputy Petroleum Minister of Iran is an OU graduate.)[497]
Their members may also come from a broader philosophic milieu, and unlike the PLO, have a wider range of targets, including not only
Israel, but secular regimes in Muslim countries and those states that support them.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Oklahoma City sub-cell originated with the Palestinian students who were sent from various Arab countries to study Petroleum
Engineering at OU in Norman. (the current Deputy Petroleum Minister of Iran is an OU graduate.)[497]
Their members may also come from a broader philosophic milieu, and unlike the PLO, have a wider range of targets, including not only
Israel, but secular regimes in Muslim countries and those states that support them. Notes Middle East analyst James Phillips: "Because they are motivated by apocalyptic zeal, and not sober political calculations, their choice
of possible targets is much wider and more indiscriminate than that of other terrorists."[498]
The goal of this new breed of terrorist was not aimed at influencing U.S. or world opinion over the Palestinian issue, but to prove the strength
of the Muslim fundamentalist cause. As former Dallas Special Agent in Charge Oliver "Buck" Revell said:
"...If you listen to what [the Islamic extremist terrorists] are really saying, they're not just aimed at the Israelis, they are not just aimed at the
Jewish state. Their goals are completely and totally to eradicate any opposition to Hamas and to Islam and to move against the United
States ultimately."[499]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Obviously, these journalists and experts hadn't developed their theories in a vacuum.

The evidence was clear, and the warnings were
imminent.

Allan Denhan wrote in ASP Newsletter that a Jordanian Intelligence official had passed a "target list" to an American businessman
two months prior to the bombing, and the Murrah Building was on that list.

Although this information is unconfirmed, it makes perfect sense,
since Jordan has a long-standing intelligence relationship with the CIA.

In March of 1995, Israel's Shin Bet (General Security Services, Israel's equivalent to the FBI), arrested approximately 10 Hamas terrorists in
Jerusalem, some of whom had recently returned from a trip to Ft.

Lauderdale, Florida.

According to Northrop, interrogation of those suspects
was thought to have revealed information concerning the plot to bomb the Murrah Building.

"The Shin Bet filed a warning with the Legal
Attaché (FBI) at the American Embassy in Tel Aviv as a matter of course," wrote Northrop.[500]
On April 20, the Israeli newspaper Yediot Arhonot wrote:
Yesterday, it was made known that over the last few days, U.S.

law enforcement agencies had received intelligence information originating
in the Middle East, warning of a large terrorist attack on U.S.

soil.

No alert was sounded as a result of this information.[501]
Northrop also said that the German Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND, the equivalent of the American CIA), also sent a warning to the U.S.

State Department.

That was followed by a warning from the Saudis.

"A Saudi Major General… informed former CIA Counterterrorism Chief
Vince Cannistraro, who in turn informed the FBI.

There is a 302 (FBI report) in existence."[502]
The agent Cannistraro passed the information to was Kevin L.

Foust, one of the FBI's leading counterterrorism agents.

Ironically, the
information was given to Foust on the same day as the bombing.Foust, one of the FBI's leading counterterrorism agents.

Ironically, the
information was given to Foust on the same day as the bombing.

According to the information obtained by Stephen Jones, the Saudi Arabian Intelligence Service reported that Iraq had hired seven Pakistani
mercenaries — Afghani War veterans known as the Mujahadeen — to bomb targets in the U.S., one of which was the Alfred P.

Murrah
Building.

They also advised the FBI that — as is often the case — the true identity of the sponsor may not have been revealed to the
bombers.[503]
Interestingly, Northrop stated that three Israelis were in Oklahoma before the April 19th attack to "keep an eye on things." Avi Lipkin and
William Northrop were two such individuals.[504]
In addition to these warnings — as well as the mighty armada of U.S.

intelligence agencies, analysts, and surveillance technology which
would have undoubtedly been monitoring the situation — at least one local informant tried to warn authorities in advance.

His warnings went
unheeded.

The Drug Connection Informant
After the bombing, Cary Gagan stepped forward to tell Jones that he had been present at a meeting of bombing conspirators including
Middle-Easterners, Caucasians, and Hispanics which took place in Henderson, Nevada.[505]
In depositions and interviews with Jones and in numerous interviews with the author, the government informant and former drug courier
described a number of meetings at the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City.

In 1980, the Soviets asked Gagan to assist them in procuring military
secrets from Dan Howard, a contact of Gagan's who worked at Martin Marietta, a large defense contractor in Waterton, Colorado.

The
Soviets had been watching Howard.

Gagan was a friend.

He informed the FBI.[506]
In June of 1986, the Soviets again asked Gagan's help — this time, to assist illegal Iranian immigrants needing false IDs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Gagan was a friend. He informed the FBI.[506]
In June of 1986, the Soviets again asked Gagan's help — this time, to assist illegal Iranian immigrants needing false IDs. The small-time
hustler and counterfeiter met his contact, a man named "Hamid" who worked at Stapleton International Airport in Denver, and secretly
recorded the conversation. He turned the tapes over to FBI Agent Bill Maten, and Kenny Vasquez of the Denver Police Intelligence Bureau. [507]
The 51-year-old government informant supported himself by ferrying Cocaine between Mexico and Colorado for Colombians posing as
Mexicans, living in Denver. It was through his association with these Colombians that Gagan met "Omar" and "Ahmed," in Las Vegas in
March of '94. "They tried to first play themselves off as Colombians, " said Gagan "but I knew they were Iranians… or Middle-Easterners. They were multi-
lingual, with big-time funding. It was at this meeting that the drug dealer learned he was to transport kilos of cocaine from Mexico to Denver. He informed DEA Agent
Robert Todd Gregory. "I told Gregory this dude looked like a banker to me. They had heavy cash. They took care of me. They had all kinds
of connections."
On May 16, 1994, Gagan met his new contacts at the Western Motel in Las Vegas, where his brother worked as a pit-boss. There were eight

--- PAGE BREAK ---men at the meeting, five of whom were Middle Eastern, including Omar and Ahmed.

"Two of them didn't say a word," recalled Gagan, "but
they looked like Colombians to me — you know, Latin."
One of the Middle Easterners was from Oklahoma City.

He appeared to be the leader.

The Eighth man was Terry Nichols.

In a sworn
deposition, Gagan told McVeigh's attorney:
Gagan: "I met with some Arabs, and in that group, and I did not know it at the time, but in that group was Nichols."
Jones: "Terry?"
Gagan: "Terry Nichols."[508]
Gagan first recalled seeing Nichols in the parking lot of a bingo parlor the men had stopped at.

"He was wearing a plaid, short sleeve shirt
and dockers.… I remember going, 'That's kind of a dirty lookin' dude.' That's all I said.

I thought, you know, he didn't fit in the picture here.

He
looked like a scientist."[509]
The men snorted cocaine at the Western Motel and discussed their plans, then drove to an apartment complex in Henderson called the
Player's Club.

It is not known whom they met with.

As far as Gagan knew, they were all there to discuss drug dealing.

It wasn't exactly clear
what the Colombians were doing with the Arabs.[510]*
Gagan would soon find out though.

Omar and Ahmed, who had been paying Gagan with counterfeit money (mostly counterfeit Iranian $100
bills), wanted him to take part in a plot to blow up a federal building in Denver, using a mail truck packed with explosives.

"I was going to be part of it because I could move through… because I'm Anglo and I'm a U.S.

citizen and, you know, I wouldn't draw
attention.… I'm in and out of that federal building every day."
The truck, purchased from a government auction, was painted to resemble a working mail truck.

On January 14, 1995, Gagan picked up the
truck at the Metro Bar & Grill and drove it to the Mariott Hotel, just outside of Golden, Colorado.

"Omar came out with me, showed me where the truck was, and said, 'Just get in it and drive down I-70, and here's where you park it.On January 14, 1995, Gagan picked up the
truck at the Metro Bar & Grill and drove it to the Mariott Hotel, just outside of Golden, Colorado.

"Omar came out with me, showed me where the truck was, and said, 'Just get in it and drive down I-70, and here's where you park it.

And as
soon as you make the delivery, make this call….' And I gave the FBI the pay phone number saying it was there.

And I stayed in there and
had a drink — in the bar, and came walking out, and the sucker was gone."
Gagan says he talked to the FBI duty agent from a pay phone at 9th and Logan for over 35 minutes.

"I said 'Hey, I need you to tell what to
do here.' And they never called back."
In the back of the truck were approximately thirty duffel bags of ammonium nitrate marked "U.S.

mail," and boxes from Sandex Explosives
[in Las Vegas] marked "High Explosives."
Gagan boarded a bus and went home.

He said the agents never showed up.

"Can you imagine if I'm driving this truck and it blows up in the city of Denver?" said an incredulous Gagan.

Also in the back of the truck was a Lely farm mixer.

Gagan recalls that it was approximately four feet high, two feet across, and "shaped like
a diamond."
Interestingly, this was the same description given by witness David King.

King, who was staying at the Dreamland Motel in Junction City —
where McVeigh stayed — saw a Ryder truck with a trailer attached to it in the parking lot on April 17.

Inside the trailer was an object secured
by a canvas tarp.

"It was a squarish shape, and it came to a point on top," said King.

"It was about three or four feet high."
In June, Gagan discovered plastic explosives in an athletic bag packed with cocaine he was to deliver to Denver.

The bag, Omar said, was
to be left at the Postal Center, a shipping and receiving facility owned by George Colombo, who also operated a Ryder truck leasing center
across the street.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"It was about three or four feet high."
In June, Gagan discovered plastic explosives in an athletic bag packed with cocaine he was to deliver to Denver. The bag, Omar said, was
to be left at the Postal Center, a shipping and receiving facility owned by George Colombo, who also operated a Ryder truck leasing center
across the street. A friend of Gagan's, Colombo would occasionally let him stay at an apartment he maintained when things got too heavy. [511]
Things were definitely getting heavy for Gagan. When the casual cocaine user decided to open the bag and help himself to a little "blow," he
discovered plastic explosives wrapped in brown paper. "And I'm thinking, 'Jesus, how the hell did this get by the airport'? So I packed it up,
and I'm thinking, 'I'm going to the feds,' because you know… I'm a felon, this is C-4… I'm going [down] forever."
Gagan asked Colombo to hold the bag for him. He then called the Denver Police Intelligence Bureau and met them at a Burger King in
Aurora. Gagan sat in the unmarked car, as his friend Billy, a cab driver, watched from nearby. "I said, 'Look, there's some C-4…' I'm feeling them out… I give them some names, you know, what the deal was in Las Vegas. I tell them I'm

--- PAGE BREAK ---in contact with the DEA — Robert Gregory and all that.

They don't say anything.

This is June, mid-June of '94.

They say they'll get back to
me."
Three weeks later, after contacting the FBI, the police called Gagan back.

"They tell me quote, 'Since you're the source of the information
Gagan, we're not going to investigate.'"
Gagan then called Gregory at the DEA.

Gregory told Gagan, "Hey, we can't take you on.'"
The informant claims he continually challenged the police and the FBI to charge him if his information was false.

"If all this was a big lie, they
could have charged me with lying, but they didn't."
While the FBI and the Denver Police were debating the merits of Gagan's credibility, Omar picked up the bag from Colombo and left.

Three months later, in September, Gagan was approached by Omar and Ahmed again.

"They said 'It's going to involve terrorism, do you
have a problem with that?' I said 'no.' I asked them, 'What kind of money are we looking at?' They said 'a quarter of a million dollars.' I said
'up front?' They said 'Yes.'
Gagan accepted the money, which he believes was paid out of the Cali Cartel.

"The FBI knew it," said Gagan.

"They never got back to me."
Were Latin American drug dealers conspiring with Arab terrorists to blow up the Federal Building?

Said 25-year DEA veteran agent Mike
Levine: "When you consider terrorist actions like TWA 800 (or Oklahoma City), and you omit any drug trafficking involvement, it's insane — it
doesn't make any sense….

You know you take for example two years or three years ago the La Bianca plane that was blown out of the sky
— it was attributed to drug traffickers.Said 25-year DEA veteran agent Mike
Levine: "When you consider terrorist actions like TWA 800 (or Oklahoma City), and you omit any drug trafficking involvement, it's insane — it
doesn't make any sense….

You know you take for example two years or three years ago the La Bianca plane that was blown out of the sky
— it was attributed to drug traffickers.

I can think right off the top of my head of another case in Colombia of a plane blown up with a lot of
passengers to kill one person, and probably many, many more."
Levine, a highly decorated DEA agent, and the DEA's former Argentine Station Chief, told me that countries such as Bolivia, Paraguay, and
Colombia are full of Arabs doing business with Latinos, including drug dealing.

"The first thing you have to keep in mind is that drug
trafficking is now a half a trillion dollar business around the third-world," said Levine, "and it's mainly a third-world business.

The top drug
traffickers around the world have more power than presidents.

The Mujahadeen for instance, which we supported, were always top heroin
smugglers.

They were rated one, two and three by DEA as a source, and they right now support every Muslim fundamentalist movement on
the face of the earth…."[512]
The parallel may be more than speculative.

Shortly after the bombing, on May 8, Tulsa police veteran Craig Roberts received information
from a law enforcement source in Texas that "Juan Garcia Abrego was involved in the bombing as a 'cash provider' for the event.

The
source said that Abrego had sent two Mexican nationals to Oklahoma City with a satchel full of cash to finance the bombing."
Abrego was a Mexican Mafia chieftain involved in the cocaine and heroin trafficking through Mexico from Guadalajara to Texas.

He allegedly
was the ground transportation link during the Iran-Contra/Mena affair.The
source said that Abrego had sent two Mexican nationals to Oklahoma City with a satchel full of cash to finance the bombing."
Abrego was a Mexican Mafia chieftain involved in the cocaine and heroin trafficking through Mexico from Guadalajara to Texas.

He allegedly
was the ground transportation link during the Iran-Contra/Mena affair.

This information was forwarded to both the FBI and the DEA who were asked for each to check their files and/or computers, using various
spellings, to see if they had heard of such an individual.

Neither replied back that they had knowledge and no further action was taken.…[513]
Considering the FBI's apparent lack of knowledge, is curious that Abrego was at the top of the FBI's "Ten Most Wanted" list since March, a
month before the bombing and almost two months before Robert's original inquiry.

It seemed the FBI's lack of interest in Robert's information was suspiciously similar to their lack of interest in Gagan's.[514] What is also
interesting is that their first effort to discredit Gagan — a drug runner on the periphery of the Iran-Contra drug network — coincided with the
Iran-Contra affair becoming public.[515]*
"In my opinion, people were paid massive amounts of dope to carry this thing out," said Gagan.

The informant's belief that he was paid by
the Cali Cartel may be significant in light of Robert's information that Abrego funneled money to the bombing conspirators.

Was the FBI's attempt to repudiate the Middle Eastern connection tied to their refusal to look at the Abrego lead?

As Levine said: "The minute you start taking about terrorist actions, and you eliminate drug trafficking, well, then… you're just not credible…
It's just very unrealistic to look at a situation — any terrorist situation — and not look at a drug trafficking angle anymore.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Was the FBI's attempt to repudiate the Middle Eastern connection tied to their refusal to look at the Abrego lead? As Levine said: "The minute you start taking about terrorist actions, and you eliminate drug trafficking, well, then… you're just not credible…
It's just very unrealistic to look at a situation — any terrorist situation — and not look at a drug trafficking angle anymore. In my opinion, and I
think there's plenty of substantiation eventhough the government won't talk about it, you can say, this vast ocean of money traveling around
the world — illegal untapped money — pays for an enormous amount of terrorist activity."
If the Cali Cartel and Gagan's Arabs were connected, and in turn tied to a tentacle of the Iran-Contra Octopus through Abrego, it's only
natural that the FBI — which played its own role in covering up Iran-Contra — would tend to look the other way. In spite of the FBI's apparent refusal to act on Gagan's information, and their subsequent attempts to discredit him, on September 14, 1994,

--- PAGE BREAK ---Gagan was granted a Letter of Immunity by the U.S.

Attorneys Office in Denver.

The immunity was arranged through Federal Public
Defender Raymond Moore.[516] (See Appendix)
The informant was told to stay with the group and report back to the Bureau.

On March 17, Gagan met with his Arab friends at the Hilton Inn
South in Greenwood Village, Colorado.

On the table were the construction plans for the Alfred P.

Murrah Building, bearing the name J.W.

Bateson Company of Dallas, Texas.

Still, Gagan alleges that federal agents didn't follow up on any of his leads.

"I knew, when they did not contact me after the truck… when I was moving explosives, I knew something was up.

I knew.

I figured from that
point on, without a doubt, they had a government agent in this ring.

Because they cannot let me do that type of stuff.

"And then, after the March 17th meeting, I waited for them to contact me, because I just had a feeling that the dude that had come up [from
Oklahoma City] — the new guy on the scene there — was an agent.

The way he acted and talked… I just felt different than I did around the
other dudes.… That's just my personal feeling."[517]
Did the feds ignore Gagan's warnings because they had their own agent in the bombing cell and wanted to obtain more information to "sting"
the bombers later on?

Gagan believes this is a possibility.

Yet while Gagan had the option of pulling out, he realized it would be too risky to
suddenly disappear from the scene.

Omar and Ahmed were watching him.

On April 4, 1995, Omar pulled up at the Western Motel in Las Vegas, where Gagan's brother worked.

"Come on," said Omar to a somewhat
startled Gagan, "I want you to drive with me to Kingman."
The two men then drove to Arizona, where they delivered a package to a man waiting on the corner of Northern and Sierra, wearing a
cowboy hat and driving a rusty brown pick-up.On April 4, 1995, Omar pulled up at the Western Motel in Las Vegas, where Gagan's brother worked.

"Come on," said Omar to a somewhat
startled Gagan, "I want you to drive with me to Kingman."
The two men then drove to Arizona, where they delivered a package to a man waiting on the corner of Northern and Sierra, wearing a
cowboy hat and driving a rusty brown pick-up.

Could this mystery figure have been Steven Garrett Colbern, who owned the brown pick-up
seen stopped ahead of McVeigh when he was pulled by Trooper Hanger over after the bombing?

The description of the man matched
Colbern's height and build.

But Gagan did not know who he was at the time, or what was in the package.

On the way home, Gagan recalled Omar saying, "we're taking down a building in two weeks."[518]
On March 27 and 28, Gagan made over five calls to the U.S.

Marshals Office.

None were ever returned.

Agent Mark Holtslaw of the FBI's
Domestic Counter terrorism Squad, told me, "I can assure you that any info was thoroughly checked out.… There are things that go on in the
background that the individual is not aware of." But, Holtslaw added, "there is no statutory obligation to get back to an individual regarding
our investigation and its status."[519]
Gagan doesn't buy Holtslaw's explanation.

The FBI's procedures regarding informants require that they be controlled and supervised.

"How
do you investigate a thing if you don't contact me?" asked Gagan.

"So they either had another agent or another informant inside the group."
Gagan was getting nowhere with the Marshals, the U.S.

Attorneys, and the FBI.

It was now less than two weeks before the bombing.

On
April 6, Gagan drafted a letter and delivered it to Tina Rowe, head of the U.S.

Marshals Office in Denver.

While Gagan waited outside, his
cab driver friend dropped it off.

The letter read:
Dear Ms.--- PAGE BREAK ---

While Gagan waited outside, his
cab driver friend dropped it off. The letter read:
Dear Ms. Rowe:
After leaving Denver for what I thought would be for a long time, I returned here last night because I have specific information that within two
weeks a federal building(s) is to be bombed in this area or nearby. The previous requests I made for you to contact me, 25th & 28th of March
1995 were ignored by you, Mr. Allison and my friends at the FBI. I would not ignore the specific request for you personally to contact me
immediately regarding a plot to blow-up a federal bldg. If the information is false request Mr. Allison to charge me accordingly. If you and/or
your office does not contact me as I so request herein, I will never again contact any law enforcement agency, federal or state, regarding
those matters set out in the letter of immunity.[520]
Cary Gagan. Call 832-4091 (Now)
Rowe did not respond. When she was confronted by KFOR-TV in Oklahoma City, she said that she had never received Gagan's letter. (See
Appendix)
Yet Gagan's friend gave New American editor Bill Jasper a signed affidavit showing that he personally delivered the warning to the U.S. Marshals.[521]
According to Rowe, the point is moot, because the college graduate and former public school teacher has a history of "psychological

--- PAGE BREAK ---problems." It seems that Gagan was sent to the Colorado State Mental Hospital in September of 1986 by Dr.

Erwin Levy, at the behest of
the feds.[522]*
"That was because I wasn't cooperating with my attorney," he said, referring to a 1986 theft case in Arapahoe County.

"You tell somebody
you're involved in espionage with the Soviets, and that's what they do, send you down to the James Bond ward."[523]
According to Gagan, the Colorado State Mental Hospital's Dr.

Green pronounced Gagan sane, and he seemed level-headed when
Representative Key and I interviewed him in March of '97.

Others think the informant isn't reliable.

A friend of Gagan's who's known him for 30 years told me he thinks Gagan's "full of shit," and "not in
touch with reality."
Another, a Federal Public Defender who represented Gagan, told me, "Cary has an encyclopedic memory, of events, places and times." She
said that Gagan was "bright [and] well-intentioned," although she added, "My gut sense is that the pure facts may be right, but I sometimes
questioned the legal significance of some of it." Overall, she said she "liked" the informant.[524][525]
Moreover, if Rowe's allegations regarding Gagan's credibility are valid, why then did U.S.

Attorney Henry Solano grant him a Letter of
Immunity?

If the feds thought Gagan was incompetent, they had a full decade of experience with him [as did the Denver Police] from which
to establish his credibility or lack thereof.

"If I had a history of mental illness," explained Gagan, "they couldn't take me on as an informant."
The feds' opinions may have stemmed from a 1983 incident where the informant was blacklisted by the DEA due to allegations he provided
false information to the benefit of several drug dealers.

Yet Gagan claims he redeemed himself by obtaining sensitive DEA-6 files that had
been stolen from their office."If I had a history of mental illness," explained Gagan, "they couldn't take me on as an informant."
The feds' opinions may have stemmed from a 1983 incident where the informant was blacklisted by the DEA due to allegations he provided
false information to the benefit of several drug dealers.

Yet Gagan claims he redeemed himself by obtaining sensitive DEA-6 files that had
been stolen from their office.

Gagan said the DEA noted the informant's assistance on his record.[526]*
Then in 1986, while Gagan was in jail for insurance fraud, he was visited by Kenny Vasquez, Bill Maten, and two FBI agents: Phillip Mann
and Stanley Miller.

They offered to get him early release if he would work again as an informant.

Gagan declined.

"They wanted to take me
out of jail, and bring me back at night," said Gagan.

"I Didn't want any part of it."
In January of 1989, Agents Miller and Mann again asked Gagan to assist them in a joint FBI/Customs counterintelligence sting operation
known as Operation Aspen Leaf.

Their interest centered on one Edward Bodenzayer, a Soviet spy whom Gagan had met in Puerto Vallerta
in 1982.

Bodenzayer had been exporting classified technology to Russia through his import/export company.

Finally, on September 14, 1994, the Justice Department granted Gagan his immunity.

The agreement, printed on an official U.S.

Justice
Department letterhead, read [in part]:
This letter is to memorialize the agreement between you and the United States of America, by the undersigned Assistant United States
Attorney.

The terms of this agreement are as follows:
1.

You have contacted the U.S.

Marshals Service on today's date indicating that you have information concerning a conspiracy and/or
attempt to destroy United States court facilities in [redacted] and possibly other cities.

2.

The United States agrees that any statement and/or information that you provide relevant to this conspiracy/conspiracies or attempts will
not be used against you in any criminal proceeding.--- PAGE BREAK ---

2. The United States agrees that any statement and/or information that you provide relevant to this conspiracy/conspiracies or attempts will
not be used against you in any criminal proceeding. Further, the United States agrees that no evidence derived from the information or
statements provided by you will be used in any way against you....[527]
In spite of the sensitive nature of Gagan's information, and the Letter of Immunity, "In the period of one year, from September 14, 1994, to
the first week of September, 1995," said Gagan, "not one agent recontacted me, not one U.S. official of any kind recontacted me except [FBI
SAC] Dave Shepard in Vegas."
Naturally, the FBI denied any wrongdoing. Assistant U.S. Attorney James Allison was quoted in the August 12, 1995 issue of the Rocky Mountain News as saying, "Why would I grant
somebody immunity and then not speak with him?"
When this author contacted Allison, he said, "I'm not going to discuss who is or who isn't a federal informant."
Yet U.S. Attorney Henry Solano, Allison's boss, granted an interview with Lawrence Myers of Media Bypass magazine, violating the
informant's confidentiality agreement, placing Gagan in danger. In the October, 1995 issue, Myers printed Gagan's letter which had been
hand delivered to U.S. Marshall Tina Rowe. When Myers reprinted the letter — which was faxed to him by Solano — "April 6" was changed
to "April 1," a weekend, in an attempt to show that Gagan couldn't possibly have delivered the warning. It is not clear whether Solano or
Myers changed the date.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Discharged from a mental hospital in 1980 with a personality disorder, Myers was convicted of extortion in 1985 and was later asked by FBI
Agent Steve Brannon to work as an informant.

Myers denied working for the FBI.

Yet in 1991 he showed up at the trial of Leroy Moody, working as an "explosives expert" on behalf of the defense.

Curiously, he then turned
around and fed confidential information to the FBI and the state prosecutor.[528]
Interestingly, Myers claimed to have worked for the CIA in Central America, apparently at the behest of Wackenhut, a CIA proprietary
infamous for gathering intelligence on U.S.

citizens.

Even more interestingly, he wrote several books on explosives for Palladin Press,
another CIA proprietary, including Counterbomb, Smart Bombs, and Improved Radio Detonation Techniques.

One Myers title, called
Spycomm, instructs readers on the "dirty tricks of the trade" regarding "covert communication techniques."
Myers also showed up at ex-spook Charles Hayes' home in London, Kentucky on the premise of writing a flattering story on the CIA agent
turned whistle-blower.

Hayes subsequently wound up in jail on a murder conspiracy charge — a charge he adamantly denies.

Hayes says he thinks that Myers was working for the government when he came to Kentucky to write a flattering profile of Hayes for the
magazine Media Bypass, then privately told FBI agents that Hayes was looking for someone to kill his son.[529]
Were Solano and Myers part of a coordinated effort to discredit Gagan?

Said a private investigator and retired Army CID officer regarding
Myers: "I got the impression he was probably Counterintelligence… just by knowing these parts.

The people he mentioned — the people he
knew — told me that he was probably in the C.I.C.Said a private investigator and retired Army CID officer regarding
Myers: "I got the impression he was probably Counterintelligence… just by knowing these parts.

The people he mentioned — the people he
knew — told me that he was probably in the C.I.C.

(Counterintelligence Corps) at one time."[530]
Conetta Williamson, an investigator for the Tennessee Attorney General's office, described Myers in court testimony as "a professional and
pathological liar."[531]
Myers also wrote a piece about Federal Grand Juror Hoppy Heidelberg, the only grand juror who dared question the government's line.

In
fact, Heidelberg never consented to be interviewed by Myers, who had obtained the content of a privileged attorney/client interview of
Heidelberg surreptitiously.

The information was then crafted into an "interview" and published in Media Bypass, ultimately resulting in
Heidelberg's dismissal from the grand jury.

It seemed that Myers, using Media Bypass as a cover, had managed to put a government whistle-blower in jail, discredit a federal informant
who had embarrassing information implicating the government in the bombing, and cause the dismissal of a troublesome grand juror.

If the feds were so intent on discrediting their own informant, why had they granted him a Letter of Immunity?

Not only did Solano grant
Gagan immunity, but the informant had retained it for a full 17 months.

If Gagan was actually incompetent, why didn't Solano revoke the
immunity instead of letting Gagan continue working with terrorists?

"It doesn't make much sense does it?" said Gagan.[532]
It appears that the Justice Department had granted Cary Gagan immunity so they wouldn't look bad.

After all, Gagan had already informed
Dave Floyd at the U.S.

Marshals office in September about the meeting with Omar and Ahmed.

The cat was out of the bag.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Marshals office in September about the meeting with Omar and Ahmed. The cat was out of the bag. Gagan believes he was granted the Letter of Immunity as part of a more sinister scheme — a plan to allow him to proceed with the bombing
plot unhindered — at which point the Letter of Immunity was revoked. "What if at that time I was told to go in and get immunity by the terrorists, and somebody working with the terrorists… like the U.S. Government?" said Gagan. "I can't get prosecuted, can I? [The terrorists] knew that they would give me a Letter of Immunity and they knew
that the FBI would cut me loose. So what's that enable them to do? If there needs to be something moved, and I'm the one that's moving it, I
can't be prosecuted. I can haul as much shit as I want, and I have immunity, as long as I call the FBI, and let them know."
As a Florida police detective who's investigated connections between Arab-Americans, the PLO, and the Cali Cartel told me, "Who has the
best route for getting something across? Drug dealers."[533]
Was Cary Gagan part of some sinister plot by the feds? Or was he merely used as a "mule," allowing the terrorists to move money, drugs,
and explosives while another government agent monitored the situation from within? Perhaps the new man from Oklahoma City who
appeared on the scene in March? Was Cary Gagan a "throwaway?"
Recall that Gagan had transported a duffel-bag filled with C-4 and cocaine, and had driven a truck laden with explosives across the state at

--- PAGE BREAK ---the behest of his terrorist friends.

He claims the FBI did nothing to stop him.

"You got to understand something here," said Gagan.

"Federal law prohibits me from doing what I was doing.

You cannot go out as an
informant — I'm not an agent — I cannot take drugs and explosives from point A to point B…."
Yet it seems that permitting the informant to commit such illegal acts would focus more light on the government's role — whether it involved
foreknowledge or an actual conspiracy — as Gagan began to go public with his story.

But Gagan, who believes he was scheduled to be
"terminated" after the bombing, disagrees.

The informant displayed medical records showing that he was badly beaten, and claims to have
been the victim of a drive-by shooting.[534]
Whatever the case, it is interesting to note that authorities alleged that the bombing conspiracy began in September of 1994, the same
month that Gagan received his Letter of Immunity and began informing the FBI.

On April 10, four days after he delivered the warning letter to Tina Rowe, Gagan received a note instructing him to appear at the law library
of the U.S.

Courthouse.

"I just gave the U.S.

Marshals a bombing warning," said Gagan.

"They didn't call me back.

I had to go somewhere to cover my ass.

I came
back, I got a note saying, 'We need to see you; come to the U.S.

Law Library.' I thought it was the U.S.

Marshals or the FBI."
When Gagan arrived at the law library, he met his contact: an "athletic looking dude, 40s, short hair," dressed in a blue Nike cap and
jumpsuit.

"I get there and say, 'Hey, you got the shit?' He said, 'Hey, we've got everything taken care of.

We need you to do this….'"
The man was not one of Gagan's Arab friends.

"He was government," said Gagan.

"He was probably CIA."
The mysterious figure asked Gagan to drive a trailer to Junction City, Kansas.

In the trailer was the same Lely mixer that Gagan had driven
to Golden on January 14."He was probably CIA."
The mysterious figure asked Gagan to drive a trailer to Junction City, Kansas.

In the trailer was the same Lely mixer that Gagan had driven
to Golden on January 14.

This mixer — the one that was driven to the Mariott at the behest of an Arab terrorist — was now on its way to
Junction City at the request of a government agent!

The date was now April 11, three days before Timothy McVeigh checked into the Dreamland Motel in Junction City.

As previously
mentioned, David King, who was staying at the Dreamland, recalled seeing a Ryder truck with a trailer attached to it in the parking lot on
April 17.

The trailer contained a "squarish object about three or four feet high that came to a point on top," secured by a canvas tarp.

This
was the exact description Gagan gave of the Lely mixer.[535]
On April 13 Gagan drove to Oklahoma City, he said, to case the Murrah Building.

Three days later, Gagan says he drove a van from Denver to Trinidad, Colorado, that was picked up by Omar and Ahmed.

According to Gagan, it wasn't until three months after the bombing, in July of '95, that Las Vegas FBI Agent Dave Shepard agreed to meet
him.

"We're sitting in the car behind the Sahara, and Shepard tells me we're not interested in pursuing the lead."[536]*
That lead — was the two Arab suspects seen running from the Murrah Building towards a late model brown Chevy pick-up minutes before
the blast — the same suspects that the FBI had issued an All Points Bulletin (APB) for on April 19:
"…Middle-Eastern males 25-28 years of age, six feet tall, athletic build, Dark hair and a beard — dark hair and a beard.

Break."[537]
"And these two Middle Eastern dudes that were seen running from the scene — that's the same description I had given," said Gagan.

"Gray
in the beard, you know — Omar and Ahmed — to the FBI… on September 14."
Gagan had provided that information to the FBI six months before the bombing.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Break."[537]
"And these two Middle Eastern dudes that were seen running from the scene — that's the same description I had given," said Gagan. "Gray
in the beard, you know — Omar and Ahmed — to the FBI… on September 14."
Gagan had provided that information to the FBI six months before the bombing. After the bombing, Gagan contacted Solano and said, "Isn't
that amazing. You know, these are the [same] two dudes.…"
In a letter to Gagan dated February 1, 1996, Solano and Allison wrote:
Attempts by federal law enforcement officers to meaningfully corroborate information you have alleged to be true have been unsuccessful.... Therefore, the immunity granted by the letter of September 14, 1994 is hereby revoked.…
You are warned that any statement you make which would incriminate you in illegal conduct, past, present or future can be used against
you. You are no longer protected by the immunity granted by letter on September 14, 1994. Recall that after ATF informant Carol Howe had revealed that her knowledge of the bombing plot was reported to federal authorities before
April 19, they tried to discredit her, claiming that she was "unstable," just as they had done with Gagan. While they revoked Gagan's Letter of
Immunity, they indicted Howe on spurious charges.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Howe also reported a subsequent bombing plot by neo-Nazi activists, but, like Gagan's warnings both before and after the bombing, she
claimed her calls weren't returned.[538]
Interestingly, Howe was also told by her ATF handler, Angela Finley-Graham, not to report her informant payments, and was led to believe
that her debriefings were not being taped when they were.

Both are a violation of C.I.

(Confidential Informant) procedures.

Was this a way to
discredit Howe in case they needed to distance themselves from her later, as they attempted to do with Gagan?

One year later, Gagan filed a lawsuit alleging that numerous federal officials had failed to uphold their agreement with him; failed to exercise
proper procedures in regards to the handling of an informant; failed to investigate a terrorist conspiracy against the American people; failed
to warn the public; and failed to properly investigate the crime after it occurred.

It is not surprising that officials wouldn't take Gagan's warning seriously.

On December 5, 1988, a Palestinian named Samra Mahayoun
warned authorities in Helsinki that a Pan Am 747 leaving Frankfort was to bombed within two weeks.[539]
Two weeks later, on December 21, Pan Am flight 103 was blown out of the skies by a terrorist's bomb.

Two hundred and fifty-nine people
plunged to their deaths over Lockerbie, Scotland, and 11 more died on the ground.

State Department official Frank Moss later called Mahayoun's warning a "goulish coincidence." Mahayoun, they claimed, was just not
credible.[540]*
Demonstrating the limits of absurdity the government will go to in order to cover up its complicity and negligence, the U.S.

Marshals Service
was still insisting — after 169 people lay dead in Oklahoma — that Cary Gagan was still not credible.[541]*
Yet this is not the first time the government has ignored viable warnings.State Department official Frank Moss later called Mahayoun's warning a "goulish coincidence." Mahayoun, they claimed, was just not
credible.[540]*
Demonstrating the limits of absurdity the government will go to in order to cover up its complicity and negligence, the U.S.

Marshals Service
was still insisting — after 169 people lay dead in Oklahoma — that Cary Gagan was still not credible.[541]*
Yet this is not the first time the government has ignored viable warnings.

Prior to the World Trade Center bombing, the FBI's paid informant,
Emad Eli Salem, had penetrated Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman's Jama a Islamiya and had warned the FBI of their plans.

The agent in charge
of the case, John Anticev, dismissed the former Egyptian Army Colonel's warnings, calling him "unreliable." On February 26, 1993, a large
bomb detonated underneath the twin towers, killing six people and injuring 1,000 more.

At the same time as "unreliable" people like Cary Gagan were warning federal authorities in Denver about the pending attack, The Star
Ledger, a Newark, New Jersey newspaper, was reporting:
U.S.

law enforcement authorities have obtained information that Islamic terrorists may be planning suicide attacks against federal
courthouses and government installations in the United States.

The attacks, it is feared, would be designed to attract worldwide press attention through the murder of innocent victims.

The Star Ledger has
learned that U.S.

law enforcement officials have received a warning that a "fatwa," a religious ruling similar to the death sentence targeting
author Salman Rushdie, has been issued against federal authorities as a result of an incident during the trial last year of four persons in the
bombing on the World Trade Center in New York.

The disclosure was made in a confidential memorandum issued by the U.S.

Marshals Service in Washington calling for stepped-up security
at federal facilities throughout the nation….--- PAGE BREAK ---

The disclosure was made in a confidential memorandum issued by the U.S. Marshals Service in Washington calling for stepped-up security
at federal facilities throughout the nation…. According to the source, Iranian-supported extremists have made it clear that steps are being taken to strike at the "Great Satan," a phrase
that has been used to describe the United States…
Even more strenuous security precautions are being taken in New York, where 12 persons, including the blind fundamentalist Sheik Omar
Abdel-Rahman, are currently on trial on charges of conspiring to wage a war of urban terrorism against the United States by blowing up the
United Nations, FBI headquarters and the tunnels between New York and New Jersey…
The memo, issued by Eduardo Gonzales, director of the U.S. Marshals Service, warns that attacks may be designed to "target as many
victims as possible and draw as much media coverage as possible" to the fundamentalist cause…
The terrorists, possible suicide bombers, will not engage in negotiations," the memo warned, and said "once the press is on the scene, the
new plans call for blowing everyone up.[542]
If that last statement is true, it could explain the presence of a box of explosives found in the Murrah Building with a timer on it set for ten
minutes after nine. The initial bomb(s) blew up at two minutes after nine. The U.S. Marshal's Service — the federal agency charged with the task of protecting federal facilities — had clear warning from at least two
different undercover informants. Why then was there no security at the Murrah Building on April 19? It was also reported that the Israelis, the Saudis, and the Kuwaitis all warned the U.S. about an impending attack. Whatever the U.S.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Marshals Service felt about Cary Gagan's warning, Gonzales apparently felt his other sources were reliable enough to issue a nation-wide
alert.

Perhaps that memo, like the one issued by the FBI in 1963 to its field offices warning of an attempt on the life of President Kennedy,
just "disappeared."
A Trail of Witnesses
On April 19, Abraham Ahmed, a Jordanian, was detained by authorities as a possible bombing suspect as he attempted to fly from
Oklahoma City to Amman, Jordan.

American Airlines personnel observed Ahmed "acting nervous," prior to his flight, and notified security
personnel, who in turn notified the FBI.

Agents detained Ahmed in Chicago, where the Oklahoma City resident explained that he was on his way to his father's wedding, and was
scheduled to return to the U.S.

in July.

Yet Ahmed's story changes.

He told reporters alternately that he had gone back to Jordan: a) for a wedding, b) to build a house, c) to
replace the youngest son who had moved out, and d) to attend to a family emergency.

After being questioned for six hours, the FBI allowed Ahmed to continue on his way.

Yet he was detained in London the following day, where
he was questioned for another five hours, then handcuffed and put on the next plane back to the U.S.

In the meantime, Ahmed's luggage continued on to Rome, where authorities discovered a suitcase full of electronic equipment, including two
car radios, silicon, solder, shielded and unshielded wire, a small tool kit, and, incredibly enough, a photo album with pictures of weapons and
missiles!

Security sources at London's Heathrow Airport also said that a pair of blue jogging suits and a timing device was found in one of his
bags.[543]
When asked what he was doing with these items, Ahmed explained that they were for his relatives in Jordan, who could not obtain good-
quality electrical components.In the meantime, Ahmed's luggage continued on to Rome, where authorities discovered a suitcase full of electronic equipment, including two
car radios, silicon, solder, shielded and unshielded wire, a small tool kit, and, incredibly enough, a photo album with pictures of weapons and
missiles!

Security sources at London's Heathrow Airport also said that a pair of blue jogging suits and a timing device was found in one of his
bags.[543]
When asked what he was doing with these items, Ahmed explained that they were for his relatives in Jordan, who could not obtain good-
quality electrical components.

Ahmed also had a blue jogging suit similar to what a Middle-Eastern suspect was wearing at the Murrah
Building on the morning of the blast.

According to an account in the London Telegraph, Ahmed was reportedly in Oklahoma City on
Wednesday — the day of the bombing.[544]
If Ahmed had been cleared by U.S.

authorities for the worst domestic terrorist attack in U.S.

history, why did British authorities refuse to
allow him into the country?

Did they know something the U.S.

did not?

The Justice Department's Carl Stern downplayed the breakthrough saying only, "There are a number of good, solid leads in this
investigation."[545]
Yet in FBI agent Henry Gibbons' affidavit, special mention was made of the items in Ahmed's suitcase, and his coincidental April 19, 10:43 a.

m.

departure time, and Gibbons stated he considered Ahmed's testimony in front of the Federal Grand Jury vital.

One FBI source interviewed by KFOR's Jayna Davis admitted that he didn't think Ahmed was telling the truth on a polygraph test.

Yet
Ahmed was simply allowed to go on his way, and like so many other suspects and witnesses, was never called before the grand jury.

Interestingly, the Middle Eastern community was apologized to by President Clinton.Yet
Ahmed was simply allowed to go on his way, and like so many other suspects and witnesses, was never called before the grand jury.

Interestingly, the Middle Eastern community was apologized to by President Clinton.

This is very interesting coming from a president that
failed to apologize to Randy Weaver, the Branch Davidians, and the thousands of people wrongly accused, imprisoned and murdered each
year by U.S.

law-enforcement personnel.

A possible explanation may be found in the bombing of Pan Am 103.

In February of 1989, a prime suspect in the case, Jordanian bomb
maker Marwan Kreeshat, admitted in a statement provided by Jordanian intelligence that he had manufactured at least five highly
sophisticated, powerful bombs for PFLP-GC (Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command) leader Ahmed Jibril, by
cleverly concealing them in portable radios — the same type which destroyed flight 103.

Jordanian intelligence officials, who have
maintained a close, long-standing relationship with the CIA, admitted that the Jordanian national was actually an undercover agent, and was
also an asset of U.S.

intelligence.[546]
Could this explain why the FBI released Ahmed?[547]
Taylor Jesse Clear, a retired State Department Counter-Terrorism expert who has studied the case, disagrees with this analysis.

Clear
believes that Ahmed's conspicuously timed departure, complete with nervous act and a suitcase full of electronic gear, was a diversion.

"They wanted to inoculate the media to the Arab connection," explained Clear.

Letting Ahmed get caught with a suitcase full of that stuff,
then discovering he was innocent, inoculated everybody to the Middle Eastern connection.

Then they could come back, beat their chests,
and say, 'look what you did to the Arab community.'"[548]*
Yet the brown Chevy pick-up seen speeding away from the Murrah Building was traced to an Oklahoma City business run by a Palestinian,
with possible PLO ties.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Letting Ahmed get caught with a suitcase full of that stuff,
then discovering he was innocent, inoculated everybody to the Middle Eastern connection. Then they could come back, beat their chests,
and say, 'look what you did to the Arab community.'"[548]*
Yet the brown Chevy pick-up seen speeding away from the Murrah Building was traced to an Oklahoma City business run by a Palestinian,
with possible PLO ties. That man… is a good friend of Abraham Ahmed's. According to a witness who worked for the Palestinian, Ahmed
was seen driving the pick-up in the weeks before the bombing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Numerous witnesses also place McVeigh in Oklahoma City in the days before the bombing with a friend of Ahmed's — an Iraqi — a man
who bares a strong resemblance to the mysterious, stoic passenger seen in the Ryder truck by Mike Moroz on the morning of April 19 at
Johnny's Tire Store.

KFOR reporters Brad Edwards and Jayna Davis broke the story on June 7, 1995 with a series of interviews with witnesses who saw
McVeigh with the Iraqi, first in a bar, then in a restaurant, then in a pawn shop.

One of the witnesses, a barmaid at the Roadrunner Tavern on South May Avenue, saw McVeigh buying beer for the man on Saturday, April
15.

"He was dark, kind of muscular, he had on a ball cap," said the barmaid.

"He talked like they do over in Iran or Iraq, or whatever during
Desert Storm, when you would hear the way they talked on TV."
When Davis asked her how sure she was that the man they had been tracking was the man she saw with McVeigh, she replied, "I'm sure."
The tavern owner also saw the Iraqi a few days after the bombing.

He picked him out from a group of photos.

While the Iraqi claimed he was
never in any bar on NW 10th Street, a co-worker interviewed by KFOR said he had drank with him at a bar on NW 10th and Indiana, and in
fact he was arrested for driving under the influence around the corner, at NW 8th and Blackwielder in early June.[549]
In another interview, three women who worked at a pawnshop stated that McVeigh and two other men came into their shop twice: "…on
April 14 and again on April 17, just two days before the bombing."
"It had to have been McVeigh," said the pawn shop owner.

"If it was not McVeigh, it was his twin brother."
"They spoke in a foreign language," said one of the pawn shop employees.

"They huddled together and they all three spoke secretively to
one another, and it was a foreign language."
A restaurant owner down the street also remembered McVeigh and the Iraqi."If it was not McVeigh, it was his twin brother."
"They spoke in a foreign language," said one of the pawn shop employees.

"They huddled together and they all three spoke secretively to
one another, and it was a foreign language."
A restaurant owner down the street also remembered McVeigh and the Iraqi.

"[McVeigh acted] like a contractor coming in and buying his
hand lunch, that was the impression I had," recalled the proprietor.

As previously mentioned, restaurant worker Phyliss Kingsley recalled a Ryder truck pulling into the Hi Way Grill at SW 104 and Portland on
April 16.

Accompanying the truck was a white long-bed Chevy pick-up, and a darker pick-up, possibly blue or brown.

She recalls Timothy
McVeigh strolling in and ordering two "trucker burgers" and fries to go.

Accompanying McVeigh was a short, stocky man of about 5'2", either
Mexican or American Indian (or Arabic) descent, with black, curly hair.

She said the man closely resembled the FBI sketch of John Doe 2,
but with slightly thinner features.

Kingsley recalled that the man spoke briefly with McVeigh.[550]
Waitress Linda Kuhlman described him as having straighter hair and being slightly taller.

She described him as wearing green army fatigue
pants and a white t-shirt.

Kuhlman, who grew up around trucks and hot-rods, is positive that one of the trucks was a Chevy long-bed, most likely an '87 model.

When
shown photos, including the Iraqi and Michael Brescia, they came close to picking out the Iraqi, but could not positively identify either man.

The passenger in the Ryder truck, they said, a man with longish wavy, permed-out brown or dirty blond hair and glasses, never got out.[551]
Dennis Jackson, a VA worker, recalled seeing two or three Arabic men in the Murrah Building the following day, April 17.

"There was a
distinct air about them," recalls Jackson.

"We were working late that day, the office had closed, and they were just kind of hanging around
the Social Security office.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"There was a
distinct air about them," recalls Jackson. "We were working late that day, the office had closed, and they were just kind of hanging around
the Social Security office. I thought that was kind of unusual… They might have been there for Social Security, but I hardly think so."
Jackson's co-worker Craig Freeman recalled one of the men as a short, stocky Arabic man, about 5' 2'', 150 pounds, wearing khaki military
style pants, combat boots and a white T-shirt — the same combination seen on the Middle Eastern suspect described by Linda Kuhlman. In a bizarre twist, a white Chevy pick-up showed up a Freeman's house several days after the bombing. Freeman recalls a Caucasian
looking man in the truck, which was parked near his house on two consecutive days. "It was right before and right after the FBI and OSBI
(Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation) came and interviewed me," recalls Freeman. "I could tell this guy was watching me because when
I walked by, he sort of turned away and hid his face. I'm a former Air Force Master Sergeant and a third degree black belt, and I'm trained to
be observant."[552]
Could the man Freeman saw have been there to intimidate him? The barmaid at the Road Runner Tavern also told KFOR's Brad Edwards that after her interview aired, the Iraqi pulled up by the open back
door of the tavern and stared menacingly at her. What is interesting is that the Iraqi's Palestinian boss owns a white pick up truck — a
Nissan, however, not a Chevy. Freeman and Linda Kuhlman are positive the truck they saw was a Chevy. Yet another witness to a post-bombing incident involving the Palestinian claimed that he also was followed by the man, who was driving a
white pick-up.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Back in Junction City, the manager of the Great Western Inn was watching TV with two reporters when the sketch of John Doe 2 flashed on
the screen.

The manager immediately recognized the man as the person who had stayed in room 107 on April 17.

"He spoke broken
English," said the manager.

"[He] gave a foreign name and was driving a Ryder truck."
The man's name would never be revealed, however, because the FBI confiscated the hotel's log book.[553]
Several months later, Newsweek reporter Leslie Jorgensen uncovered information that several men had stayed at the Radisson Inn in
Oklahoma City the day before the bombing.

The men were dressed in Arab garb, but according to an employee, were not Arabs.

At the
same time, phone calls were placed from the Radisson to one of Timothy McVeigh's friends — a man in Idaho associated with the Aryan
Republican Army.

A few days earlier, across town, two men had checked into the Plaza Inn.

They told desk clerk Tiffany Harper they were Spanish visitors
from Mexico.

But Harper thought they were Arabs because of the way they talked.

According to employee Ruby Foos, another man checked into the motel a day or two later, went to his room, then emerged wearing flowing
Arab robes.

As far as Foos could tell, the man was not connected with the other two men.[554]
While it may not be unusual for Arab-garbed individuals to be in Oklahoma due to its connection with the oil industry, Douglas Boyer, the
security guard at the Plaza, said a yellow Ryder truck was parked out front.

All of the men checked out a day or two before the bombing.

Interestingly, two Middle Eastern men were spotted driving from Oklahoma City to Dallas immediately after the bombing.

The men stopped
to ask directions from an Oklahoma Highway Patrolman.

When the officer ran their plate, he discovered that it didn't match the vehicle.

The
plate belonged to a rented blue Chevy Cavalier, which was later found at a motel in Oklahoma City.

The driver of that vehicle, Asad R.The
plate belonged to a rented blue Chevy Cavalier, which was later found at a motel in Oklahoma City.

The driver of that vehicle, Asad R.

Siddiqy, a cab driver from Queens, along with the other two men, Anis Siddiqy and Mohammed Chafi, were taken into custody.[555]
While the men were ultimately questioned and released, a blue Chevy Cavalier would be spotted by a witness in downtown Oklahoma City
— along with a Ryder truck, a yellow Mercury, and a brown Chevy pick-up — the other vehicles in the bombing convoy.

On the morning of the blast, a woman was riding the elevator in the Murrah building, when she noticed a young Arab man wearing a
backpack, hurriedly pushing the buttons as if trying to get off.

As previously mentioned, she followed him outside, not suspecting anything
was amiss.

Moments later, she was sent sprawling to the sidewalk as the building blew up behind her.

Gary Lewis, a pressman for the Journal Record newspaper, had just stepped outside to smoke his pipe when he remembered he had left
something in his car.

As he walked down the alley, a yellow Mercury peeled away from its spot near the Murrah Building, jumped a concrete
barricade, swerved to avoid hitting a dumpster, then bore down on him, forcing him up onto the curb.

Lewis got a good look at the driver,
describing him as one Timothy James McVeigh, and his passenger as resembling the sketch of John Doe 2.

He said the car had an
Oklahoma tag which was dangling by one bolt.

Several minutes later, Lewis was thrown to the floor as the Journal Record building rocked with the impact of the blast.

As he picked himself
up, another, more powerful explosion sent him sprawling again.

As he and his fellow workers rushed outside, he noticed a peculiar sight: an
Arab man standing nearby, staring at the Federal Building, grinning from ear to ear.

"It unnerved me," said Lewis, who described how the man seemed out of place among the throng of battered and bloody people.As he and his fellow workers rushed outside, he noticed a peculiar sight: an
Arab man standing nearby, staring at the Federal Building, grinning from ear to ear.

"It unnerved me," said Lewis, who described how the man seemed out of place among the throng of battered and bloody people.

He seemed
"enraptured."
As discussed earlier, another witness saw two men running from the area of the Federal Building toward a brown Chevy truck just prior to
the blast.

The witness described the two men as "males, of possible Middle-Eastern descent, approximately six feet tall, with athletic builds."
One of the men was described as approximately 25-28 years old, having dark hair and a beard.

The second person was described as 35-38
years old, with dark hair and a dark beard with gray in it — the same description Cary Gagan gave.

He was described as wearing blue
jogging pants, a black shirt, and a black jogging jacket.

The witness also described a third person in the pick-up.[556]
Was this the same pick-up seen by Leonard Long and his daughter?

Long was driving east on 5th Street at approximately 8:00 a.m.

when
he was forced to swerve out of the way by a erratically-driven brown pick-up with tinted windows.

As the truck pulled up alongside, the
passenger, a stocky, dark-skinned, dark-haired man began hurling racial epithets at the black couple.

Long said the driver was a tall, thin
white man with sharp features, a description not unsimilar to that given by James Linehan.

The truck took the I-35 exit and headed south.[557]
Approximately 50 minutes later, as Margaret Hohmann and her friend Ann Domin were pulling into a parking spot in front of the Murrah
Building, a brown pick-up peeled away from its parking spot, burning rubber as it tore down 5th Street.

"Where's the cops when you need
them?" Hohmann thought to herself.[558]
A few blocks away from the Murrah Building, Debra Burdick and her daughter were on the way to the doctor's office.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The truck took the I-35 exit and headed south.[557]
Approximately 50 minutes later, as Margaret Hohmann and her friend Ann Domin were pulling into a parking spot in front of the Murrah
Building, a brown pick-up peeled away from its parking spot, burning rubber as it tore down 5th Street. "Where's the cops when you need
them?" Hohmann thought to herself.[558]
A few blocks away from the Murrah Building, Debra Burdick and her daughter were on the way to the doctor's office. As she stopped for a
light at 10th and Robinson, she noticed three vehicles parked on the north side of the street between a church and a garage. One was a
brown pick-up, one was a blue Chevy Cavalier, and the other was a yellow Mercury.

--- PAGE BREAK ---"I looked across," said Burdick, "and there was that light blue car, it had a white interior, and there were three men in it.

They were dark, but
they were not black… I would say they were Middle Easterners.

There was a brown pick-up, but I couldn't see in (because of the tinted
windows), and behind it was the yellow car with the cream top.

"Now, I noticed the three men in the car, that guy sitting in the middle was kind of staring out….

I said 'Huh, I wonder what they're looking
at?' and as I turned around, I said 'there's nothing there but buildings.'"[559]
A few moments later, the bomb(s) went off.

Hohmann and Domin, who were inside one of the Murrah Building's restrooms, were sent
crashing to the floor.

At the same moment, Debra Burdick and her daughter went skidding to the side of the road.

When she looked back,
the three vehicles were gone.

Five blocks south of the Murrah Building, at Robinson and Main, Kay H.

had just raced out of her office.

As she stepped on to the meridian,
she was nearly run over as the brown pick-up came careening around the corner.

The near miss gave her an opportunity to get a good look
at the occupants.

"The driver — I made eye contact with him," recalled Kay.

"He looked like he was in his twenties — late twenties.

[He] had an angry look on
his face.

I'll never forget the look on his face.

It just was full of hate and anger.

It really struck me, because everyone else — people were
coming out and they looked scared and confused, and he just looked full of anger."[560]
Kay recalled that two of the three people in the truck were Middle-Easterners.

When she was shown photos, she picked out the Iraqi — the
same one seen with McVeigh — as the driver.

David Snider, the Bricktown worker who had spotted one of the Ryder trucks that morning, ran outside after the bomb went off, and saw the
brown pick-up as it flew past.

"They were doing about 60 mph," recalled Snider.David Snider, the Bricktown worker who had spotted one of the Ryder trucks that morning, ran outside after the bomb went off, and saw the
brown pick-up as it flew past.

"They were doing about 60 mph," recalled Snider.

"They turned north and headed over the Walnut Street
Bridge."[561]
An all-points-bulletin (APB) was quickly put out on the pick-up:
Dispatcher: "Be on the lookout for a late model almost new Chevrolet full-size pick-up — full size pickup brown pick-up.

Will be brown in
color with tinted windows — brown in color with tinted windows.

Smoke colored bug deflector on the front of pick-up."
"…Middle-Eastern males 25-28 years of age, six feet tall, athletic build, Dark hair and a beard — dark hair and a beard.

Break."
Officer: "Ok, Is this good information, or do we not really know?"
Dispatcher: "Authorization FBI."[562]
Strangely, the FBI canceled the APB several hours later, refusing to say why and demanding that it not be rebroadcast.

When KPOC's David
Hall asked the FBI why they canceled it, they denied ever putting it out.

But when Hall played back his copy for the FBI man, he suddenly
had "no comment."[563][564]
Soon after, Brad Edwards received a tip that the pick-up had been seen several times before the bombing at Sahara Properties (not its real
name), a real-estate business in northwest Oklahoma City.

The owner of Sahara Properties, an Israeli-born Palestinian named Sam Khalid
(not his real name), was the Iraqi's employer.[565]*
Not long after KFOR's reports began airing, the Iraqi sued the station, then held a press conference claiming that he was not a suspect in the
bombing, and that he had a solid alibi for the morning of April 19.

His name was Hussain al-Hussaini, and he was at work, he said, painting a
garage on NW 31 Street.

Yet Alvin Devers, a neighbor interviewed by Davis, claimed no one was working on the house that day.

"I didn't see
anybody," said Devers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Yet Alvin Devers, a neighbor interviewed by Davis, claimed no one was working on the house that day. "I didn't see
anybody," said Devers. "I'd remember…."
In addition, Hussaini's co-worker, Ernie Cranfield, said Hussaini's alibi for the morning of April 19 — a time sheet stating he was at work at
8:08 a.m. — was patently false. Cranfield told Davis that Hussaini was working at a different house by 10:00 a.m., six blocks away, but
wasn't there at 8:30 a.m. "They was out there acting like they was painting on that garage all morning," Cranfield told me. "They didn't know I was already there
before.…"[566]
Moreover, according to Cranfield, Sahara Properties doesn't use time sheets: "They use a time clock. They started about five months ago —
five, six months ago… I've seem them clocking in every morning." Davis later learned that Khalid's daughter Heather had concocted
Hussaini's "time sheet" at the request of her father.[567]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Hussaini also claimed that he worked a second job as at the Western Sizzlin restaurant — as a janitor, three days a week, from 10:00 p.m.

to 8:00 a.m.

— which would have kept him too busy to be at the Murrah Building on April 19.

Yet when Davis checked with Jeff Johnston, the
assistant manager, she was told Hussaini hadn't worked from April 17 through April 20.

According to Khalid's secretary, none of Hussaini's Iraqi co-workers, who started working for Khalid in November, showed up on the 17th.

Was it merely coincidental that Craig Freeman and Dennis Jackson saw a suspicious group of Arab men in the Murrah Building on the
afternoon of the 17th?

Interestingly, Hussain al-Hussaini reapplied for his job at the Western Sizzlin in May, then quit in June, saying that he didn't need a job.

Khalid's secretary said that Hussaini also purchased a Cadillac after the bombing.

Had he suddenly come into a large amount of money?

When KFOR shared their evidence with the FBI, they downplayed their findings.

FBI spokesman Dan Vogel said that eyewitness accounts
are "notoriously inaccurate.

Their credibility must be checked out, their stories corroborated."
Yet KFOR was able to corroborate their story with at least eight different witnesses.

They not only placed McVeigh with Hussaini in at least
three different locations in Oklahoma City, they were able to trace the brown pick-up to the business where Hussaini worked — to a
businessman that had been investigated by the FBI for PLO ties.

They determined that Hussaini had a tattoo exactly as described by the
FBI, and that his alibi for the morning of April 19 was patently false.

Strangely, the FBI decided to back up Hussaini's story, telling KFOR that it might be difficult to place Hussaini near the Murrah Building on
the morning of the 19th.

Apparently the government had not counted on a local TV station stumbling onto Hussaini.

After KFOR's story
broke, a major damage control apparatus went into motion.Apparently the government had not counted on a local TV station stumbling onto Hussaini.

After KFOR's story
broke, a major damage control apparatus went into motion.

KWTV, KOCO, the Daily Oklahoman, and the Oklahoma Gazette all ridiculed
KFOR's reporting.[568]
Interestingly, when Hussaini appeared before TV cameras on June 15 to dispel the "rumors" about him, it was Abraham Ahmed who
appeared as his interpreter!

The Gazette and KOCO also both claimed that Hussaini couldn't speak English, implying that he couldn't have been talking with McVeigh.

Yet KFOR learned that he spoke broken English, and a police D.U.I.

report indicated that he replied in English when questioned.[569]
"The information quoted on Channel Four is not true," FBI Agent Jeffrey Jenkins told the Daily Oklahoman.

Though Jenkins later denied
saying that, he admits that "he cringed when he saw the KFOR report."
Perhaps Jenkins cringed when he saw Hussaini on TV because the news station had, quite accidentally, uncovered the FBI's confidential
informant.

Why else would the FBI act so patronizing towards KFOR, who had clearly established a link between Hussaini and McVeigh?

The FBI wouldn't say if they had checked out Hussaini.

Nor would they clear him.

They told KFOR that they were "not in the business of
clearing suspects." Yet, as Jayna Davis pointed out, they did clear numerous other John Doe 2 suspects, including Robert Jacks, Gary
Land, and Todd Bunting, the Army private seen at Elliott's Body Shop.

Interestingly, they then used the Bunting incident to say that John
Doe 2 had been a red herring all along.

John Doe 2, the FBI claimed, had never existed.[570]
Just why would the FBI issue a blanket "no comment" on a suspect who was seen by numerous witnesses with Timothy McVeigh, and was
seen speeding away from the bombing?

For his part, Hussaini claims he was an officer in Iraq's elite Republican Guard, and was imprisoned for distributing anti-Saddam literature.--- PAGE BREAK ---

John Doe 2, the FBI claimed, had never existed.[570]
Just why would the FBI issue a blanket "no comment" on a suspect who was seen by numerous witnesses with Timothy McVeigh, and was
seen speeding away from the bombing? For his part, Hussaini claims he was an officer in Iraq's elite Republican Guard, and was imprisoned for distributing anti-Saddam literature. According to the Gazette's account, he was released after serving eight years of a 13-year sentence.[571]
But the story changes. According to KWTV, he escaped during a prison uprising at the end of the war, and after searching for his family, he
"ran to American soldiers and asked for help." He was then interned in a Saudi refugee camp, where he spent the next four years, until he
was relocated to the U.S. in 1995.[572]
The problem with this story is that U.S. forces didn't get within 200 miles of Baghdad, which means that if Hussaini "ran to American
soldiers," he would have had to run across several hundred miles of open dessert. Yet according to his boss, Sam Khalid, Hussaini was never in the Republican Guard at all. A Shíite Muslim, he was imprisoned for his anti-
Saddam beliefs, and forced to serve as cannon fodder on the front lines, as the Republican Guard withdrew.[573]
Yet the story changes once again. According to William Northrop, Hussaini served in the Hammurabi Division of the Republican Guard, and
"was captured by the American 24th Mechanized Infantry Division in a fight on Highway 8, west of Basra, a few days after the war ended."
Northrop stated that the Iraqis encountered the U.S. force, and, thinking it was merely a probe, opened fire. The Iraqis were badly beaten in
the ensuing firefight, and Hussaini was wounded. He claims Hussaini was never in an Iraqi prison.[574]

--- PAGE BREAK ---If Hussaini was trying to concoct a cover-story, he apparently wasn't doing a very good job.[575] According to Northrop:
This lad was no ordinary soldier.

[He] came to the United States around November of 1991.

He triggered a "watch" on the Iraqi community in
Boston and shortly thereafter, moved to Oklahoma City.

I understand that he is currently residing in Houston.

Northrop also states that "Ramzi Ahmed Yousef (The 'mastermind' behind the World Trade Center bombing) served in the Hammurabi
Division of the Republican Guard during the Gulf War.…"[576]
While it is not known how accurate this information is, there is evidence tying Yousef — a Pakistani Baluchi born in Kuwait — to Iraqi
intelligence.

The Baluch, who are Sunni Moslems, oppose the clerical Shia regime of Tehran, and had forged close links with Iraqi
intelligence during that country's 10-year war with Iran.

According to Dr.

Mylroie, Iraq used the Baluch to carry out acts of terrorism against
Iran.[577]
Alias Abdul Basit Mahmud Abdul Karim, Yousef arrived in the United States carrying an Iraqi passport.

Both Yousef and his partner in the World Trade Center bombing, Ahmed Ajaj, worked for Edwards Pipeline Testing and Technical Welding
Laboratories in Houston, whose CEO is Maunal Bhajat, a close associate of Ishan Barbouti — an international Iraqi arms dealer who built
Libya's chemical weapons plant at Ràbta.

Barbouti's son Haidar (like Hussaini) also lives in Houston.

According to Louis Champon, who
went into business with Haidar, "Haidar Barbouti is an Iraqi agent."[578]
It was Barbouti who financed Champon's Product Ingredient Technology through his son Haidar.

Wackenhut (a company with long-standing
ties to the FBI and CIA) provided the security.

According to Champon, Barbouti (with perhaps a little help from the secretive and mysterious
Wackenhut) secretly drained thousands of gallons of ferrocyanide — a naturally occurring Cherry extract used to make cyanide gas — from
Champon's plant.Wackenhut (a company with long-standing
ties to the FBI and CIA) provided the security.

According to Champon, Barbouti (with perhaps a little help from the secretive and mysterious
Wackenhut) secretly drained thousands of gallons of ferrocyanide — a naturally occurring Cherry extract used to make cyanide gas — from
Champon's plant.

Barbouti's ability to procure U.S.

weapons technology for sale to Libya and Iraq wasn't exactly hindered by U.S.

officials.

While the Bush
administration was publicly decrying Hussein's use of chemical weapons on the Kurds, the potassium ferrocyanide was shipped to Iraq to
manufacture chemical weapons for Iraq's army, with the full knowledge and complicity of the Bush administration.

Said Champon, "Not one U.S.

agent — not one official, ever questioned Haidar Barbouti — for evasion of taxes, where he got his money
from, his involvement… in shipping cyanide outside the P.I.T.

plant… nothing.

I was told — and this is a quote from U.S.

Customs [agent
Martin Schram] — "This matter is highly political.

Haidar Barbouti cannot be indicted, and if he were, he would never be convicted."[579]
The key that allowed the Iraqi "businessman" (Barbouti doesn't like to be called an arms dealer) to interface with the CIA was one Richard V.

Secord, an integral player in the Iran-Contra arms-for-drugs network.

Secord, it should be noted, was also a business partner of Vang Pao,
the Laotian General who ran a heroin smugging ring out of Long Tien Airbase during the Vietnam War, and Monzer al-Kassar, the Syrian
arms and drugs dealer who was involved in the Pan Am 103 bombing — another crime that was successfully covered up by the CIA and the
FBI.Secord, an integral player in the Iran-Contra arms-for-drugs network.

Secord, it should be noted, was also a business partner of Vang Pao,
the Laotian General who ran a heroin smugging ring out of Long Tien Airbase during the Vietnam War, and Monzer al-Kassar, the Syrian
arms and drugs dealer who was involved in the Pan Am 103 bombing — another crime that was successfully covered up by the CIA and the
FBI.

According to Richard Babayan, a former CIA contract employee, "Barbouti was placed in the hands of Secord by the CIA, and Secord
called in Wackenhut to handle security and travel for Barbouti and his export plans."[580]
Mike Johnston, the attorney who sued Barbouti on behalf of TK-7, an Oklahoma City company, ran into the same sort of stonewalling by the
Justice Department.

As Johnston was told by the federal team investigating this little corner of Iraqgate, "Mr.

Johnston, you don't understand,
we have to limit the objective of the investigation so we can get on with the business of running the government."
"Going into the investigation… was a disguised whitewash," Johnston later told me, echoing what U.S.

Customs agent Martin Schram told
Louis Champon.

Former CIA asset Charles Hayes said the CIA-connected Wackenhut was helping Barbouti ship chemicals to Iraq, "Supplying Iraq was
originally a good idea," he maintains, "but then it got out of hand."[581]
Said Champon, "I can assure you, that if drums of cyanide left our plant, Dr.

Barbouti had his reasons, either to be used against American
troops or terrorist acts against the United States at home."[582] Cyanide is a necessary ingredient in the development of nerve gas.

One
thousand grams of cyanide later wound up in the World Trade Center bomb, constructed by Iraqi agent Ramzi Yousef.

Yousef's partner, Ahmed Ajaj, a member of the Egyptian-based Al-Gama'a al-Islamiya, lived in Texas.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One
thousand grams of cyanide later wound up in the World Trade Center bomb, constructed by Iraqi agent Ramzi Yousef. Yousef's partner, Ahmed Ajaj, a member of the Egyptian-based Al-Gama'a al-Islamiya, lived in Texas. A Texas hamburger stand was
reportedly used to relay telephone calls between the World Trade Center bombers as a means of avoiding detection. It was owned by some
Palestinian friends of Ajaj, and Yousef and Ajaj used the number for conference calls while Ajaj was in prison. The records may also indicate a tie between Ajaj and Hussaini's boss, Sam Khalid. Records obtained during TK-7's civil suit against Ishan
Barbouti show a phone call to one of Khalid's properties in Houston. The person who made call was Ahmed Ajaj.[583]
Yet Barbouti wasn't just trying to procure material and technology from U.S. companies on behalf of Iraq. Barbouti also built the bunkers

--- PAGE BREAK ---used to house Saddam Hussein's Mig jet fighters during Desert Storm.

It was during TK-7's suit against Barbouti that the Americans learned
of these bunkers.

Barbouti's London head of Security, Tony Davisson, decided to sell the Americans the blueprints.

It isn't clear whether
Davisson had a falling out with Barbouti, or was simply being patriotic.

The point may be moot, as Barbouti was apparently dead.

The Iraqi
arms dealer died (or faked his death) around the same time the Israeli Mossad knocked off his contemporary, Gerald Bull, the developer of
the ill-fated Iraqi "Super-Gun."[584]
Davisson called TK-7's attorney, Mike Johnston, who flew to London, where he purchased the plans for $2,700, and promptly turned them
over to the CIA.

With the plans for Saddam's underground bunkers, the U.S.

Airforce was able to practically wipe out Iraq's entire fleet of Mig
fighter jets at the start of the war.

This didn't exactly make Saddam happy.

In the parlance of the Arab world, this equated to pay-back time.

If Hussein thought Barbouti was
responsible for the destruction of his air force, he may have insisted the arms dealer cooperate in an act of revenge against the United
States.

Yet the destruction of the Hussein's air force wasn't the only motive Iraq had for seeking revenge against the U.S.

While Americans were
busy tying yellow ribbons on their front porches for our boys in the Gulf, these same brave boys were slaughtering enemy soldiers and
helpless civilians by the thousands.

As reported by Mike Erlich of the Military Counseling Network at the March-April, 1991 European
Parliament hearings on the Gulf War:
…hundreds, possibly thousands, of Iraqi soldiers began walking toward the U.S.

position unarmed, with their arms raised in an attempt to
surrender.

However, the orders for this unit were not to take any prisoners…
The commander of the unit began the firing by shooting an anti-tank missile through one of the Iraqi soldiers.position unarmed, with their arms raised in an attempt to
surrender.

However, the orders for this unit were not to take any prisoners…
The commander of the unit began the firing by shooting an anti-tank missile through one of the Iraqi soldiers.

This is a missile designed to
destroy tanks, but it was used against one man.

At that point, everybody in the unit began shooting.

Quite simply, it was a slaughter.[585]
The government-controlled sanitized media campaign beamed into our living rooms, replete with scenes of high-tech "smart-bombs"
whistling through the windows of enemy command centers, merely belied the terrible and deliberate carnage inflicted upon thousands of
helpless civilians.

On February 13, 1991, a U.S.

Air Force Stealth Bomber dropped two 1,000-pound, laser-guided bombs onto the roof of the Al-Amira air raid
shelter in Baghdad.

Two hundred and ninety four people — mostly women and children — died in what the U.S.

military called a "military
surgical strike."
According to William Blum, author of Killing Hope: U.S.

Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II, the bombing of the Al-Amira air
raid shelter wasn't accidental, it was deliberate:
The United States said it thought that the shelter was for VIPs, which it had been at one time, and claimed that it was also being used as a
military communications center, but neighborhood residents insisted that the constant aerial surveillance overhead had to observe the daily
flow of women and children into the shelter.

Western reporters said they could find no signs of military use.[586]
An American journalist in Jordan who viewed unedited videotape footage of the disaster, which the American public never saw, wrote:
They showed scenes of incredible carnage.Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II, the bombing of the Al-Amira air
raid shelter wasn't accidental, it was deliberate:
The United States said it thought that the shelter was for VIPs, which it had been at one time, and claimed that it was also being used as a
military communications center, but neighborhood residents insisted that the constant aerial surveillance overhead had to observe the daily
flow of women and children into the shelter.

Western reporters said they could find no signs of military use.[586]
An American journalist in Jordan who viewed unedited videotape footage of the disaster, which the American public never saw, wrote:
They showed scenes of incredible carnage.

Nearly all the bodies were charred into blackness; in some cases the heat had been so great
that entire limbs were burned off.… Rescue workers collapsed in grief, dropping corpses; some rescuers vomited from the stench of the still-
smoldering bodies.[587]
Said White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater after the bombing of the shelter: It was "a military target… We don't know why civilians were
at this location, but we do know that Saddam Hussein does not share our value for the sanctity of life."[588]
This so-called "value for the sanctity for life" shown by American forces and lauded by the Bush administration, included not only attacks
such as the one at Al-Amira, but the bombing and strafing of unarmed civilians who tried to flee to the Jordanian border.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Western reporters said they could find no signs of military use.[586]
An American journalist in Jordan who viewed unedited videotape footage of the disaster, which the American public never saw, wrote:
They showed scenes of incredible carnage. Nearly all the bodies were charred into blackness; in some cases the heat had been so great
that entire limbs were burned off.… Rescue workers collapsed in grief, dropping corpses; some rescuers vomited from the stench of the still-
smoldering bodies.[587]
Said White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater after the bombing of the shelter: It was "a military target… We don't know why civilians were
at this location, but we do know that Saddam Hussein does not share our value for the sanctity of life."[588]
This so-called "value for the sanctity for life" shown by American forces and lauded by the Bush administration, included not only attacks
such as the one at Al-Amira, but the bombing and strafing of unarmed civilians who tried to flee to the Jordanian border. Buses, taxis, and private cars were repeatedly assaulted, literally without mercy, by rockets, cluster bombs and machine guns; usually in
broad daylight, the targets clearly civilian, with luggage piled on top, with no military vehicles or structures anywhere to be seen, surrounded
by open desert, the attacking planes flying extremely close to the ground… busloads of passengers incinerated, and when people left the
vehicles and fled for their lives, planes often swooped down upon them firing away.…
"You're killing us!" cried a Jordanian taxi driver to an American reporter. "You're shooting us everywhere we move! Whenever they see a car
or truck, the planes dive out of the sky and chase us. They don't care who we are or what we are. They just shoot." His cry was repeated by
hundreds of others.….[589]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Mike Ange, a GI from North Carolina, described the carnage:
I actually went up close and examined two of the vehicles that basically looked like refugees maybe trying to get out of the area.

You know,
you had like a little Toyota pick-up truck that was loaded down with the furniture and the suitcases and rugs and the pet cat and that type of
thing, all over the back of the this truck, and those trucks were taken out just like the military vehicles.[590]
"The U.S.

military considers the murdering of our children nothing more than 'collateral damage," said Al Kaissy, an information officer at the
Iraqi Interests section of the Algerian Embassy in Washington.

"They have never apologized or even admitted their mistake."[591]
At the same time, the American public, fed a daily dose of propaganda generated in Pentagon media briefing rooms, could not understand
how terrorists could bomb a civilian building in the heartland of America.

While the estimate of Iraqi forces killed runs as high as 250,000, the actual number of Iraqis killed, including civilians, runs much higher.

American planes deliberately destroyed Iraq's power plants, its sewage systems, and its hospitals.

The economic embargo severely
compounded the situation, forcing an entire population to struggle amidst massive epidemics of starvation and disease.

Their infrastructure
decimated, without sanitation, food and medical supplies, hundreds of thousands of civilians suffered horrible, lingering deaths — all caused
by the U.S.

military, the greed of Big Oil, and their life-long friend, George Herbert Walker Bush.

The people of Baghdad have turned the rubble of the Al-Amira air raid shelter into a shrine, complete with mementos and pictures of the
children who perished.

In Oklahoma City, victims placed mementos of their dead relatives on a chain-link fence surrounding the remains of the Alfred P.

Murrah
Building and asked, "Who could do such a thing?In Oklahoma City, victims placed mementos of their dead relatives on a chain-link fence surrounding the remains of the Alfred P.

Murrah
Building and asked, "Who could do such a thing?

Who could kill innocent civilians?"
While the World Trade Center and Oklahoma City bombings may have been the result of Iraqi revenge, what ultimately lay behind the New
York and Daharan bombings appeared to stem from a broader-based alliance of Islamic militants from Iraq, Iran, Syria, Saudi Arabia,
Pakistan, and other countries committed to the expulsion of U.S.

troops from the region and an all-out attack on the "Great Satan."[592]
It has been reported that groups ranging from the Palestinian-based Islamic Jihad, Hamas, the Sudanese National Islamic Front, the
Pakistan-based al-Fuqra, and groups funded by Saudi Arabian Osama bin-Laden were involved in the World Trade Center bombing and
related plots.

In fact, as early as 1990, World Trade Center conspirators El-Sayyid Nossair, Mahmud Abouhalima, and al-Fuqra member Clement Rodney
Hampton-El (an American Black Muslim) had met in New York City with Sheik Abd-al-Aziz Awadah, who is alleged to have been a senior
commander engaged in the coordination of terrorist operations with Iranian, Palestanian, and Hizbollah leaders.[593]
Such alliances were also reflected in a major terrorist conference held in Tehran in 1993, where it was decided the terrorists' war against the
U.S.

would include "targeting buildings for bomb spectaculars."[594]
Another major terrorist conference was held in Tehran on June 20-23, 1996, during which it was announced that there would be increased
attacks against U.S.

interests.

Two days later, on June 25, the military housing complex in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, was bombed, claiming
the lives of 19 servicemen.

The Movement for Islamic Change, which had already claimed credit for the Riyadh bombing, took credit.Two days later, on June 25, the military housing complex in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, was bombed, claiming
the lives of 19 servicemen.

The Movement for Islamic Change, which had already claimed credit for the Riyadh bombing, took credit.

This was followed by another terrorist conference at the Northwest Frontier Province town of Konli, near the Afghani border in Pakistan on
July 10-15, 1996.

The meeting saw some of the most important militant Islamic leaders come together under one tent.

They included Osama
bin Ladin, a Saudi Arabian who funded the Mujahadeen, was implicated in the Riyadh and Dhahran bombings, and was a close associate of
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, Ahmed Jibril of the PFLP-GC (who carried out the Pan Am 103 bombing on orders from Teheran), Abdul Rasul
Sayyaf, a senior representative of Iranian intelligence, senior Pakistani intelligence officers, and senior commanders of Hamas, HizbAllah,
and other groups.

All resolved to use whatever force was necessary to oust all foreign forces stationed on Islamic holy land.[595]
One Arab observer with direct knowledge of the conference said the participants' resolution was "a virtual declaration of relentless war" on
the U.S.-led West.[596] A glimpse of that conference can be seen in Defense and Foreign Affairs:
Rasul Sayyaf stated that "the time to settle accounts has arrived." The senior representative of Iranian intelligence declared that "attack is
the best means of defense." He urged a combined offensive, both in the Muslim world, particularly the Persian Gulf and Arabian Peninsula,
and at the heart of the West.

He repeated Iran's commitment to the cause and reiterated Tehran's willingness to provide the Islamists with all
possible aid.--- PAGE BREAK ---

All resolved to use whatever force was necessary to oust all foreign forces stationed on Islamic holy land.[595]
One Arab observer with direct knowledge of the conference said the participants' resolution was "a virtual declaration of relentless war" on
the U.S.-led West.[596] A glimpse of that conference can be seen in Defense and Foreign Affairs:
Rasul Sayyaf stated that "the time to settle accounts has arrived." The senior representative of Iranian intelligence declared that "attack is
the best means of defense." He urged a combined offensive, both in the Muslim world, particularly the Persian Gulf and Arabian Peninsula,
and at the heart of the West. He repeated Iran's commitment to the cause and reiterated Tehran's willingness to provide the Islamists with all
possible aid. Another commander concurred, adding that "there is an imperative need for an integrated plan to deal a fatal blow to the international forces
of arrogance." A UK-based commander from a Persian Gulf state stressed that given the immense strategic importance of the Persian Gulf
to the U.S. and its allies, the only way to compel the West to withdraw was through the infliction of so much pain on these countries, that
their governments would find it impossible to tolerate the public outcry and be compelled to withdraw as the only way to stop the Islamist
terrorism at home.[597]

--- PAGE BREAK ---On July 16, one day after the Konli conference, the U.S.

Senate passed sanctions against Iran and Libya.

With their continued sanctions
against the innocent civilians of Iraq, and now Iran, the U.S.

was building to a confrontation with the militant Islamic community.

As Ronald
W.

Lewis wrote in the November, 1996 edition of Air Forces Monthly:
On the following day (after the Konli conference), July 17, the Movement for Islamic Change sent a chilling fax to the London-based Arab
newspaper al-Hayat, warning: "The world will be astonished and amazed at the time and place chosen by the Mujahadeen.

The Mujahadeen
will deliver the harshest reply to the threats of the foolish American president.

Everyone will be surprised by the volume, choice of place and
timing of the Mujahadeen's answer, and invaders must prepare to depart alive or dead, for their time is morning and morning is near." That
fax, and a warning by Israeli intelligence that Iran was likely to launch an attack against a U.S.

aircraft, were ignored.

At 8:31:10 p.m.

(0031:10 GMT) that evening, nobody could dismiss the horrendous explosion of TWA Flight 800 off the coast of Long Island,
New York.

Attack number three had just been carried out.[598]
That excerpt appeared in a U.S.

military newspaper.

But Lewis wasn't the only observer cognizant of these facts.

As Dr.

Laurie Mylroie noted
regarding the July 17 attack on TWA flight 800, it occurred precisely on Iraqi national day.

The day of the bombing, Saddam Hussein had
made his own threats, telling the U.S.

that they would be unable to avoid "the sweeping flood and flaming fire that is burning under their
feet.…"[599]
The bombing of the World Trade Center occurred on the second anniversary of Iraq's surrender to coalition forces in the Gulf.

While reports from the State Department and such institutions as the Heritage Foundation decry the use of Arab state-sponsored terrorism
against the West, the truth is that the West — and especially the U.S.that they would be unable to avoid "the sweeping flood and flaming fire that is burning under their
feet.…"[599]
The bombing of the World Trade Center occurred on the second anniversary of Iraq's surrender to coalition forces in the Gulf.

While reports from the State Department and such institutions as the Heritage Foundation decry the use of Arab state-sponsored terrorism
against the West, the truth is that the West — and especially the U.S.

— has been exporting terrorism in the form of economic sanctions,
assassinations, coups, death-squads, and covert/overt wars in almost every part of the world since the beginning of the century.[600]
To the Muslim world, and especially terrorist groups such as the PLO, Islamic Jihad, Hizbollah, and Hamas, the U.S.

assault on its ally Iraq
represented a turning point in Islam's struggle against the West.

The Gulf War marked the first time the United States had used an all-out,
full-scale military assault on an Arab country, with devastating results.

Under the influence of religious figures such as Sheik Omar Rahman, the Mujahadeen (the Afghani freedom fighters who had been trained
by the CIA) and their allies became staunch opponents of the United States.

Thousands of Muslims from almost 40 countries flocked to
Afghanistan and Pakistan during the war, and thousands remain there, training for the day when Islam will rise up in its final great Jihad
against the West.[601]
To these groups, the Gulf War marked the signal for a new escalation in their war against the U.S.

The bombing of the World Trade Center,
the Federal Building in Oklahoma, the Al-Khubar military complex in Daharan, and possibly the shootdown of TWA 800, were all expressions
of this rage against the United States.

On January 25, 1993, less than one month before the World Trade Center attack, Mir Aimal Kansi, a Pakistani, vented his rage by opening
fire with an AK-47 outside CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia.The bombing of the World Trade Center,
the Federal Building in Oklahoma, the Al-Khubar military complex in Daharan, and possibly the shootdown of TWA 800, were all expressions
of this rage against the United States.

On January 25, 1993, less than one month before the World Trade Center attack, Mir Aimal Kansi, a Pakistani, vented his rage by opening
fire with an AK-47 outside CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia.

Two CIA employees were killed and three others were wounded.

Like
Ramzi Yousef, Kansi was a native Baluchi.

He was involved with the Pashtun Students Organization, the student wing of Mahmood Khan
Achakzai's Pakhtoon Khwa Awami Milli Party, which claimed the CIA's sudden pull-out of Afghanistan resulted in millions of deaths at the
hands of the Soviets.

Kansi claimed the CIA had betrayed his father.[602]
Yousef himself spent considerable time in Baluchistan.

Located in western Pakistan, Baluchistan is a nexus for the Muslim Jihad, and a
major arms and drug network.

Pakistan has served not only as a training center for the Mujahadeen, but a haven for Philippine terrorist
groups such as Abu Sayyaf and the Moro Liberation Front, who have used the free-flowing Pakistani arms and drugs nexus in an effort to
promote and finance their activities.[603]
Support in the form of arms and drugs flowed from Pakistan and Afghanistan to militant Islamic groups around the world, aided by the CIA,
rogue intelligence officers, and senior U.S.

officials in for their piece of the action — just as Oliver North's "Enterprise" would do with the
Contras in Nicaragua.

In fact, many of the same individuals were involved.

Yousef next showed up in the Philippines with a Libyan missionary named Mohaimen abu Bakr, leader of the Libyan Mullah Forces.

It was
there that he joined forces with an Afghani named Wali Khan Amin Shah and his old friend from Kuwait, Abdul Hakim Murad.

They were
there to train the Abu Sayyaf.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was
there that he joined forces with an Afghani named Wali Khan Amin Shah and his old friend from Kuwait, Abdul Hakim Murad. They were
there to train the Abu Sayyaf. Headquartered on the Philippine island of Mindanao, the 400-member strong Abu Sayyaf has conducted over 10 major terrorist attacks in
the last six years in its bid for autonomy, and is strongly allied with other Islamic revolutionary groups, such the Philippine-based Moro
Liberation Front. Abu Sayyaf's funding and support comes from high-profile Islamic leaders such as Libyan President Muammar Qaddafi,
and wealthy Islamic financiers such as Tariq Jana, a Pakistani businessman, and Osama bin Laden. Considered by the State Department to be one of the world's preeminent sponsors of Islamic radicalism, bin Laden's threats to wage Jihad

--- PAGE BREAK ---on Americans in the Middle East immediately preceded the November, 1995 blast at a U.S.

military facility in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, in which
five Americans and two Indians were killed.

Eight months later, a massive truck-bomb killed 19 servicemen and injured 400 at Dhahran.

In a March, 1997 interview with the London Independent from his Afghani hideout, bin Laden warned of additional measures against U.S.

forces in Saudi Arabia, and said he had obtained the support of thousands of Pakistanis.[604]
Readers will also recall that General Wafiq al-Sammara'i, the former head of Iraqi military intelligence, told the London Independent a year
earlier that the 1996 Dhahran bombing "strongly resembled plans drawn up by a secret Iraqi committee on which he served after the
invasion of Kuwait.…"[605]
Not surprisingly, in February of 1995, U.S.

authorities named bin Laden and his brother-in-law, Mohammad Jamal Khalifa among 172
unindicted co-conspirators in the World Trade Center bombing and related plots to blow up New York City landmarks, including the Javitz
Federal Building and the United Nations.

Those plots were strongly linked to Iraq.[606]
Khalifa also ran an Islamic center in the Philippines linked to similar organizations in countries such as Iraq and Jordan.

Given Abu Sayyaf's
close ties with bin Laden, Khalifa, and their connections with the Mujahadeen, it is only natural that Ramzi Yousef, a Pakistani who is
considered an Iraqi agent, would be involved with the group.

Abu Sayyaf's former military strategist, Edwin Angeles, who surrendered to Philippine authorities in February of '96, admitted that the Abu
Sayyaf was in fact linked to Yousef and Murad — both of whom recently went on trial in New York for their role in "Project Bojinka" — a
dramatic plan to blow up 12 U.S.

airliners in a single day.

The plot was foiled when police raided Yousef's Manila apartment on January 6,
1995, after a fire caused by the pair mixing bomb-making chemicals in a sink.airliners in a single day.

The plot was foiled when police raided Yousef's Manila apartment on January 6,
1995, after a fire caused by the pair mixing bomb-making chemicals in a sink.

While Murad was captured, Yousef escaped, making his way
to Pakistan, where he was captured by police in February.[607]
Nine of his accomplices — six of them Iraqis — were rounded up one year later along with plastic explosives, blasting caps, detonating
cords, time fuses, and fake passports.

The terrorists, including a Sudanese and two Saudis, were part of a plot to bomb various Western
targets and assassinate Pope John Paul II during his January, 1995 Philippine visit.[608]
Before his capture however, Yousef, an engineering graduate of Britain's Swansea University, had time to try out his new bomb — an
experimental form of nitroglycerin.

The small test-bomb, taped under a seat on Philippine Air flight 434, killed one Japanese tourist and
injured 10 others.

Before the explosion, Yousef had safely departed the plane in Cebu City.

Another temporary resident of Cebu City was Terry Nichols.

As discussed, Nichols had moved to Cebu City with his new wife, Marife Torres,
a mail-order bride whom he met there in November of 1989.

After trying life in Michigan and Nevada, the couple moved back to Cebu City in
early 1993, where they lived for a short time.

According to Nichols' ex-wife Lana Padilla, her former husband had traveled to the Philippines about four times a year since meeting Marife.

Although some of the visits were to see his new bride and make arrangements for her entry into the U.S., he occasionally traveled alone.[609]*
"Sometimes he went when Marife was in Kansas," wrote Padilla.According to Nichols' ex-wife Lana Padilla, her former husband had traveled to the Philippines about four times a year since meeting Marife.

Although some of the visits were to see his new bride and make arrangements for her entry into the U.S., he occasionally traveled alone.[609]*
"Sometimes he went when Marife was in Kansas," wrote Padilla.

"It didn't make sense, but I never asked why."[610]
Nichols told Padilla he was traveling to Cebu City to meet "potential business partners." The Michigan farmer was making the multi-thousand
dollar trips, he said, to bring back little paper "butterflies" — curious merchandise for a man intent on setting himself up in the military surplus
business.[611]
It is also curious why Nichols carried two stun-guns on his last trip, why he left $20,000 taped behind a drawer for his son, and a note to
McVeigh telling him "You're on your own," and "go for it!" in case he didn't come back, and why his son cried, "I'm never going to see my
Dad again…."
Perhaps Nichols had reason to worry.

According to FBI 302 reports and investigations conducted by McVeigh's defense team, Abu Sayyaf
leader Edwin Angeles spoke of a terrorist meeting in the vicinity of the Del Monte labeling factory in Davao, on the Island of Mindanao, in late
1992 or early '93.

It was there, Angeles said, that Ramzi Yousef, Abdul Hakim Murad, Wali Khan Amin Shah, and several others discussed
the Oklahoma City bombing plot.[612]*
One of the men at the meeting, recalled Angeles, introduced himself as "a farmer."[613]
When the "farmer" returned home from his last visit to the Philippines on January 16, 1995, and discovered that Padilla had opened the
mysterious package and read the contents, he turned "white as a ghost."[614]
On April 19, 1995, Abdul Hakim Murad was sitting in his New York jail cell when the word went out that the Oklahoma City Federal Building
had been bombed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to FBI 302 reports and investigations conducted by McVeigh's defense team, Abu Sayyaf
leader Edwin Angeles spoke of a terrorist meeting in the vicinity of the Del Monte labeling factory in Davao, on the Island of Mindanao, in late
1992 or early '93. It was there, Angeles said, that Ramzi Yousef, Abdul Hakim Murad, Wali Khan Amin Shah, and several others discussed
the Oklahoma City bombing plot.[612]*
One of the men at the meeting, recalled Angeles, introduced himself as "a farmer."[613]
When the "farmer" returned home from his last visit to the Philippines on January 16, 1995, and discovered that Padilla had opened the
mysterious package and read the contents, he turned "white as a ghost."[614]
On April 19, 1995, Abdul Hakim Murad was sitting in his New York jail cell when the word went out that the Oklahoma City Federal Building
had been bombed. Murad casually admitted to a prison guard that the Liberation Army of the Philippines — a group connected to Abu

--- PAGE BREAK ---Sayyaf — was responsible.

Abu Sayyaf leader Edwin Angeles later corrected Murad for the record: "It was the Palestine Liberation Army and/or the Islamic Jihad which
Murad was referring to," he said.

"This army is associated with Hamas and based in Lebanon.…"
However, given the fact that Saudi intelligence informed the FBI that Iraq had hired Pakistanis who might not have known they were
operating on behalf of Iraq, it is highly possible that Murad (a Pakistani) and Angeles were unaware of their true sponsor.

As the Washington
Post's Jack Anderson reported in 1991: "A preferable revenge for Iraq would involve having a 'surrogate terrorist' carry out a domestic attack
that Hussein could privately take credit for…."
As Stephen Jones wrote in his March 25th Petition for Writ of Mandamus:
This terrorist attack was "contracted out" to persons whose organization and ideology was friendly to policies of the foreign power and
included dislike and hatred of the United States government itself, and possibly included was a desire for revenge against the United States,
with possible anti-black and anti-Semitic overtones.

Because Iraq had tried a similar approach in 1990, but had been thwarted by Syrian
intelligence information given to the United States, this time the information was passed through an Iraqi intelligence base in the Philippines.

[615][616]
The sighting of Terry Nichols with Islamic terrorists in the Philippines dovetails with Cary Gagan's sighting of Nichols with his "Iranian" friends
— Omar and Ahmed — in Henderson, Nevada.

Gagan recalled how Nichols looked "out-of-place" among his Arab comrades at the May '94
meeting.

Was Terry Nichols associated with World Trade Center bomber Ramzi Yousef, a reputed Iraqi agent?

Was Timothy McVeigh associated
with Hussain al-Hussaini, a former Iraqi soldier?

Were Yousef and Hussaini part of a terrorist network set up by Iraq to infiltrate the United
States?Was Timothy McVeigh associated
with Hussain al-Hussaini, a former Iraqi soldier?

Were Yousef and Hussaini part of a terrorist network set up by Iraq to infiltrate the United
States?

On January 28, 1991, the Washington Post reported that an Iraqi terrorist network was being sponsored and planned by Saddam Hussein.

The article stated in part:
Highly classified US intelligence reports say that the United States has received information that Saddam has already dispatched more than
100 terrorists, both experienced and novice, to try to infiltrate the United States.

One report, quoting sources inside Iraq, cites a specific
number of terrorists — 160 — who have been sent off with missions in America.

That coincides with reports that at least two and possibly as many as four Iraqi diplomats in their embassy in Washington were monitored as
they attempted to set up terrorist cells in the capital and elsewhere in the United States.…
…A recent intelligence report says that Saddam has deposited money in several Swiss bank accounts that will automatically be paid out to
terrorists no matter what happens to Saddam… Iraqis living in the United States who support Saddam strongly enough to resort to violence
would probably be used to provide bank accounts, safe houses and materials for the experts who sneak into the country.

According to Northrop, information from a London banker "Sayanin" (source) showed that several million dollars was transferred from the
Bank of Iraq, through the SWIFT international banking system in Brussels, Belgium, to a bank in Kingman, Arizona under the account name
of "Nayaad." Attempts by Northrop to confirm this information were unsuccessful.[617]
What is also interesting is that Cary Gagan claimed to have received $250,000 from his Arab friend Omar, who wanted to set up an account
for him.

Omar and Gagan had also traveled to Kingman.According to Northrop, information from a London banker "Sayanin" (source) showed that several million dollars was transferred from the
Bank of Iraq, through the SWIFT international banking system in Brussels, Belgium, to a bank in Kingman, Arizona under the account name
of "Nayaad." Attempts by Northrop to confirm this information were unsuccessful.[617]
What is also interesting is that Cary Gagan claimed to have received $250,000 from his Arab friend Omar, who wanted to set up an account
for him.

Omar and Gagan had also traveled to Kingman.

The million dollar account was to be wired from a Swiss bank and deposited into
the Bank of Cherry Creek in Denver.

Part of the plan was to allow Omar and Ahmed to purchase the Postal Center, a shipping and receiving store in Denver owned by George
Colombo, who also operated a Ryder truck leasing operation across the street.

Omar had asked Gagan to broker a deal to buy the facility
from Colombo.

He believes they were interested in the mail and truck rental facility.

For some reason, the deal fell through.

While Gagan claims he was paid by Omar, there is no direct evidence that McVeigh or Nichols were funded by Gagan's Arab contacts.

Yet
there is circumstantial evidence that the two bombing defendants met with Sam Khalid, who spent considerable time in Las Vegas.

The Arab
high-roller frequented Binyon's Horseshoe, the Glitter Gulch, and the MGM casino, where Nichols would occasionally take his 12-year-old
son Josh.[618]
As Northrop said, "gambling is a favorite pastime of Sunni Moslems.…" Was Omar simply there to gamble, or did he have another agenda?

According to Gagan: "Omar and Ahmed were wiring money in and out of MGM.

They used to get money — huge amounts of money — they
were using these wire transfers."
Former high-ranking CIA operative Gunther Russbacher told author Rodney Stich (Defrauding America) that Binyon's Horseshoe was one of
the casinos used for money laundering and political payoffs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to Gagan: "Omar and Ahmed were wiring money in and out of MGM. They used to get money — huge amounts of money — they
were using these wire transfers."
Former high-ranking CIA operative Gunther Russbacher told author Rodney Stich (Defrauding America) that Binyon's Horseshoe was one of
the casinos used for money laundering and political payoffs. Khalid is a regular at Binyon's Horseshoe.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Two other frequent visitors to Binyon's Horseshoe, it appears, were Terry Nichols and Timothy McVeigh.

The two men attended the Claude
Hall Gun Show in Las Vegas in November and January of 1994, stayed at Padilla's house, and reportedly frequented Binyon's and a strip
joint next door called the Glitter Gulch, where Khalid is also a regular.[619]†
While no one at the casinos would cooperate in placing Khalid with the two bombing suspects, Padilla said that Nichols had met with "Middle
Eastern" men while in Las Vegas.[620]
That information dovetails with Cary Gagan's testimony.

As stated earlier, the federal informant said he met with approximately eight men —
five of whom were Middle Easterners — at the Western Motel in Las Vegas on May 16, 1994.

There was an Arab man from Oklahoma City
who Gagan referred to as the "leader."
The Eighth man was Terry Nichols.

The question remained, who was Omar, and was he connected with Sam Khalid?

Interestingly, Khalid's alias is "Omar."[621]
In an attempt to track Khalid's whereabouts in Las Vegas, KFOR's Jayna Davis hired a security guard and part-time P.I.

named Louis
Crousette.

Crousette had worked at the Glitter Gulch.

In a transcript of the conversation, Davis asks Crousette if Angie (not her real name),
Khalid's favorite stripper, recognized him:
Crousette: "She knew who he was.

Her eyes… her… her… how do I want to say this?

Her whole demeanor changed.

She went from being
a calm person to being a scared little rabbit."
Davis: "All right.

And she said she didn't want to get involved…"
Crousette: "Does the word getting up and running and leaving the place tell you anything?

Davis: "Okay.

So…"
Crousette: "She left.

She got up and left.

She left her money and left.She got up and left.

She left her money and left.

She grabbed her stuff and was out the door."
According to Crousette, Angie also described an Arab man in the Glitter Gulch acting as a "recruiter," who introduced Khalid to a pair of
"skinny white guys." Could these two skinny white guys have been Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols?

Angie declined to say, telling Davis that she'd "wind up at the bottom of Lake Meade" if she talked.[622][623]*
But just who was this "recruiter" that Crousette spoke of?

Crousette saw him hobnobbing in a wealthy part of town with a man in a white
BMW.

Just who was in the car with him wasn't clear.

However, the information is curious in light of Gagan's report that he and his Arab
friends met at the Player's Club, an upscale apartment complex in a Las Vegas suburb.

Also mentioned in Crousette's phone conversation is "Jaffer," an apparent reference to Jaffer Oshan (not his real name).

Oshan, who
sometimes goes by the name Ossan Jaffar, is an electrical engineer who works for Khalid, and translates for his rusty Arabic.

Oshan was reportedly the target of FBI surveillance at the same time Khalid was being indicted for insurance fraud.

Like Abraham Ahmed,
Oshan disappeared just before the bombing, traveling to Jordan.

And like Ahmed, he gave a similar story, telling Ernie Cranfield he was
going to the Middle East to attend to family matters — in this case — his own wedding.

According to Cranfield, he did not marry.

A native Jordanian, Oshan showed up in KFOR's surveillance photos with Khalid and Hussain al-Hussaini.

Crousette showed the photos to
his "intelligence" source:
Crousette: Three people that I know of that went in service — two feds and two of them were ex-company (CIA).

They know who these
guys are.

When I showed them these pictures they looked at me and told me, "Get the hell out of it.

What the hell are you doing doing this?"
Davis: Did they tell you they were Iraqi Intelligence?--- PAGE BREAK ---

When I showed them these pictures they looked at me and told me, "Get the hell out of it. What the hell are you doing doing this?"
Davis: Did they tell you they were Iraqi Intelligence? Crousette: Two of them did, yes.… The feds know who did it. Davis: And they're not arresting them? Crousette: I'm not gonna' get involved. Davis: Are they Middle Eastern?

--- PAGE BREAK ---Crousette: I'm not getting involved on this.

Okay.

I'm sending in my bill.

I'm getting out of it now….[624]
Crousette has since avoided all attempts to contact him.

Gordon Novel, an investigator who used to work for District Attorney Jim Garrison,
spent a week in Las Vegas attempting to talk with the former security guard.

"He was real adamant about not wanting to be talked to," said
Novel.

As a frustrated Novel was about to leave, a large goon appeared at his hotel room with an automatic tucked in his belt and some words of
advice: "You betta' stay da fuck out odda Oklahoma thing," he warned.

"Work on da Waco thing if ya wanna, but stay out odda Oklahoma
thing.

There's a lodda sand out dare where no one will ever find ya."
"He had a very serious big gun," said Novel, "and he wasn't a cop — I don't know what he was."[625]
Why would an apparent Mob mule be concerned about steering an investigator away from a Las Vegas connection to the Oklahoma City
bombing?

Was Khalid connected to the Mob?

KFOR first bumped into Sam Khalid when reporter Brad Edwards received a mysterious phone call from Sharon Twilley.

Twilley was working
at the time for Khalid's real-estate business, Sahara Properties, which he owned with his ex-wife Carol, who died in the bombing.

A three-
year employee, Twilley did a variety of jobs for Khalid, including bookkeeping and acting as rental agent for his 500-plus properties.

Twilley told Edwards and Davis that she had seen her boss in the company of Abraham Ahmed, who had been detained by the FBI as a
possible suspect on April 19 as he attempted to fly from Oklahoma to Jordan.

According to Twilley and Ernie Cranfield, Ahmed had been seen driving the brown Chevy pick-up seen speeding away from the bombing,
back and forth to Khalid's place in the days prior to the bombing.

Ahmed's increasingly frequent visits coincided with the arrival of Hussain al-
Hussaini and five other Iraqis in November.According to Twilley and Ernie Cranfield, Ahmed had been seen driving the brown Chevy pick-up seen speeding away from the bombing,
back and forth to Khalid's place in the days prior to the bombing.

Ahmed's increasingly frequent visits coincided with the arrival of Hussain al-
Hussaini and five other Iraqis in November.

Twilley also said that Khalid began acting very secretive after the arrival of the six men, and
would only speak to Ahmed in Arabic.

Yet, perhaps most incredibly, both Cranfield and Twilley had seen a yellow Mercury Marquis parked at Khalid's office; Twilley said she saw
Abraham Ahmed in the passenger seat.[626]
The presence of Ahmed wasn't the only thing that raised eyebrows at Sahara properties in the days following the bombing.

Cranfield told the
FBI and Edwards that he saw one of Khalid's Arab employees, a man named Haider al-Saiidi, acting strangely ebullient after the bombing.

"When the news reports first came about some Islamic group being responsible, well Haider kind of laughed about that," recalled Cranfield.

"I heard they found three babies that was dead from the blast, and I went and told the guys… and John Doe 2 (Cranfield's reference to
Hussaini) started crying.

He went out on the porch to cover his face and he stood by the wall crying.

He was upset that children got hurt.

He
was really upset.

And Haider was laughing because he was crying."[627]*
To make things even stranger, Khalid decided to visit Las Vegas on the evening of April 20, the day after his ex-wife Carol was killed in the
bombing.

It seems Khalid had asked her to help him with his taxes on Monday, her regularly scheduled day at the Department of Agriculture.

Consequently, she went into work on Wednesday, her day off.

As news reports showed Dr.

Espe, Carol's boss, being carried down a ladder
by rescue workers, Khalid's daughter Heather began crying.

She knew her mom worked in that office.

"We was all sitting around the office watching the news," said Cranfield.--- PAGE BREAK ---

She knew her mom worked in that office. "We was all sitting around the office watching the news," said Cranfield. "And when they showed Espe being carried down that ladder, she
(Najaya, Khalid's current wife) just burst out laughing. Heather was crying, and Najaya was laughing."[628]
Some might consider it odd that a girl's stepmother would burst out laughing upon learning that her mother had been killed. Some might
consider it stranger still for a man to be partying on the eve of his ex-wife's death. Was there a motive? Did Khalid know there would be a bombing on Wednesday? Did he know Carol would go into work on Wednesday to
make up for her day off? "It was set up," said Cranfield. "I know it was set up. He got rid of her because of the taxes she filed."
According to Cranfield, Khalid reported to the IRS that his employees were sub-contractors, thus avoiding having to pay benefits. Khalid's
steady worker of nine years also told me that his boss made up business cards for the employees that purported to show their "independent"
status. It was Carol on whom fell the responsibility of preparing the returns. Cranfield caught a glimpse of her on Monday, two days before her death. "She didn't look happy that morning when she was doing his taxes," recalled Cranfield. "She did not look happy at all… 'cause he was

--- PAGE BREAK ---fucking the government over the taxes."[629]
At the time of this writing there was a case pending against Khalid for tax fraud.

Carol most likely would have testified against him in that
case.

The circumstances at Sahara Properties in the days after the bombing were too much for Cranfield.

"I left the job site and went to the office
and said 'I want my money.' I told them I didn't want to work for no terrorists.

I was so… I feared that these people were involved, and them
workers were involved in this.

And with all the strange things that was going on, I wasn't going to take no chances.

And when they found
Abraham [Ahmed], that was it.

That was all I needed to know.

That's all I wanted to know.

I wanted to get the hell out of there!"
The brown Chevy pick-up that Ahmed had been seen driving was found abandoned the Tuesday after the bombing at the Woodscape
Apartment complex on Route 66.

Resident Jeannie Royer recalled a heavy-set Middle-Eastern man getting out of the truck which was left
near a storage shed.

The man gave Boyer a hard look that said, "You'd better forget what you just saw."
The man showed up a week later and followed Royer while she was out walking her dog.[630]† When shown a photo of a heavy-set Middle
Eastern suspect by KFOR (one of Khalid's workers), she said, "It sure does look like him.

I would sure like to see a close-up of his eyes.

Those eyes of his were frightening!"[631]
The abandoned pick-up, incidentally, had been painted yellow, and the serial numbers ground off.

"You could see the yellow over-spray all
over the chrome fender," said Joe Royer.

The FBI then towed the truck to its impound lot, and nothing has been heard about it since.[632]
What is even more interesting (or coincidental, depending on your point of view) is that Khalid owns the property on which a body shop is
located — Route 66 Auto Collision — a nondescript, run down place on the far side of town."You could see the yellow over-spray all
over the chrome fender," said Joe Royer.

The FBI then towed the truck to its impound lot, and nothing has been heard about it since.[632]
What is even more interesting (or coincidental, depending on your point of view) is that Khalid owns the property on which a body shop is
located — Route 66 Auto Collision — a nondescript, run down place on the far side of town.

Route 66, curiously, is two miles directly due
west of the Woodscape Apartments.

A body shop would be a very convenient place to paint a pick-up.

Khalid bought the property in 1994 at a tax auction.

The sale was disputed by the current owner, Rex Carmichael, and as of this writing, the
case was in court.

"I'm sure it wasn't painted there," said Carmichael.

"Khalid hasn't hadn't had anything to do with that body shop.… he's
tried to get it, he's tried to own it, he's tried to possess it from me…."[633]
Interestingly, an anonymous caller to Oklahoma State Representative Charles Key who claimed to be a friend of the brother of a man
involved in the bombing, told him that a meeting of bombing conspirators took place at a garage on Northwest 39th Street.

Although he didn't
state the name, Route 66 is located right on Northwest 39th Street.[634]
After the bombing, Route 66 changed it's name to Tom's, but is not listed in the phone book or the information directory under either name.

KFOR's P.I., Bob Jerlow, told me he staked the place out for five days but never saw anybody go in for an estimate.

"It's probably a chop-
shop," said a retired police officer.[635]
If so, it may fit into what Cranfield told me next: "They (Khalid and his employees) would always buy cars, then I found out that they was
taking them and running them to Mexico, running trips to Mexico and selling the cars.… Within two weeks to a month, everyone of them was
driving a different car.

They wouldn't have it but less than a month, then they'd be rid of it, and you wouldn't see it again.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"It's probably a chop-
shop," said a retired police officer.[635]
If so, it may fit into what Cranfield told me next: "They (Khalid and his employees) would always buy cars, then I found out that they was
taking them and running them to Mexico, running trips to Mexico and selling the cars.… Within two weeks to a month, everyone of them was
driving a different car. They wouldn't have it but less than a month, then they'd be rid of it, and you wouldn't see it again. "I seen them many times up there at this garage (Route 66). It was the same guys that came in [in November]. The same six that came in. Just them — them six."
One of the six was Hussain al-Hussaini. The date November, 1994 may be prophetic. Three witnesses in Stillwater, about an hour's drive north of Oklahoma City, saw a man who
closely resembles Ramzi Yousef in late October, early November, 1994. The man, who called himself Y.T., was managing Boomer's Used
Auto Sales in Stillwater, along with a man who resembled John Doe 2. He drove a yellow Mercury Marquis similar to Timothy McVeigh's,
albeit with a vinyl roof. Ronnie White (not his real name), who was working as a mechanic for Boomer's at the time, said the men ran a "shoddy" operation and
were "hostile" towards customers. The business, he said, was buying used cars and shipping them overseas, possibly to Kuwait. while in
itself not an unusual practice, White said he saw as much as $100,000 pass through per month, which is unusual for such a small operation. White says the two men suddenly departed for Ohio the last week of October, 1994. They told him "Don't tell anybody where we're going."
They left no forwarding address and no way for the customers to pay their bills. (Coincidentally perhaps, Timothy McVeigh was in Kent, Ohio
on October 5.)
Said customer Michael Reed, "They were some pretty strange people. They were supposed to be running a car lot, but they were always

--- PAGE BREAK ---gone." They returned from their supposed car-buying trip the first week of November, with one used Honda.

White went to the FBI when he saw Yousef's wanted poster in the local police station.

Like many witnesses, the FBI appeared to show no
interest.[636]
Was the man these witnesses saw really internationally wanted fugitive Ramzi Yousef?

A Washington source familiar with Yousef and the
World Trade Center bombing doesn't think it likely that Yousef reentered the county after the 1993 attack.

The FBI put Yousef in the
Philippines in November and December of '94, just in time to launch an ill-fated attack on President Clinton during his APEC visit, but his
exact timeline was never established.

Yousef himself is a chameleon.

One FBI photo depicts him as a thin, haunted-looking criminal, the other a boyish-looking foreign exchange
student.

Yet all three witnesses in Stillwater are adamant.

"I was shocked," said Michael Reed, "it looked just like him."[637]
Had the Arab cell involved in the bombing reinlisted the aid of expert bomb maker Ramzi Yousef for the Oklahoma City attack?

A U.S.

Marshall told Jayna Davis that he believed the World Trade Center and Oklahoma City bombings were linked.

Other sources expressed
similar opinions.

Finally, the Justice Department's Office of Inspector General report on the Oklahoma City bombing indicates that nitroglycerin was was
found at the scene.

As previously stated, Yousef had been experimenting with a new form of nitroglycerin.

If Y.T.

was Ramzi Yousef, he didn't seem too concerned that he was operating in the U.S.

as a wanted fugitive.

Samir Khalid, who by now was being investigated by KFOR and surveilled by Jerlow, apparently didn't seem too concerned he was being
watched either.

At one point he casually strolled up to Jerlow and Edwards, who were staking out his house, rapped on their window, and
said "What do you want with me?" Jerlow, his hand on his gun, watched in amazement.

Later, Khalid called him on the phone.At one point he casually strolled up to Jerlow and Edwards, who were staking out his house, rapped on their window, and
said "What do you want with me?" Jerlow, his hand on his gun, watched in amazement.

Later, Khalid called him on the phone.

"Which
country hired you to investigate me," Khalid demanded to know, "and how much are they paying you?"
A curious question.

If Khalid wanted to know what country had hired Jerlow, it would subsume, at least in his mind, that the U.S.

would have
no reason to investigate him.

Why would he assume such a thing?

Was Khalid an operative or an informant for the U.S.

Government?

When Hani Kamal, a Lebanese/Jordanian businessman, occasional FBI informant, and long-time acquaintance of Khalid's was shown
KFOR's surveillance photos by OCPD officer Don Browning, he reportedly became frightened and said, "You have to leave this alone.

This
is the Mossad.

You do not know what you're messing with." After that, Kamal would no longer talk to the cop.[638]*
Jerlow's sources also came up dry.

When the P.I.

asked his phone company source to pull Khalid's records, they had mysteriously
"disappeared." An attorney friend of Jerlow's who had some dealings with Khalid told him, "Khalid is a dangerous motherfucker.

You stay
away from him." He didn't explain why.[639]
His warning may have been well-founded however.

Three months after the bombing, on July 3, a man matching Khalid's description, and
driving his truck, showed up at Sharon Twilley's house, pulled out a pistol, and fired four shots.

Two of the bullets went into Twilley's
bedroom, one went into her car, shattering the windshield, and another lodged under a neighbor's window.

A terrified Sharon Twilley rolled out of bed, clutching the phone in her hand, and dialed 911.

She then ran over to neighbor Glenn Moore's
house.

"He knows where I slept!" she told Moore, who had watched the scene from his window.--- PAGE BREAK ---

She then ran over to neighbor Glenn Moore's
house. "He knows where I slept!" she told Moore, who had watched the scene from his window. "He could have killed me if he had wanted
to!"
Just why Khalid would want to scare Sharon Twilley literally to death is an interesting question. This excerpt from the police report may shed
some light on the motive:
Twilley stated she worked for the suspect until after the bombing of the Murrah building when the F.B.I. came out and questioned her about
the suspect's activity. The next day she was fired. Since that time the suspect has tried to kick her out of his rent [sic] house. He had refused
to accept her check & had taken her to district court & the judge ordered him to serve a 30 day notice. Twilley stated that since that time her
residence was burglarized and then this incident of the shooting took place. Twilley stated the F.B.I. had spoke [sic] with her a few times
since she was fired & then it all started. Twilley stated Khalid was furious when he found out she had spoken to the F.B.I. Just what had Twilley told the FBI? When I interviewed the OCPD detective who wrote the report, he told me that Twilley had seen "some
new deal he was into," and was "nervous."
"She didn't want him to know that she had talked to the FBI," said the detective. "She was definitely afraid."[640]
FBI agents James Strickland and Dave Swanson's names also appeared on the report. Why would the FBI take an interest in a local assault
case? Although Khalid later admitted to the author that he had been interviewed and polygraphed by the FBI in regards to the bombing,
Strickland wouldn't comment.[641]

--- PAGE BREAK ---In spite of the bullet holes in Twilley's house and car, and Moore's eyewitness account, the OCPD did little.

Assistant DA Sherry Todd
declined to prosecute the case on "lack of evidence." The police report stated it as follows:
Moore stated on the morning on 7-3-95 at approx.

3:30-4:00 he heard gun shots.

Moore got up & looked out the window and saw a dark
skinned male running from the house.

I asked him if it was Mr.

Khalid.

Moore stated "I think it was him, but I'm not sure.

It looked like him but
I'm not positive.

He was driving the same white Nissan pick-up that he drives.

But I'm not sure.

Moore seemed a bit more certain when I spoke to him.

"He was a short guy that smokes a cigar," said Moore.

"[He] looked real aggravated.

He was randomly shooting; he shot four times."
In fact, the police report had previously stated Moore's identification in more positive terms:
Moore recognized the suspect as the landlord who rented the house out prior to Twilley living there & knew him as having a white Toyota
pick up & he said that was him, meaning the suspect.

As if to add more grist to the mill, Khalid and an associate had shown up at Twilley's house the previous day and had smashed a brick
through her window.

Moore told me he recognized Khalid by his baseball cap, cigar, and white pick-up.

I began to suspect that Todd's refusal to prosecute came from DA Robert Macy, who had blindly cooperated with the Justice Department by
refusing to pursue a local investigation of the bombing.

Todd dismissed that notion.

"It's very, very rare when he's involved in the decline or
acceptance of charges," she said, then added, "I felt there were some problems with the witnesses statements."[642]
Although initially polite, when I suggested that Khalid might be involved in the bombing, and that she should re-open the case, she turned
suddenly hostile, and said, "I'm gonna' go back to work.

This case is closed," then abruptly hung up."It's very, very rare when he's involved in the decline or
acceptance of charges," she said, then added, "I felt there were some problems with the witnesses statements."[642]
Although initially polite, when I suggested that Khalid might be involved in the bombing, and that she should re-open the case, she turned
suddenly hostile, and said, "I'm gonna' go back to work.

This case is closed," then abruptly hung up.

Some time later, Mike Johnston, a local attorney familiar with the case, ran into Assistant U.S.

Attorney Ted Richardson in the courthouse.

Johnston raised the issue of Sam Khalid.

"Oh you must have been talking to that guy from San Francisco," Richardson replied, referring to
the author.

When Johnston siad that he had gleaned his information from other sources as well, and suggested that Richardson look into the
matter, Richardson looked at his watch and said, "Well Mike, that's an interesting theory.

I gotta' run."[643]*
As for Glenn Moore, he told me he was being followed by Khalid and didn't want to get involved.

And Sharon Twilley?

Moore said she was
scared and had probably moved back to Georgia.

Was Khalid guilty of assault with a deadly weapon?

Was he involved in the bombing?

His attorney, Francis Courbois, put it eloquently when
he said, "…he is typical of those immigrants who work hard to achieve the opportunities America offers."
Indeed.

In 1973, Khalid was convicted of Grand Larceny.

In 1991, he was indicted in Federal Court on eight counts of insurance fraud, which included setting fires to some of his 500-plus properties.

He served nine months out of a year at El Reno Federal Prison.[644]
Robert Kulick, a former employee of Khalid's, told the FBI that Khalid had instructed him to set fires to four of his properties.

When agents
questioned Kulick and his wife about Khalid's associations, Mrs.

Kulick blurted out, "We don't want to get Sam [Khalid] in any trouble,"
whereupon the agents immediately advised Kulick of his Miranda rights.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When agents
questioned Kulick and his wife about Khalid's associations, Mrs. Kulick blurted out, "We don't want to get Sam [Khalid] in any trouble,"
whereupon the agents immediately advised Kulick of his Miranda rights. Kulick later jumped bond and fled to California after claiming he had received "threatening phone calls." He didn't say from whom.[645]*
Yet the FBI's interest seemed to lay more in Khalid's connections to the PLO than in arson. According to Northrop, the FBI investigated
Khalid for alleged PLO activity in 1991. Khalid's attorney insisted that it would have been precisely the FBI's interest in Khalid — "the
microscope under which he, as a Palestinian, has been monitored" — which would have revealed any wrongdoing. For all intents and purposes, Sam Khalid appears to be just what his lawyer says he is, a hard-working immigrant out to achieve the
opportunities America has to offer. A 56-year-old Palestinian, Khalid was born Samir Abdul-Ghani Sharif Khalid, and emigrated to the U.S. from Kuwait in 1968.[646]† He received his M.A. from Oklahoma City University in 1975, his Ph.D. in psychology from O.U. in 1979, and went
on to teach at public schools and at nearby Tinker Air Force base. He also did a brief stint in the Oklahoma Department of Human Services. [647]
Khalid claims to have relatives in Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Iraq, who provided the money for his education and real-estate investments. In
1982, Khalid quit teaching and devoted himself full-time to his burgeoning real-estate business. By 1995 he had acquired over 500

--- PAGE BREAK ---properties, mostly through HUD, the federal agency besieged with corruption in the late '70s and early '80s.[648]
Hani Kamal was surprised when I told him Khalid owned over 500 properties: "In the '70s this son-of-a-bitch did not have a dime to his
name.

He couldn't survive.

He used to ask me for money.

Where did he get 500 properties?

Where did the money come from?"
Kamal, who claimed to have worked with the Insurance Fraud Division of the FBI (Browning said he was merely an informant), believes
Khalid is a money launderer.

"Khalid should be a millionaire with that much property," exclaimed Kamal, "but he lives in a dilapidated shack
on 32nd Street." Sure enough, Khalid makes his home in a run-down, low-income part of town.

It is Kamal's opinion that Khalid is just an
"errand boy," and somebody else really owns the properties.

Northrop agrees.

He says the money to fund this burgeoning real estate empire comes from the PLO, which instructs him on how to live for
appearance' sake.

Northrop also indicated that Khalid's claim of numerous relatives — an apparently false claim — merely provides a cover
for the funneling of money to his business.

Do these largely circumstantial facts make Sam Khalid a terrorist?

That depends on who you talk to.

According to Northrop:
[By information and belief] Khalid is a long-standing participant in PLO fund-raising activities in the United States.

He is most probably a sub-
cell leader, part of the intellectual fringe that guide the cell, a classic Russian Nihilistic Terrorist structure.

The destruction of the fringe
leadership can be seen in the so-called Spook War between the Israelis and the PLO that took place in Europe and the Middle East between
1972 (the Munich Massacre) and 1986 (the death of Abu Jihad).He is most probably a sub-
cell leader, part of the intellectual fringe that guide the cell, a classic Russian Nihilistic Terrorist structure.

The destruction of the fringe
leadership can be seen in the so-called Spook War between the Israelis and the PLO that took place in Europe and the Middle East between
1972 (the Munich Massacre) and 1986 (the death of Abu Jihad).

Khalid fits the pattern of the well-funded, well-educated father figure who takes care of his flock, remaining outside the center core of sub-cell
foot soldiers (the hel in the Nihilistic structure).[649]
A West 57th Street documentary described how fund-raising by insurance fraud is a classic PLO technique.

The May, 1989 episode,
entitled, "Palestinians: Dirty Business," focused mostly on insurance fraud in Miami in the early to mid-'80s.

Sunrise, Florida Police detective
Don Cannon said the money was "being sent back to fund the PLO or the PFLP or the Intifida."
The principals of this fund-raising scheme, CBS reported, hailed from the West Bank town of Deir Dibwan.

Reporter Karen Burnes received
confirmation from the FBI that a number of scams were going on throughout the U.S.

at the time.[650]
One method of raising money involved small store owners who would open businesses, buying merchandise on credit, then quickly close
shop and vanish with the proceeds.

There were other scams.at the time.[650]
One method of raising money involved small store owners who would open businesses, buying merchandise on credit, then quickly close
shop and vanish with the proceeds.

There were other scams.

California insurance lawyer Gordon Park told CBS, "What they would do is
throw a brick through their front window and say, 'Ok, gosh, I got burglarized.'"[651]
In Brooklyn, investigators discovered a phony coupon redemption center run by Mahumud Abouhalima — currently serving 240 years in
prison for his role in the World Trade Center bombing.[652]
"Insurance scams first surfaced in the United States in the mid-1970's," wrote Northrop, "when California authorities busted a PLO cell in Los
Angeles." The Israeli said that Khalid travels to Israel at least once a year, and avoids any contact with the PLO, but communicates through
a "cut-out," a member of his family.

Northrop also stated that Khalid had been transferring funds from the Bank of Oklahoma in Tulsa to Bank
Hapolim, an Israeli bank in Jerusalem:
The signatory on this particular account in Israel is a member of the Nashashibi clan, a prominent Palestinian family who live in Jerusalem
and the surrounding area (West Bank).

These funds have been used to help finance 'Palestinian aspirations" (and all that implies).[653]
While this information in itself is largely circumstantial, it begins to look less exculpatory when combined with other evidence.

In May of 1996, U.S.

Customs agents in Los Angeles seized a shipment of weapons — Semtex plastic explosives and small arms — bound
for Florida.

The North Korean-manufactured ordinance had been shipped through Manila, and was bound for a Hamas group in Miami.

The co-founder of Islamic Jihad — a close cousin of Hamas — Fathi Shikaki, had been assassinated in Syria by the Shin Bet (Israeli Secret
Service) in October of 1995.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The North Korean-manufactured ordinance had been shipped through Manila, and was bound for a Hamas group in Miami. The co-founder of Islamic Jihad — a close cousin of Hamas — Fathi Shikaki, had been assassinated in Syria by the Shin Bet (Israeli Secret
Service) in October of 1995. Islamic Jihad now needed a new leader, and they sought him in Professor Ramadan Abdullah Shallah, an
adjunct political science teacher at the University of South Florida in Tampa. Shallah co-founded the World and Islam Study Enterprise (WISE), linked to the Islamic Committee for Palestine, both of which have been
accused by federal authorities of fronting for terrorist groups. While Shallah vehemently denied these allegations, he suddenly appeared in Syria in November of 1995 as the new head of Islamic Jihad. Cary Gagan claims to have seen Shallah in late 1994 and February of '95 at Caesar's Palace and The Racetrack — two Las Vegas casinos. "Who is this dude?" Gagan asked Khalid about the short, fat, balding man with a mustache and beard. Gagan was simply told he was a

--- PAGE BREAK ---professor from Florida.

Shallah also appeared in Teheran in June of 1996 as HizbAllah International was organizing its joint working committee to coordinate
international terrorist attacks.

Authorities later discovered that Shallah had been Jihad's number two man in Tampa.[654]
While the Florida group had made threats over the extradition of one of their operatives — Mousa Mohammed Abu Marzuk — to Israel, the
FBI and the Jewish community hadn't taken them seriously.

After the Oklahoma City bombing however, and the interception of the arms
shipment in May, the scenario changed.

The FBI and the Jewish community were now taking a keen interest in the Miami group.

Back in Houston, Northrop was checking into some PLO suspects.

He punched up an inquiry into the Aman (Israeli military intelligence)
computer on Hussain al-Hussaini.

It came up empty.

But the FBI had a list of 27 PLO and Hamas operatives in Florida and Oklahoma.

Ten of those individuals had previously been arrested by
the Israelis in March of '96, and the FBI needed their help.

When an Israeli agent in New York named Avi ran the names through the
computer, he noticed Northrop's inquiry on Hussaini.

He called Northrop and asked him to fly to Miami.

What Northrop discovered when he arrived was that the same group he had been investigating in Oklahoma and Houston had been seen in
Miami.

Hussain al-Hussaini, Sam Khalid, Jaffer Oshan, and Haider al-Saadi — six to seven in all — were positively ID'd by Israeli Sayanim
in Ft.

Lauderdale.

They were there, according to sources, meeting with members of Hamas.

It appears that the Khalid family's activities in the terrorist underworld date back at least to 1982.

According to Army CID (Army Criminal
Investigation Division) records, Khalid's brother Mike, (AKA: Ahmed Khalid, Mike Yousif, Wahid S.It appears that the Khalid family's activities in the terrorist underworld date back at least to 1982.

According to Army CID (Army Criminal
Investigation Division) records, Khalid's brother Mike, (AKA: Ahmed Khalid, Mike Yousif, Wahid S.

Yousif), was involved with a group of
Iranians in Huntsville, Alabama who were romancing local female enlisted personnel in an attempt to procure military secrets.[655]
Yousif/Khalid's mission was to court a woman named Walker from Tuskumbee, AL, whom he had met in Oklahoma City in late 1982, when
they worked together at Shotgun Sam's Pizza Parlor.

Walker's brother, Jimmy, was the pilot for General Robert L.

Moore, Commander of the
Redstone Arsenal U.S.

Army Missile Command in Huntsville.

As commander, Moore had responsibility for the Army's missile program
worldwide.[656]*
"What he had wanted, according to her," said a retired Army criminal investigator who wishes to remain anonymous, "was all kinds of
information about General Moore."[657]
Moore also recalled the case.

He told me the Army had stepped up security around him during this time.

Interestingly, this was around the
same time that attacks on U.S.

military installations were occurring in Europe.[658]
The Army investigator also recalled that "Huntsville, Alabama, at that time, was a hotbed of espionage.

There were 27 known KGB agents in
Huntsville.

They were known.

They were known to the Bureau (FBI); they were known to military intelligence."
This espionage activity was due to the close proximity of Redstone Missile Command, NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, and similar
high-tech facilities located throughout the area.

The investigator has no doubts that the Iranians and the KGB were cooperating.

This account also jives with Gagan's story.

The Soviets had asked Gagan's help in obtaining classified information from his friend at Martin-
Marietta.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This account also jives with Gagan's story. The Soviets had asked Gagan's help in obtaining classified information from his friend at Martin-
Marietta. Later, the Soviets introduced the informant to a man named Hamid who needed fake documentation for illegal Iranians entering the
country. "Back at the time we had a big problem with Iranians," said the former CID investigator, "a big problem. They were always trying to infiltrate
the arsenal. A number of them were attending Alabama A&M University under student visas, but most of them didn't go to school. They were
involved in a lot of different criminal enterprises, drugs, stolen property, prostitution, all sorts of things.…"
The suspects were also linked to a string of convenience stores. Interestingly, Northrop believes that Sam Khalid is a "money man" for Arab
immigrants wishing to open businesses — namely convenience stores. Those wishing to do so must split the profits with the "money man"
fifty-fifty. Could this be another PLO funding scam? CID opened their case on Yousif/Khalid in September of 1982. "During the course of all this, to verify that the guy was real, we got his phone
number… and I called the number one night, and I asked for Ahmed Khalid, and this guy got on the phone and said, 'I don't know him.' And I
said, 'Well, it's got to be you. I got to talk to you — it's important.' Twenty-four hours later that guy was in Tuskumbee, AL."
Like his brother Sam, Wahid was never prosecuted. "The FBI [officially] took no interest.… Another CID investigator got reprimanded by our
SAC, because he went and did this (interviewed Walker). That was the total gist of the FBI's involvement."[659]
The Army investigator's experiences paralleled that of Gagan's. "That's a pretty common thread when you deal with them (the FBI)," Gagan
explained. "You bring them information, and you never hear another word about it."

--- PAGE BREAK ---Florida police who investigated Arab links to insurance scams and organized crime received the same treatment from the FBI.

"People didn't
want to investigate this," said a police detective I spoke with.

"Things weren't right.

It was as if someone was looking at this and saying, 'stay
away from it.'"[660]*
In spite of the FBI's stonewalling, the Army investigator remembers the case well: "The female soldiers would go out at night to the different
clubs and discos and stuff… we caught one out there, and he supposedly ran a convenience store.… And we caught him on the arsenal.…
"Hassan Niakossary — he was the big leader of this gang.

He was associated with a local gangster named Dewy Brazelton, who ran a club
called the Plush Horse.

He had a lot of Cosa Nostra connections into New York — a lot.

Hassan worked for him."[661]†
Middle Eastern terrorists involved in espionage with the KGB, associated with the Mob?

The Army investigator said Niakossary traveled
frequently to Las Vegas, a known Mob town.

So does Wahid's brother, Sam Khalid.

A regular high roller, Khalid reportedly shows up with at
least $10,000 in his pocket.

As Hani Kamal pointed out, the Cosa Nostra has cooperated with Iranians in money laundering in the past.

Could this explain Khalid's
frequent visits to Las Vegas?

Were his trips part of a money laundering operation?

As Gunther Russbacher explained, several Las Vegas casinos, including Binyon's Horseshoe, are pay-off points for political and judicial
slush-funds.

Federal judges and others are allegedly paid off through Shamrock Development Corp.

in Ireland, via off-shore banks and Las
Vegas Casinos.

The bribe recipients collect their money in the form of gambling chips, then cash them in.

Is Khalid receiving money this way?The bribe recipients collect their money in the form of gambling chips, then cash them in.

Is Khalid receiving money this way?

It's hard to say, but it is worth noting that the CEO of Shamrock, Donald Lutz, was on the management
staff of Silverado Savings & Loan, the S&L case tried by Judge Matsch, who would later try McVeigh and Nichols (Neil Bush, a board
member of Silverado, walked).

And what about Omar's trip(s) to Kingman?

It was there that Omar and Gagan drove from Las Vegas, two weeks before the bombing.

Why
would a high-roller like Omar drive to the dusty, isolated desert town of Kingman?

One possible reason may have been to make contact with
Timothy McVeigh, who was holed up in the Imperial Motel at the time.

Another reason may have revolved around drugs.

Recall that Gagan's original relationship with Omar was under the guise of drug dealing.

"I
brought some back from Puerto Vallerta for him," said Gagan, "using a camper with a false top… through San Diego.

At one time I saw 10-
15 kilos.

That's quite a bit of dope."
Recall that Gagan had delivered a bag of cocaine from Kingman to Denver (which contained plastic explosives), and he believes the
$250,000 Omar paid him came from the Cali Cartel.[662]
As mentioned earlier, on April 4, 1995, Gagan and Omar delivered a package to a man in a cowboy hat in Kingman, driving a rusty brown
pick-up.

Authorities reported that a brown pick-up, belonging to Steven Garrett Colbern, was caught on Trooper Hanger's video camera as
he stopped McVeigh on I-35 an hour and-a-half after the bombing.[663]*
A chemist who knew McVeigh under the alias of "Tim Tuttle," Colbern had recently been spotted with a bag of ammonium nitrate in his truck.

His roommate, Dennis Malzac, was being held on charges of arson for a small explosion that had damaged a house in town two months
earlier.

That house was owned by Rocky McPeak, a friend of McVeigh's.--- PAGE BREAK ---

His roommate, Dennis Malzac, was being held on charges of arson for a small explosion that had damaged a house in town two months
earlier. That house was owned by Rocky McPeak, a friend of McVeigh's. Colbern, who shared a mailbox in Kingman with McVeigh, was
absent from work four days prior to and ten days after the bombing. He claimed he was in California visiting his parents.[664]†
Interestingly, FBI agents digging in the desert outside Kingman for evidence, found more than 150 pounds of ammonium nitrate buried in the
sand.[665]
Colbern was arrested in May of 1995, and released on April 23, 1997, after serving time in Lompac Federal Prison on illegal weapons
charges.[666]
Despite the incriminating connections, Colbern disappeared from the official radar screen almost as quickly as he had appeared. The
Oklahoma Highway Patrol video showing the brown pick-up — like the numerous surveillance tapes showing the activity at the Murrah
Building on the morning of April 19 — was "seized" by the FBI. Was Colbern the man to whom Omar delivered the mysterious package on April 4? Was the it meant for Timothy McVeigh? Did Khalid meet Terry Nichols in Las Vegas in May of 1994? Were Nichols and McVeigh the "two skinny white guys" he met at the Glitter
Gulch in November? Was McVeigh's yellow Mercury at Sahara Properties as Ernie Cranfield claimed? And was McVeigh with Hussain al-Hussaini at the pawn
shop and the Roadrunner Tavern in Oklahoma City as KFOR's witnesses said?

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ultimately, were McVeigh, Nichols and their friends in fact plotting with Arab extremists to blow up the Alfred P.

Murrah Building?

"He (McVeigh) had mentioned before that he wanted to become a mercenary in the Middle East, because they paid the most," recalled
former Army buddy Greg Henry, "But we just took it as a joke.

But he's the kind of person that would have become that."[667]
Was McVeigh some sort of intermediary between neo-Nazi groups and Arab terrorists?

While this may sound bizarre, as previously noted,
cooperation between such groups has been well documented.

The origins of Arab-Nazi collaboration go back to WWII.

The Mufti of Jerusalem, who was Hitler's guest, actually raised Muslim SS units for
the Nazi war effort, culled from Bosnian Muslims and Arabs.

ODESSA, the Nazi organization formed to funnel support to ex-SS members, arranged rendezvous with representatives of various Arab
organizations after the war, as part of the Dulles/McCloy/OSS Ratlines.

This secret CIA operation also funneled Nazis to various Latin
American countries, where they set up "security services" (death squads) for their respective government employers.

One ODESSA member, former Gestapo Chief General Ernest Rhemer, settled in the Middle East, where he set up intelligence operations
for several Arab countries, including Syria and Egypt.

Rhemer, who is currently active in the "Revisionist" scene, for several decades played
a key role in coordinating German Right-wing activity with the Arab world.

Alois Brunner, Aldoph Eichmann's chief, who murdered 128,500 people during the Nazi Holocaust, played an early role in Arab-Nazi
collusion.[668]
Also playing a role in Arab-Nazi cooperation was Hitler's "favorite commando," Otto "Scarface" Skorzeny, who helped install Gamel Abdul
Nasser as Egyptian president with the assistance of an elite corps of former SS storm troopers.

Skorzeny also helped train early PLO groups
for commando raids into Israel.Alois Brunner, Aldoph Eichmann's chief, who murdered 128,500 people during the Nazi Holocaust, played an early role in Arab-Nazi
collusion.[668]
Also playing a role in Arab-Nazi cooperation was Hitler's "favorite commando," Otto "Scarface" Skorzeny, who helped install Gamel Abdul
Nasser as Egyptian president with the assistance of an elite corps of former SS storm troopers.

Skorzeny also helped train early PLO groups
for commando raids into Israel.

The ardent Nazi, who conveniently missed his day at the Nuremberg trials courtesy of the U.S.

Government,
was stationed in Egypt at the behest of the CIA.[669]
One of Skorzeny's subordinates, a Swiss Nazi named François Genoud, served with Skorzeny's troops in Egypt.

Genoud also befriended Ali
Hassan Salameh, the leader of Black September, the group which murdered nine Israeli athletes during the 1972 Munich Olympics.

Currently a banker in Geneva, Genoud reportedly masterminded several airplane hijackings for the PLO.

A close friend of Genoud's, French attorney Jacques Vergès, defended several members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine
(PFLP), and spoke as a "character" witness on behalf of the notorious Gestapo chief Klaus Barbie (the "Butcher of Lyon"), who murdered
hundreds of French resistance fighters, and deported 7,000 Jews to the death camps.

And as recently as the early 1980's, a neo-Nazi named Odifried Hepp was responsible for attacks against at least four U.S.

military and
NATO installations, as well as German nightclubs frequented by U.S.

servicemen.

Hepp worked with the PFLP, and was also financed by
Yasser Arafat's Al Fatah, who in turn was supported by François Genoud.

As another example of Arab-Nazi collaboration, when members of Abu Nidal, and Abu Abass' Palestine Liberation Front (PLF) hijacked the
Greek cruise ship Achille Lauro in 1985, they demanded Hepp's release.

"I know Hepp quite well," Abass told the French daily Liberation in
1985.As another example of Arab-Nazi collaboration, when members of Abu Nidal, and Abu Abass' Palestine Liberation Front (PLF) hijacked the
Greek cruise ship Achille Lauro in 1985, they demanded Hepp's release.

"I know Hepp quite well," Abass told the French daily Liberation in
1985.

"He is a friend."[670]
The German magazine Der Speigel reported on a group of neo-Nazis called Kampfsportgruppe, headed by a man named Hoffmann (a
Hoffmann member had blown himself up, along with 11 others, at the Oktoberfest celebration in Munich in 1981).

Kampfsportgruppe, it
seemed, was connected to terrorist groups in Beirut.[671] At the same time, a number of German terrorists have reportedly been trained in
Palestinian camps in Jordan, South Yemen, Syria, and Iraq.

Iraqi arms dealer Ishan Barbouti met with former Nazi scientist Volker Weissheimer in order to recruit other former Nazis to work on Libyan
and Iraqi chemical weapons projects.[672]
The Syrians — who are well-known sponsors of terrorism — offered funding to Robert Mathews, the former leader of The Order, also known
as "Der Buders Schweigen" (The Silent Brotherhood).

Mathews, who was killed in a shoot-out with police in 1984, had issued a "Declaration
of War" against the so-called "Zionist Occupied Government, including Jews, blacks, Hispanics, Asians and white "race traitors" who didn't
agree with white supremacist goals.

Mathews' Order was responsible for a string of armored car robberies and the machine-gun killing of
Jewish talk show host Allen Berg in Denver.

As discussed earlier, reports of other Middle-Eastern "terrorist" states such as Libya funding or offering funding to neo-Nazi and other
dissident groups such as the Black Muslims and the El Rukns has been reported.

One of Libya's primary beneficiaries was the Nation of
Islam (NOI), whose leader, Louis Farrakhan, received $5 million dollars from Libyan President Muammar al-Qaddafi.--- PAGE BREAK ---

As discussed earlier, reports of other Middle-Eastern "terrorist" states such as Libya funding or offering funding to neo-Nazi and other
dissident groups such as the Black Muslims and the El Rukns has been reported. One of Libya's primary beneficiaries was the Nation of
Islam (NOI), whose leader, Louis Farrakhan, received $5 million dollars from Libyan President Muammar al-Qaddafi. As previously discussed, Farrakhan's predecessor, Elijah Muhammad, had formed a pact with the KKK and American Nazi Party in 1961.

--- PAGE BREAK ---This unusual alliance stretched right up to the present day.

In the fall of 1992, WAR leader Tom Metzger appeared on the Whoopi Goldberg
Show preaching the benefits of young blacks joining the NOI.

In 1985, Metzger and Farrakhan spoke together in Los Angeles, and in October of 1996, David Irving, a British Nazi Holocaust Revisionist,
showed up with a pair of NOI bodyguards.

Twenty-five year DEA veteran Mike Levine described to me the unique connection between Nazis and Arab terrorists: "Years ago I was
undercover in the American Nazi party, and it was an odd mix of people that I ran into.

First of all, I'm very dark, and my undercover I.D.

said
I was Italian — Mike Picano.

But, what I found interesting was that members of the American Nazi party were Arabs, you know, [and] there
were light-skinned Latinos… There were Arab members of the American Nazi Party going all the way back to 1968, when I was a member.

The mutual hatred was the Jews and the blacks.[673]
As Levine says, the ties that bind these two seemingly disparate groups is a loathing of the U.S.

and hatred of "World Jewry," which they see
as the dominating force behind all world political and financial power.

In April of 1991, Ahmed Rami, European correspondent for Al Shaab newspaper, urged a "Western Intifada" against alleged Jewish
dominance.

Rami's call was duplicated in several Right-wing German publications, including Deutsche Rundschall, Remer Depesche, and
Recht Und Wahrheit, which wrote:
One can say that the only winner of WWII was the organized World Jewry… attained through Auschwitz, a never-before existing freedom to
unrestricted development of power.

Today, Jews control all important positions of power in the U.S.A.Rami's call was duplicated in several Right-wing German publications, including Deutsche Rundschall, Remer Depesche, and
Recht Und Wahrheit, which wrote:
One can say that the only winner of WWII was the organized World Jewry… attained through Auschwitz, a never-before existing freedom to
unrestricted development of power.

Today, Jews control all important positions of power in the U.S.A.

Similar twisted sentiments were echoed by the Islamic Association of Palestine, which published a communiqué urging Muslims to die in a
holy war against Jews, who they call "enemies of humanity, the bloodsuckers, and the killers of prophets." The principle American support
group of Hamas, is the IAP in Dallas, Texas.

According to ABC 20/20 reporter Tom Jarriel, law-enforcement sources said that Iranians had emigrated to the U.S.

for the purpose of
"recruiting" Americans for homegrown terrorism.

The January, 1996 episode focused on David Belfield (AKA Daoud Salahuddin), a young
black man who became disenchanted with American social and economic life and was drawn to the militant Islamic movement.

In 1980, Salahuddin assassinated a former Iranian Embassy official, Ali Tabatabai, who had advocated the overthrow of the Ayatollah
Khomani.

Like Cary Gagan's "Iranian" friends who had planned to bomb a federal building using a postal truck packed with explosives,
Salahuddin used a postal jeep to gain entry into the official's home.

He then fled the U.S.

and assimilated himself into the Arab terrorist
underground.

According to the report, Salahuddin was typical of many young black males indoctrinated into the Islamic faith by Iranian
agents, who convinced them that terrorism was a legitimate means of protest.

With the help of Washington, D.C.

private investigator Carl Schoffler, ABC 20/20 investigators were able to obtain police intelligence reports
which established that "the Ayatollah had established a recruiting and training program within the U.S.With the help of Washington, D.C.

private investigator Carl Schoffler, ABC 20/20 investigators were able to obtain police intelligence reports
which established that "the Ayatollah had established a recruiting and training program within the U.S.

for home-grown terrorists."
Calling themselves the Islamic Guerrillas in America (IGA), the group, originally comprised of approximately a dozen young black men,
became involved in murder, bank robbery, and threats on the lives of judges and prosecutors.

Regarding the assassination of Tabatabai, Salahuddin told 20/20, "I assume that the decision came from what was the Revolutionary
Council in Iran, in Tehran.

That's my assumption."
Another of Salahuddin's close pals was Cleven Holt, who under his Islamic name, Isa Abdullah, fought against the Israelis in Lebanon and
was seen extensively outside the Marine Corps compound in Beirut just before it was bombed in 1983.

Shoffler recalls that Abdullah was
once arrested while casing Air Force One, the Presidential jet.…
According to Schoffler, "There are clear signs that constant recruitment's going on.…"[674]
Some of this recruitment was for a group known as al-Fuqua, which claims between 200 and 300 operational members.

A splinter from the
Da'ar al-Islam sect, al-Fuqra was founded in Brooklyn in 1980 by a Pakistani cleric named Shaykh Mubarik Ali Gilani.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Shoffler recalls that Abdullah was
once arrested while casing Air Force One, the Presidential jet.…
According to Schoffler, "There are clear signs that constant recruitment's going on.…"[674]
Some of this recruitment was for a group known as al-Fuqua, which claims between 200 and 300 operational members. A splinter from the
Da'ar al-Islam sect, al-Fuqra was founded in Brooklyn in 1980 by a Pakistani cleric named Shaykh Mubarik Ali Gilani. Al-Fuqra's international
headquarters is in Lahore, Pakistan, and they maintain strong ties to both Pakistani intelligence and the Mujahadeen.[675]
The group, which is based on the classical terrorist cell structure, is thought to have at least five operational cells in the U.S., and is
suspected of 17 bombings and assassinations throughout the country, including the murder of at least 12 people.[676]
In September of 1989, the FBI confiscated the contents of a storage locker in Colorado Springs owned by al-Fuqra members, including 30
pounds of explosives (three pipe-bombs, homemade plastic explosives, hand-grenades, mines, fuses, mercury switches and timing
devices), weapons (10 handguns and silencers), military manuals, bomb-making instructions, a photo of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, target-
practice silhouettes with such headings as "FBI Anti-Terrorist Team" and "Zionist Pig." Also included in the lot were plans to attack Colorado
military installations, and Colorado utilities and aviation infrastructures.[677]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Cary Gagan was already familiar with Al Fuqra from his time in prison.

Omar had asked Gagan to "take care of" an al-Fuqra member named
"Eddie," should he call.

Gagan believes the man was Edward Flinton, a Colorado-based al-Fuqra member charged with conspiracy to
commit murder in the August 1984 firebombing of a Hare Krishna temple, and the February 1993 murder of Rashid Khalifa, an Iman of a
Tucson mosque.[678]
In August of 1995, six months after the bombing in Oklahoma City, "Eddie" called.

Gagan met the al-Fuqra member, and the two allegedly
discussed plans to detonate car bombs outside the Governor's Mansion, the Attorney General's office, the Department of Labor and
Employment, and the Colorado Bureau of Investigation (CBI).[679]
The plan included not only blowing up buildings — but assassinating a federal judge — Lewis Babcock.

Babcock was one of several judges
and federal agents on the terrorists' hit list.

"He was my guy up here," said Gagan.

"I was to take him out."
The idea was to take Babcock's upstairs neighbor, John Strader, hostage, tie him up, then plant a bomb in his apartment.

Apparently, this
time the U.S.

Marshals took Gagan's warning seriously.

A call to Babcock and Strader confirmed that the judge had extra security around
him during this time.

Nevertheless, Gagan said Agent James Tafoya didn't want to follow up.[680]
On October 20, 1995, Gagan returned to Denver at the behest of his "Hizbollah" contact, where he met two Americans named "Paul" and
"Daniel" at the Broadway Plaza Motel.

"I had just come back from Kingman, where I dropped off money to a militia-looking dude," said
Gagan.

The men discussed bombing targets in Denver and Phoenix.

"Daniel deals with these dudes (al-Fuqra)," said Gagan.

"They were
connected to Hizbollah."[681]
Although the agencies targeted for the attacks stepped up security at these facilities, the FBI began a concerted effort to discredit Gagan."Daniel deals with these dudes (al-Fuqra)," said Gagan.

"They were
connected to Hizbollah."[681]
Although the agencies targeted for the attacks stepped up security at these facilities, the FBI began a concerted effort to discredit Gagan.

Then in early February, Gagan says he met at the Tomahawk Truck Stop in Watkins, Colorado, where he helped load approximately 300
pounds of high-grade explosives allegedly stolen from Explosives Fabricators.

Also loaded into a van were anti-tank weapons stolen from
the Army, electronic circuitry, and boxes of chemicals marked Ammonium Silicate.

Gagan says he drove the van to Denver, whereupon he
contacted Agent Matt Traver of the ATF.

Gagan said he informed FBI Agents Johnson and Holtslaw and U.S.

Attorneys Allison and Solano.

Gagan told Holtslaw he would take a
Polygraph test, requested that he confirm the status of his Immunity Letter, and meet with his family to assure them that precautions would
be taken for their safety.

Gagan alleges that Holtslaw refused, and ceased all contact with him.

The FBI claims that Gagan refused to take a
Polygraph, and was therefore unreliable.

Yet Gagan's involvement with al-Fuqra is significant in light of several factors.

First, Clement Rodney Hampton-El and Earl Gant, both al-
Fuqra members, were indicted in the World Trade Center bombing and the subsequent plot to blow up four New York City landmarks by
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman's Jama a Islamiya.

Hampton had fought with Gulbaddin Hekmatyar's Hizb-I-Islami (Islamic Party) during the
Afghan War, and assisted in the testing of explosives for the New York City bombings, although he didn't actually take part in the final plot.

[682]
Second, al-Fuqra is aligned, not only with Pakistani intelligence, which supports the Mujahadeen (World Trade Center bomber Ramzi Yousef
is a Pakistani who reportedly fought alongside the Mujahadeen), but to the HizbAllah International through leaders such as Gulbaddin
Hekmatyar.Hampton had fought with Gulbaddin Hekmatyar's Hizb-I-Islami (Islamic Party) during the
Afghan War, and assisted in the testing of explosives for the New York City bombings, although he didn't actually take part in the final plot.

[682]
Second, al-Fuqra is aligned, not only with Pakistani intelligence, which supports the Mujahadeen (World Trade Center bomber Ramzi Yousef
is a Pakistani who reportedly fought alongside the Mujahadeen), but to the HizbAllah International through leaders such as Gulbaddin
Hekmatyar.

Al-Fuqra's contacts also include Hamas, and the Moro Liberation Front, based in the Philippines, where Terry Nichols and
Ramzi Yousef allegedly rendezvoused.

Third, an individual claiming to be the brother of the friend of a man involved in the plot called Oklahoma State Representative Key to
provide him with information after the bombing.

According to the anonymous caller, one of the bombers was a black Muslim.

He spoke of a
man named "Colonel Hardin" from Arizona, whose "supposed to be deeply involved in this, along with some with some Middle Eastern and
some black Muslims."
The reader should take note that this conversation occurred before any discussion of Middle Eastern involvement became public as a result
of Stephen Jones' Writ or other investigations:
Caller: So, according to him there was nine people that he knows of that was supposedly involved in this.

Now there was… there was two
white guys and a black dude.

And he said that he thought one of the white guys could possibly be a short-haired girl that she looked like she
might be from the Middle East or something.

But the second time that he saw the car, he said it was about ten minutes before the bombing, he said they drove up to him and told him to
get the hell out, that there was gonna' be a bomb.

And he said it was the same car only that it had the white guy and the black dude in it.

The
other person, he said thought might be a female wasn't in the car at that time.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And he said it was the same car only that it had the white guy and the black dude in it. The
other person, he said thought might be a female wasn't in the car at that time. Now this about ten minutes before.…
And this black dude-he's a member of the Nation of Islam, but he's also prior service military. And this stupid asshole, he supposedly called

--- PAGE BREAK ---Channel Four after the bombing, claiming credit for it.

Key: Well I heard that… I forget who called in to where but somebody called in and said, you know, it was the Nation of Islam.

Caller: Well, he was supposed to have been the one.

And another thing… Channel Four said late last night that this leg was supposed to
have had some PVC embedded it.

And, you know, you use PVC pipe to pack plastic explosives in.

It greatly increases the detonation of it
and the shear power of it, and it's also a tidy way of handling it.[683]
Finally, there is the unidentified leg found in the rubble of the Murrah Building.

The severed leg, allegedly belonging to a black female, was
clothed in combat boots, two pairs of socks, and an olive military-issue blousing strap.

Authorities eventually claimed the leg belonged to 21-year-old Air Force Airman Lakesha Levy, who was in the Social Security office at the
time of the blast.[684]
What is strange is that there were eight bodies with missing or severed limbs.

If the leg was clothed in military garb, it should have been a
simple task to match it with Levy, who likewise would have been wearing a military uniform.

Eventhough Levy was buried before this leg was
found, it should have been a simple task to go back and see which of the bodies with severed limbs belonged to military personnel wearing
military uniforms.

Yet authorities originally buried a different leg with Levy before finding this one on May 30.

The State Medical Examiner's Office originally claimed the leg belonged to a white or light-skinned male, most likely under 30 year of age.

This finding was later recanted by the FBI, who "decided" that it belonged to Levy.

Of course, By stating the leg belonged to Levy, the FBI
conveniently removed all speculation as to whom the leg really belonged to.This finding was later recanted by the FBI, who "decided" that it belonged to Levy.

Of course, By stating the leg belonged to Levy, the FBI
conveniently removed all speculation as to whom the leg really belonged to.

As Stephen Jones stated, "[Perhaps] the experts are more
interested in proving the non-existence of a different bomber at the scene than validating the Oklahoma Medical Examiner."[685]
Could the unidentified leg have actually belonged to the real bomber — a black Muslim prepared to sacrifice himself or herself for the cause?

Perhaps this explains why authorities allegedly recovered no bodies that matched this leg.

It is possible the leg belonged to an additional
bomber who was disintegrated by the blast.

This could also explain the confused look Daina Bradley witnessed on John Doe 2's face after
he walked to the back of the Ryder truck.

Perhaps upon opening the door, he was confronted with a comrade who ordered him away, then
set off the device, neatly severing himself or herself in the process.

While the Nation of Islam (NOI) are supposedly enemies of Al Fuqra, it should be pointed out that the NOI has forged links with the KKK, the
American Nazi Party, and Tom Metzger's White Aryan Resistance (WAR).

The Tulsa, Oklahoma leader of WAR, Dennis Mahon, freely admitted to William Jasper and other journalists that the Iraqis paid him $100-a-
month — $4800 total — between 1991 and 1995, to stir up dissent among the neo-Nazi/White Supremacist community against the Gulf War
sanctions.

(At least Mahon believes the money came from the Iraqi embassy.)[686]
A former Grand Dragon of the Ku Klux Klan, Mahon had visited Germany in an effort to recruit young Germans into the KKK.

Also recall that
during the Gulf War, the Anti-Zionist League's Michael Kühnen, working with his old mercenary friend Michel Faci, negotiated a contract to
provide 200 German, American and British neo-Nazi volunteers to fight alongside Iraqi troops.(At least Mahon believes the money came from the Iraqi embassy.)[686]
A former Grand Dragon of the Ku Klux Klan, Mahon had visited Germany in an effort to recruit young Germans into the KKK.

Also recall that
during the Gulf War, the Anti-Zionist League's Michael Kühnen, working with his old mercenary friend Michel Faci, negotiated a contract to
provide 200 German, American and British neo-Nazi volunteers to fight alongside Iraqi troops.

As previously discussed, Kühnen was succeeded by a man named Hubner, who has spoken with Kirk Lyons at meetings of the group
"Deutsche Alternative." Lyons' client was Michael Brescia's roommate Andreas Strassmeir, a good friend of Dennis Mahon's.

A frequent
visitor to Elohim City, Mahon was close friends with Brescia.

He almost certainly knew Brescia's friend, Timothy McVeigh.

Again, the question must be asked: Were McVeigh, Nichols, and their comrades in fact plotting with Arab extremists and their black Muslims
counterparts to blow up the Federal Building, and was Iraq behind it?

As the Washington Post's Jack Anderson stated: "A preferable revenge for Iraq would involve having a 'surrogate terrorist' carry out a
domestic attack that Hussein could privately take credit for…"
Anderson's analysis may be rather prescient.

States and their intelligence agencies have being using terrorist groups as "cut-outs" for years
in order to maintain deniability.

Defense & Foreign Affairs, stated it thusly:
…despite the important evolution in the role of the terrorist organizations and other entities through the HizbAllah International, the actual
control over the operations themselves remains firmly in the hands of, and under the tight control of, the sponsoring states, being
perpetrated by operatives of intelligence services.…
It is through these "organizations" that the sponsoring states in effect take credit for their terrorist operations and have their message clear
and explicit.--- PAGE BREAK ---

States and their intelligence agencies have being using terrorist groups as "cut-outs" for years
in order to maintain deniability. Defense & Foreign Affairs, stated it thusly:
…despite the important evolution in the role of the terrorist organizations and other entities through the HizbAllah International, the actual
control over the operations themselves remains firmly in the hands of, and under the tight control of, the sponsoring states, being
perpetrated by operatives of intelligence services.…
It is through these "organizations" that the sponsoring states in effect take credit for their terrorist operations and have their message clear
and explicit. Given the marked escalation of international terrorism and the higher stakes involved, the importance of the front groups
"speaking" for the sponsoring states — particularly Iran and the global Islamic Revolution it is running — is of growing importance and
centrality to international terrorism.[687]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Another example of such methodology was the World Trade Center bombing.

As Ramzi Yousef's accomplice Mahmud Abu Halima put it,
"The planned act was not as big as what subsequently occurred.… Yousef showed up on the scene… and escalated the initial plot.…
Yousef used [Salameh and the others]… as pawns and then immediately after the blast left the country."[688] Some terrorism experts think
Yousef was working for Iraq.

Stephen Jones believes a similar plan unfolded in Oklahoma City.

As he stated in his March 25th Writ of Mandamus:
The plan was arranged for a Middle Eastern bombing engineer to engineer the bomb in such a way that it could be carefully transported and
successfully detonated.

There is no reported incident of neo-Nazis or extreme Right-wing militants in this country exploding any bomb of any
significant size, let alone one to bring down a nine (9) story federal building and kill 168 persons.… This terrorist attack was "contracted out"
to persons whose organization and ideology was friendly to policies of the foreign power and included dislike and hatred of the United States
government itself, and possibly included was a desire for revenge against the United States.…[689]
In November of 1994, Gagan said he made a trip to Mexico City with Omar, where he ran into a familiar face amongst the terrorist crowd —
Frank Terpil.

"I saw him down in Mexico City… with Omar," recalled Gagan.

"We met him in the Zona Rosa area."
A retired CIA communications specialist, Terpil had been convicted, along with rogue CIA agent Edwin Wilson, of selling 20 tons of C-4
plastic explosives and 50,000 electronic timers to the Libyan government.

Terpil had also lined his pockets by supplying torture devices to Ugandan Dictator Idi Amin, and sophisticated detonators and
communications equipment to the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.

He and Wilson had also set up a terrorist training camp in
Libya, and had recruited U.S.Terpil had also lined his pockets by supplying torture devices to Ugandan Dictator Idi Amin, and sophisticated detonators and
communications equipment to the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.

He and Wilson had also set up a terrorist training camp in
Libya, and had recruited U.S.

Green Berets to train Arab terrorists in bombing and assassination techniques.

After being indicted, Terpil fled the country, and was last seen hiding out in Cuba, until he showed up in Mexico City… with Omar.

"They met
at the bar," said Gagan.

"Terpil and Omar spoke for about fifteen minutes, alone."
"Who's that dude?" Gagan asked Omar as they left the bar.

"An ex-CIA agent named Terpil," came the answer.

"He lives in Cuba."
"Frank Terpil?

I thought he was dead?

What's up with him?"
"He lives in Cuba.

He's hands-off.…"
Considering Terpil's well-documented relationship with Arab terrorists, and his "wanted" status in the U.S., it is understandable why he would
choose to meet Omar in Mexico City.

Gagan himself was no stranger to Mexico City.

As previously discussed, the Soviets had solicited Gagan's help in 1980 to procure military
secrets from his friend at Martin Marietta.

They requested his help again in 1986 to assist illegal Iranian immigrants who needed false IDs.

While in Mexico Gagan had also met an Austrian, Eduard Bodenzayer, a Soviet spy, and had been to the Russian embassy repeatedly.

As
he told Stephen Jones, "My contacts there were a guy named Vallery and Elyia."
Did Omar, Sam Khalid, or their associates have contact with the Russians?

Considering Khalid's reported ties to the PLO and Hamas, and
the long history of Soviet-Arab cooperation, it is highly likely.

Like Nazis and neo-Nazis who've forged links with Arab terrorists, the Soviets have provided wide-ranging support to Arab terrorist groups
throughout the years.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Considering Khalid's reported ties to the PLO and Hamas, and
the long history of Soviet-Arab cooperation, it is highly likely. Like Nazis and neo-Nazis who've forged links with Arab terrorists, the Soviets have provided wide-ranging support to Arab terrorist groups
throughout the years. As James Phillips of the Heritage Foundation writes:
During the 1970s the Soviet Union and its satellites greatly expanded their support for terrorist groups. Moscow often used Middle Eastern
client states such as Iraq, Libya, Syria, and the former People's Democratic Republic of South Yemen as intermediaries to mask Soviet
arms, training, intelligence, and logistical support for a wide variety of terrorist groups.[690]
If the Russians were sponsoring their Arab friends in terrorism, it is likely the Arabs may have wished to maintain further deniability by
engaging the assistance of American neo-Nazis. This possibility became more apparent as connections were drawn, not only between
Dennis Mahon and Iraqi embassy officials, but between Terry Nichols and Iraqi terrorist Ramzi Yousef, and between Timothy McVeigh and
former Iraqi soldier Hussain al-Hussaini. This likelihood became clearer after interviewing Michele Torres, the daughter of a former Communist Party official (P.R.T. Party) in Mexico
City. An intelligent young woman, Michele had been raised under the harsh regimentation of a person destined for a position in the
Communist Party, but had rebelled, and at age 17, fled to the United States. Torres recalled the numerous and strange faces that would often pass through her home and her father's office. Arab men from Jordan,

--- PAGE BREAK ---Palestine, Iraq… she was not allowed to ask them their names or their business.[691]
Torres also claimed to have overheard conversations between her father and PLO representatives some years earlier.

The meetings, she
said, involved discussions of a bombing plot to be carried out in the U.S.

It was the winter of 1992, and Michele's father, Hirram Torres, was working in the office of the PLO in Mexico City.

He was speaking with a
man from Palestine, and another from Jordan or possibly Iraq.

In broken English, Torres recounts the conversation:
Torres: They were saying: "What do you think about the new plan?" And the other man says: "Well, we can… the Russian officers told us
we can probably blame the fascists." You know what I mean?

"Americans — the American Patriots, and all the stupid stuff with the white
supremacists and the neo-Nazis.

So we can give two strikes at once."
Hoffman: Did he explain what he meant by two strikes?

Torres: They didn't explain it but I understood it.

Hoffman: Did they say anything about the Patriot Movement or the Militia Movement?

Torres: They don't say anything about militia.

When they want to talk about militia, they say fascists or neo-Nazis.

And when they speak
about Patriots, or Yankees… the way they say.

They used to speak about white supremacists… all Americans… white Americans are white
supremacists.

Yankees and fascists.

Hoffman: Tell me what they meant by the two strikes at once.

Torres: They wanted… the Arab people wanted… to make a terrorist act.

They needed to make a terrorist act.

There was like, some of the
Arab leaders — wanted to make — wanted to give a strike to the United States.

They didn't even understand why.

But at the same time, the
Communist Party tells them that it was a great idea to…
Hoffman: Now are you relating the actual conversation?

Torres: Yes.

They were saying that it was… all the time they were talking about… what the Russian officers told them to do.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Torres: Yes. They were saying that it was… all the time they were talking about… what the Russian officers told them to do. So that man
who was talking was the Palestinian man — my father told him that it was very good, and that they would probably find an easy way — an
easy way to blame that kind of people. That he was trying… that he had tried to contact neo-Nazi people to help him…
Hoffman: Did he say who? Torres: Yes. He tried to contact any kind of National Socialist people (American Nazi Party)… I tell you the way I heard it: "We can probably
use those neo-Nazi bastards. I tried to contact them, but they refused to do it, and they don't want to get involved in that kind of stuff with
Communists. And I don't think anyone can get those fucking idiots, but I don't care." He said something like, "I don't care. We are anyway
going to blame them."
Hoffman: We don't want to get involved with Communists and that kind of stuff and what…
Torres: "But anyway can blame them. No matter if they want to cooperate with us or not." Then he told me… he told that guy that… he was
going to hire a white man. Hoffman: To act as a neo-Nazi? You mean to play the part of a neo-Nazi? Torres: To play the part of a neo-Nazi. And… and to participate with his comrades… he spoke about his Arab comrades. Hoffman: In what respect? Torres: His Arab comrades… and he used to call them brothers or some kind of thing…
Hoffman: Your father spoke of them this way? Torres: Yes. But, well, he told it in Russian, that he was — that boy who they were going to hire, was going to work together with the
Tobarich (Russian for comrade). With the Tobarich. Hoffman: Do you remember any names — any specific names of any people — anybody? Torres: No. That time, they were just going to plan it. That was the plan…

--- PAGE BREAK ---Hoffman: This was in the winter of '92?

Torres: Yes.

They were just discussing the plan.

They didn't even know the names.

My father was… by that time my father was… deciding.

Hoffman: Now why do you think so long ago?

That's four years between now and then.

Torres: They always plan it in that way.

They take their time, and always a very long time.

They always take a very long time…
Hoffman: Is there anything else about what they discussed that you haven't told me that you think is important?

Torres: They said they were going to do it in the middle of the country.

And they were going to do it in a business office.

Hoffman: Did they say how big?

Torres: Yes, big.

And they wanted… children to be victims of it.

There must be children there — it must be an office where children were
somehow.

They had to kill children.

Because it was a very important part of the emotional part of the strike….

Hoffman: Did they ever mention Pan Am 103 or the World Trade Center bombings in reference?

Torres: They talked something about… trade centers.

Anyway they spoke about trade centers — about places where business were made,
because Americans regard so much their money and their business.

That was the explanation my father gave to the Palestinian guy.

They
spoke about places where business were made, and that it was not the only strike they were going to make.

You know one of the reasons I am not scared of this conversation (this interview) is because I heard — I listen to this kind of conversation all
of my life.

My father — he has killed a lot of people — he has done a lot of wrong things.

He was involved…
While Torres' mention of Russian intelligence seems to have all the makings of a Claire Sterling novel, it should be mentioned that Mexico
City is home to one of the largest Soviet consulates in the Western hemisphere, with its attendant Soviet intelligence apparatus.My father — he has killed a lot of people — he has done a lot of wrong things.

He was involved…
While Torres' mention of Russian intelligence seems to have all the makings of a Claire Sterling novel, it should be mentioned that Mexico
City is home to one of the largest Soviet consulates in the Western hemisphere, with its attendant Soviet intelligence apparatus.

It appears that what Torres was describing was more than a loose-knit group of terrorists, but a sophisticated centrally-controlled state-
sponsored terrorist apparatus.

As Defense & Foreign Affairs stated:
Despite the unprecedented role of the HizbAllah International in the decision making process, all major terrorist operations remain state-
controlled.

These operations are conducted by agencies of states and in pursuit of the long-term and strategic interests of the controlling and
sponsoring states.

The "names" and "profiles" of the organizations and groups issuing the communiqués and claims constitute an integral
component of the state sponsorship mechanism.

These named entities serve a specific function: stating the identity of the interests involved
in, and the outlining of the logic and objectives behind, these operations without having the sponsoring states assume formal responsibility.…
Incredible as it sounds, Torres' story may be the key piece of the puzzle linking the Arab and neo-Nazi contingents.

Her story is significant in
light of the fact that Dennis Mahon was being paid by the Iraqis to stir up dissent amongst the white supremacist community.

Her story also ties into the fact that Omar allegedly met with Frank Terpil in Mexico City; and Terry Nichols reportedly met with Ramzi Yousef
in the Philippines.

Finally, Timothy McVeigh, an alleged white supremacist, was seen with Hussain al-Hussaini, an Iraqi.[692]
Interestingly, within hours of the blast in Oklahoma City, Radio Tehran in Iraq had the answer.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Her story also ties into the fact that Omar allegedly met with Frank Terpil in Mexico City; and Terry Nichols reportedly met with Ramzi Yousef
in the Philippines. Finally, Timothy McVeigh, an alleged white supremacist, was seen with Hussain al-Hussaini, an Iraqi.[692]
Interestingly, within hours of the blast in Oklahoma City, Radio Tehran in Iraq had the answer. "…the perpetrators were Christian extremist
militias from Montana and Oklahoma observing the two-year anniversary of the U.S. government killing of 86 men, women, and children in
the Branch Davidian Waco massacre."[693]
Was Timothy McVeigh the "neo-Nazi bastard" that Michele's father talked about hiring?[694]*
And were the Russians using Middle Eastern terrorists as proxies — who in turn were using American neo-Nazis — to destabalize the West
while maintaining deniability? While the apparent demise of the Soviet Union convinced a lot of people that the long-feared Communist
threat was over, many within the intelligence community disagree. A recent Rueters report quoted Raymond Mislock, Chief of the FBI's National Security Division, as saying that the Russians "still are on the
scene," and continue to employ intelligence officers in this country. In fact, the FBI was investigating over 200 cases of suspected Russian
espionage activity at the time of this writing.[695]
And what about Khalid's employees trips to Mexico? Was Khalid liasoning with terrorists there? Ultimately, the question was, who was

--- PAGE BREAK ---Khalid working for?

Although Louis Crousette avoided any further attempts to contact him, he left Jayna Davis with one final word of advice.

Echoing Hani
Kamal's words of warning regarding Israeli intelligence, Crousette said, "You know who's your best bet to talk to, if you haven't thought about
it… the Mossad."
That final adage led me straight back to Northrop, who stated in his report that Khalid "fit the role" of a PLO operative, and insisted that the
bombing was the work of Iraqi terrorists.

But if Khalid, Hussaini, and Oshan were simple Arab terrorists — and they had left a trail of
evidence a mile long — why were they still walking around?

In spite of Novel's and Davis' unsuccessful attempts to positively I.D.

Khalid with McVeigh or Nichols, Gagan stated that he had seen Nichols
with Omar, at a meeting which took place just outside of Las Vegas.

The FBI had also investigated Sam Khalid for PLO fundraising activities, and had looked into the shooting assault of Sharon Twilley.

They had put out an APB on the brown pick-up driven by Hussain al-Hussaini, which was seen speeding away from the scene of the
bombing.

And Hussaini's alibi for the morning of the April 19 was patently false.

KFOR's witnesses who placed Hussaini with McVeigh seemed perfectly credible, and KFOR had passed on their information to the FBI.

Khalid had access to an auto body shop, and one of Khalid's employees had been seen abandoning the re-painted pick-up in a nearby
apartment complex.

Then there was the mysterious disappearance of Khalid's phone records, and the strange comments he made to Ernie Cranfield when he
was asked why Abraham Ahmed had been seen hanging around Khalid's place in the brown pick-up.

Khalid had been placed by Northrop's sources with the same Hamas operative in Miami — Ramadan Shallah — that Gagan had seen in Las
Vegas.

Finally, Omar (Khalid?) was seen meeting with Frank Terpil — a rogue CIA agent who had supplied Arab terrorists with several tons of C-4.Khalid had been placed by Northrop's sources with the same Hamas operative in Miami — Ramadan Shallah — that Gagan had seen in Las
Vegas.

Finally, Omar (Khalid?) was seen meeting with Frank Terpil — a rogue CIA agent who had supplied Arab terrorists with several tons of C-4.

Although circumstantial, the facts were sufficient to make an incontrovertible case, and yet these people seemed to walk through walls.

Could the FBI be so inept?

Were their agents so compartmentalized that they couldn't put two and two together?

Or had the Justice
Department's investigation become so politicized that bureaucratic ineptitude had become the desired and inevitable result?

It would seem
all of the above, and yet this still seemed too simple an answer.

Even Northrop's report seemed a bit one-dimensional.

While the former Israeli intelligence agent drew a picture of Arab terrorists forged in
the fire of the PLO, the image that lurked just beneath the surface, one drawn in invisible ink, was that of intelligence operatives conceived in
the secret chambers of the Mossad… or the CIA.

This was the one remaining possibility that lent credence to the seemingly irreconcilable facts which presented themselves.

After all, why
had the FBI ignored a veritable mountain of damming evidence?

Why had they suddenly and mysteriously canceled the APB on the brown
pick up?

And why, after 48 hours of reporting nothing but Middle Eastern connections, did the Justice Department and their obedient lap
dogs of the mainstream press suddenly announce that no Middle Eastern connection existed?

Certainly the capture of McVeigh and Nichols did not repudiate the still-standing Middle Eastern connection.

Nor could the sudden change
have been the result of information from low-level agents in the field.

No.

It could have only been the result of one thing — a strategic
decision from the Justice Department, which had as its basis, a political directive from the White House.--- PAGE BREAK ---

No. It could have only been the result of one thing — a strategic
decision from the Justice Department, which had as its basis, a political directive from the White House. It was to Washington that Khalid traveled shortly after the bombing, according to employees, to meet with a Congressional representative. The purpose? As an emissary to discuss the problem of "Muslim bashing."
Yet KFOR's P.I., Bob Jerlow, claims he spoke to the Representative's aide who checked the Congressman's schedule and claimed she
never saw the name Khalid. If Sam Khalid was a run-of-the-mill Arab terrorist who had just played a role in the biggest terrorist attack in U.S. history, why would he
attract attention to himself by firing shots at Sharon Twilley? A convicted felon like Khalid would easily earn a stiff prison sentence for
possession of a firearm and assault with a deadly weapon. Unless he was "protected."
This would tend to explain why he acted so non-chalant towards Ernie Cranfield, Bob Jerlow, Brad Edwards, and the author. It would
likewise tend to explain the FBI's lack of interest in Khalid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---If Khalid and Hussaini were run-of-the-mill Arab terrorists, what was Khalid doing meeting with such high-level U.S.

officials?

It would seem
that President Clinton's publicly televised admonishment not to blame the Arab community also served as a handy excuse to cover up the
Middle Eastern connection.

Yet why would Clinton want to cover up their connection to the bombing?

There are two reasons: First, Clinton needs an excuse to crack
down on the Patriot/Militia community, who represent a threat to Clinton's anti-constitutional plans for America, and the establishment's plans
for a "New World Order." This Clinton did with a vengeance.

Once the Justice Department had announced the capture of McVeigh and
Nichols, the mainstream media, with information supplied mainly by the Anti-Defamation League of the B'nai B'rith (ADL), and the Southern
Poverty Law Center (SPLC), was able to focus their anti-militia spotlights, launching vitriolic attacks against anyone connected with the far-
Right.

Under the orchestration of the ADL, attacks on the Patriot/Militia movement continued for months, eventhough there was no
documentable proof of the suspects' connections to the militias, or the militias' connection to the bombing.

Number two, Clinton and Bush were responsible for bringing individuals like Hussain al-Hussaini into this country.

Between 1992 and 1995,
over 18,000 Iraqi refugees and their families were resettled into the U.S.

under a largely unknown and hotly debated program initiated by
President Bush and followed up by President Clinton.

They were part of a contingent of Iraqi refugees that flooded the Saudi border during
and after the war, including many former Iraqi soldiers and deserters.

According to Oklahoma Senator David Boren, approximately 950 of these former soldiers were resettled in the U.S.

in 1992 and 1993.

Congressional Research Service figures indicate that an additional 549 soldiers were resettled in 1994, and 219 in 1995.in 1992 and 1993.

Congressional Research Service figures indicate that an additional 549 soldiers were resettled in 1994, and 219 in 1995.

A "Sense of the Congress" resolution initiated by Republicans Don Manzulla of Illinois and Clifford Stearns of Florida attempted to halt the
resettlement.[696]
"We're rolling out the welcome wagon to prisoners of war, yet our own veterans who fought there are having trouble getting any help," Sterns
said.

Some of the refugees included Shi'ite Muslims who were oppressed by Iraqi President Saddam Hussein and in some cases rebelled
against him.

Others included Iraqi soldiers who Hussein vowed to execute because they didn't fight to the death.

"I'm sympathetic with the
idea that people who opposed Saddam Hussein should not be allowed to be massacred," said Tennessee State Republican Representative
John L.

'Jimmy' Duncan Jr., "but we should give the benefit of the doubt to our own people and put the burden of proof on the people who
want to come in."[697]
In spite of the resolutions, the White House backed the program, officially admitting approximately 18,000 Iraqi refugees into the U.S.

According to Manzulla's office, the figure may be higher.

Some figures put approximately 5,000 Iraqis in the Tulsa and Oklahoma City areas
alone.

Others fear that such a resettlement would create a sort of "blowback." The U.S.

already has Muslim extremist cells, and it is difficult to
gather accurate intelligence on all those admitted under the program.

According to the Congressional Research Service Report, "…there
has been no contact with Kuwaiti intelligence services in the effort to verify that the refugees are not Iraqi agents."[698]
If Hussain al-Hussaini, a former Iraqi officer, was resettled into the U.S., it is possible — highly possible in fact — that he was recruited by
the CIA or DIA as part of a deal.

There is a precedent for such collaboration.According to the Congressional Research Service Report, "…there
has been no contact with Kuwaiti intelligence services in the effort to verify that the refugees are not Iraqi agents."[698]
If Hussain al-Hussaini, a former Iraqi officer, was resettled into the U.S., it is possible — highly possible in fact — that he was recruited by
the CIA or DIA as part of a deal.

There is a precedent for such collaboration.

In 1949 and 1950 the National Security Council issued NSC Intelligence Directive 13 and 14,
which expanded the CIA's authority to function inside the U.S.

(in violation of the CIA's charter.) One of their programs involved bringing
"favored European exiles" into the country.

"Favored European exiles" was a euphemism for Nazi war criminals.[699]
It may not be fair to compare Iraqi war refugees with Nazi war criminals or Islamic terrorists.

But given the United States' precedent in using
expatriated Nazis and Cubans for their covert operations, and the extremely low-key nature of the Bush/Clinton Iraqi resettlement program,
one has to wonder what Hussaini's real purpose was.[700]
As former Pentagon investigator Gene Wheaton observes: "Every major Middle-Eastern terrorist organization is under surveillance and
control of the intelligence agencies in the U.S.

None of these guys move around as freely as they'd like you to think."
If Hussaini was working for the Mossad, the FBI, the DIA, or the CIA, who have been known to cooperate with each other on "special
projects," he may have been a double-agent, working for Iraq at the same time.

Remember that Saddam Hussein had threatened revenge
against the United States ("Does the United States realize the meaning of opening the stores of the world with the will of Iraqi people?...

Does it realize the meaning of every Iraqi becoming a missile that can cross to countries and cities?")
If an element of the United States Government played a role in the destruction of the Alfred P.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Remember that Saddam Hussein had threatened revenge
against the United States ("Does the United States realize the meaning of opening the stores of the world with the will of Iraqi people?... Does it realize the meaning of every Iraqi becoming a missile that can cross to countries and cities?")
If an element of the United States Government played a role in the destruction of the Alfred P. Murrah Building, using an Arab to do its dirty
work would prove far easier than attempting to recruit an American citizen. Sam Khalid's ability to monitor the activities of a group of Middle Easterners with dubious connections (through hiring and renting homes to
Arab immigrants), and his status as former felon, make him a likely candidate as an operative or informant.

--- PAGE BREAK ---asterners with dubious connections (through hiring and renting homes to
Arab immigrants), and his status as former felon, make him a likely candidate as an operative or informant.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Was he playing both sides of the fence?
Politically, the government's refusal to concede the complicity of Iraq in the World Trade Center bombing, and possibly to the Oklahoma City
bombing, may stem from its desire to halt any public outcry against U.S. policies. One major example is the government's refusal to face the
consequences of its immoral, brutal, and devastating actions in the Gulf.
Dr. Laurie Mylroie believes the Clinton administration's failure to address the problem lies in its refusal to face the specter of state-sponsored
terrorism. Instead it chooses to adopt a microcosmic "law-enforcement" approach to what she perceives as an international problem —
hence the focus on "domestic terrorists."
Moreover, the White House may not want to admit the specter of state-sponsored terrorism because it might panic the populace. Such is the
case of a state-sponsored biological attack which has been increasingly threatening our population.[701]
If Iraq indeed proved to be behind the Oklahoma City bombing, it would not fare well for the Clinton administration, who followed up on
President Bush's Iraqi resettlement program. It would not fare well for Bush and his business and political cronies — the same CIA/Iran-
Contra coterie who armed and fueled Saddam Hussein's military machine with conventional and biological weapons.
And it would preclude this same international arms/drugs cabal from profiteering by re-supplying Iraq in the future. In short, it would preclude
"business as usual."[702]
Whatever the reason, certainly the public wasn't being told the full truth about the Oklahoma City bombing. They would never be allowed to
glimpse any evidence of the Middle Eastern connection.
Yet this was only part of the picture.
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.comtruth about the Oklahoma City bombing. They would never be allowed to
glimpse any evidence of the Middle Eastern connection.
Yet this was only part of the picture.
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---6
"No Stone Unturned"
"We will leave no stone unturned in our effort to get to the truth."
— Attorney General Janet Reno
"McVeigh and Nichols are going to hell regardless.

I'm just looking forward to sending them there a little sooner."
— U.S.

Attorney Joseph Hartzler
Almost from the beginning, the Justice Department and the mainstream press focused their attention on Timothy McVeigh, painting him as a
spurned ex-soldier who was angry for failing to make the Special Forces; an extremist Right-wing "Patriot" who hated the government with a
passion for their atrocities at Waco.

McVeigh, the angry misguided loner, it is alleged, conspired with anti-government tax protester Terry
Nichols to teach the Federal Government a lesson in Oklahoma.

Like the arrest of Lee Harvey Oswald, the "capture" of Timothy McVeigh was an incredible stroke of timing and luck.

Like Oswald, who was
arrested for walking into a movie theater without paying, McVeigh would be arrested for speeding down the highway with a conspicuously
missing license plate.

In both cases, the FBI was quickly notified that their "suspect" was in custody.

With their extraordinary run of good luck, the FBI was able to
instantly trace the serial number found on the bomb truck to Ford, then to Ryder, then to Elliott's rental agency, then to a "Bob Kling," and
finally to "McVeigh."[703]
Like Oswald's Mannlicher-Carcanno rifle, which the FBI traced from its entrance into the U.S., to an importer, to Klein's Sporting Goods, to a
sale to an "A.J.

Hidell," then to Oswald — all without computers and over a weekend — the FBI would quickly trace the Ryder truck to the
lone bomber.

Finally, like "lone nut" Lee Harvey Oswald, "lone nut" Timothy James McVeigh would be transferred from the Noble County jail, paraded in
front of onlookers and the press as the mass murderer.Hidell," then to Oswald — all without computers and over a weekend — the FBI would quickly trace the Ryder truck to the
lone bomber.

Finally, like "lone nut" Lee Harvey Oswald, "lone nut" Timothy James McVeigh would be transferred from the Noble County jail, paraded in
front of onlookers and the press as the mass murderer.

While there was no Jack Ruby to intervene this time, McVeigh would be led away in
a bright orange jumpsuit, without a bullet-proof vest, which he had specifically requested.

Ironically, his departing words were, "…I might be Lee Harvey Oswald, Jr.… You remember what happened with Jack Ruby."[704]
As in the arrest of Lee Harvey Oswald, the circumstances surrounding the arrest of McVeigh and Nichols would prove highly questionable.

The media widely reported that McVeigh was stopped by Highway Patrolman Charles Hanger 78 minutes after the blast(s), heading north on
I-35, near Perry.

McVeigh was driving without a license plate.

As Trooper Hanger's affivadit states:
"…That I stopped the vehicle and the defendant was the driver and only occupant of the vehicle.… That as the defendant was getting his
billfold from his right rear pocket I noticed a bulge under the left side of his jacket and I thought it could be a weapon.… That I then told the
defendant to pull his jacket back and before he did he said, 'I have a gun under my jacket.…' That I then grabbed a hold of the left side of his
jacket and drew my own weapon and pointed it at the back of his head and instructed him to keep his hands up and I walked him over to the
trunk of his car and had him put his hands on the trunk.…"
Yet accounts vary.

Some acticles stated that McVeigh was speeding at 81 miles per hour.

Yet Hanger only cited him for no license plate, no
insurance, and possession of a concealed weapon.

Were these accounts meant to suggest that McVeigh was trying to make a fast get-
away?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Yet Hanger only cited him for no license plate, no
insurance, and possession of a concealed weapon. Were these accounts meant to suggest that McVeigh was trying to make a fast get-
away? If so, why would a man who had just committed such a heinous crime wish to draw attention to himself? McVeigh supposedly just blew up a building and killed 169 innocent people — men, women, and children — including a number of federal
agents. It is 78 minutes later, and he is being pulled over by a state trooper. He has no tags, no insurance, and is carrying a concealed
weapon without a permit. He is most likely going to jail, where his name, Social Security number, and description will be uplinked to the
National Crime Information Center (NCIC) at the FBI — an FBI that is now on full alert. McVeigh is carrying a large combat knife, and a Glock model 21 automatic pistol loaded with deadly hollow-point bullets. McVeigh is a
trained soldier, a top marskman, and a hardened combat veteran.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The cop is exiting his vehicle and walking over to McVeigh's car.

McVeigh's life outside the electric chair is very likely about to come to an
end.

What does McVeigh — this hardened combat veteran, this brutal killer of 169 innocent people — do?

He casually informs the cop that
he has a concealed weapon, and meekly hands himself over for arrest.[705]
Of course the mainstream press wouldn't make any attempt to analyze this bizarre inconsistency in McVeigh's behavior, only reporting that
he was "uncommunicative," (Time), "calls himself a 'prisoner of war,'" (New York Times), and is refusing to cooperate with investigators and
prosecutors…" (U.S.

News & World Report) — a story which would be repeated by numerous other papers.

Yet as McVeigh stated to Newsweek, "I never called myself a prisoner of war."[706] McVeigh's account is backed up by the Los Angeles
Times, which obtained McVeigh's arrest records.

As the Times' Richard Serrano notes:
….They reveal a McVeigh sharply different from the one sources had earlier portrayed.

He was not the silent soldier who gave jailers only
his name, rank and serial number.

Rather, he was often polite.

And smooth.[707]
With only the serial number of a truck differential and a sketch to work with, the FBI fanned out through Junction City.

Upon examining the
rental receipt at Elliott's Body Shop, the FBI discovered all the information on it was false.

As Agent Henry Gibbon's affidavit states:
The person who signed the rental agreement identified himself as Bob Kling, SSAN 962-42-9694, South Dakota driver's license number
YF942A6, and provided a home address of 428 Maple Drive, Omaha, Nebraska, telephone 913-238-2425.

The person listed the destination
as 428 Maple Drive, Redfield, South Dakota.

b.

Subsequent investigation conducted by the FBI determined all that information to be false.

Yet employees of Elliott's Body Shop did recognize the sketch of Unsub #1 as the man who rented the truck used in the bombing.Subsequent investigation conducted by the FBI determined all that information to be false.

Yet employees of Elliott's Body Shop did recognize the sketch of Unsub #1 as the man who rented the truck used in the bombing.

The FBI
then took the sketch of Unsub #1 to the Dreamland Motel, where they found that Unsub #1 had rented a room from April 14 through the April
18.

As the FBI affidavit states:
An employee of the Dreamland Motel in Junction City, Kansas, identified Timothy McVeigh as a guest at the motel from April 14, 1995,
through April 18, 1995.

This employee, when shown a photo lineup identified Timothy McVeigh's picture as the individual who registered at
the motel under the name of Tim McVeigh, listed his automobile as a Mercury bearing an Arizona license plate, and provided a Michigan
address, on North Van Dyke in Decker Michigan.[708]
On April 21, only hours before McVeigh was due to be released from the Perry County Jail, "District Attorney John Maddox received a call
from the FBI telling him to hang onto the prisoner.[709]
As the New York Times reported, "…a routine check of his Social Security number matched one flagged by the FBI as belonging to a
suspect in the bombing."[710] This subsumes that the FBI had obtained McVeigh's Social Security number from the accurate registration
information at the Dreamland, not the false information at Elliott's.

Why would Tim McVeigh — who was bent on committing such a terrible crime — use a fake name and address at the Ryder rental agency,
yet use his real name and address at a motel right down the street?[711] Perhaps because, as will be explained below, McVeigh never visited
the rental agency.

While in custody, McVeigh listed James Nichols as a reference.

Why would McVeigh list the brother of his so-called accomplice as his only
reference?

On April 21, Terry Nichols was busy with chores around his new home in Herrington.

Unbeknownst to him, a team of 11 FBI agents had
already staked out his house.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On April 21, Terry Nichols was busy with chores around his new home in Herrington. Unbeknownst to him, a team of 11 FBI agents had
already staked out his house. Later that afternoon, Nichols heard his name being broadcast as a possible suspect. At 2:42 p.m. he and Marife got into their blue pick-up,
and drove to the Herrington police station, with the FBI on his tail. According to Marife, Terry was frightened, and anxious to know why his
name was being broadcast. Inside, Nichols asked why his name was being mentioned on the radio in connection with the bombing. The
cops replied that they didn't know, but they had some questions for him. "Good," Nichols said, "because I have some questions for you."
Strangely, FBI agents then read Nichols his Miranda rights, something not normally done unless someone is under arrest, and told him three
times he was free to go. In fact, Nichols wasn't free to go. An arrest warrant had been issued five hours earlier, but Nichols wouldn't be informed of this until almost
midnight. In the interim, he and Marife were questioned by the FBI for over nine hours. Back at his house, a SWAT team had already arrived, and agents were sealing it with crime tape, and checking it for booby traps. It was
there that agents would claim to discover 55-gallon barrels, rolls of primadet detonator cord, non-electric blasting caps, and a receipt for 40
50-pound bags of ammonium nitrate with McVeigh's thumbprint.

--- PAGE BREAK ---If Terry Nichols was an accomplice in the bombing, why would he leave such incriminating items in his house?

Wouldn't he have attempted
to hide the items before driving over to the police station?

Moreover, if Nichols was a co-conspirator in the largest domestic terrorist attack in the history of the country, why would he casually stroll
into the police station asking why his name was being broadcast on TV?

This makes about as much sense as Timothy McVeigh casually
pulling over for Officer Hanger and meekly handing himself over for arrest.

Several days after McVeigh's arrest, Hanger claimed to have recovered a crumpled business card from behind the front passenger seat of
his patrol car, where McVeigh had been sitting.

The card for Paulsen's Military Supply of Antigo, Wisconsin, contained a handwritten note:
"Dave.

TNT at $5 a stick.

708-288-0128.

Need more.

Call after 1 of May, see if I can get some more."
Had McVeigh actually left such a note in the cruiser?

When McVeigh defense team investigator Marty Reed attempted to interview Hanger,
he was told by OHP chief legal counsel John Lindsey, "The FBI has requested that no one interview Trooper Charlie Hanger."
And as in the Kennedy case, the evidence collected by the FBI in their case, code-named "OKBOMB," would prove just as specious.

The
FBI quickly claimed that they had traced the Ryder truck from a serial number — 6 4 PVA26077 — found on its rear differential, which had
flown 575 feet through the air "like a boomerang" and landed on a Ford Fiesta.

(For those confused about the FBI finding the serial number
on the "axle," it was actually on the axle housing.)[712][713]
Curiously, while Deputy Sheriff Melvin Sumter told me he had found the axle, an Oklahoma City Policeman, Mike McPherson, claimed that
he had in fact discovered it, as did an FBI agent.

These three accounts were contradicted by Governor Frank Keating, who claimed that he
had actually found the axle.(For those confused about the FBI finding the serial number
on the "axle," it was actually on the axle housing.)[712][713]
Curiously, while Deputy Sheriff Melvin Sumter told me he had found the axle, an Oklahoma City Policeman, Mike McPherson, claimed that
he had in fact discovered it, as did an FBI agent.

These three accounts were contradicted by Governor Frank Keating, who claimed that he
had actually found the axle.

The Ryder truck belonging to the axle, rented under the alias of "Bob Kling," the FBI claimed, was the instrument of the deadly destruction in
Oklahoma City.

But had it actually been rented by Timothy McVeigh?

The "McVeigh" Eldon Elliott described to the grand jury was 5' 10" to 5' 11", with medium build, weighing between 180-185 pounds.

Elliott's
mechanic Tom Kessinger stated that the man had a "rough" complexion with "acne," and employee Vicki Beemer said he had a deformed
chin.

Not only is McVeigh clear-skinned, he is a lanky 6', 2", and weighs only 160 pounds.

He does not have a deformed chin.[714]
Readers will also recall that ATF informant Carol Howe, who had penetrated the Elohim City enclave, told ATF and FBI agents that the
sketch of John Doe 1 who rented the truck appeared to be Elohim City resident and close Strassmeir friend Peter Ward.[715]
According to J.D.

Cash, so did Dennis Mahon.

Mahon told the reporter that Ward was "known at Elohim City as 'Andy's shadow'...

Ward
went everywhere Strassmeir did and is dumb as dirt." Mahon also added, "…you know his brother, Tony, has a pocked complexion..."[716]
Yet authorities insist that it was McVeigh who rented the truck on April 17.

They introduced surveillance footage from a Junction City
McDonalds, slightly over a mile from Elliott's, showing McVeigh walking towards the cashier at approximately 3:55 p.m.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ward
went everywhere Strassmeir did and is dumb as dirt." Mahon also added, "…you know his brother, Tony, has a pocked complexion..."[716]
Yet authorities insist that it was McVeigh who rented the truck on April 17. They introduced surveillance footage from a Junction City
McDonalds, slightly over a mile from Elliott's, showing McVeigh walking towards the cashier at approximately 3:55 p.m. Yet McVeigh was not
wearing military attire as was "Kling." Nevertheless, the prosecution contends that McVeigh left the restaurant, walked the 1.3 miles to
Elliott's during a light drizzle, then showed up nice and dry, wearing completely different clothes. Eldon Elliott would play along for the prosecution. In spite of his previous grand jury testimony, and the FBI 302 statements of his
employees, Elliott testified at McVeigh's trial that Timothy McVeigh was the man who rented the truck.[717]
Interesting that he could make such an assertion, when the FBI hadn't brought him before a line-up eventhough they had questioned him
just 48 hours after the bombing. In fact, the FBI didn't show Elliott a photo line-up until 48 days later. During McVeigh's trial, Elliott attempted
to compensate for the discrepancy in McVeigh's height by stating that McVeigh had "leaned" on the counter while filling out the reservation
form. Had Elliott been coached by the prosecution?[718]
"From his body language, the way he acted nervous, avoided my questions, I could tell he was under some sort of pressure," said former
Federal Grand Juror Hoppy Heidelberg. When defense team investigator Richard Reyna went to interview Elliott, he was told the FBI had instructed him not to talk to anyone about
the case because "they didn't want to get things distorted." He then handed Reyna the card of FBI Special Agent Scott Crabtree. When Marty Reed and co-investigator Wilma Sparks approached Elliott a week later, he referred them to a man named Joseph Pole. Pole

--- PAGE BREAK ---stated that he was "working for Ryder… indirectly." He refused to speak with the investigators and excused himself, saying he had to make a
phone call.

When Sparks and Reed went outside, they noticed a government car with the license number G-10 03822, parked in front of the
shop.

When they returned the next day, they were again met by the mysterious "Ryder employee" who didn't produce a business card.

When they
asked the body shop's employees why the government car was there, they were told it was being worked on.

But the investigators saw no
signs of damage.

Upon returning the following day, the car was parked between two campers, ostensibly in an attempt to conceal it.[719]
Was the FBI attempting to influence a key witness?

A reporter who worked the case later told me, "They were very hooked in with the FBI…
the Ryder security was obtained through the FBI… and they're in constant touch with the FBI for briefings, or they were.

And I got that from
the PR guy who's the Vice President of Ryder in Miami… A Newsweek reporter that I work with got Elliott on the phone, and somebody
clicked down the phone as he was talking to her.

Elliott was saying 'let me just finish, let me just finish,' and all of the sudden, the phone
went dead."[720]
Such a symbiotic relationship between the FBI and Ryder shouldn't be surprising.

According to one bombing researcher, Ryder's CEO,
Anthony Mitchell, is a member of the Trilateral Commission — the New World Order folks.

She also uncovered the fact that both the FBI and
the ATF have leasing contracts with the company.[721]
To rent his Ryder truck, "McVeigh" allegedly used his pre-paid phone card, obtained in November of 1993 through the Spotlight under the
name "Daryl Bridges," to call Elliott's and make the reservation.According to one bombing researcher, Ryder's CEO,
Anthony Mitchell, is a member of the Trilateral Commission — the New World Order folks.

She also uncovered the fact that both the FBI and
the ATF have leasing contracts with the company.[721]
To rent his Ryder truck, "McVeigh" allegedly used his pre-paid phone card, obtained in November of 1993 through the Spotlight under the
name "Daryl Bridges," to call Elliott's and make the reservation.

Vicki Beemer told the FBI she recalled speaking to a man named "Kling."
Records supposedly indicate the call was made on April 14, from a Junction City, Kansas bus station.[722]
Yet the FBI had no way of proving that the call placed to the Ryder agency under the name "Kling" was actually made by McVeigh, or even
that the Spotlight card was used for the call.

OPUS Telecom, which runs the system used for the pre-paid card, maintains no records
indicating exactly who placed a specific call.[723]
As an example of the uncertainties promulgated by the FBI, they originally asserted the call was made at 8:44 a.m.

from a pay phone at Fort
Riley.

They later decided it was made at 9:53 a.m.

from a pay phone in Junction City.

However, Beemer, who took the call, said it came at
10:30 a.m.

At the time the FBI alleged McVeigh made the 9:53 a.m.

call, he was at a phone booth down the street from a Firestone store, where he had
been negotiating a deal on a 1977 Mercury.

The store manager who sold McVeigh the car, Thomas Manning, testified that his customer
excused himself, then came back 10 or 15 minutes later.

The FBI contends that McVeigh used this period to make two calls, one to Terry
Nichols' house, and one to Elliott's.

Yet, as the Rocky Mountain News noted:
An early version of the FBI reconstruction showed two calls within two minutes from phones 25 miles apart, which implied involvement by
someone other than McVeigh and Nichols, since neither was then in the second location.The FBI contends that McVeigh used this period to make two calls, one to Terry
Nichols' house, and one to Elliott's.

Yet, as the Rocky Mountain News noted:
An early version of the FBI reconstruction showed two calls within two minutes from phones 25 miles apart, which implied involvement by
someone other than McVeigh and Nichols, since neither was then in the second location.

But the location of that call later was reassigned to a place fitting the government's case.[724]
How convenient.

Moreover, as the defense pointed out, Manning hadn't bothered to mention the fact that McVeigh left the Firestone store for over a year-and-
a-half, despite being interviewed by defense attorneys and FBI agents 11 different times.[725]
Additionally, while rental receipts and employee testimony indicates "Kling" rented his truck on the 17th, a Ryder truck was seen days earlier
by James Sargeant and other eyewitnesses.

Sargeant reported seeing several unidentified men crawling in and out of the cargo area for
three days, backed up to the lake so that no one ashore could see inside.

"I really began to wonder about why someone would be wasting
their money on a rental truck out there...

no one was ever fishing, either."[726]
Barbara Whittenberg, owner of the Sante Fe Trail Diner in Herrington, recalled seeing a Ryder truck, along with McVeigh, Nichols, and John
Doe 2, on Saturday, April 15.

The men had stopped by the restaurant for breakfast at 6:00 a.m., and Whittenberg reported seeing a large
Ryder truck at Geary State Fishing Lake later that afternoon.[727]
Lea McGown, owner of the Dreamland Motel in Junction City, and her son Eric, both recall seeing McVeigh pull into the motel with his truck
on the afternoon of Easter Sunday, April 16, as did residents Renda Truong, Connie Hood, David King, and King's mother, Hetta.

The truck
appeared to be an older, privately owned Ryder truck.

McGown had just returned from Manhattan, Kansas, where he and his mother were
having lunch.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The truck
appeared to be an older, privately owned Ryder truck. McGown had just returned from Manhattan, Kansas, where he and his mother were
having lunch. The time was approximately 4:00 p.m. Truong testified she had seen it after Easter Sunday dinner, which would have been
around dusk. Yet under examination by the prosecution during McVeigh's trial, Eric McGown would not testify as to the exact date he saw the truck. Yet
his FBI 302 said: "He thinks the man came there with a truck on April 16, 1995, and that the Ryder truck sat at the motel all day on April 17,

--- PAGE BREAK ---1995."[728]
His mother, like both Hood and Truong, was certain it was the 16th.

As she stated in her FBI 302:
She is certain that the Ryder truck she saw parked at the DREAMLAND MOTEL and in which she observed TIM MCVEIGH sitting on one
occasion was driven into the motel grounds on Sunday, April 16, 1995.

She recalls that the Ryder truck that was parked at the DREAMLAND MOTEL on April 16, 1995, through April 18, 1995, did not have the
word Ryder on the back doors as do other Ryder trucks she has seen.

She recalls the back doors of the Ryder truck in which she saw TIM
MCVEIGH were a plain faded yellow color, with no printing visible on them.[729]
Hetta King was also sure it was Sunday the 16th.

"There's no question in my mind — it was Easter Sunday," King testified.

The reader will recall that this is the exact same day that Phyliss Kingsley and Linda Kuhlman saw the convoy, including "McVeigh," John
Doe 2 and 3, and the Ryder truck at the Hi Way Grill just south of Oklahoma City.

It was approximately 6:00 p.m.

The two locations are hundreds of miles apart — too far apart to drive in two hours.

This is also the same day the FBI alleged Nichols drove from Kansas to Oklahoma City to pick up McVeigh, who had left his Mercury
Marquis near the YMCA as the "get-away" vehicle.

Yet a witness at the Dreamland recalled seeing McVeigh's yellow Mercury at the motel
the next day.

Interesting that "McVeigh" and his car could be in two places at once.

Real estate agent Georgia Rucker and her son also saw a Ryder truck at Geary Lake days before "Kling" rented his.

Then on Tuesday
morning, as Rucker again drove by lake, she not only saw a Ryder truck, but two other vehicles as well.

She thought this was "very
suspicious."[730]
On Monday, April 17, Connie Hood saw the Ryder truck again.

This time, there were several men "fiddling with the back of the truck." Hood
thinks one of those men was Michael Fortier; she recalls he had scraggly hair and a beard.She thought this was "very
suspicious."[730]
On Monday, April 17, Connie Hood saw the Ryder truck again.

This time, there were several men "fiddling with the back of the truck." Hood
thinks one of those men was Michael Fortier; she recalls he had scraggly hair and a beard.

Those who recall the photo of Fortier taken after
the bombing may recall that Fortier had just shaved off his beard, leaving a clearly visible demarcation line.

While these are all blatant discrepancies in the FBI's official timeline, the Bureau was apparently interested in McGown's testimony because
the Dreamland is the only place where McVeigh, or someone purporting to be McVeigh, signed his real name.

What is curious is that the FBI has consistently promoted the idea that there was only one Ryder truck involved.

Yet the statements of
McGown, Bricktown warehouse worker David Snider, and others indicate that there were two Ryder trucks involved.

When a Newsweek
reporter spoke to the security guard at Elliott's, he said "Think about two trucks."[731]
This fact was reiterated by grand juror Hoppy Heidelberg.

"A small number of people testified during the grand jury hearings about two
trucks," said Heidelberg.

"McVeigh picked his truck up on Monday.

John Doe 2 had his truck the weekend before.

The fact that there were
two trucks I'm very comfortable with."[732]
If McVeigh had rented his truck on April 17, as the FBI contends, why did witnesses report seeing a Ryder truck at Geary State Fishing Lake
as early as April 10?

It was at this lake, on April 18, the FBI originally asserted, that the two suspects built their magic ANFO bomb.

FBI
agents reported finding diesel fuel and strands of detonator cord on the ground.[733]
Yet at the time witnesses first saw the truck at the lake, neither McVeigh or Nichols were in Kansas.

As the Denver Post reported:
Nichols was returning from a gun show in Michigan, and McVeigh was holed up in a residence hotel in Kingman, Arizona.--- PAGE BREAK ---

FBI
agents reported finding diesel fuel and strands of detonator cord on the ground.[733]
Yet at the time witnesses first saw the truck at the lake, neither McVeigh or Nichols were in Kansas. As the Denver Post reported:
Nichols was returning from a gun show in Michigan, and McVeigh was holed up in a residence hotel in Kingman, Arizona. The government's
key witness, Michael Fortier, also was not in Kansas.[734]
Interestingly, shortly before the start of McVeigh's trial, the prosecution dropped its contention that the bomb was built at Geary Lake. It's
possible they did so because had the defense brought up the witness sightings on the 10th, it would have conflicted, not only with the
prosecution's carefully constructed timeline, but the fact that there were additional suspects.[735]
As will be seen, this is not the first time the government excluded witnesses who's testimony didn't fit with their carefully crafted version of
events. Nevertheless, it was this truck, rented by "Kling" on April 17, authorities insisted, that was loaded with ammonium nitrate and guided by the
lone bomber to its final and fateful destination at the Alfred P. Murrah Building.

--- PAGE BREAK ---To build their magic ANFO bomb, the FBI reports McVeigh and Nichols began searching for racing fuel and detonator cord in September of
'94.

Using the calling card McVeigh and Nichols had obtained under the pseudonym of "Daryl Bridges," ostensibly inspired by the film "Blown
Away" staring Jeff Bridges, McVeigh allegedly made over 22 calls to various companies who supply chemicals, racing fuel, and even one of
the country's largest explosives manufacturers.

His first call was to Paulsen's Military Supply, just outside of Madison, Wisconsin, looking for detonators.

According to authorities, McVeigh
left Paulsen's business card in the patrol car upon his arrest, that read, "Dave" (presumably David Paulsen, Ed Paulsen's son, who McVeigh
had met at a gun show), with the notation, "More five pound sticks of TNT by May 1."[736]
A salesman at Fatigues and Things, a military store in Junction City, said McVeigh and another man bought a book entitled Improvised
Munitions two weeks before the bombing.

The other man was not Terry Nichols.

Prosecutors also called an old friend of McVeigh's, David Darlak, who allegedly received a call from him in an attempt to obtain racing fuel.

Another friend was Greg Pfaff, whom McVeigh had met at gun shows.

Pfaff testified that McVeigh had called him seeking to buy det cord.

McVeigh was so eager to obtain the cord, Pfaff said, that he offered to drive to Virginia.

Another of the calls reflected on the mens' calling card was to Mid-American Chemical.

Linda Juhl, an employee of the company,
remembered receiving a call in the Fall of 1994 from a fellow in Kansas who wanted to purchase Anhydrous Hydrazine, a rocket fuel which
can be used to boost the power of an ANFO bomb.

The FBI also reported that two individuals, one named "Terry Tuttle," visited Thumb Hobbies, Etc.

in Mariette, Michigan in mid-December,
1993, looking to buy 100 percent nitromethane model airplane fuel.The FBI also reported that two individuals, one named "Terry Tuttle," visited Thumb Hobbies, Etc.

in Mariette, Michigan in mid-December,
1993, looking to buy 100 percent nitromethane model airplane fuel.

According to Sanilac County Sheriff Virgil Stickler, the store clerk
inquired about ordering it, then told the customers several weeks later that he could not or would not do so.

The clerk said that "Tuttle"
replied that it was okay, that they had found another source.[737]
Another incident not made public until the County Grand Jury investigation was the recollection of Gary Antene, who saw McVeigh and John
Doe 2 at Danny's Hobby Shop in Oklahoma City the Saturday before the bombing.

The two men asked him if Danny's carried 100 percent
nitromethane fuel.

"I explained that no one in the RC (remote-controlled) airplane hobby used 100 percent nitromethane as a fuel, that at most we generally
used nothing over 20 percent," said Antene.

Antene reported the incident to the FBI a couple of times, but was not called to testify at McVeigh's trial, probably because his account didn't
fit into the FBI's "official" timeline.[738]
On October 20, the FBI alleged that McVeigh checked into a motel in Pauls Valley, Oklahoma.

The next day, he drove 170 miles to the Chief
Auto Parts Nationals drag race in Ennis, Texas.

Timothy Chambers, an employee of VP Racing Fuels, testified at McVeigh's trial that he and
co-worker Brad Horton sold a man resembling McVeigh three 54 gallon drums of Nitromethane racing fuel for $2,775.

The man said the fuel
was for him and his friends who race Harleys once a year in Oklahoma City.

Chambers testified it didn't make sense for a few motorcycle
racers to buy that much fuel, and had never seen anyone pay cash for that large a purchase.[739]
Interestingly, the FBI didn't announce this new lead until one month before the start of McVeigh's trial, as other evidence, including that from
the FBI's crime lab, began falling apart.The man said the fuel
was for him and his friends who race Harleys once a year in Oklahoma City.

Chambers testified it didn't make sense for a few motorcycle
racers to buy that much fuel, and had never seen anyone pay cash for that large a purchase.[739]
Interestingly, the FBI didn't announce this new lead until one month before the start of McVeigh's trial, as other evidence, including that from
the FBI's crime lab, began falling apart.

The Rocky Mountain News reported that Glynn Tipton had alerted the ATF to the strange purchase
as far back as October of 1994.[740]
Yet this "new" evidence would coalesce perfectly with the government's emerging case, now that many Americans were convinced that a
simple ANFO bomb hadn't destroyed the Murrah Building.

A bomb built with volatile, highly-explosive racing fuel would make the
prosecution's case much more convincing.

The startling discovery of McVeigh's racing fuel purchases, like the new revelations of Thomas Manning, or those of Eldon Elliott, were
reminiscent of the sudden discoveries by Lockerbie investigators of Libyan terrorists.

The 1988 bombing had originally been attributed to
Iran, contracted through former Syrian army officer Ahmed Jibril of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command
(PFLP-GC), in retaliation for the American downing of an Iranian passenger liner a year and-a-half earlier.

Now that George Bush needed
the cooperation of the Syrians for his Gulf War coalition, the blame needed to be shifted to someone else.

Then, ten months after the bombing, Lockerbie investigators discovered new evidence.

The owner of a clothing store on Malta suddenly
remembered to whom he had sold some baby clothes that had been found in the bomb suitcase onboard the plane.

In fact, not only had he
recalled the customer, he remembered the precise date of the purchase, and recalled the man clearly enough for artists to render a sketch.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The owner of a clothing store on Malta suddenly
remembered to whom he had sold some baby clothes that had been found in the bomb suitcase onboard the plane. In fact, not only had he
recalled the customer, he remembered the precise date of the purchase, and recalled the man clearly enough for artists to render a sketch. He was Abu Talb, a PFLP-GC member who was known to have visited Malta shortly before the bombing.[741]
At least that's what the FBI wanted the public to believe. In fact, owner Tony Gauci and his brother Paul made 18 different statements to
authorities, most of which were vague and contradictory. They then signed statements eventhough they couldn't read English. Nevertheless,

--- PAGE BREAK ---investigators quickly placed 24-hour guards around the shopkeepers bearing this valuable "new evidence," just as the FBI had done with
Eldon Elliott.

Yet records show that the calls to chemical companies continued in October of '94 from Kingman, around the same time that the suspects
allegedly drove there to hide stolen explosives, and around the same time they allegedly began purchasing ammonium nitrate.

The
indictment states that Nichols allegedly stole Dynamite and an explosive called Tovex from the Martin Marietta quarry in Marion, Kansas, not
far from where Nichols had been working as a ranch hand.

Bud Radeke, a blaster and driller for Martin Marietta, testified at McVeigh's trial that 299 dynamite sticks, 544 blasting caps, detonator cord,
and Tovex was stolen over the long Labor Day weekend.

FBI agents discovered a drill bit in Nichols' home that they claim matched the hole
drilled in one of the magazine's locks.

The suspects had allegedly made the mistake of leaving one of the five locks they had drilled into
behind.

Yet could the FBI actually tell from a hole drilled in a lock which particular bit had made the impression?

The FBI hadn't discovered the bit in
Nichols' tool kit until six months after the robbery.

No doubt it had been used since, as Nichols, a handyman, had recently moved into his
new house.

The signature of the drill bit would undoubtedly have been altered.

How could the FBI be so sure it was the bit which had drilled the locks at the quarry?

Ed Hueske, a firearm and tool examiner at Weckerling Scientific Laboratory near Dallas said a drill bit can "leave marks that are
characteristic of the nose of the bit," especially "if the bit is worn or damaged." A former forensic specialist with the Tulsa Police Department,
Hueske added that such a test is "not routine," but is "theoretically possible."[742]
Yet if the bit was used afterwards on metal, or if it had been sharpened, it would change the striations of the markings.How could the FBI be so sure it was the bit which had drilled the locks at the quarry?

Ed Hueske, a firearm and tool examiner at Weckerling Scientific Laboratory near Dallas said a drill bit can "leave marks that are
characteristic of the nose of the bit," especially "if the bit is worn or damaged." A former forensic specialist with the Tulsa Police Department,
Hueske added that such a test is "not routine," but is "theoretically possible."[742]
Yet if the bit was used afterwards on metal, or if it had been sharpened, it would change the striations of the markings.

If it still contained bits
of metal shavings from the lock, however, then a match could be made.

But agents testified that no shavings were found.

Then how did the FBI match the bit?

Frank Shiller, a firearm and tool examiner at Forensic Consultant Services in Fort Worth, offered his
opinion: "Some of that type of work has been done, but it's not a very frequent thing.

I don't think it would be very productive."
Shiller, who has 36 years experience in forensic science, has never even been asked to conduct such a test, nor has his boss, Max
Courtney, with 27 years experience.

"It would be extremely difficult to match a drill," said Shiller, "because of the random motion of the drill moving through its… moving up and
down the hole.

So it would be hard to track any imperfections or microscopic markings that might be present.

That would be a pretty tough
task."[743]
Even Hueske, who admitted the theoretical possibility of such a test, said that the two or three drill bit tests he's conducted over the years
produced no results.

The quarry also had pre-mixed professional grade ANFO in stock.

Why didn't Nichols steal that too, since, as the government alleges, it was
the prime ingredient in the bomb?

This certainly would have been easier and more discreet than buying large quantities of ammonium
nitrate, diesel, and racing fuel, then attempting to mix it into a gigantic bomb.Why didn't Nichols steal that too, since, as the government alleges, it was
the prime ingredient in the bomb?

This certainly would have been easier and more discreet than buying large quantities of ammonium
nitrate, diesel, and racing fuel, then attempting to mix it into a gigantic bomb.

But for some reason, our prime suspects decided to leave the
professional grade ANFO behind, and go to the trouble and expense of making their own.

The two men then allegedly drove to Kingman on October 4, where McVeigh rented a storage locker to hide the goods.[744] It was in
Kingman that McVeigh allegedly showed his dangerous booty to his friends, Michael and Lori Fortier.

Lori testified at trial that McVeigh
asked her to wrap up the blasting caps as Christmas presents for the long ride back to Michigan.

A friend of Nichols and McVeigh, Kevin Nicholas, testified that he helped McVeigh unload his car upon returning to Decker.

"I was just
grabbing stuff and just throwing it in the back of my truck; and Tim said, "Don't handle them.

I'll take care of them two Christmas-wrapped
packages there."[745]
Phone records also show that McVeigh called military surplus dealer Dave Paulsen on December 17 from Kingman, and Nicholas testified
that McVeigh drove to Chicago to see Paulsen in late December to sell him the blasting caps.

On September 30, 1994, according to the FBI, McVeigh and Nichols, who used the alias "Mike Havens," purchased forty 50-pound bags of
ammonium nitrate at the Mid-Kansas Co-Op in Manhattan, Kansas.

Then, on October 17, after renting a room in Salina under the name
"Havens," Nichols rented storage locker No.

40 at Boots U-Store-It in Council Grove, under the alias "Joe Kyle." On October 18, the dynamic
duo was back again at the Mid-Kansas Co-Op, stocking up on more fertilizer, buying another forty 50-pound bags to be stored at the locker
in Council Grove.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then, on October 17, after renting a room in Salina under the name
"Havens," Nichols rented storage locker No. 40 at Boots U-Store-It in Council Grove, under the alias "Joe Kyle." On October 18, the dynamic
duo was back again at the Mid-Kansas Co-Op, stocking up on more fertilizer, buying another forty 50-pound bags to be stored at the locker
in Council Grove. Nichols attorney, Michael Tigar, attempted to explain his client's use of aliases by stating that Nichols wanted to hide his assets from Chase
Manhattan bank, which had won a large credit card lawsuit against him. This explanation does not explain why Nichols used the alias while
purchasing fertilizer.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Finally, there would be the ordinance found at Nichols' home and the farm of his brother James.

The Decker, Michigan farm contained 28
fifty-pound bags of ammonium nitrate, non-electric blasting caps, a 55-gallon drum containing fuel-oil, and large fuel tanks which appeared to
contain diesel fuel.

As previously mentioned, neighbors Daniel Stomber and Paul Isydorak told authorities that the Nichols brothers and
McVeigh would experiment with the items to make small homemade bombs.

A search of Terry Nichols' home by the ATF and FBI allegedly turned up 33 firearms, an anti-tank launcher (which was inert), five 60-foot
Primadet detonator cords, non-electric blasting caps, ammonium nitrate, a fuel meter (which was inoperable — a fact that was never
mentioned), and four 55-gallon blue plastic drums.

(Nichols' son Josh, who frequently played at his dad's house, believed the barrels were
white with blue tops.)
While some accounts indicate that the drums were of the type used in the bombing, the New York Times wrote on April 30, "…it is not clear
that they match blue plastic fragments found at the blast site."[746] In fact, the FBI never stated that the fragments removed from bombing
victims matched those from Nichols' home.

Certainly the FBI, with the most sophisticated crime lab in the world, would have been able to
determine whether the fragments were of the same type.

Moreover, most of the fragments, if they had come from Nichols' home, would have
been white, not blue.

Nichols' attorney, Michael Tigar, raised this issue while cross-examining an FBI agent during a pre-trial hearing.

According to Tigar, the FBI's
inventory list described the barrels simply as white without blue lids.

The agent replied that the FBI doesn't list the lids separately.

When
Tigar asked the agent why they had inventoried a collection of 5-gallon buckets with the lids listed separately, he had no response.The agent replied that the FBI doesn't list the lids separately.

When
Tigar asked the agent why they had inventoried a collection of 5-gallon buckets with the lids listed separately, he had no response.

Those blue fragments may very likely have been from the 80 or so blue trash barrels distributed throughout the building for the purposes of
trash collection.

As Richard Williams, a 51 year-old GSA manager testified at McVeigh's trial, "They were placed throughout the building for
pickup during the week."
One month later, Nichols would write his cryptic letter to McVeigh, instructing him to extend the lease on unit number 37, which allegedly
contained stolen coins and guns, and "liquidate 40," in case Nichols failed to return from his last trip to the Philippines.

It was this letter that
contained the infamous phrase, "You're on your own.

Go for it!"
Was this a message inspiring McVeigh to bomb a federal building, or a note encouraging him to make a success of himself in the military
surplus business?

According to James Nichols, it was the later.

Nichols claims his brother was about to make a large cash loan to McVeigh
for this purpose, and the note was simply in case of his death.

Terry, he said, was a very meticulous and thorough man who always made
certain his affairs were in order.[747]
Nichols family friend Bob Papovich also claims the pair was selling fertilizer at gun shows as plant food, along with an odd assortment of
other items sold at gun shows, repackaging it in smaller bags to increase their profit margin.

Yet two tons of fertilizer is an awful lot to sell at gun shows.

Had McVeigh and Nichols actually purchased that much fertilizer?

What is
interesting is that employees of Mid-Kansas Co-op were never able to positively identify McVeigh or Nichols during the purported fertilizer
buying trips.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Had McVeigh and Nichols actually purchased that much fertilizer? What is
interesting is that employees of Mid-Kansas Co-op were never able to positively identify McVeigh or Nichols during the purported fertilizer
buying trips. Although employee Frederick Schendler thought one of the men may have been Terry Nichols, he said during a pre-trial
hearing that the second man wasn't McVeigh. He was driving a truck that didn't appear to be Nichols', with a red trailer attached. Papovich
told me that Nichols owns no such truck. Federal prosecutors were also counting on a receipt found in Nichols' home for the purchase of a ton of ammonium nitrate, allegedly
containing McVeigh's thumbprint. Had Nichols foolishly kept a receipt for bombing materials that could be traced back to him? Was he as
stupid as Mohammed Salemeh, the World Trade Center bomber who returned to the Ryder agency after the bombing in an attempt to
retrieve his rental deposit? Or was McVeigh's fingerprint actually on the receipt after all? FBI agent Louis Hupp testified at trial that he hadn't found McVeigh's fingerprints at Elliott's, in motel rooms where McVeigh stayed, or in the
storage lockers where McVeigh allegedly stored the bomb-making materials.[748]
Ramsey: Agent Hupp, you identified — or handled many documents with regard to fingerprints, didn't you, with regard to this case? Hupp: Yes, ma'am. Ramsey: Did you also test the Ryder rental truck reservation form? Hupp: Yes, I did. Ramsey: And did you find Timothy McVeigh's fingerprints on that? Hupp: No, ma'am.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ramsey: Did you find Timothy McVeigh's fingerprints on the Ryder rental truck form where he actually — where it was actually rented?

Hupp: No, ma'am.…
Ramsey: Did you check the counter at Elliott's Body Shop for fingerprints?

I don't recall if I asked you that or not.

Hupp: The countertop was removed by me and transported back to headquarters and was in fact processed for latent prints.

Ramsey: And did you find any fingerprints of Timothy McVeigh?

Hupp: No, ma'am.

Ramsey: And did you also check to see if there were any fingerprints on any of the storage units that have been discussed in this case?

Hupp: Yes, ma'am.

Ramsey: And did you find any fingerprints of Timothy McVeigh?

Hupp: No, ma'am.

Hupp also testified that he had not found McVeigh's prints on the rental paperwork, or the key belonging to the Ryder truck, found in a
nearby alley.

Yet Hupp explained, "There are many times a person doesn't leave prints.

It's a chance impression."
What if the FBI had claimed it had discovered prints?

On November 22, 1963, after JFK's murder, the FBI took Oswald's Mannlicher-Carcanno rifle to their Washington, D.C.

crime lab.

The
technicians concluded that Oswald's prints were not on the weapon.

The FBI then returned the rifle to the Dallas Police Department.

Shortly
thereafter, the DPD excitedly announced that they had "discovered" Oswald's palm print.[749]
This "new evidence" forced even the Warren Commission's chief counsel, J.

Lee Rankin, to conclude, "Because of the circumstances which
now exist there is a serious question in the minds of the Commission as to whether the palm impression that has been obtained from the
Dallas Police Department is a legitimate palm impression removed from the rifle barrel or whether it was obtained from some other
source…."
In 1984, FBI Agent Vincent Drain, who handled the weapon, was questioned by JFK researcher Henry Hurt.

Drain concluded that there
never was such a print.Lee Rankin, to conclude, "Because of the circumstances which
now exist there is a serious question in the minds of the Commission as to whether the palm impression that has been obtained from the
Dallas Police Department is a legitimate palm impression removed from the rifle barrel or whether it was obtained from some other
source…."
In 1984, FBI Agent Vincent Drain, who handled the weapon, was questioned by JFK researcher Henry Hurt.

Drain concluded that there
never was such a print.

"All I can figure is that [Oswald's print] was some kind of cushion because they were getting a lot of heat by Sunday
night.

You could take that print off Oswald's card and put it on the rife.

Something like that happened."
In spite of this, the Warren Commission made no effort to resolve the issue, and presented Oswald's so-called palm print as fact.[750]
Yet the fertilizer receipt containing McVeigh's thumbprint wasn't the only ammunition in the FBI's arsenal of specious evidence.

Prosecutors
would rely heavily on an explosive component called PETN, allegedly found on McVeigh's clothing.

A pair of earplugs found on McVeigh
also reportedly tested positive for EGDN, a chemical found in dynamite.

Finally, there was a piece of plywood from the Ryder truck which
contained glazed ammonium nitrate crystals.

Yet once again, this evidence was highly questionable.

It seemed the crystals had disappeared before independent experts for either the
prosecution or defense could confirm its existence.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Yet once again, this evidence was highly questionable. It seemed the crystals had disappeared before independent experts for either the
prosecution or defense could confirm its existence. Interestingly, affidavits of Frederick Whitehurst, a Special Agent in the FBI's lab division, announced to an incredulous public in September of
1995 that the Bureau had been mishandling evidence and slanting results to favor prosecutors for years.[751]
As one FBI lab technician told the New York Times, "You get an inadvertent bonding of like-minded individuals supporting each other's false
conclusions."
After federal agents searched the residence of Richard Jewell, a private security guard who was an early suspect in a bombing at the Atlanta
Olympics… FBI scientists and other specialists warned that "you've got the wrong guy," an FBI laboratory official said. But their cautionary
remarks, based on the absence of even trace amounts of explosive materials, went unheeded for months.[752]
In March of 1997, the Los Angeles Times reported the findings of the Justice Department Inspector General's office, which concluded that
the lab made "scientifically unsound" conclusions that were "biased in favor of the prosecution" in the Oklahoma City bombing case. The still-secret draft report, obtained by the paper, also concludes that supervisors approved lab reports that they "cannot support" and that

--- PAGE BREAK ---FBI lab officials may have erred about the size of the blast, the amount of explosives involved and the type of explosives used in the
bombing.

According to the Times, the draft report shows that FBI examiners could not identify the triggering device for the truck bomb or how it was
detonated.

It also indicates that a poorly maintained lab environment could have led to contamination of critical pieces of evidence, the
Times said.[753]
Whitehurst also told the Inspector General that the agents who conducted the tests in Oklahoma City, including Tom Thurman, Chief of the
Explosives Unit, and Roger Martz, Chief of the Chemistry and Toxicology Unit, were not even qualified to do so.[754]
During the 1993 World Trade Center bombing investigation, Whitehurst decided to secretly test efficiency and procedures at the lab.

He
mixed human urine with fertilizer and added it to some of the bomb material being tested.

Martz subsequently excitedly identified the urine-
fertilizer mixture as an explosive.[755]
Whitehurst also contended that Martz's examining room was contaminated, making it impossible to accurately test for explosives and other
substances, including the PETN allegedly found on McVeigh's clothes.[756]
During the prosecution's closing argument, Martz made an interesting Freudian Slip: "The evidence shows that Mr.

McVeigh's clothing was
contaminated with… excuse me, Mr.

McVeigh's clothing was filled with bomb residue."
Whitehurst also claimed that Martz had perjured his testimony in prior cases.

Whitehurst himself was even asked to alter his reports.

Materials-analysis-unit chief Corby "had me come into his room one day and told me they — I don't know who 'they' were — wanted me to
take statements out of my report....Whitehurst himself was even asked to alter his reports.

Materials-analysis-unit chief Corby "had me come into his room one day and told me they — I don't know who 'they' were — wanted me to
take statements out of my report....

Whitehurst refused.[757]*
During the 1991 trial of Walter Leroy Moody, convicted of killing Federal Judge Robert Vance with a letter-bomb, both Thurman and Martz
"circumvented established procedures and protocols… [and] testified in areas of expertise that [they] had no qualifications in, therefore
fabricating evidence in [their] testimony," Whitehurst wrote in a memorandum to the Bureau's Scientific Analysis Chief James Kearny.

Both Martz and Thurman were fully aware of the fact that they were in violation of procedures and protocols of the FBI Laboratory and did
knowingly and purposely commit perjury and obstruction of justice in this matter.[758]
Interestingly, the chief prosecutor in the case was none other than Louis Freeh, who was an Assistant U.S.

Attorney at the time.

According to
Whitehurst, Freeh did not have a single piece of evidence tying Moody to the crime.

Thurman got around this little inconvenience by sending
the evidence to his friend Roger Martz, who, like Thurman, was not qualified to perform the examination.

Both Thurman and Martz were
recently removed from their positions due to allegations of falsification of evidence and perjury.

Thurman's original claim to fame was the Pan Am 103 case.

He had concluded that a tiny fragment of microchip, amazingly discovered two
years after the bombing, was part of a batch of timers sold to the Libyans by the Swiss firm MEBO.

This "new evidence" allowed the U.S.

government to point the finger of blame at Libya, conveniently letting Syria — originally implicated in the bombing — off the hook.

After the assassination of JFK, nitrate tests conducted on Lee Harvey Oswald concluded that he had not fired a rifle on November 22.--- PAGE BREAK ---

government to point the finger of blame at Libya, conveniently letting Syria — originally implicated in the bombing — off the hook. After the assassination of JFK, nitrate tests conducted on Lee Harvey Oswald concluded that he had not fired a rifle on November 22. Yet
this fact, like the false palm print, was kept secret for 10 months, then buried deep inside the Warren Commission Report.[759]
In the Moody case, Freeh possessed copies of reports that disproved the prosecution's allegations, but did not even make them available, or
known, to the jury. Freeh also failed to inform the jury that his chief witness, Ted Banks, failed a lie-detector test regarding his association
with Moody. In 1995, Banks testified at an appeal hearing that Freeh had threatened and coerced him into testifying against the defendant. [760]
In the World Trade Center case, Whitehurst testified that he was told not to provide any information or evidence, such as alternate
explanations to the urea-nitrate theory, that could be used by the defense to challenge the prosecutors' hypothesis of guilt.[761]
In Oklahoma, Whitehurst conducted a test on McVeigh's clothes, but found nothing. While the FBI claimed it found traces of PETN in McVeigh's pants pocket, on his shirts, and on a set of earplugs, Agent Burmeister
acknowledged on cross-examination that no PETN or ammonium nitrate was found at the blast scene. Nor was ammonium nitrate found in McVeigh's car, his personal effects, hotel rooms he had stayed at, the various storage sheds the
suspects allegedly used to store the bomb-making components, or in Nichols' Herington, Kansas home. The Bureau also found no evidence
of explosives residue in samples of McVeigh's hair, or scrapings from his fingernails.[762]
Burmeister also testified that crystals of ammonium nitrate, which he found on a piece of wood paneling from the Ryder truck, later vanished.

--- PAGE BREAK ---"That piece has gone through a lot of hands since the time that I've seen it," Burmeister testified, "and I can't speak to how they could have
disappeared."[763]
As Canadian County Sheriff Deputy Clint Boehler said, "The FBI disturbed and removed evidence.

They don't tell anybody else; they don't
work with anybody else.… How did they know it was the truck?

They never looked at so many obvious things."[764]
Yet, as in the Kennedy case, Federal Prosecutors went to trial armed with deliberate lies and other distortions that favored their somewhat
questionable version of events.

While the FBI's evidence procedures would be called into question, prosecutors would seek to impress the jury with evidence of the
suspects' militant Right-wing leanings.

Prosecutors began with letters McVeigh sent to his sister Jennifer, expressing his rage over the
events at Ruby Ridge and Waco, at the same time millions of Americans were expressing the very same anger.

"The Federal Government was absolutely out of control," said Sarah Bain, the San Antonio school teacher who served as forewoman of the
jury that acquitted the [Davidian] sect members of most of the serious crimes they were charged with.

"The wrong people were on trial," Bain
complained.

"It should have been the ones that planned the raid and orchestrated it."[765]
But it was other evidence — more incriminating and disturbing — that would provide the critical elements needed to convince the jury of
McVeigh's malicious intent.

In November of '94, McVeigh visited his family in Lockport, New York, where he confided to his sister Jennifer
that he had been driving around with 1,000 pounds of explosives.

In a letter sent to her in March, a month before the bombing, McVeigh wrote, "Something big is going to happen in the month of the bull."
Finally, to prove McVeigh's malevolent intentions, prosecutors introduced a letter stored on Jennifer's computer.In November of '94, McVeigh visited his family in Lockport, New York, where he confided to his sister Jennifer
that he had been driving around with 1,000 pounds of explosives.

In a letter sent to her in March, a month before the bombing, McVeigh wrote, "Something big is going to happen in the month of the bull."
Finally, to prove McVeigh's malevolent intentions, prosecutors introduced a letter stored on Jennifer's computer.

The letter, addressed to the
ATF, warned, "ATF, all you tyrannical motherfuckers will swing in the wind one day, for your treasonous actions against the Constitution and
the United States.

Remember the Nuremberg War Trials.

But...

but...

but...

I was only following orders!......

Die, you spineless, cowardice
bastards!"[766]
McVeigh also supposedly left a letter to a "girlfriend" (which media psychojournalists claimed he didn't have) in the glove compartment of his
car, outlining plans to bomb additional targets.

Had McVeigh actually left such a letter in his vehicle, and dropped Paulsen's business card in the patrol car?

While it is possible, such
scenes are reminiscent of the doctored photograph of Lee Harvey Oswald holding a rifle and Communist newspaper, or Earth First!

activist
Judi Bari holding a machine gun, which was loaned to her for the photo by an FBI informant — a photo which he took.

In Oklahoma City, as in all criminal conspiracies, the old adage, "follow the money" would apply.

Certainly a pair of lone nuts with a fertilizer/
fuel bomb wouldn't need much — a couple of thousand dollars at most — considering they didn't have to pay off a web of co-conspirators.

A November '94 robbery in Arkansas would prove to be just the crime investigators needed to put the final piece of the puzzle in place.

When the indictments were returned, the grand jury concluded the bombing was financed by the robbery of gun dealer Roger Moore (AKA:
Bob Anderson), who had known McVeigh and let him stay at his home.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A November '94 robbery in Arkansas would prove to be just the crime investigators needed to put the final piece of the puzzle in place. When the indictments were returned, the grand jury concluded the bombing was financed by the robbery of gun dealer Roger Moore (AKA:
Bob Anderson), who had known McVeigh and let him stay at his home. Yet what is interesting is that the FBI had already come to the conclusion that the bomb components were already purchased or stolen by
the date of the robbery. The indictment was also incongruously worded: "McVeigh and Nichols "caused" the robbery of $60,000 worth of guns, coins and precious
metals. Exactly how had they "caused" the robbery? The prosecution first presented the testimony of McVeigh's friend Kevin Nicholas:
Nicholas: He said that he screwed him some way out of some money or something. Mackey: Who is "he"? Nicholas: That Bob did for when Tim worked for him. Mackey: And as a result? Nicholas: He said he — that he'd be an easy guy to rob because he lived way back in the sticks and, you know, there was woods around
his house and stuff. Yet McVeigh had a solid alibi. He was at a gun show in Kent, Ohio on November 5. Still, the government attempted to have Michael Fortier implicate his friends at trial by testifying that McVeigh called him and said, "Nichols

--- PAGE BREAK ---got Bob!" This largely hearsay testimony would not be backed up by further evidence.

Authorities never proved that McVeigh or Nichols actually robbed Moore, but did prove that on November 7, 1994, Nichols rented a storage
locker — number 37 — in Council Grove, under the alias "Ted Parker" to store some of the stolen items.

In his "confession" to authorities, Fortier said that McVeigh met him in Kingman on the 15th, whereupon they drove to Kansas.

On the way,
Fortier testified, McVeigh pointed out the Murrah Building as the target of the upcoming attack.

When they reached the storage locker, they
loaded 25 guns into Fortier's rented car.[767]
Back in Kingman, Fortier pawned the weapons, or sold them to friends, including his neighbor, James Rosencrans.

On November 16, Nichols rented locker Q-106 at AAAABCO Storage in Las Vegas, where ex-wife Lana Padilla discovered gold and silver
bars, jade, along with wigs, masks, and pantyhose.

A safety deposit box key belonging to Moore was found at Nichols' home.

The 60-year-old Moore claimed he was surprised one morning shortly after 9:00 a.m., when two masked men accosted him outside his
kitchen door.

The men, wearing woodland-style camouflage fatigues, bound him and ransacked his house, taking guns, coins, jewels, and
personal effects.

What is strange is that the thieves left a number of expensive handguns and large-capacity magazines, both highly desirable items.

The
private gun dealer, who had enough weapons to supply a platoon, did not have an insurance rider for the guns, and most of the serial
numbers weren't registered.

Moore told the author he didn't have a rider because he was afraid some insurance company secretary would see his large collection and
tell her boyfriend, who would then come and rob him.

A curious explanation for failing to insure a highly valuable collection.

Moore claims he
only got a limited settlement — approximately $10,000.A curious explanation for failing to insure a highly valuable collection.

Moore claims he
only got a limited settlement — approximately $10,000.

Interestingly, one well-connected source I spoke to asserted that "the [Moore] robbery was staged.… that's the truth.… He (Moore) used a
lot of aliases, he had eight different social security numbers, eight different dates of birth, and that's only the ones that I know about.…"
This source also claimed, long before defense attorney Michael Tigar's allegations were made public, that the motive of the "robbery" was
insurance fraud, staged with the help of Nichols and McVeigh.

"Nichols had simply bought weapons [from Moore]….

Moore approached
Nichols about the fraud originally.… Moore took payment of some odd items that winds up in Terry Nichols' [storage locker]."
This assertion was reinforced at Nichols' trial, when Tigar questioned Moore's girlfriend, Karen Anderson, about why she had included on her
list — a list she claimed had been drawn up in late 1992 or early 1993 — a gun that hadn't been purchased until late 1994![768]
When I spoke to Moore's friend and neighbor, Nora Waye, she told me Moore had complained to her that the local Sheriff who investigated
the robbery, "blew [Moore's] cover."
Could a phony robbery set-up explain the wigs, masks, and pantyhose in Terry Nichol's storage locker?

Given the relationship between
McVeigh and Moore, it is possible the two men made some sort of deal.

Former grand juror Hoppy Heidelberg is another person who had doubts about Moore: "Something wasn't right about him," said Heidelberg.

"It wasn't that his testimony wasn't believable.

He was just cocky.

He had a strange attitude for a man testifying before a grand jury.

He was
so casual about it, that was strange.

He testified like a man who had done it many times before.… It wasn't anything he said, it was his
attitude.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He was
so casual about it, that was strange. He testified like a man who had done it many times before.… It wasn't anything he said, it was his
attitude. You'll see the same attitude in an FBI agent whose testifying."[769]
"Moore's being protected," said my source. "No matter how this thing's going to get played out. He'll talk to you all day long and won't tell you
a thing. He knows how to talk."
John Doe Who? "We have no information showing anyone other than Mr. McVeigh and Mr. Nichols are the masterminds" - U.S. Attorney Beth Wilkinson
On the day of the deadly attack, Attorney General Janet Reno announced, "The FBI and the law enforcement community will pursue every
lead and use every possible resource to bring these people responsible to justice.… It is very important that we pursue each lead… it is
going to be very important that we leave no stone unturned…"
In fact, numerous stones were left unturned. While the Justice Department (DoJ) focused its efforts on McVeigh and Nichols, scant attention was focused on other suspects — John Doe
2, the mysterious entity who was seen with McVeigh, and had accompanied him the morning of the bombing. Witnesses also saw him with
McVeigh in the Murrah Building, in stores, at restaurants, at a bar, and at the truck rental shop before the bombing. Still others claim to have

--- PAGE BREAK ---seen him speeding away from the scene.

All in all, there are almost two-dozen witnesses who reported seeing John Doe 2.

The FBI made a big show of tracking down this illusive, menacing-looking suspect.

"The FBI has conducted over 9,000 witness interviews
and has followed every possible lead in an intensive effort to identify and bring to justice anyone who was involved in this disaster," stated U.

S.

Attorney Patrick Ryan in a letter to the victims' families.[770]
The search for John Doe 2 quickly became the biggest man-hunt in FBI history.

What authorities weren't saying however, was that not only
was there a John Doe 2, there were least four John Does!

Yet the issue was quickly and quietly narrowed down to just one John Doe 2.

On April 23, four days after the bombing, The Washington Post quoted a senior law enforcement official who said "at least four" men were
involved in the terrorist act last week and "there very well could be more."[771]
The FBI then requalified its position on May 15: "Wherever we look, it's Terry and Timmy, Terry and Timmy — and nobody else," quipped an
unnamed FBI official in Time magazine.

Yet on June 11, another FBI official was quoted in the Post as saying, "I think when this is over we'll have at least six or eight guys indicted
and in custody.

It's just too big for two guys to pull off."[772]
Then on June 15, the FBI backtracked again.

"Periodically you just get something in an investigation that goes nowhere.

John Doe 2 goes
nowhere.

It doesn't show up in associations, it doesn't show up in phone calls.

It doesn't show up among the Army buddies of
McVeigh…"[773]
The previous day, the FBI put out a story that John Doe 2 may have actually been Todd Bunting, a soldier at Fort Riley, Kansas who had
rented a truck at the same dealer McVeigh had.

The FBI stated that Bunting wore clothing similar to that ascribed to John Doe 2, that he had
a tattoo in the same place, and that he wore a hat similar to John Doe 2's.It doesn't show up among the Army buddies of
McVeigh…"[773]
The previous day, the FBI put out a story that John Doe 2 may have actually been Todd Bunting, a soldier at Fort Riley, Kansas who had
rented a truck at the same dealer McVeigh had.

The FBI stated that Bunting wore clothing similar to that ascribed to John Doe 2, that he had
a tattoo in the same place, and that he wore a hat similar to John Doe 2's.

Yet Elliott's employees dismissed Bunting as the person who was seen with McVeigh, and Bunting held a press conference stating that he
had in fact rented a truck at Elliott's — 24 hours after McVeigh allegedly rented his.

The Bunting story was officially dropped.

Then, on January 28, 1996, the prosecution switched tracks again, officially resurrecting the Todd Bunting story.

In a long brief, the
government disclosed that Elliott's employee Tom Kessinger was the only one who could recall John Doe 2 well enough to describe him.

Now, after a November interview with a prosecutor and two FBI agents, Kessinger was "confident that he had Todd Bunting in mind when he
provided the description for the John Doe 2 composite." Kessinger, the brief continued, is "now unsure" whether anyone accompanied
McVeigh.

But his two co-workers "continue to believe that two men came in to rent the truck."
In that brief, the prosecution speculated that the defense might use "Kessinger's admitted confusion" to challenge his identification of
McVeigh.

It seemed it was less "Kessinger's admitted confusion" than a deliberate fabrication by prosecutors and the FBI to cover up the existence of
John Doe 2.

As Kessinger told bombing victim Glenn Wilburn, who conducted his own investigation, "I don't know how they came up with
that one."
Kessinger later changed his story at the urging of federal prosecutors Patrick Ryan and Joseph Hartzler.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It seemed it was less "Kessinger's admitted confusion" than a deliberate fabrication by prosecutors and the FBI to cover up the existence of
John Doe 2. As Kessinger told bombing victim Glenn Wilburn, who conducted his own investigation, "I don't know how they came up with
that one."
Kessinger later changed his story at the urging of federal prosecutors Patrick Ryan and Joseph Hartzler. During a pretrial conference, Jones
challenged Kessinger:
"How can you be so wrong 60 hours after the event and so right a year and a half later?" Jones asked him. "Could you be changing your
mind because the government wants you to?"
"No," Kessinger replied.[774]
Yet on March 25 and April 5, Hartzler had written Jones that "The existence and identity of this John Doe 2, whom we are confident is not
Mr. Bunting, is the subject of a continuing investigation."
And in a May 1, 1996 letter written by Hartzler, the government prosecutor informed Jones that Kessinger and Beemer had been shown a
picture of the cap Bunting wore when he picked up a truck on April 18. "They both stated that the cap was not the same one they saw on
John Doe II," Hartzler wrote, "and they reaffirmed that this second individual accompanied 'Kling' when he rented the truck."[775]
Yet at a hearing on April 9, federal prosecutor Beth Wilkinson stated that the government "has no information showing anyone but Mr. Nichols and Mr. McVeigh were the masterminds of this bombing."[776]

--- PAGE BREAK ---"They keep telling us they're looking for John Doe No.

2, but then they turn around and give statements indicating that they don't believe
there is a John Doe No.

2," said a woman whose husband was killed in the bombing.[777]
Other victims, like naive children, blindly placed their faith in the government's dubious assurances.

Hartzler held one meeting with bombing
victims in which he "discussed and disposed of some of the more bizarre theories."
"I just got a better feeling about what's going on," said Bud Welch, whose daughter, Julie, died in the attack.

"The prosecution assured us
that there was no evidence that was suppressed.

We really didn't know that," added Welch.

"We know what's going on now and that they're there for us," Pamela Weber-Fore said of the prosecutors.[778]
Other victims weren't as easily fooled.

"I don't think that there's any question about the fact that they're covering up who was involved in the
bombing," said V.Z.

Lawton, a HUD worker who was injured in the blast.

"I've talked to five witnesses myself who saw McVeigh with John
Doe number two in Oklahoma City that morning, within fifteen minutes of the blast...

tells me that there is something wrong."[779]
As Nichols' attorney Michael Tigar said, "It's strange that the official version has focused on Nichols and McVeigh, and that the government
is now busily engaged in denying all possibility that there could be anybody else."[780]
Grand Jury Bypass
"The FBI has thoroughly investigated all leads and I am confident in the investigation." - lead prosecutor Joseph Hartzler
Naturally, while many eyewitnesses stepped forward to tell the FBI they had seen additional suspects, not one was ever called before the
grand jury.

Yet federal prosecutors still had one hurdle to overcome before they could make their case.

They had to deal with Hoppy Heidelberg.Yet federal prosecutors still had one hurdle to overcome before they could make their case.

They had to deal with Hoppy Heidelberg.

Heidelberg, who often quoted from the grand juror's handbook, was aware that the grand jury was charged with the task of determining the
relevance of the evidence, and asking those questions pertinent to the case.

So far, all the evidence centered around Timothy McVeigh and
Terry Nichols.

Heidelberg wanted to know why prosecutors had not subpoenaed the many witnesses who had seen John Doe 2.

"No one who saw McVeigh with other suspects, was ever allowed to testify before the federal grand jury," said Heidelberg.

The obvious
inference being that those who saw McVeigh would have also seen John Doe 2.

But Patrick Ryan seemed to be controlling the jury.

He did not like Heidelberg's tendency to go against the flow.

In a letter to the victims'
families, Ryan states:
The United States has never maintained or even suggested, that no other person or persons were involved with McVeigh and Nichols in the
commission of these crimes.

As stated earlier, the question of involvement of others is the subject of intensive investigation by federal
investigators and prosecutors who are totally devoted and committed to identifying and prosecuting all persons involved in the planning or
commission of these crimes.

Yet, as in the Kennedy assassination, federal prosecutors simply paraded before the grand jury those witnesses favorable to their
preordained view of the case, ignoring leads and witnesses that conflicted with their highly dubious version of events.

Although Heidelberg attempted to question grand jury witnesses, he was repeatedly stonewalled by prosecutors.

In an interview with
journalist Jon Rappaport, Heidelberg stated, "They said I'd have to get the prosecuting attorney's okay for each question I wanted to ask.

But
you know, in dialog one question leads to another right away, so you can't cross-examine that way.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In an interview with
journalist Jon Rappaport, Heidelberg stated, "They said I'd have to get the prosecuting attorney's okay for each question I wanted to ask. But
you know, in dialog one question leads to another right away, so you can't cross-examine that way. "They kept promising and promising to answer all my questions, but ultimately they stalled me. I was had."[781]
In an interview on CBS This Morning, Stephen Jones said, "…what is troubling here is that the prosecutors, in effect, according to this grand
juror's allegation, took away from the grand jury their duty to go after the full story, not just concentrating on the two people that had already
been arrested."[782]
Not buying the government's story of a couple of pissed-off whackos with a fertilizer bomb, Heidelberg also asked that bomb experts be
called in to identify the type of bomb used. "Let's get the answer… Let's get the architects and engineers who built the building in there and
question them," Heidelberg told Rappaport. "Did you request that?" asked Rappaport. "Of course! I demanded bomb experts all along. And engineers and geologists. They said — do you want to know what they said? They

--- PAGE BREAK ---didn't have the money!

I said I'd go down to the University of Oklahoma and bring some geologists back myself for free.

They wouldn't let me.

"The bomb is the key to the whole case."[783]
In order to satisfy the grand jury that an ANFO bomb blew up the building, prosecutors called in one bomb expert — Robert Hopler.

Hopler, it
turns out, recently retired from Dyno-Nobel, an explosives manufacturer in Salt Lake City.

Dyno-Nobel used to be Hercules Powder
Company — a reputed CIA front.

"I knew he was CIA," said Heidelberg.

"It was pretty obvious to me and most of the jury."[784]
Judge David Russell eventually dismissed Heidelberg from the grand jury for having the audacity to question the government's case.

In a
letter to Heidelberg dated October 24, 1995, Russell states:
Effectively immediately, you are dismissed from the grand jury.

Your obligation of secrecy continues.

Any disclosure of matters that occurred
before the grand jury constitutes a contempt of court.

Each violation of the obligation of secrecy may be punished cumulatively.

The government's excuse for dismissing Heidelberg was an anonymous interview he supposedly gave to Lawrence Myers of Media Bypass
magazine.

As previously noted, Heidelberg never consented to be interviewed by Myers, and in fact, Myers had surreptitiously obtained the
content of an interview conducted by the investigator for Heidelberg's attorney, John DeCamp.

But Heidelberg claims the real reason was a letter he wrote to Judge Russell dated October 5th, in which Heidelberg states:
The families of the victims deserve to know who was involved in the bombing, and there appears to be an attempt to protect the identity of
certain suspects, namely John Doe 2….

"I think they (the government) knows who John Doe 2 is, and they are protecting him," said Heidelberg in an interview in Jubilee Magazine.But Heidelberg claims the real reason was a letter he wrote to Judge Russell dated October 5th, in which Heidelberg states:
The families of the victims deserve to know who was involved in the bombing, and there appears to be an attempt to protect the identity of
certain suspects, namely John Doe 2….

"I think they (the government) knows who John Doe 2 is, and they are protecting him," said Heidelberg in an interview in Jubilee Magazine.

"This is because John Doe 2 is either a government agent or informant and they can't afford for that to get out."[785]
Eventually, the FBI dropped the John Doe 2 lead altogether.

John Doe 2 had been a red herring, a false lead, the Justice Department
claimed.

John Doe 2 had never really existed.[786]
Dozens of credible witnesses think otherwise.

Catina Lawson, who was friends with McVeigh, remembered John Doe 2 from the Summer of '92, when she and her friends would hold
parties and invite soldiers from nearby Fort Riley.

McVeigh showed up with Andy Strassmeir, Mike Fortier, and Michael Brescia.

In fact,
Lawson's roommate, Lindsay Johnson, dated the handsome, well-built Brescia.

Two days after the bombing, Lawson called the FBI and told them that Brescia closely resembled the sketch of John Doe 2.

Yet in spite of overturning 21,000 stones, the FBI never even bothered to follow up on her story.

Robert Gohn, who lived across the road from McVeigh in Kingman, recalled seeing one of the mysterious John Does around the early
Summer of '94.

According to Gohn, one day a short, stocky man who looked "like a weight lifter" arrived at McVeigh's trailer with Terry
Nichols.[787]
On April 7, Dr.

Paul Heath was working in his office at the Murrah Building when "McVeigh" and two of his companions stopped by for a
chat.

Heath recalled one of the men as "American-Indian looking" and "handsome."[788]
As the Associated Press reported on April 27, 1995:
… [U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Paul Heath was working in his office at the Murrah Building when "McVeigh" and two of his companions stopped by for a
chat. Heath recalled one of the men as "American-Indian looking" and "handsome."[788]
As the Associated Press reported on April 27, 1995:
… [U.S. Attorney Randy] Rathburn said neighbors of Nichols'… reported that Nichols spent April 12-14 with McVeigh and several
unidentified men. One of the men resembled sketches of John Doe 2.…[789][790]
On Saturday, April 15, Barbara Whittenberg served breakfast to three men at the Sante Fe Trail Diner in Herrington, Kansas. One of the
men was dark-skinned and handsome. When he told her they were on their way to Oklahoma City, McVeigh shot him a hard look that said
"keep quiet."[791]
Early the next day, around 1:00 a.m., Melba was working the deli counter at Albertson's Supermarket on South May in Oklahoma City, when
"McVeigh" and John Doe 2 stopped by for sandwiches.[792]
"McVeigh," it seems, was still in town when Phyliss Kingsley and Linda Kuhlman saw three vehicles pull into the Hi-Way Grill, just south of

--- PAGE BREAK ---Oklahoma City, around 6:00 p.m.

on Sunday.

McVeigh came in and ordered hamburgers and fries to go, and was accompanied by a short,
stocky, handsome man, of either Mexican or American Indian descent.

The man closely resembled the FBI sketch of John Doe 2.[793]
That same day, back at the Dreamland Motel in Junction City, Connie Hood was returning to her room around 12:45 a.m.

when a man in
room 23 quickly opened the door as if expecting a visitor, then quickly closed it when he saw Hood.

The man, who startled her, was in his
early 20s, about 5'8" tall, 180 lbs., with dark hair brushed straight back and an olive complexion.

Hood recalls he closely resembled the
sketch of John Doe 2, but with slightly fuller features.

She described him as a "foreigner."[794]
The following day, Hood and her husband Donald returned to the Dreamland to visit their friend David King in room 22.

A Ryder truck pulled
up at the same time they did, the driver strongly resembling the man Hood saw the previous day.

Shane Boyd, a helicopter mechanic who was also staying at the Dreamland, later told reporters and investigators that he saw a bushy-haired
man resembling the John Doe 2 sketch in the parking lot near room 25 — Timothy McVeigh's room.

One exit away from the Dreamland Motel sits the Great Western Inn.

According to the manager, a Middle Eastern man stayed at the motel
on the 17th.

"He spoke broken English," said the manager.

"[He] gave a foreign name and was driving a Ryder truck." The man closely
resembled the FBI's sketch of John Doe 2.

"Sometime on Monday," recalled Connie Hood, "those two — McVeigh and the foreigner — loaded up together, in a Ryder truck, and pulled
out of the Dreamland parking lot together… that was the last I saw of them."[795]
Later that day, janitors Katherine Woodly and Martin Johnson were working the 5-9 p.m.

shift in the Murrah Building when they saw
"McVeigh" and John Doe 2."Sometime on Monday," recalled Connie Hood, "those two — McVeigh and the foreigner — loaded up together, in a Ryder truck, and pulled
out of the Dreamland parking lot together… that was the last I saw of them."[795]
Later that day, janitors Katherine Woodly and Martin Johnson were working the 5-9 p.m.

shift in the Murrah Building when they saw
"McVeigh" and John Doe 2.

McVeigh spoke to Martin about a job, and John Doe 2 nodded to Woodly.[796]
At 3:00 p.m.

on Monday, or possibly Tuesday, Jerri-Lynn Backhous and Dorinda Hermes were working at the Easy-Mart in Newkirk, 100
miles north of Oklahoma City, when a convoy pulled in.

One of the vehicles — a light blue pick-up with a camper top — was being driven by
Terry Nichols.

Backhous recalled Nichols' passenger as average height, dark-skinned, with black hair and a muscular build.

"He looked just
like the John Doe 2 sketch," she said.[797]
Debbie Nakanashi was working at the Post Office across the street from the Murrah Building around on Monday or Tuesday when
"McVeigh" and John Doe 2 stopped in and asked where they might find federal job applications.

Nakanashi helped provide the description
for the well-known profile sketch of John Doe 2 in the baseball cap.

Guy Rubsamen, a security guard at the Murrah Building saw a large Ryder truck pull up to the curb in front of the building around 4:00 p.m.

on Monday, the 17th.

Rubsamen later concluded it was a dress rehearsal.

"There was either two or three men, but one jumped out the driver's side, and one or two out the passenger side," Rubsamen told the Rocky
Mountain News.

"The first thing that struck me was how quickly they jumped out.

Those guys were in a hurry."[798]
The Ryder truck would make its appearance the following evening at the Cattle Baron's Steakhouse in Perry, Oklahoma.

Jeff Meyers and
another customer recalled seeing McVeigh and a companion, who stopped by for a few beers.Those guys were in a hurry."[798]
The Ryder truck would make its appearance the following evening at the Cattle Baron's Steakhouse in Perry, Oklahoma.

Jeff Meyers and
another customer recalled seeing McVeigh and a companion, who stopped by for a few beers.

The man was approximately six feet tall and
weighed 260 pounds — a description not befitting the John Doe 2s described by other witnesses.[799]
Richard Sinnett, the assistant manager of the Save-A-Trip convenience store in Kingman, Kansas, sold fuel to McVeigh and three other men
at approximately 1:30 a.m.

on April 19.

Sinnett saw three vehicles in all, including a Ryder truck, an older brown pick-up (possibly belonging
to Steven Colbern?), and a light colored car.

Sinnett described John Doe 2 as muscular, 170 to 180 pounds, with short light brown hair and a light complexion.

He recalled the Ryder
truck was towing a trailer that contained a large, round tank filled with clear liquid.

The store is about 175 miles north of Oklahoma City.[800]
Fred Skrdla, a cashier at a 24-hour truck stop near Billings, told the FBI he sold fuel to McVeigh between 1 and 3 a.m.

on April 19.

The
station is about 80 miles north of Oklahoma City.

As the sun rose, McVeigh and a friend sat down for coffee at Jackie's Farmers Store in Mulhall, Oklahoma.

Mulhall Postmaster Mary
Hunnicutt stood right next to McVeigh as he ordered his coffee.

She was "advised" not to discuss what she had seen, lest she be summoned
before the Federal Grand Jury.

She wasn't.[801]
Ten minutes before the blast, Leroy Brooks was sitting in his car at the Sooner Post Office across from the Murrah Building, when a Ryder
truck pulled up across the street, trailed by a yellow Mercury.

The drivers of both vehicles got out and walked to the back of the truck, where
they spoke for a few seconds, and exchanged a small package.--- PAGE BREAK ---

She wasn't.[801]
Ten minutes before the blast, Leroy Brooks was sitting in his car at the Sooner Post Office across from the Murrah Building, when a Ryder
truck pulled up across the street, trailed by a yellow Mercury. The drivers of both vehicles got out and walked to the back of the truck, where
they spoke for a few seconds, and exchanged a small package. After Brooks came out of the Post Office, he saw that the Ryder truck, which
contained a passenger, had moved in front of the Murrah Building. "McVeigh" was walking briskly across 5th Street towards the Journal
Record building.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Danny Wilkerson sold "McVeigh" a pack of cigarettes (McVeigh doesn't smoke) and two soft drinks at a deli inside the Regency Towers
apartments a block from the Murrah Building.

Wilkerson recalled a passenger sitting in the cab of the Ryder truck, which had a cab
overhang, and was shorter than the 24-foot model the FBI claimed McVeigh had rented.[802]
Federal authorities had still more witnesses to call on had they wanted to.

Mike Moroz, who was at work at Johnny's Tire Store on 10th and
Hudson, on April 19, looked up to see a Ryder truck pull in at 8:40 a.m.

The occupants were looking for directions to the Murrah Building.

Moroz caught a glimpse of the passenger — a stocky man with dark curly hair wearing a ball cap, and a tattoo on his upper left arm.

Several minutes earlier, David Snider was waiting for a delivery in Bricktown, about 25 blocks away, when a Ryder truck passed slowly by,
as if looking for an address.

However, this time the driver was a dark-skinned man with long, straight black hair, wearing a thin mustache
and tear-drop sunglasses.

The passenger was "McVeigh." Since Snider's account of the occupants differed remarkably from the previous
accounts, could this have been the second Ryder truck described by witnesses?

If so, did this mean there were two "McVeighs" and two
John Doe 2s?[803]
At approximately the same time as Snider saw the Ryder truck, Tulsa banker Kyle Hunt came upon the truck at Main and Broadway, trailed
by a yellow Mercury.

Hunt said the Mercury driver was Timothy McVeigh.

"He gave me that icy, go-to-hell look," said Hunt.

"It kind of
unnerved me."[804] While Hunt didn't see the occupants of the truck, he did recall two passengers in the car.

One of them, he said, had long
hair, similar to the man Phyliss Kingsley saw on Sunday at the Hi-Way Grill.

None of the men was Terry Nichols, who was in Herrington that
morning.One of them, he said, had long
hair, similar to the man Phyliss Kingsley saw on Sunday at the Hi-Way Grill.

None of the men was Terry Nichols, who was in Herrington that
morning.

Just outside the Murrah Building, Dennis "Rodney" Johnson was driving his catering truck, when he suddenly had to brake to avoid hitting
two men who were running towards the parking lot across the street.[805]
The men, who were in "a fast lockstep" with each other, appeared to be Timothy McVeigh and John Doe 2.

Johnson described McVeigh's
companion as "Mexican or American-Indian." He was "dark-skinned… probably about 5-8 and maybe 160 pounds," Johnson said.

"He was
wearing blue jogger pants with a stripe across the side.

He had slicked-black hair."[806]
Then there was Gary Lewis.

A pressman for the Journal Record, Lewis stepped outside to smoke his pipe just minutes before the blast.

As
stood in the alley across from the Murrah Building, a yellow Mercury peeled away from its spot and bore down on him.

The driver, whom he
made brief eye-contact with, appeared to be Timothy McVeigh.

And his passenger resembled the sketch of John Doe 2.

The car had an
Oklahoma tag (not an Arizona tag as authorities claimed) dangling by one bolt.

Even FBI Agent John Hersley had testified before the Federal Grand Jury that "…several witnesses spotted a yellow car carrying McVeigh
and another man speeding away from the parking lot near the… [building] before the blast."[807]
Finally there was Daina Bradley.

A young mother, Bradley was standing by the window of the Social Security office seconds before the blast,
when she saw a man get out of the passenger side of the Ryder truck.

Moments later, Bradley's world turned to blackness, smoke and dust
as she was showered by falling concrete.

Bradley, who lost her leg, her mother, and her two children in the bombing, still clearly recalls the
man who got out of the truck.

He looked like John Doe 2.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bradley, who lost her leg, her mother, and her two children in the bombing, still clearly recalls the
man who got out of the truck. He looked like John Doe 2. Of course, federal "investigators" would show as little interest in these and other discrepancies as they would in the numerous John Does. Some of these witnesses were never even contacted by the FBI, eventhough all of them had repeatedly tried to alert the Bureau. Only after
federal prosecutors had coerced Daina Bradley into changing her story, did she testify at McVeigh's trial. None of the others were ever called. "I know I wasn't called because I would have to testify that I did see John Doe 2. I know I saw John Doe 2," said Rodney Johnson.[808]
Then in March of 1997, after changing it's mind half a dozen times about the existence of John Doe 2, it was "leaked" to the press that the
FBI was searching for a John Doe. His name was Robert Jaques. This "new" John Doe 2 had appeared at the office of real estate broker William Maloney, of Cassville, Missouri, in November of '94, along
with Terry Nichols and a man who looked like McVeigh. They were there to discuss purchasing a remote piece of land. Joe Lee Davidson, a
salesman in Maloney's office, recalled the encounter with Jaques: "The day he was here, he seemed to be the one that was in control and in
charge of what was going on," said Davidson. "Nichols never said a whole lot and McVeigh never did come in…."[809]
Maloney described Jaques as muscular, with a broad, dark face, similar to, but not quite identical as, the original FBI sketch of John Doe 2. Is it possible the sudden announcement of Jaques was a diversion, to satisfy a public increasingly savvy about the existence of John Doe 2? Nevertheless, a month after this new lead was announced, the government went ahead with the trial of McVeigh, making no attempt to
introduce any additional suspects.

--- PAGE BREAK ---They also dropped the lead on Steven Colbern, in spite of the fact that his pick-up was seen stopped ahead of McVeigh 90 minutes after the
bombing.[810]
The Middle-Eastern lead was also dropped.

The FBI denied putting out the APB on the brown pick-up containing the three Middle Eastern
males seen speeding away from the bombing.

And while the FBI knew about Sam Khalid, they did nothing but ask him some questions.

An affidavit submitted by FBI Agent John Hersley stated: "A witness to the bombing saw two, possibly three persons in a brown Chevrolet
pickup — fleeing the area of the crime — just prior to the blast." Although agents interviewed the witness who saw Hussain al-Hussaini
driving the brown pick-up, she was never brought before a line-up, and never called to testify before the Federal Grand Jury.

Hussaini's
friend Abraham Ahmed was turned loose as well.[811]
As in the Kennedy assassination, the FBI sent thousands of agents hither and yonder to scour the country, searching out even the most
obscure leads.

Agents swarmed through Kingman, conducting warrantless searches, arresting innocent people, and wrecking havoc.

Dozens more swooped down on Terry Nichols 12-year-old son Josh, whom they thought may have been John Doe 2.

Agents were sent to
the Philippines to investigate Nichols' activities there, and thousands more had detained and questioned anyone even remotely suspicious.

Yet, as in the Kennedy case, few agents actually knew just why they were following up on any given lead.

Very few ever were ever allowed
to compare notes, or catch a glimpse of the "big picture."
More importantly, those individuals who should have been prime suspects for questioning were never even detained.

No agents were sent to
Elohim city to interview Andreas Strassmeir or Michael Brescia, or Peter and Sonny Ward.

Likewise, none of the Middle Eastern suspects
previously mentioned were arrested.No agents were sent to
Elohim city to interview Andreas Strassmeir or Michael Brescia, or Peter and Sonny Ward.

Likewise, none of the Middle Eastern suspects
previously mentioned were arrested.

Had any FBI agents actually attempted to follow up on any of these leads, like their predecessors in Dallas, they would have been quickly
reassigned to other cases by Washington.

The same held true for local law-enforcement.

FBI SAC Bob Ricks — who doled out a mendacious dose of propaganda during the Waco
massacre — was appointed Public Safety Director after the bombing, putting him in charge of the OHP.

The OSBI were made coffee boys and drivers for the FBI.

District Attorney Bob Macy, along with local police, were "advised" to stay out of
the case.[812]
Six days before the start of McVeigh's trial, Steven Jones filed a defense motion citing law-enforcement and defense interviews with a
Filipino terrorist who admitted meeting with bombing defendant Terry Nichols.

Lead prosecutor Joseph Hartzler called Jones' carefully investigated and researched information "pulp fiction."
Yet a Washington-based terrorist expert who investigated the World Trade Center bombing and is familiar with some the suspects in Jones'
brief said, "The whole idea that no one but Timothy McVeigh — that there's nothing wider than this — no one would believe it if the
government weren't saying it.

It's so implausible a story.

"The government has the nerve to call it pulp fiction," added the highly-respected source.

Their story is 'pulp fiction.'"[813]
Apparently, the government was concerned enough about Jones' revelations to order all the witness statements sealed.

In the end, the FBI propounded its disingenuous theory that McVeigh and Nichols were the "lone bombers" just as quickly as they had
decided that Lee Harvey Oswald was the "Lone assassin" twenty-eight years ago.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Their story is 'pulp fiction.'"[813]
Apparently, the government was concerned enough about Jones' revelations to order all the witness statements sealed. In the end, the FBI propounded its disingenuous theory that McVeigh and Nichols were the "lone bombers" just as quickly as they had
decided that Lee Harvey Oswald was the "Lone assassin" twenty-eight years ago. Choir Boys
"Stated simply, neither the ATF nor any other federal agency had any advance knowledge of the deadly bomb that McVeigh delivered to the
Murrah Building.… The prosecution is not withholding anything that even remotely would support such an outrageous charge." - Department
of Justice
"I can assure you that there has been no government misconduct and the men and women of the FBI that we're working with are beyond
reproach."
- U.S. Attorney Joseph Hartzler

--- PAGE BREAK ---"Our government, unfortunately, has shown remarkable ability to lie."
- Stephen Jones
One example of the Justice Department's refusal to admit the possibility of any suspects other than McVeigh and Nichols was its stubborn
insistence on hoarding discovery documents that it should have been rightfully turned over to the defense under the federal Brady
requirements.

In a motion filed six days before the start of McVeigh's trial, Jones alleged that the prosecution not only lied about the
available evidence, they deliberately obsfucated and distorted certain ATF and FBI reports on Elohim City, deliberately misspelling the
names Carol Howe, Robert Millar, Andreas Strassmeir, Dennis Mahon and others so that the defense would be unable to retrieve any
documents regarding these suspects during their computer searches.

As Jones wrote in his brief:
Defense counsel is convinced that the government has engaged in a willful and knowing cover-up of information supplied to it by its
informant.

The defense was unable to locate this insert using a computer because all major search terms contained in the insert were
misspelled.

Elohim City was misspelled or misidentified (Elohm City), as was Mahon (Mehaun), Strassmeir (Strassmeyer), the Rev.

Robert
Millar (Bob Lamar) and in addition, Carol Howe was not identified in the insert at all.[814]
Thus the defense was unable to locate important information that Carol Howe, a ATF informant, had provided critical warnings that the
Murrah Building was about to be bombed.

As Jones wrote:
Our patience is exhausted… We are no longer convinced the documents drafted and furnished to us, after the fact, by bureaucracies whose
very existence and credibility is challenged, can be relied upon.…
The government has told the district court that it had 'no information" of a possible foreign involvement when it did.Robert
Millar (Bob Lamar) and in addition, Carol Howe was not identified in the insert at all.[814]
Thus the defense was unable to locate important information that Carol Howe, a ATF informant, had provided critical warnings that the
Murrah Building was about to be bombed.

As Jones wrote:
Our patience is exhausted… We are no longer convinced the documents drafted and furnished to us, after the fact, by bureaucracies whose
very existence and credibility is challenged, can be relied upon.…
The government has told the district court that it had 'no information" of a possible foreign involvement when it did.

The government has told
the district court that "Andreas Strassmeir was never the subject of the investigation," when he was.…
Statements to the court by the prosecution that it cannot connect Strassmeir and Mahon to the bombing are hardly surprising.

They did not
try very hard to connect them because had they been connected, and Carol Howe's previous warning disclosed, the resulting furor would
have been unimaginable.…
The repeated practice of the government and prosecution in this case when the shoe gets binding is to make a partial disclosure, assure the
District Court it understands its Brady obligations, and hold its breath, hoping the court does not order further disclosure, or will rely on the
prosecution's "good faith".…
This is a solemn criminal case, not Alice in Wonderland where definitions mean only what "the Queen thinks" and what she thinks is not
known to anyone else.[815]
Lying about additional suspects wasn't the only crime the "Justice" Department was guilty of.

Manipulating and confiscating evidence also
seemed to be a major tool in their arsenal of deceit.

Richard Bieder, the attorney representing a group bombing victims in their negligence lawsuit against the government, told the London
Telegraph that he had seen internal ATF documents which supported many of the claims made by Carol Howe.Manipulating and confiscating evidence also
seemed to be a major tool in their arsenal of deceit.

Richard Bieder, the attorney representing a group bombing victims in their negligence lawsuit against the government, told the London
Telegraph that he had seen internal ATF documents which supported many of the claims made by Carol Howe.

But the reports for
December 1994, probably the most critical ones, have vanished from the files.[816]
On April 14, 1995, the FBI placed a call to Assistant Chief Charles Gaines at the Oklahoma City Fire Department to warn him of a potential
terrorist threat within the next few days.

Yet like the FBI's warnings of the threat against the life of President Kennedy, or Nixon's infamous
Watergate tapes, the audio logs of the Fire Department's incoming calls were mysteriously "erased."
When asked to explain this "accidental" erasure, Assistant Chief Jon Hansen intelligently replied, "We made a boo-boo." Hansen then
admitted to reporter J.D.

Cash that the tapes had been erased after the national media had requested them.[817]
On April 28th the tape of James Nichols' hearing was released by court order, and it was blank.

Nothing whatsoever could be heard on the
tape.

It was the only record of the proceedings.

On April 19, the seismic data monitor at the Omniplex Museum, four miles from the Murrah Building, had recorded the shock waves of the
explosion.

The seismograph readings, including one from the University of Oklahoma 16 miles away in Norman, presented startling evidence
— evidence that the explosion that ripped through the Alfred P.

Murrah building may in fact have been several distinct blasts.

The
implications of this are ominous.

At a meeting of the Oklahoma Geophysical Society on November 20th, Seismologists Ray Brown of the Oklahoma Geological Survey and
Tom Holzer of the U.S.

Geological Survey gathered to discuss the findings.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At a meeting of the Oklahoma Geophysical Society on November 20th, Seismologists Ray Brown of the Oklahoma Geological Survey and
Tom Holzer of the U.S. Geological Survey gathered to discuss the findings. Pat Briley, a seismic programmer, who has independently
investigated the bombing, attended the meeting, as did U.S. Attorney Patrick Ryan and Assistant U.S. Attorney Jerome A. Holmes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Although the two scientists disagreed on findings regarding the number of bombs, less than a third of the way through the presentation,
Ryan got up, walked to the back of the room, and began giving a private press conference:
"I was certainly satisfied that these scientists could not say that there was anything other than one bomb that caused the seismology
reading," said Ryan, a statement obviously inconsistent with the discussion occurring at the time.

"Ryan lied very heavily," said Briley.

"This guy really lied."
After the meeting, Briley politely asked Ryan to give him the original seismogram in the FBI's possession.

Ryan got up, angrily accused
Briley of working for the defense team, then stammered out of the room.[818]
Surveillance cameras located in the parking lot across from the Murrah building, and on neighboring buildings, would have recorded the
entire fateful event that terrible morning.

The tapes would have also shown the building collapsing.

They would have conclusively proven
whether the structure was destroyed by cutting charges, or by a truck-bomb.

But like Abraham Zapruder's famous footage of the Kennedy
assassination, the tapes were quickly confiscated by the FBI.

In an interview with Jon Rappaport, Hoppy Heidelberg said, "The various surveillance videotapes of the bombing, tapes from, say,
Southwestern Bell and the Journal Record Building across the street, we don't know that they showed all the details of the bombing,
including the perpetrators, but it's possible.

None of this material was shown to us in the grand jury."
Certain segments of the footage was presented by the prosecution at trial.

One cut included a shot of a blue GMC pick-up with a white
camper top (the kind owned by Terry Nichols) driving slowly past the Regency Towers apartments near the Murrah Building on April 16 —
the day Nichols allegedly drove to Oklahoma to pick up McVeigh.None of this material was shown to us in the grand jury."
Certain segments of the footage was presented by the prosecution at trial.

One cut included a shot of a blue GMC pick-up with a white
camper top (the kind owned by Terry Nichols) driving slowly past the Regency Towers apartments near the Murrah Building on April 16 —
the day Nichols allegedly drove to Oklahoma to pick up McVeigh.

The prosecution also displayed a still frame of a Ryder truck driving by the Regency Towers on the morning of the blast.

The time was 8:59 a.

m.

They then showed a still of the truck blowing up, stamped 9:02 a.m.

Curiously, the government was careful not to show the jury any
footage which showed any suspects getting out of the truck.[819]
Surveillance footage taken by Trooper Charles Hanger upon his arrest of McVeigh had caught a brown pick-up stopped just ahead —
thought to belong to Steven Colbern.

When researcher Ken Armstrong questioned the OHP about the tape, he was told it had been "seized"
by the FBI.

The OHP would not comment further.[820]
On June 1st, KFOR reporter Brad Edwards sent the Justice Department a Freedom of Information request concerning the various
surveillance footage.

In their reply, the FBI stated:
A search of our indices to the Central Records System, as maintained in the Oklahoma City Office, located material responsive request (sic)
to your request.

This material is being withheld in its entirety pursuant to the following subsection of Title 5, United States Code, Section 552:
(b) (7) (A)
When Jones finally filed a motion for disclosure after prosecutors refused to hand over the tapes, he was given 400 hours of footage.

According to defense attorney Amber McGlaughlin, the tapes did not reveal the presence of Timothy McVeigh.[821]
Of course, who knows what the FBI actually turned over to the defense.This material is being withheld in its entirety pursuant to the following subsection of Title 5, United States Code, Section 552:
(b) (7) (A)
When Jones finally filed a motion for disclosure after prosecutors refused to hand over the tapes, he was given 400 hours of footage.

According to defense attorney Amber McGlaughlin, the tapes did not reveal the presence of Timothy McVeigh.[821]
Of course, who knows what the FBI actually turned over to the defense.

In the Kennedy case, the most revealing evidence was the Zapruder
film — homemade footage showing Presidents Kennedy's head being blasted towards the right-rear — indicating the fatal shot came from
the Grassy Knoll, not the Book Depository as the government claimed.

Yet the FBI confiscated Zapruder's film and altered the sequence of
the incriminating frames, reversing them to give the impression that Kennedy's head had lurched forward.

It was only later that experts
revealed the tampering.

The FBI said it was a "mistake."
The Zapruder film was finally released in 1968, the result of District Attorney Jim Garrison's courageous efforts to reveal the truth.

The
question is, when will the American public get to see the video footage of the Oklahoma City bombing?

While the FBI did their best to keep key evidence from the grand jury, as in the Kennedy case, they even went so far as to convince several
witnesses that their former statements were false, and to retract them in lieu of statements more favorable to the prosecution.

A primary
example is Michael Fortier, who originally told investigators, "I do not believe that Tim [McVeigh] blew up any building in Oklahoma.

There's
nothing for me to look back upon and say, yeah, that might have been, I should have seen it back then — there's nothing like that.… I know
my friend.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A primary
example is Michael Fortier, who originally told investigators, "I do not believe that Tim [McVeigh] blew up any building in Oklahoma. There's
nothing for me to look back upon and say, yeah, that might have been, I should have seen it back then — there's nothing like that.… I know
my friend. Tim McVeigh is not the face of terror as reported on Time magazine…"
But after the FBI raided his home, Fortier reversed his statement, saying that he and McVeigh has "cased" the federal building, in response
to an offer of a plea bargain. Fortier was then transferred to the Federal Medical Facility at Fort Worth, Texas. It is not known why.[822]
According to Heidelberg, the FBI brought 24-hour-a-day pressure on Fortier for months before he was arrested. Consequently, Fortier did

--- PAGE BREAK ---not retain a lawyer, didn't know he needed one, and was subsequently bullied by the Bureau.

By the time he managed to retain a lawyer,
Fortier had already been broken.

Lori Fortier testified that McVeigh tried to solicit Nichols' help in building the bomb, but that Nichols wanted out.

He then allegedly tried to
solicit her husband.

According to her testimony, McVeigh got down on the floor of their trailer and, using soup cans to represent 55-gallon
drums, demonstrated how to make a bomb.[823]
Were the Fortiers relaying accurate testimony?

Like the testimony of Eldon Elliott about McVeigh's height, or that of Thomas Manning
regarding McVeigh's phone call to Elliott's, none of this information was contained in prior statements made by the Fortiers to the FBI.

As will be seen with prior incidents of government witness tampering and fabricated testimony, their testimony is highly circumspect.

The Fortiers' testimony is also somewhat questionable due to their drug use.

According to co-worker Deborah Brown, who testified at
McVeigh's trial, Lori Fortier used crystal methamphetamine almost daily.

Methamphetamine is widely known for its ability to induce
delusional or even psychotic states over time.[824]
Fortier eventually confessed to transporting and selling stolen firearms, drug possession, foreknowledge of the bombing plot, and failing to
inform federal authorities.[825]
Said grand juror Hoppy Heidelberg, "The FBI relied on a man, Fortier, who really couldn't provide anything important to them.

You need to
remember that.

That's important."[826]
Lori Fortier also testified that "I still believed he (McVeigh) couldn't really do it." Jones then asked her, "Ms.

Fortier, you said you thought
McVeigh really wouldn't carry out his plans, then you said you, 'wanted out.' How can you 'want out' if there was nothing to 'be in'"?

Jones would take this one step further.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fortier, you said you thought
McVeigh really wouldn't carry out his plans, then you said you, 'wanted out.' How can you 'want out' if there was nothing to 'be in'"? Jones would take this one step further. On cross-examination, he assiduously questioned Fortier's motivations:
Jones: Now, in addition, in your conversation you had with your brother on April the 25th, 1995 — that's your brother John? Fortier: Yes, sir. Jones: Did you make the following statement: "I've been thinking about trying to do those talk-show circuits for a long time, come up with
some asinine story and get my friends to go in on it"? Fortier: Yes, sir, I made that statement. Jones: And in the same conversation, did your brother say to you: "Whether the story is true or not, if you want to sit here and listen to a
fable, that's all it was at the time is a fable"? And then did you say: "I found my career, 'cause I can tell a fable"? And then did you burst out
laughing and say, "I could tell stories all day"? Fortier: Yes, sir. Jones: Then do you know an individual named Glynn? Fortier: Yes. Jones: And his last name, sir? Fortier: I think you're referring to Glynn Bringle. Jones: Did you have a conversation with him by telephone on April the 30th? Fortier: Yes. Jones: And did you say, "I want to wait till after the trial and do book and movie rights. I can just make up something juicy"? And then did
you laugh? Fortier: I'm not sure if I laughed or not, but I did make that statement. Jones: "Something that's worth The Enquirer, you know." You made those statements.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Fortier: Yes, sir.

The obvious inference was that the "Justice" Department had a hand in generating the Fortiers' testimony.

As Jones pointed out during his
closing argument, the terms of Fortier's plea agreement provided that any leniency would be contingent upon his performance in court.

Not true, according to the FBI, which spent over 175 hours soliciting statements from the Fortiers; and Joseph Hartzler, who met with his
"star witness" between 7 and 10 times to "make sure he told the truth."[827]
In fact, during McVeigh's trial, Lori Fortier testified on cross-examination that she had arrived in Denver five days before she was scheduled
for trial.

She testified that she spent the better part of Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday practicing for her testimony with federal
prosecutors.

Philadelphia prosecutors spent a lot of time with Veronica Jones to "make sure she told the truth" too — convincing her to implicate journalist
Mumia Abu-Jamal, accused of shooting police officer Daniel Faulkner.

Jones, who was facing unrelated felony charges at the time, originally
told police she saw two other men flee the scene.

After threats and promises from police, she changed her story, testifying to the
government's version of events.

Her felony charges were subsequently dropped.[828]
Fortier, whose speech and appearance were magically transformed for his day in court, reportedly received a reduced sentence of three
years in exchange for his testimony.

His wife Lori was granted complete immunity from prosecution for her's.

Jones also accused the FBI of harassing Jennifer McVeigh and her friends in the days after the bombing, hoping to obtain derogatory
information about her brother.His wife Lori was granted complete immunity from prosecution for her's.

Jones also accused the FBI of harassing Jennifer McVeigh and her friends in the days after the bombing, hoping to obtain derogatory
information about her brother.

He said the FBI scared people "beyond belief with threats of prosecution" if they didn't talk.[829]
On the fifth day of Jennifer McVeigh's interrogation, the FBI ushered her into a room with huge blown up pictures of her and her brother
(taken off her refrigerator door), and babies who died in the bombing.

Interspersed between the photos were statutes from the U.S.

Code
pertaining to treason, with phrases such as "Treason is punishable by death," and "The penalty for treason is DEATH." (government's
emphasis)
Under cross-examination, Jennifer was asked if she was aware that treason is only punishable in times of war.

Stunned by this revelation,
she answered, "No."
The FBI also tricked Jennifer into testifying by promising her immunity from prosecution if she cooperated.

During a break in the trial, a
reporter asked prosecutor Vicky Behenna why Jennifer needed immunity.

"She didn't," Behenna replied," but she wouldn't testify without it,
so we gave it to her."[830]
The FBI also tricked Marife Nichols into signing a consent form before they searched her house.

When she was asked if the agents advised
her of her right to retain a lawyer or refuse to answer questions, the 23-year-old Filipino answered, "I don't remember.

I don't think so."
Marife said that when she asked whether she did need a lawyer, prosecutors and FBI agents discouraged her.

"They told me, 'You're okay
as long as you are telling the truth.

You don't need a lawyer."[831]
James Nichols discovered they were raiding his house after he heard it on the news.

"I heard on the radio they were raiding a house in
Decker, Michigan.--- PAGE BREAK ---

You don't need a lawyer."[831]
James Nichols discovered they were raiding his house after he heard it on the news. "I heard on the radio they were raiding a house in
Decker, Michigan. I said, 'Wow, that's awful close to home.' Well, within an hour I found out… Mine!"[832]
Nichols believes the ATF, which raided his house, set him up to be murdered, either as an act of revenge or to prevent him from testifying at
trial. He told Dateline's Chris Hansen that after the agents entered his home, they asked him to retrieve a gun he kept in his bedroom. Nichols responded, "No, I won't go get it. I told you, send an agent or two in there to go do it." 'Aw, go ahead. Go and do it,' the agent
responded, and they all turned their backs, real nonchalantly. I said, 'Whoa, wait a minute…' They'd 'a shot me, because they would have
just said 'He pulled a gun on us.' The fate of Terry and Tim would have been signed, sealed and delivered… Dead people don't testify."[833]
For his part, Terry Nichols believed that he was not in custody after he walked into the Herrington, Kansas police station on April 21 to see
why his name was being broadcast on television. Apparently, the agents were hoping they could get more out of Nichols by leading him to
believe they had no intention of arresting him. "Mr. Nichols was coerced, deceived, and subjected to psychological ploys designed to overcome his will and make him confess," his
attorney stated in a legal brief. Defense attorneys also contend Nichols was falsely promised he could review agents' notes on his
statements for accuracy, and was falsely told he or his wife could be present at searches. Prosecutors countered that federal agents acted "with remarkable diligence and in a manner that honored the Constitution."
Sure. Frank Keating: Damage Control Inc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---"We are going to impose our agenda on the coverage by dealing with the issues and subjects we choose to deal with." - Richard M.

Cohan,
Senior Producer of CBS News
"The business of the New York journalist is to destroy the truth, to lie outright, to pervert, to vilify, to fawn at the feet of Mammon, and to sell
his race and his country for his daily bread." - John Swinton, CEO, New York Times, New York Press Club, April 12, 1953.

"The Central Intelligence Agency owns everyone of any significance in the major media." - William Colby, former CIA Director
Eight months after the bombing, Oklahoma State Representative Charles Key, dissatisfied with the "official" investigation, attempted to form
a state oversight committee.

House Speaker Glen Johnson ridiculed Key's efforts, stating his satisfaction with the Justice Department's
official fantasy tale.

Anyone who subsequently attempted to challenge the government's official line was publicly discredited by Governor
Keating, sneered at by Attorney General Drew Edmondson, and laughed at by the mainstream press.[834]
The local media provided a convenient platform for Governor Keating to dismiss critics of the government's handling of the case, including
Edye Smith, Hoppy Heidelberg and Representative Key.

In an attempt to discredit Heidelberg, Keating headed a carefully orchestrated
chorus of media pundits, stating that Heidelberg was "off the reservation."
Keating also joined KWTV in attacking KFOR's coverage of the Middle Eastern connection, stating they lacked integrity.

He labeled Jim Levine, an attorney who represented several victims pro bono in an attempt to release money from the Governor and
Mayor's Victims Relief Funds a "bottom-feeding" lawyer.[835]*
For his courageous efforts in uncovering the truth, Keating said Representative Key was "baying at the moon."[836]†
Along with bombing victim Glenn Wilburn, Key attempted to impanel a County Grand Jury.In an attempt to discredit Heidelberg, Keating headed a carefully orchestrated
chorus of media pundits, stating that Heidelberg was "off the reservation."
Keating also joined KWTV in attacking KFOR's coverage of the Middle Eastern connection, stating they lacked integrity.

He labeled Jim Levine, an attorney who represented several victims pro bono in an attempt to release money from the Governor and
Mayor's Victims Relief Funds a "bottom-feeding" lawyer.[835]*
For his courageous efforts in uncovering the truth, Keating said Representative Key was "baying at the moon."[836]†
Along with bombing victim Glenn Wilburn, Key attempted to impanel a County Grand Jury.

Such a jury, operating outside the scope of the
federal investigation, would not only have the power to investigate facts ignored by the federal grand jury, but have the power to level
criminal obstruction of justice charges against anybody whom they believed might have impeded the investigation.

Given the allegations of wrongdoing in the federal investigation, such charges could conceivably be leveled against everybody from the ATF
to the Justice Department.

In an interview in the McCurtain Gazette, Key explained, "Indisputable proof exists now that the federal grand jury was purposely shielded
from witnesses who saw Timothy McVeigh with other suspects, both prior to and immediately after the bombing assault….

They may have a
good motive for this, but thus far it escapes me — and, I might add, several members of the federal grand jury who witnessed this farce."
Keating's response, quoted in the Daily Oklahoman was: "I don't think a legislative committee would contribute one whit of intelligence to this
process."[837]
The Daily Oklahoman and the Tulsa World, the state's two largest dailies, which should have led the pack in ferreting out the truth of this
terrible tragedy, instead led the local media chorus with editorials such as this one in the Daily Oklahoman, entitled, "Drop It, Mr.In an interview in the McCurtain Gazette, Key explained, "Indisputable proof exists now that the federal grand jury was purposely shielded
from witnesses who saw Timothy McVeigh with other suspects, both prior to and immediately after the bombing assault….

They may have a
good motive for this, but thus far it escapes me — and, I might add, several members of the federal grand jury who witnessed this farce."
Keating's response, quoted in the Daily Oklahoman was: "I don't think a legislative committee would contribute one whit of intelligence to this
process."[837]
The Daily Oklahoman and the Tulsa World, the state's two largest dailies, which should have led the pack in ferreting out the truth of this
terrible tragedy, instead led the local media chorus with editorials such as this one in the Daily Oklahoman, entitled, "Drop It, Mr.

Key."
The Daily Oklahoman has opposed Key's mission from the beginning.… State Rep.

Charles Key's quest to prove that a government
conspiracy played some role in the Murrah Building bombing is a weird and misguided exercise.… Oklahoma County District Attorney Bob
Macy is correct in appealing a court ruling that allows Key a free hand to seek a county grand jury probe of his conspiracy theories.…[838]
The Tulsa World chimed in with editorials such as "Making Tragedy Pay," which labeled Key as a "dedicated hustler" peddling "goofy
theories" to rightwing-crank audiences." They also accused the representative of profit-making from the sale of his bombing videos, which
barely paid for themselves.

The fact that Key had recently lost his insurance business due to his tireless efforts investigating the bombing,
and was living on his $33,000-a-year salary to support a wife and three children in a small, ramshackle house, was not mentioned by the
yellow journalists of the Tulsa World.

The "truth seekers" of the local media weren't finished either.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The fact that Key had recently lost his insurance business due to his tireless efforts investigating the bombing,
and was living on his $33,000-a-year salary to support a wife and three children in a small, ramshackle house, was not mentioned by the
yellow journalists of the Tulsa World. The "truth seekers" of the local media weren't finished either. They eagerly focused on the efforts of Drew Edmondson, who accused Key of
proposing a "wasteful witch hunt" and of engaging in "the worst kind of paranoid conspiracy pandering." (See Appendix)
One article reported how Edmondson had convinced the State District Attorney's Council to oppose Key's investigative funding bill. "This is unprecedented, as far as I know, for the Attorney General to go to such lengths with the District Attorneys Council and to use such

--- PAGE BREAK ---intemperate language," the soft-spoken Key told The New American.

In fact, local radio polls revealed that an overwhelming majority of Oklahomans supported Key's efforts.

While the Tulsa World and the Daily
Oklahoman went to extremes to label Key as a "conspiracy nut," they never bothered mentioning that little fact.[839]*
Naturally, the CIA-connected Washington Post would have their say, comparing the "myth" of John Doe 2 to the Loch Ness Monster.

Lead prosecutor Joseph Hartzler added his voice to the ensemble, calling the leads "whacky theories."[840]
Key's grand jury petition was quashed on November 6th, 1995 by District Judge Daniel Owens on the grounds that it would be "re-inventing
the wheel."[841]
Key appealed.

As his attorney, Mark Sanford stated, "Legally [Owens] didn't have the right to quash the petition.

But because he's a judge
he has the power, whether it's legal or not."[842]
Beverly Palmer from Bob Macy's office argued at the appeals hearing in defense of Owens, claiming that the petition was "insufficient on its
face," and the request was duplicitous of the federal grand jury's efforts.

Yet, as Appeals Judge Ronald Stubblefield pointed out, nowhere did Judge Owens state why the petition was insufficient.

In fact Stubblefield
was highly skeptical that Owens had any facts to advise him properly in his decision.

"I question whether Judge Owens has the discretion"
said Stubblefield.

"He's just operating on what he knows about the bombing.

Do you think it's right to make a judgment based on what he
reads in the newspaper?"[843]
The same could be said about DA Bob Macy.

At the time I interviewed him, he was collecting information on the case by reading Morris
Dees' Gathering Storm, and The Turner Diaries.

This was a year and-a-half after the bombing — a bombing that occurred right outside his
window.

He didn't know about John Doe 2.

He had no idea about the Middle Eastern connection.

He had done absolutely no investigation.He had no idea about the Middle Eastern connection.

He had done absolutely no investigation.

"I have not seen these things you are talking about right now," Macy told me.

"When I see the evidence… I haven't been presented with the
evidence." Macy subsequently claimed he wanted me to work with his so-called "task force" that was "investigating" the bombing, then never
called me back.

His attitude was adequately reflected by his Assistant DA, Beverly Palmer.

Visibly nervous, Palmer grasped at straws during the appeals
hearing, arguing that the grand jury shouldn't be convened because of the need for "judicial economy," and that it contravened "public policy
concerns."
"What policy concerns?" Judge Daniel Boudreau asked.[844]
In spite of the efforts of a group of good ole' boy politicians to sabotage justice, Judge Stubblefield remained firm: "The people have the right
to circulate a petition if the people find that things aren't going the way they ought to be," he said.

"Is it not the right, by the sanctified right of
the grand jury in Oklahoma, to inquire whether a crime is committed?

Don't they have the right to investigate people who they think are
involved?

This is a highly protected right."
The Appeals Court upheld Key's right to petition for a County Grand Jury by a unanimous vote.

Just two months before the hearing Macy claimed to this author that he intended to prosecute McVeigh and Nichols in a state trial on 161
counts of First Degree Murder.

"I don't like taking a second seat to the [federal] prosecution," Macy stated.

"The bombing killed 10 of my
friends."
In a May 24, 1995 letter to Senator Orrin Hatch, one of the original drafters of the Anti-Terrorism Bill, Macy wrote:
First, immediately following the trial or trials in Federal Court, I shall, working in conjunction with the United Sates Department of Justice and
the federal law-enforcement agencies investigating the bombing of the Alfred P.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"I don't like taking a second seat to the [federal] prosecution," Macy stated. "The bombing killed 10 of my
friends."
In a May 24, 1995 letter to Senator Orrin Hatch, one of the original drafters of the Anti-Terrorism Bill, Macy wrote:
First, immediately following the trial or trials in Federal Court, I shall, working in conjunction with the United Sates Department of Justice and
the federal law-enforcement agencies investigating the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Building, prosecute the cowards responsible for
murdering innocent people in the area surrounding the Federal Building.…
The State of Oklahoma has an overwhelming, compelling interest to seek and obtain the maximum penalty allowable by law for the
senseless and cowardly killings. Not only is it in the interest of the State, it is my sworn duty to seek those sanctions, and I intend to fully
carry out my responsibilities.…
Every day of delay represents a victory for these cowardly cold-blooded killers and another day of defeat and suffering for the victims and all
other Americans who cry out for justice.[845]
Macy also impressed upon the author his interest in getting at the truth: "I'm prepared to do what ever it takes to get to the truth," Macy

--- PAGE BREAK ---exclaimed.

"My sole intent is in learning the truth!"
Yet when asked if he intended to conduct an investigation independent of the Feds', he said, "Well… I don't want to be a party to anything
that will interfere with the Feds' prosecution.

I Don't want to open up a new can of worms." [846]
After Macy lost the appeals hearing, he met with Wilburn and Key, explaining that he actually wished to cooperate with their investigation.

Three days later, the two men discovered that Macy had decided to contest the Appeals Court's decision.

When a furious Key confronted Macy, all that the courageous, truth-seeking DA told him was, "They won't let me." When Key demanded to
know who "they" were, Macy just lowered his eyes to the floor and repeated, "They won't let me."[847]
Key later learned from a source at ABC News that Macy had received a conference call from Janet Reno's deputy Jamie Gorlick, and the
government's lead prosecutor, Joseph Hartzler, along with Governor Keating, Oklahoma City Fire Chief Gary Marrs, and Judge Daniel
Owens.

When the grand jury was finally impaneled, federal prosecutors quickly attempted to block the testimony of federal employees.

Key also accused [Chief Assistant DA Pat] Morgan and others in Oklahoma County District Attorney Bob Macy's office of influencing and
intimidating witnesses.

"I am very upset about it," Key said.

"Everyone should be outraged because of this."[848]
Interestingly, during a debate with Representative Key, Keating stated, "Nobody could get away with a cover-up; it would not be tolerated by
civilized Oklahoma City.… Nobody's afraid of the truth."[849]
KFOR's Jayna Davis shed some light on the "truth-seeking" efforts of Bob Macy and the good ole' boy network of politicos from which he
descends.

Two years earlier, after an 8-year-old boy was raped, both Davis and the Public Defender demanded to know why Macy hadn't
done anything."Everyone should be outraged because of this."[848]
Interestingly, during a debate with Representative Key, Keating stated, "Nobody could get away with a cover-up; it would not be tolerated by
civilized Oklahoma City.… Nobody's afraid of the truth."[849]
KFOR's Jayna Davis shed some light on the "truth-seeking" efforts of Bob Macy and the good ole' boy network of politicos from which he
descends.

Two years earlier, after an 8-year-old boy was raped, both Davis and the Public Defender demanded to know why Macy hadn't
done anything.

When Macy thought the camera was off, he whipped around and sternly admonished the reporter: "Lady, I don't know who
you are or where you came from, but this isn't how we do business in Oklahoma!"[850]
Representative Key eventually took the case to the Oklahoma Supreme Court.

In his opposing brief, Macy again argued that it would be "a
waste of the taxpayers' time and money to convene an Oklahoma County Grand Jury when one was already in session or when a Federal
Grand Jury had already heard all available evidence."
The Supreme Court did not agree with Macy.

They unanimously upheld Key's right to impanel the grand jury, which was seated in June of
'97, and is hearing evidence as of this writing.

Naturally, the Ministers of Truth at The Daily Oklahoman wasted little time, pumping out more bland editorial drivel to muddy the waters.

The
following piece, entitled "Conspiracy Theories," focuses on the fact that the County Grand Jury is only exacerbating the "agony" of some
victims, who are apparently more concerned with some fairy tale notion of "closure" then in learning the truth:
Whatever the cause, the delay adds to the agony of those bombing victims who believe the investigation is a waste of time.

The Oklahoman shares that belief, but we are optimistic the probe may satisfy many who are suspicious about events before the bombing.The
following piece, entitled "Conspiracy Theories," focuses on the fact that the County Grand Jury is only exacerbating the "agony" of some
victims, who are apparently more concerned with some fairy tale notion of "closure" then in learning the truth:
Whatever the cause, the delay adds to the agony of those bombing victims who believe the investigation is a waste of time.

The Oklahoman shares that belief, but we are optimistic the probe may satisfy many who are suspicious about events before the bombing.

Yet, we wonder if the more conspiratorial-minded will ever be satisfied.…
Conflicting conspiracy theories and an olio of circumstantial evidence abound here.

Jurors in Denver sorted through testimony and found
McVeigh guilty.

Frustrating as it may be to some, there is little more to this crime than meets the eye.

The rest is the stuff of fiction.[851]
By the Daily Oklahoman's account, the numerous credible witnesses who saw Timothy McVeigh with other suspects on the morning of the
crime adds up to little more than "circumstantial evidence," while what prosecutors presented at trial — McVeigh's phone calls to chemical
companies, his political views, and the completely irrelevant emotional tales from bombing victims — are not.[852]*
Given the local media's connections to the political good 'ole boy network via the Washington-connected Frank Keating, their position is
hardly surprising.

Famed Watergate journalist Carl Bernstein put some perspective on the matter when he revealed in a 1977 Rolling Stone
article that over 400 U.S.

journalists were employed by the CIA.

These ranged from freelancers who were paid for regular debriefings, to actual CIA officers who worked under deep cover.

Nearly every
major U.S.

news organization has had spooks on the payroll, usually with the cooperation of top management.

The three most valuable assets the CIA could count on were William Paley's CBS, Arthur Sulzberger's New York Times and Henry Luce's
Time/Life empire.--- PAGE BREAK ---

news organization has had spooks on the payroll, usually with the cooperation of top management. The three most valuable assets the CIA could count on were William Paley's CBS, Arthur Sulzberger's New York Times and Henry Luce's
Time/Life empire. All three bent over backwards promoting the picture of Oswald as a lone nut in the JFK assassination.[853]
The political good 'ole boy network wasn't finished trying to stop the courageous efforts of Representative Key. On May 7, 1997, Edmondson

--- PAGE BREAK ---subpoenaed Key before a multi-county grand jury, alleging that he violated procedures in raising money for the bombing investigation.

The
Daily Oklahoman proudly proclaimed how it had played a critical role in bringing about the investigation of Key:
The Attorney General's action is a result of an inquiry by The Oklahoman about Key's seven-page solicitation letter on the Internet.

The letter
asks for money to "secure copies of the voluminous (federal) government documents and to pay independent investigators" and other
expenses for the county grand jury investigation....

Bill Graves, an attorney who represented Key at the grand jury inquest, stated: "The law is pretty clear that you are not required to register
before you hit the ten thousand dollar threshold, and Charles [Key] had not hit that limit so was not required to register.

Edmondson knows
that.

They're just trying to slow Charles down or stop him through harassment."[854]
"This is all about stopping us and making us shut up, said Key.

"If I would just quit the grand jury deal, this would all go away."[855]
Says V.Z Lawton, a HUD worker who survived the bombing, "You don't have to be that bright or look that hard to see the fraud and
hypocrisy in these charges.

For over a year and a half, they've been doing everything imaginable and employing the most absurd arguments
to prevent Charles from impaneling a grand jury to investigate one of the worst crimes in our country's history.

Now, after he's overcome all
of their legal challenges in the courts and is close to getting a county grand jury investigation going, they drag him before a multi-county
grand jury for what amounts to jaywalking, while the bombing and other genuine, serious crimes go uninvestigated."[856]
Lawton also brought to the attention of bombing investigators a February 5th, fax transmission to federal employees on the official letterhead
of Attorney General Drew Edmondson.For over a year and a half, they've been doing everything imaginable and employing the most absurd arguments
to prevent Charles from impaneling a grand jury to investigate one of the worst crimes in our country's history.

Now, after he's overcome all
of their legal challenges in the courts and is close to getting a county grand jury investigation going, they drag him before a multi-county
grand jury for what amounts to jaywalking, while the bombing and other genuine, serious crimes go uninvestigated."[856]
Lawton also brought to the attention of bombing investigators a February 5th, fax transmission to federal employees on the official letterhead
of Attorney General Drew Edmondson.

The letter sought signatures from survivors to go with letters that were to be sent to various news
organizations.

The cover sheet said it came from Richard M.

Wintory, Chief Deputy Attorney General of the Criminal Division.

The letter, entitled, "A Plea to the Media from Oklahoma City: Don't O.J.

Us!!!" purports to be a spontaneous response from victims asking
the media not to "manipulate" and "exploit" them "for no purpose other than to enhance their ratings on the air and in publications."[857]
This obvious propaganda counteroffensive was in response to ABC 20/20's January, 1996 show about prior knowledge.The letter, entitled, "A Plea to the Media from Oklahoma City: Don't O.J.

Us!!!" purports to be a spontaneous response from victims asking
the media not to "manipulate" and "exploit" them "for no purpose other than to enhance their ratings on the air and in publications."[857]
This obvious propaganda counteroffensive was in response to ABC 20/20's January, 1996 show about prior knowledge.

It referred to the "so-
called report" by ABC as "tabloid journalism" filled with "unsubstantiated and baseless claims that have been repeatedly debunked."
"We are appalled at the lack of interest in the truth and the underhanded method utilized by 20/20" stated the letter, which claimed that ABC
had wrongfully implied that certain victims agreed with the "paranoid delusion" of the "ridiculous theory of government conspiracy in this
crime." It added that "reporters are sometime tempted to forget the truth." Ultimately, it stated, "It is PEOPLE that matter in this life, either
money nor possession nor a Pulitzer Prize."[858]
This classic PSYOP piece launched by Edmondson (which he angrily denied in a letter to the author) was signed, "Many Survivors and
Family Members, Oklahoma City Bombing."
Lawton and HUD employee Jane Graham were two survivors who angrily denounced the letter for the sham that it was.Us!!!" purports to be a spontaneous response from victims asking
the media not to "manipulate" and "exploit" them "for no purpose other than to enhance their ratings on the air and in publications."[857]
This obvious propaganda counteroffensive was in response to ABC 20/20's January, 1996 show about prior knowledge.

It referred to the "so-
called report" by ABC as "tabloid journalism" filled with "unsubstantiated and baseless claims that have been repeatedly debunked."
"We are appalled at the lack of interest in the truth and the underhanded method utilized by 20/20" stated the letter, which claimed that ABC
had wrongfully implied that certain victims agreed with the "paranoid delusion" of the "ridiculous theory of government conspiracy in this
crime." It added that "reporters are sometime tempted to forget the truth." Ultimately, it stated, "It is PEOPLE that matter in this life, either
money nor possession nor a Pulitzer Prize."[858]
This classic PSYOP piece launched by Edmondson (which he angrily denied in a letter to the author) was signed, "Many Survivors and
Family Members, Oklahoma City Bombing."
Lawton and HUD employee Jane Graham were two survivors who angrily denounced the letter for the sham that it was.

"Since the
communication was loaded with lies and half truths, I certainly could not sign it," said Lawton, "and I felt like a state Attorney General could
better spend his time supporting an effort to find the truth rather than this transparent effort at helping to hide it."
"I am angry," stated Graham in a typed response to the letter, "that the Attorney General's office would play on the emotions of this office at
HUD under the guise of keeping us posted on how they are proceeding and planning the case, causing further emotional turmoil in this office
between employees."[859]
During a June 13, 1997 television interview, Edmondson was asked why those witnesses who saw McVeigh with other suspects were never
called to testify at McVeigh's trial.It referred to the "so-
called report" by ABC as "tabloid journalism" filled with "unsubstantiated and baseless claims that have been repeatedly debunked."
"We are appalled at the lack of interest in the truth and the underhanded method utilized by 20/20" stated the letter, which claimed that ABC
had wrongfully implied that certain victims agreed with the "paranoid delusion" of the "ridiculous theory of government conspiracy in this
crime." It added that "reporters are sometime tempted to forget the truth." Ultimately, it stated, "It is PEOPLE that matter in this life, either
money nor possession nor a Pulitzer Prize."[858]
This classic PSYOP piece launched by Edmondson (which he angrily denied in a letter to the author) was signed, "Many Survivors and
Family Members, Oklahoma City Bombing."
Lawton and HUD employee Jane Graham were two survivors who angrily denounced the letter for the sham that it was.

"Since the
communication was loaded with lies and half truths, I certainly could not sign it," said Lawton, "and I felt like a state Attorney General could
better spend his time supporting an effort to find the truth rather than this transparent effort at helping to hide it."
"I am angry," stated Graham in a typed response to the letter, "that the Attorney General's office would play on the emotions of this office at
HUD under the guise of keeping us posted on how they are proceeding and planning the case, causing further emotional turmoil in this office
between employees."[859]
During a June 13, 1997 television interview, Edmondson was asked why those witnesses who saw McVeigh with other suspects were never
called to testify at McVeigh's trial.

Edmondson replied that prosecutors usually don't present witnesses whose testimony isn't "credible" or
conflicts with other witnesses.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Since the
communication was loaded with lies and half truths, I certainly could not sign it," said Lawton, "and I felt like a state Attorney General could
better spend his time supporting an effort to find the truth rather than this transparent effort at helping to hide it."
"I am angry," stated Graham in a typed response to the letter, "that the Attorney General's office would play on the emotions of this office at
HUD under the guise of keeping us posted on how they are proceeding and planning the case, causing further emotional turmoil in this office
between employees."[859]
During a June 13, 1997 television interview, Edmondson was asked why those witnesses who saw McVeigh with other suspects were never
called to testify at McVeigh's trial. Edmondson replied that prosecutors usually don't present witnesses whose testimony isn't "credible" or
conflicts with other witnesses. Rodney Johnson, who saw McVeigh with another man in front of the Murrah Building moments before it exploded, called Edmondson's
statement "misguided."
"I took those comments to be rather personal," said Johnson.[860]
Edmondson's blatant attempt at coercing the victims to pander to the official government line is similar to a letter from a group of victims
suggesting passage of the Anti-Terrorism Bill. The recipients were urged to call Edmondson if they were interested in participating. Of course, while Edmondson accused ABC 20/20 of "manipulating" and "exploiting" the bombing victims, it is obvious that Edmondson
himself hasn't done anything to manipulate or exploit anyone.[861]
Interestingly, several months after the scandalous smear campaign against Representative Key, Governor Keating was accused by the
Oklahoma Ethics Commission of 32 violations of using state-owned vehicles for political fund-raising, including the state's $2.9 million

--- PAGE BREAK ---airplane.

Conveniently forgetting his own shameful and dishonest smear attacks against Representative Key, Keating sanctimoniously
whined about how the allegations were "irresponsible, silly and completely unjustified." No doubt the Ethics Commission was "off the
reservation," and "baying at the moon."
In spite of his unsuccessful attempts to smear honest men like Representative Key, Keating and his crooked political cronies wasted no time
in discrediting Edye Smith, calling her allegations "hysterical." Smith was the mother of two young boys who perished in the bombing —
Chase and Colton.

Smith immediately gained the attention of concerned citizens all across America.

Hundreds of thousands of letters and
checks began pouring in, and relief agencies used Chase's photo on a poster memorializing the disaster.

On May 23, the day the Federal Building was demolished, Edye Smith, in a live interview on CNN, stated, "There's a lot of questions that
have been left un-answered.

We're being told to keep our mouths shut, not to talk about it, don't ask those questions..."[862]
CNN's Gary Truchmann asked Smith to describe the nature of the questions: "We, along with hundreds of thousands of other people want to
know, where was the ATF the morning of April 19th?

All of their employees survived.

They were supposed to be the target of this explosion
and where were they…?

Did they have a warning sign?

I mean, did they think it might be a bad day to go in the office?[863]
"They had an option to not go to work that day," Smith continued, "and my kids didn't get that option, nobody else in the building got that
option.

And we're just asking questions, we're not making accusations.

We just want to know why and they're telling us, 'Keep your mouth
shut, don't talk about it.'"[864]
Truchmann quickly ended the interview.

Kathy Wilburn was the Grandmother of Chase and Colton.We just want to know why and they're telling us, 'Keep your mouth
shut, don't talk about it.'"[864]
Truchmann quickly ended the interview.

Kathy Wilburn was the Grandmother of Chase and Colton.

Wilburn was among the first to arrive at the scene of the bombing, and she and
Smith, who both worked at the nearby I.R.S.

office, had witnessed the carnage first-hand.

Now, as she watched the building come down, an
eerie silence filled her soul.

Later that afternoon, Kathy Wilburn walked into the empty room where the little boys had lived, picked up their
stuffed animals, and began to cry.

Wilburn's husband Glenn had been a vocal opponent of the government's investigation, and their explanation of the bombing did not sit well
with him.

The Grandfather felt the loss of the two boys keenly.

Wilburn had taken it on his own to investigate the bombing, and the facts he
was coming up with did not make him happy.

On the afternoon the building was demolished, Wilburn received a call from U.S.

Attorney Patrick Ryan.

Ryan wanted to meet with him and
speak with the family.

"They wanted to set our minds at ease our minds that there wasn't anything sinister going on," said Wilburn.

Two days later Smith and Wilburn were visited by an entourage of federal agents including Ryan, ATF Agents Chris Cuyler and Luke
Franey, an IRS Criminal investigator, and a member of Louis Jolyon West's victim's assistance team.

"They all came in and sat down and said 'We want to answer your questions and make you feel good.' I said 'fine.' Then I looked them right
in the eye and said, 'You guys had no indication that April 19th could be a dangerous day down there?' They both answered, 'no sir.'"
"Well, two hours later I tuned on the TV, and CNN is interviewing ATF Director John Magaw.

The interview starts out, "Mr.

Magaw, based on
the significance of April 19th, did you take any precautions?'"
"Clearly there was an interest all over the country to do that," replied Magaw.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The interview starts out, "Mr. Magaw, based on
the significance of April 19th, did you take any precautions?'"
"Clearly there was an interest all over the country to do that," replied Magaw. "And I was very concerned about that. We did some things
here in headquarters and in all of our field offices throughout the country to try to be more observant.…"
"Well, if there was ever a point that I was hooked into this thing, and there was nothing that was gonna' stop me," recalls Wilburn, "that was
it… because by God, somebody lied that morning."
Ryan's conciliatory meeting with the family did not last long. The federal prosecutor became nervous after Wilburn casually mentioned that
he had talked to a family lawyer. Ryan quickly got up and left. While Edye Smith was quoted as saying that she was "satisfied" the agents had explained their whereabouts, she later told me, "I believe
they sat their and lied to us."
Unmarked cars soon began showing up at Glenn Wilburn's house. When Wilburn went out to confront them, they sped off.[865]
Two months later, Edye Smith and Kathy Wilburn had their Workers' Compensation checks cut off. Out of 462 federal employees affected by
the blast, they were the only two employees who were mysteriously "denied."
Moreover, out of thousands of checks sent to Smith through the Red Cross, none were ever received. All the letters had been opened, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---checks missing, including some sent via the Governor's and Mayor's office.

"All the mail that the Red Cross delivered to my house, probably
thousands of pieces of mail, every single piece was opened before I got it.

And it all had my name on it," said Smith.

"We started noticing that the mail that came to the house had money in it," said Kathy Wilburn, "but the majority of the mail that came to us
through the Red Cross… it was all opened and there was never a thin dime in any of it."
When Smith called the Red Cross to complain, she was told that her mail wasn't being opened, and that no money was being taken.

When
Wilburn confronted the head of the local Red Cross, she was told that their letters were being opened to check for "hate mail." Wilburn told
her that the explanation was "ridiculous."
"A mother sent me a little card that her little boy drew." said Smith, "She said 'my little boy saved this three dollars and wanted you to have
it.' And the three dollars was gone."[866]
Keating's answer to the missing funds?

Interning college students were responsible for the thefts.

Perhaps former G-Man Keating was
training the young lads for upcoming counter-intelligence operations.

Such would not be unusual tactics for a man who worked as an FBI
agent during COINTELPRO (the FBI's Counter Intelligence Program of the late-60s to mid 70s), where he personally infiltrated anti-
government activists like the Weathermen, the Black Panthers, and the SDS (Students For A Democratic Society), and stated he sees little
difference between them and the militias.[867][868]
Keating also served as Assistant Attorney General under Edwin Meese.

Meese was Attorney General during the 1985 fire-bombing of
MOVE headquarters.

MOVE was a group of black housing activists living in a squatted building in Philadelphia.Meese was Attorney General during the 1985 fire-bombing of
MOVE headquarters.

MOVE was a group of black housing activists living in a squatted building in Philadelphia.

The satchel charge, dropped
from a helicopter by Philadelphia's finest (with a little help from the FBI), resulted in the deaths of over 11 people, including five children, and
destroyed numerous square blocks of the city.

Instead of launching a proper investigation into the matter, Meese's response was "consider it an eviction notice."
Meese would later be implicated in the October Surprise scandal, which propelled Ronald Reagan into the White House via a secret deal to
release the hostages in Iran after the defeat of Jimmy Carter.

As his reward, Meese was appointed Attorney General, where he would go on
to commit then cover up other crimes, the two most notorious being Iran-Contra and the Inslaw affair.

But Keating's involvement with the scions of truth and justice doesn't end there.

Keating served in the Bush administration as Assistant
Treasury Secretary during the Iran-Contra investigations.

Gene Wheaton, a former Tulsa police officer and Army CID investigator who
worked for the Christic Institute, observes that it was George Bush who personally selected Keating as Assistant Treasury Secretary in 1985,
where he supervised INTERPOL, the Customs Service, The Secret Service, and the ATF.[869]
As Wheaton writes:
The word in Tulsa is that Bush is his "political godfather;" that Keating got his job in the Treasury Department through Bush's good offices
and that Bush "loves Keating." The connection appears to be an old-boy connection through the Southern Hills Country Club in Tulsa,
Oklahoma.[870]
"In his position, Keating could control both the investigative and prosecutorial side of any scandal that came his way," adds Portland Free
Press publisher Ace Hayes.

"1985-88 had guns, drugs, and illegal money moving all over the globe.Gene Wheaton, a former Tulsa police officer and Army CID investigator who
worked for the Christic Institute, observes that it was George Bush who personally selected Keating as Assistant Treasury Secretary in 1985,
where he supervised INTERPOL, the Customs Service, The Secret Service, and the ATF.[869]
As Wheaton writes:
The word in Tulsa is that Bush is his "political godfather;" that Keating got his job in the Treasury Department through Bush's good offices
and that Bush "loves Keating." The connection appears to be an old-boy connection through the Southern Hills Country Club in Tulsa,
Oklahoma.[870]
"In his position, Keating could control both the investigative and prosecutorial side of any scandal that came his way," adds Portland Free
Press publisher Ace Hayes.

"1985-88 had guns, drugs, and illegal money moving all over the globe.

Was the ATF, who couldn't find it's ass
with both hands, as really as incompetent as it appeared, or was Frank Keating there to make sure they did not?"[871]
In fact, it was while Keating was serving as Assistant Treasury Secretary that IRS investigator Bill Duncan — who was investigating Iran-
Contra drug-running activities at Mena — was instructed to perjure himself.

As Duncan stated in a deposition before a joint Congressional/
Arkansas Attorney General investigative committee:
Duncan: In late December of 1987, I was contacted by [the] Chief Counsel for the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime… who told me
that they were looking into the reason why no one was indicted in connection with the Mena investigations.

The Internal Revenue Service
assigned to me disclosure litigation attorneys, which gave me instructions which would have caused me to withhold information from
Congress during my testimony and to also perjure myself.

Committee: And how did you respond to the Treasury Department?

Duncan: Well, I exhibited to them that I was going to tell the truth in my testimony.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Committee: And how did you respond to the Treasury Department? Duncan: Well, I exhibited to them that I was going to tell the truth in my testimony. And the perjury, subornation of perjury resulted in an —
resulted because of an allegation that I had received, that Attorney General Edwin Meese received a several hundred thousand dollar bribe
from Barry Seal directly. And they told me to tell the Subcommittee on Crime that I had no information about that.[872]
Arkansas State Police investigator Russell Welch, who provided the information to Duncan, was subsequently poisoned. Two months later,
Keating was appointed as Associate Attorney General.[873]

--- PAGE BREAK ---It seems that Frank Keating has served as a point-man, weaving a twisted trail through some of America's most notorious crimes, including
Iran-Contra, BCCI, Iraqgate, the S&L crisis, and… Oklahoma City.

Keating has always been at the nexus bridging the agendas of good ole' boys like George Bush, with their elitist agendas, and the
subsequent covert-operations sub-cultures which they spawned.

In an article in the Portland Free Press entitled "Another Bush Boy,"
Wheaton writes:
The covert-operations "lunatic fringe" in Washington, which took over key operations at the national security level, [and] still controls them
today, was Bush's 1981 agenda, and Keating is the next generation to carry it on.[874]*
It was only three months after Keating's inauguration as Governor that the bombing of the Alfred P.

Murrah Building occurred.

Given his
background and grooming, Keating was in a perfect position to direct "damage control." As Wheaton notes:
Keating is an a perfect position to control the direction and scope of any state investigation which might not correspond to the official federal
inquiry.

It appeares Keating did just that.

As Governor, Keating was in a position to halt the hurried demolition of the Murrah building, ordered by
federal authorities under the guise of "safety." Bob Ricks, the FBI PR flack who spoon-fed a daily dose of lies to the press during the Waco
siege, was appointed Oklahoma Director of Public Safety by Keating after the demolition.

Keating and Ricks were good friends from college.

The demolition was ordered under the pseudo-psychological premise of providing "closure" to the festering wound hanging over the city.

The
demolition also effectively prevented any independent forensic investigation of the bomb site.[875]†
Said a victim whose spouse was killed in the explosion, "I was upset right from the start when there was the big rush to destroy the crime
scene, to take the building down.The demolition was ordered under the pseudo-psychological premise of providing "closure" to the festering wound hanging over the city.

The
demolition also effectively prevented any independent forensic investigation of the bomb site.[875]†
Said a victim whose spouse was killed in the explosion, "I was upset right from the start when there was the big rush to destroy the crime
scene, to take the building down.

A lot of important evidence was destroyed that could have helped solve this."[876]
The feds' decision to destroy crucial forensic evidence has an eerie parallel to the demolition of Mt.

Carmel.

The destruction of the Branch
Davidian church prevented independent examiners from determining that the ATF had fired into the roofs of the building during the early part
of the raid, and that FBI snipers had deliberately shot people trying to escape.

The destruction of the Murrah Building is also akin to the Secret Service's hasty (or carefully planned) decision to illegally remove President
Kennedy's body from Parkland Memorial Hospital.

Once under control of military officials, including Generals who were undoubtedly involved
in the assassination plot, Kennedy's autopsy could proceed under carefully controlled parameters.

While observing the autopsy, these
military officials prevented a thorough examination of the body, which would have revealed the presence of multiple entry wounds.

Back in
Dallas, Secret Service agents carefully washed Kennedy's limousine to remove all traces of bullet fragments, and had Governor Connolly's
clothes, bullet holes and all, cleaned and pressed.

Said Jannie Coverdale, who lost her grandsons Aaron and Elijah in the bombing, "Everyone I talk to has the same questions: What
happened?

What is going on?

We don't want this to be another John F.--- PAGE BREAK ---

What is going on? We don't want this to be another John F. Kennedy deal, where 32 years later the real story is still unknown."
The Federal Bureau of Intimidation
"There is no place on earth where you will be safe from the most powerful forces of justice." - FBI director Louis Freeh. In a motion filed by Stephen Jones, affidavits show that numerous witnesses were instructed by the FBI to "keep quiet" so the facts of the
case "wouldn't get distorted." This aura of secrecy quickly turned into obstruction of justice, as FBI agents routinely instructed witnesses not
to talk to defense team investigators or journalists. When defense investigator Marty Reed attempted to interview Oklahoma Highway Patrolman Charlie Hanger (the patrolman who had
arrested McVeigh), he was told by OHP chief legal counsel John Lindsey, "The FBI has requested that no one interview Trooper Charlie
Hanger."
Mitchell Whitmire, who knew McVeigh when they were both in the Army, was contacted by defense investigator Neil Hartley. Whitmire told
Hartley he was instructed by the FBI not to talk to anyone about the case unless he obtained permission from the FBI.[877]
When this author tried to interview two members of the Sheriff's Bomb Squad, they became visibly nervous. They claimed no other bombs
were pulled out of the building, clearly contradicting news accounts showing additional bombs that were taken away and detonated. As discussed previously, FBI agents put up a protective perimeter around Eldon Elliott, preventing him from talking to journalists and
defense investigators.

--- PAGE BREAK ---KFOR-TV, who took the lead in investigating the case, found it almost impossible to interview witnesses.

"We get there and all of a sudden
they've been told to shut up," said Melissa Klinzing, KFOR's former News Director.[878]
A Tulsa fire captain told investigator Craig Roberts he saw machinegun-toting black-clad agents with no markings removing boxes of files
from the Post Office ten days after the bombing.

When he was subsequently interviewed by this author, he denied seeing anything.

Ann Domin, who originally told a Tulsa police officer she had seen two Middle Eastern males loitering near the front of the Murrah Building
just before the blast, later denied saying that.[879]
According to a conversation Jon Rappaport had with Daily Oklahoman reporter Ann Defrange, witness Peter Schaffer told Defrange he had
seen the Murrah Building collapse in on itself, suggesting that cutting charges were used.

When Rappaport questioned Schaffer, he denied
seeing the building falling down at all.

When Rappaport got back to Defrange, she remained adamant about what Schaffer told her.

"She
didn't budge at all," said Rappaport.[880]
"The FBI must have gotten to him," said Heidelberg.

"You know, the FBI has been able to get witnesses to shut up about important things
they know.

We've talked to some of these people.

In certain instances the witnesses believe that concealing evidence is the right thing to do.

They really believe it.

The FBI has sold them a bill of goods about national security or something like that.

In other cases the FBI has used
straight-out intimidation on witnesses.

They size up people.

On one witness they'll use something like national security.

On another, they'll
go for intimidation."[881]
Heidelberg's own brush with the government didn't end with his dismissal from the grand jury.

Several minutes after agreeing to do an
interview with Jayna Davis, he received a call from U.S.On another, they'll
go for intimidation."[881]
Heidelberg's own brush with the government didn't end with his dismissal from the grand jury.

Several minutes after agreeing to do an
interview with Jayna Davis, he received a call from U.S.

Attorney Joseph Hartzler telling him that a reporter was on her way and that he was
not to talk to her, or he would be arrested.

Obviously, Heidelberg's phone was tapped.[882]
"They tried everything to shut me up," said Heidelberg.

"They have said they were going to throw me in jail.

When that didn't work, they got
down on their hands and knees and begged.

I mean… they have tried everything to keep me from talking to the press about this."
On July 19, FBI agents Jon Hersley and William Teater appeared at Heidelberg's home, just hours after Judge Russell called him and
discovered that he had taken his grand jury notes home.

Apparently Teater wasn't too pleased with Heidelberg's casual attitude.

At one
point, he pulled back his jacket, revealing his gun, which he had conspicuously stuck in his waist belt.

"They were trying to impress upon me the seriousness of… they were trying to give me the message that this is big time, that this is heavy
weight," said Heidelberg, "and I was supposed to be frightened… Guns mean business… I was supposed to behave and be a good boy and
not give them any trouble.

The implication was that they were gonna' shoot me, but I knew better than that," Heidelberg said.[883]*
Heidelberg doesn't feel he will serve any jail time for his actions.

"They don't want me exonerated or indicted," said Heidelberg.

"They want
me twisting in the wind."[884]
In February of '97, ABC planned a follow-up to their 20/20 "Prior Knowledge" piece, which included an interview with ATF informant Carol
Howe.

Hours before the piece was to air on "World News Tonight," it was killed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"They want
me twisting in the wind."[884]
In February of '97, ABC planned a follow-up to their 20/20 "Prior Knowledge" piece, which included an interview with ATF informant Carol
Howe. Hours before the piece was to air on "World News Tonight," it was killed. According to ABC producer Roger Charles: "They were uncomfortable with it after a series of phone calls from high-level Justice Department
and ATF people, saying that well, yes, the story is right, but you're going to draw the wrong conclusions unless we can explain it." According
to an interview with ABC conducted by McVeigh's defense team, the conversation went something like this:
Justice Dept: "We have to admit now Strassmeir has been investigated."
ABC: "But you have denied over and over that he was ever the subject of an investigation."
Justice Dept: "Well, we're undenying that now. He has been investigated, but we could not involve him specifically in the bombing of the
building.… [Regarding Howe's reports of others involved, we] "could not find anyone who bought fertilizer, could not find anyone who rented
a truck, so therefore we could not charge them with anything. [Besides], we're not sure the information was credible."
ABC: "But did you or did you not send her back out?"
Justice Dept: "Yes, she was sent back out."
ABC: "Well, what in the hell does that mean?"
Justice Dept: "She did go back out, but she was unable to develop any evidence that these people had participated, [although] essentially
your information is correct."

--- PAGE BREAK ---ABC then said the Justice Department press spokesman attempted to downplay the credibility of Howe by stating that the government hears
these types of statements all the time from "White Supremacist compounds."
ABC: "Yeah, but there's one difference here."
Justice Dept: "What is that?"
ABC: "The God damn building blew up, that's what."[885]
Not only would Howe's testimony have had unfortunate consequences for authorities, it would not have jived with the FBI's fantasy of the
"lone nut" bomber.

It seemed authorities were replaying the same scenario they had played out 28 years before.

In the JFK investigation, the
FBI focused on the "lone nut" scenario too.

Witnesses who did not support the FBI's case against Oswald as lone participant were
intimidated, debunked or misquoted in reports.

Most who saw shooters other than the one on the 6th floor of the Book Depository were
never subpoenaed to testify.

In 1963, Julia Ann Mercer told the FBI and the Dallas Police that she saw a man carry a rifle case up to the Grassy Knoll just before the
shooting.

The FBI took her statement.

Later, when she was interviewed by District Attorney Jim Garrison and shown the statements she had
given the Bureau, she began shaking her head.

"These all have been altered, she said.

"They have me saying just the opposite of what I
really told them."
In the Oklahoma City case, witnesses whose statements didn't fit the government's official timeline and scenario were either ignored
altogether, or intimidated into changing their stories.[886]
Cheryl Wood, an employee at Love's convenience store, who saw McVeigh and John Doe 2 on April 17, told FBI agents their security
camera had captured images of the two men.

The FBI didn't take the tapes and didn't want to use Wood's story.

"They tried to convince
Wood that she was crazy — that she hadn't really seen them," said a Newsweek reporter who interviewed Wood.The FBI didn't take the tapes and didn't want to use Wood's story.

"They tried to convince
Wood that she was crazy — that she hadn't really seen them," said a Newsweek reporter who interviewed Wood.

"They rattled her real
good." When the store manager decided to take the video home himself, the FBI changed their minds, and confiscated the tape.

McVeigh and his friends also stopped at another convenience store about 45 minutes from Love's.

As a Newsweek reporter who interviewed
the employees told me, the FBI didn't use the statements of those witnesses either, because it didn't fit the FBI's "official" timeline.[887]
Mike Moroz, the Johnny's Tire Shop employee who gave McVeigh and John Doe 2 directions to the Murrah building on the morning of the
blast, was interviewed by the FBI several times.

On the last interview they told him that he had seen McVeigh drive in a different direction
than he had originally stated.

The FBI then claimed to the press that Moroz had made a mistake and was confused.

Danny Wilkerson, the Regency Towers employee who sold McVeigh two softdrinks and a pack of cigarettes 10 minutes before the bombing,
claims FBI agents tried very hard to get him to change his story.

Wilkerson saw McVeigh and another man in an older, shorter Ryder truck
with a cab overhang.

FBI agents showed Wilkerson a catalog of different Ryder models, trying to coerce him into stating that the truck he
saw was bigger and newer than the one actually seen.

Wilkerson refused to change his story.

As previously discussed, Catina Lawson knew McVeigh when he was stationed in Kansas, and saw him at parties with Andreas Strassmeir
and Michael Brescia.

When Lawson saw the artist's sketch of John Doe 2, she said, "That's Mike [Brescia].

Lawson repeatedly called the
FBI to tell them it was Brescia, but they didn't want to listen, and stopped returning her calls.

"I kept telling them that the man in the [John Doe 2] sketch was that Mike guy, a nice-looking guy, dark-skinned.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lawson repeatedly called the
FBI to tell them it was Brescia, but they didn't want to listen, and stopped returning her calls. "I kept telling them that the man in the [John Doe 2] sketch was that Mike guy, a nice-looking guy, dark-skinned. But the FBI made me feel
guilty, then ignorant, as if I didn't know what I was saying. Then, later, I tried to call in with more information and they wouldn't even talk to
me."
Debra Burdick had seen the yellow Mercury, the brown pick-up, and the blue Chevy Cavalier at 10th and Robinson on the morning of the
blast. Burdick called the FBI and the OSBI, and "they blew me off. They said they didn't have time to get over there.… they told me, 'you
didn't see anything.' And that's when I thought I was going crazy.…"[888]
Jane Graham, along with three other women, had seen a trio of suspicious-looking men in the Murrah Building's underground garage the
Friday before the bombing. The men were working with wire and a small, putty-colored block which appeared to be C-4 plastic explosive. FBI Agent Joe Schwecke made two appointments to interview Graham, but kept neither of them. "He never showed up," said Graham. "I
again called and set up another appointment for the following week and that was never kept."
When Schwecke finally spoke to her, he "only wanted to know if I could identify McVeigh or Nichols. Apparently the FBI was not interested in
any time other than the Monday or Tuesday — the week of the bombing!" exclaimed Graham, "…and only if the responses pointed directly
to McVeigh!"[889]
The manager of the Great Western Inn in Junction City was certain the Middle Eastern man who had stayed in room 107 on April 17 was a

--- PAGE BREAK ---dead ringer for John Doe 2.

Yet the FBI tried to discredit him, saying that the inquiry there had been a waste of time.

If that is true, why did
the FBI confiscate the hotel's register?[890]
Barbara Whittenberg at the Sante Fe Trail Diner told Bill Jasper the FBI tried to get her to change her story.[891]
Jeff Davis, who delivered Chinese food to a man in room 25 at the Dreamland Motel, had been interviewed numerous times by the FBI.

They
appeared interested in trying to get Davis to say that McVeigh was the man he saw.

During trial, prosecutor Larry Mackey attacked Davis' credibility, noting that two days after the bombing, he told FBI agents that the man was
a white male, 28 or 29, about 6 feet tall, about 180 pounds with short, sandy hair, clean-cut with no mustache.[892]
Yet Davis originally told the FBI, "The man to whom I delivered that bag of Chinese food is not Tim McVeigh."[893]
Still, Mackey tried to shake Davis' confidence in his memory, suggesting that Davis had told a bartender and an ABC sketch artist that he
saw McVeigh.

Mackey: "You deny that?"
Davis: "Yes, sir, I do,"
In fact, the person Davis saw had "unkempt" hair, a regional accent, possibly from Oklahoma, Kansas or Missouri, and an overbite.

McVeigh
possesses none of those characteristics.[894]
"I was frustrated quite a bit because they just didn't seem to want to say 'Okay, there's somebody we may not have.' A lot of it seemed
'Damn!

I just wish he'd say it was McVeigh so we could be done with it.'"[895]
Davis told The Denver Post that the FBI never even bothered making a composite sketch of the man he saw.

A TV network finally hired an
artist to do one.

Daina Bradley had seen only one man — olive-skinned, dark-haired, wearing jeans, jacket, and baseball cap — get out of the passenger
side of the Ryder truck in front of the Federal Building moments before it blew up.

Yet when she testified for the defense during McVeigh's
trial, she switched tracks, saying she saw two suspects.Daina Bradley had seen only one man — olive-skinned, dark-haired, wearing jeans, jacket, and baseball cap — get out of the passenger
side of the Ryder truck in front of the Federal Building moments before it blew up.

Yet when she testified for the defense during McVeigh's
trial, she switched tracks, saying she saw two suspects.

What is interesting is that in numerous interviews with the media, prosecutors, and the defense team, Bradley adamantly maintained that
she had seen only one suspect — John Doe 2.

Just weeks before her testimony, Bradley again told U.S.

Attorney Patrick Ryan and defense
attorney Cheryl Ramsey she was certain the man she saw wasn't Timothy McVeigh.

Yet shortly after the start of McVeigh's trial — after meeting with federal prosecutors — Bradley suddenly "changed her mind."
It seemed that FBI agents were conveniently waiting at the airport to intercept some of McVeigh's defense witnesses, who would then be
"persuaded" to change their testimony.[896]
Under cross-examination by Ryan, Bradley — who had maintained a rock-solid story of John Doe 2 since the day of the bombing — now
claimed she saw a second man.

Yet during trial she was nervous and faltering, her testimony wavering constantly.

At one point, she covered
her face with her hands and quietly said, "I want to talk to my lawyer."
Ryan eventually got Bradley to say she wasn't sure whether the second suspect was McVeigh, but that there was "nothing different"
between McVeigh's features and those of the second man.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Yet during trial she was nervous and faltering, her testimony wavering constantly. At one point, she covered
her face with her hands and quietly said, "I want to talk to my lawyer."
Ryan eventually got Bradley to say she wasn't sure whether the second suspect was McVeigh, but that there was "nothing different"
between McVeigh's features and those of the second man. In addition, Bradley told the jury she thought the truck was parked against the flow of traffic on the one-way street — a ludicrous proposition,
but convenient for a government intent on convincing a jury that Bradley saw the suspect — who was not John Doe 2, but possibly McVeigh
— get out of the driver's side.[897]
Gary Lewis, the Journal Record pressman who was almost run over by McVeigh and two of his associates in the yellow Mercury shortly
before the blast, suddenly denied seeing them at all! Just before he was subpoenaed to testify before the county grand jury, Lewis told
reporters, "What I seen wasn't a fact, it wasn't true."
Claiming the FBI had "cleared up his confusion" more than a year ago, Lewis said the FBI showed him a photograph of McVeigh's distinctive
battered yellow Mercury, and convinced him it wasn't the same car he spotted on April 19. "It was real similar to it," Lewis said. "It was real
close but it wasn't it."

--- PAGE BREAK ---Lewis then claimed his eyewitness account, which had already been published in striking detail, had been exaggerated by Representative
Key and Glenn Wilburn.

"I don't care for [Wilburn] or Charles Key," Lewis told The Daily Oklahoman.

"They kind of pushed it along for
reasons I don't know why.

That is about all I have got to say."[898]
This was quite a change from the nervous witness who checked the underside of his car every morning for bombs, afraid he was targeted for
assassination by either bombing suspects or the feds.[899]
As previously mentioned, Dr.

Paul Heath, the VA psychologist, had spoken to McVeigh and two of his associates at his office several weeks
before the blast, when they approached him looking for "jobs."
Heath was interviewed by the FBI no less than ten times.

On the last visit, "He (the FBI agent) confronted me saying he did not want me
telling the story any longer.

He said it was a false story, that I had made it up, that it was a figment of my imagination, and that if I pursued it,
he would publicly discredit me.

"I said to him, 'that is the most despicable, uncalled for attitude that I've ever seen, and I don't know why you said that to me, but I can tell
you, you're not going to change my reality with it.'"[900]
Heath, already upset by what he witnessed the day of the bombing, is now uncertain what will happen to him.[901]
Lea Moore, a woman who was badly injured in the blast, was contacted by a reporter from the L.A.

Times.

While he was enroute to interview
her, she received a mysterious phone call telling her not to talk to him.

Moore, a diminutive woman in her fifties, was frightened.

When the
reporter showed up at her door fifteen minutes later, Moore didn't answer.

Melba, the Albertson's worker who made sandwiches for McVeigh and John Doe 2, was hostile and frightened when questioned by this
reporter — too scared to talk.When the
reporter showed up at her door fifteen minutes later, Moore didn't answer.

Melba, the Albertson's worker who made sandwiches for McVeigh and John Doe 2, was hostile and frightened when questioned by this
reporter — too scared to talk.

Connie Hood, who saw John Doe 2 at the Dreamland Motel shortly after midnight on April 16, then again the next morning, was interviewed
numerous times by the FBI.

They even went so far as to administer several polygraph tests.

Hood told the agents exactly what she saw.

On
the last test, the FBI agent "turned around and got in her face," recalled her friend David Keen, "and said, 'You've never seen John Doe!

He
never existed!'"
The experience of Hood and Keen is reminiscent of the interrogation of JFK witnesses in Dallas on November 22, when FBI agents pointedly
told them they did not see any shooters on the Grassy Knoll.

"This big old dude (FBI agent) right out told me, 'You did not see that!'" recalled Hood.

"It got to the point where I was saying, 'Excuse me,
excuse me, there was someone in that room next to us.

I know for a fact there was someone in that room next to us.

I did not imagine
someone coming out of that fricking room!'"
Hood is sure of what she saw, and is furious about the games the FBI played with her.

"I'm angry," said Hood.

"It made my blood boil."[902]
TWA 800 Sidebar
The experiences of these witnesses parallels those who saw a missile rise out of the water to shoot down TWA flight 800 on July 17, 1996,
killing all 230 people on board.

Over 154 witnesses on Long Island, who witnessed the attack, described what appeared to be a missile — a
glowing object that impacted with the plane.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"It made my blood boil."[902]
TWA 800 Sidebar
The experiences of these witnesses parallels those who saw a missile rise out of the water to shoot down TWA flight 800 on July 17, 1996,
killing all 230 people on board. Over 154 witnesses on Long Island, who witnessed the attack, described what appeared to be a missile — a
glowing object that impacted with the plane. These accounts were backed up by FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) radar records, which showed an unidentified object (a "blip" that
was not "squawking" a transponder code) move rapidly towards, then merge with, the large jumbo-jet.[903]
Yet like the seismic records, and the video surveillance footage which would have shown the Murrah Building being blown up, these radar
tapes would be confiscated by the FBI. Naturally, the government lied about the crash. The National Transportation Safety board (NTSB) claimed that the most probable cause was
a "spark" in the center fuel tank due to "static electricity." This is ridiculous even to the uninitiated. Said Michael Barr, director of aviation
safety programs at USC, "Airplanes don't blow up just like that. I've been following 747s since 1970 and I've never seen one blow up like
that."[904]
One witness, Lou Desyron, told ABC World News Sunday: "We saw what appeared to be a flare going straight up. As a matter of fact, we
thought it was from a boat. It was a bright reddish-orange color.... Once it went into flames, I knew that wasn't a flare.[905]
Another witness told the New York Daily News: "It looked like a big skyrocket going up, and it kept going up and up, and the next thing I

--- PAGE BREAK ---knew there was an orange ball of fire."[906]
Long Island resident Linda Kabot inadvertently snapped a picture of the missile while photographing friends at a party.

The photo appeared
in the July issue of Paris Match.

Eyewitnesses on the ground weren't the only ones who saw a missile.

Vasilis Bakoynis, a Greek commercial airline pilot flying behind flight
800, told the FBI that he saw what appeared to be a missile rise up from the water and strike the plane.

"Suddenly I saw in the fog to my left
toward the ocean, a small flame rising quickly toward the sky.

Before I realized it, I saw this flame become huge.…"[907]
Private pilot Sven Faret reported a "short pin-flash of light [which] appeared on the ground, perhaps water," that rose up "like a rocket launch
at a fireworks display."[908]
Major Fred Meyer, the pilot of an Air National Guard helicopter which was in the area, said he saw "a streak of red orange" heading toward
the plane.

"...it arrived at a point in space where I saw a small explosion which grew to a small fireball, then a second explosion and a huge
fireball," the Boston Herald quoted Meyer as telling a press briefing on July 18th.

Meyer's co-pilot, Captain Chris Baur, told Aviation Week & Space Technology on March 10, "Almost due south, there was a hard white light,
like burning pyrotechnics, in level flight.

I was trying to figure out what it was.

It was the wrong color for flares.

It struck an object coming from
the right [TWA 800] and made it explode."[909]
Ten days later, Meyer, a Vietnam veteran, told the Riverside Press-Enterprise: "I know what I saw.

I saw an ordinance explosion.

And
whatever I saw, the explosion of the fuel was not the initiator of the event.

It was one of the results.And
whatever I saw, the explosion of the fuel was not the initiator of the event.

It was one of the results.

Something happened before that which
was the initiator of the disaster."[910]
Meyer and Baur's account was backed up by Air National Guard C-130 pilot Cononel William Stratemeir, Jr., who told Aviation Week &
Space Technology what "appeared to be the trail of a shoulder-fired SAM ending in a flash on the 747."[911]
Yet the government would seek to silence the hundreds of eyewitnesses who saw the missile.

A team of approximately 50 FBI agents, many
of the same agents who worked the Oklahoma City case, would visit these witnesses and ask, then demand, their silence.

"There was nothing I observed that gave me any indication that the streak of light I saw was caused by a missile," Meyer would later quoted
as saying.

"I don't know what I saw."[912]
"We did not see smoke trails [from a missile], any ignition source from the tail of a rocket nor anything…" said Stratemeir four months later.

[913]
Medical Examiner Dr.

Charles V.

Wetli originally told reporters that the passengers in the forward compartment were hit hardest, indicating
the major event was in the front of the plane, not the center as the government claimed.

Dr.

Wetli and others then backed off from their
findings.

An explosion had happened and killed people was as much as he could say, reported the New York Times.

[914]
Was the government covering up evidence of a terrorist missile strike, or the negligence of the United States Navy?

While the disintegration
of flight 800's number three engine appears to indicate a shoulder-launched missile, the large gaping hole running from just underneath the
center fuel tank through the top of the forward cabin suggests a strike by an unarmed missile "drone."
There is evidence for both theories.[914]
Was the government covering up evidence of a terrorist missile strike, or the negligence of the United States Navy?

While the disintegration
of flight 800's number three engine appears to indicate a shoulder-launched missile, the large gaping hole running from just underneath the
center fuel tank through the top of the forward cabin suggests a strike by an unarmed missile "drone."
There is evidence for both theories.

After denying the existence of any military operations in the area, the Pentagon eventually admitted that
a C-130 military transport and two HH-60G Blackhawk helicopters of the New York Air National Guard's ANG's 106th Rescue Wing were
operating in the area as part of a night-rescue exercise.

Such a "rescue exercise" doesn't explain the presence of a P-3 Orion anti-submarine warfare plane, which, contrary to claims by Navy public
affairs, is capable of carrying missiles.

The U.S.S.

Normandy, an Aegis class guided missile cruiser (similar to the one that accidentally shot
down Iran Air Flight 655 over the straits of Hormuz, killing all 290 people), was also operating in the vicinity.

The Normandy carries RIM-67
Standard SM-2ER semi-active radar homing air defense missiles, with a range of 93 miles and an altitude of 100,000 feet.

Was the
Normandy firing drones as part of a practice drill?

Such maneuvers are routinely carried out off the coast of Long Island.

Area W-105 was
activated as a "hot zone" at the time of the disaster.[915]
Naturally, the Navy claimed the Normandy was 180 miles from flight 800, which was in area W-106, 15 miles to the Northwest of W-105.[916]
FBI chief investigator James Kallstrom cited claims of military culpability as "irresponsible… total unadulterated nonsense," and, echoing the
psychobabble employed by the government in the Oklahoma City bombing investigation, stated that such claims are hurtful to the victims.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Such maneuvers are routinely carried out off the coast of Long Island. Area W-105 was
activated as a "hot zone" at the time of the disaster.[915]
Naturally, the Navy claimed the Normandy was 180 miles from flight 800, which was in area W-106, 15 miles to the Northwest of W-105.[916]
FBI chief investigator James Kallstrom cited claims of military culpability as "irresponsible… total unadulterated nonsense," and, echoing the
psychobabble employed by the government in the Oklahoma City bombing investigation, stated that such claims are hurtful to the victims. Jim Hall, head of the NTSB investigation, backed up Kallstrom, saying the allegations "are causing incredible pain and confusion for those
who lost loved ones."

--- PAGE BREAK ---"I can tell you we left no stone unturned," Kallstrom announced, as if playing a bad re-run of Janet Reno's press conference on Oklahoma
City.[917]
Then in November, Pierre Salinger, a former ABC News correspondent and press secretary for President Kennedy, told reporters in Cannes,
France, he had obtained a document from French intelligence (there were numerous French citizens onboard) detailing how the Navy was
indeed test firing missiles and accidentally hit Flight 800 because the plane was flying lower than expected.

Salinger said the document
written by someone who "was tied to the U.S.

Secret Service and has important contacts in the U.S.

Navy."[918]
Backing up Salinger's report was Lt.

Col.

Bo Gritz, a highly decorated Vietnam veteran and Special Forces commander, who reported in
June that the Army and Navy were conducting final acceptance tests of the AEGIS-CEC (Cooperative Engagement Capability) system, in
the wake of the tragic shootdown of an Iranian airbus by the USS Vincennes.

The military chose Area W-105, claimed Gritz, in order to provide a realistic test using a densely populated area.

"W-105 had been
especially selected (and activated for live fire) because of its similarity to the Persian Gulf."
The Navy Orion P-3, a member of the CEC team, was loaded with up-graded gear, allowing integration of Army and Navy Anti-Aircraft
Artillery acquisition radar.

The equipment was supposed to "discriminate between friend-neutral-foe electronic signatures, isolate the hostile
threat and select the weapon best positioned for an assured kill to launch at the target."
The simulated boogie was a Navy BQM-74E missile drone launched from Shinnecock Bay, east of Riverhead, Long Island by an Army unit
shortly after the "all clear" at 8:30 p.m.…
Through the thickening fog of replicated hostile images, a shot solution was plotted and relayed to the missile unit best positioned for the kill."W-105 had been
especially selected (and activated for live fire) because of its similarity to the Persian Gulf."
The Navy Orion P-3, a member of the CEC team, was loaded with up-graded gear, allowing integration of Army and Navy Anti-Aircraft
Artillery acquisition radar.

The equipment was supposed to "discriminate between friend-neutral-foe electronic signatures, isolate the hostile
threat and select the weapon best positioned for an assured kill to launch at the target."
The simulated boogie was a Navy BQM-74E missile drone launched from Shinnecock Bay, east of Riverhead, Long Island by an Army unit
shortly after the "all clear" at 8:30 p.m.…
Through the thickening fog of replicated hostile images, a shot solution was plotted and relayed to the missile unit best positioned for the kill.

The software then automatically triggered the launch of a Navy Standard IV Anti-missile missile.…
The antimissile was programmed to climb rapidly until a "mid-course" correction would be relayed to the missile's on-board computer
directing the dive to impact.

Final course adjustments would be made by the missile's "semi-active" radar device after "lock-on" was
achieved.…
Tragically, the last radar able to see the boogie through the heavy jamming and target replication suddenly and unexpectedly went blind.…
Unable to receive guidance commands to keep it on an intercept course with the target drone, the Standard IV reverted to its own
programming and began seeking a target.

In a heartbeat, the internal radar acquired the TWA 747 well above and to the west of the
intended target.[919]
Was the 747 destroyed by "friendly fire?" Reports that rocket fuel residue was present on seat backs and bodies of the victims, and the large
entry and exit holes, tend to support these allegations.[920]
During the 1982 Falklands War, an Argentine AM.39 Exocet anti-ship missile struck the British destroyer HMS Sheffield.Final course adjustments would be made by the missile's "semi-active" radar device after "lock-on" was
achieved.…
Tragically, the last radar able to see the boogie through the heavy jamming and target replication suddenly and unexpectedly went blind.…
Unable to receive guidance commands to keep it on an intercept course with the target drone, the Standard IV reverted to its own
programming and began seeking a target.

In a heartbeat, the internal radar acquired the TWA 747 well above and to the west of the
intended target.[919]
Was the 747 destroyed by "friendly fire?" Reports that rocket fuel residue was present on seat backs and bodies of the victims, and the large
entry and exit holes, tend to support these allegations.[920]
During the 1982 Falklands War, an Argentine AM.39 Exocet anti-ship missile struck the British destroyer HMS Sheffield.

Although it was a
dud, "the kinetic energy of the missile, flying at supersonic speed, was able to punch through the hull and slice into fuel lines, allowing the
still-burning rocket motor to ignite a deadly and explosive fire.

TWA 800 may have experienced an airborne version of this same fate."[921]
Gritz' claim that the military chose the area off of Long Island for testing jives with the well-documented fact of decades-long military testing
on unsuspecting civilians in hundreds of cities across the nation — including everything from drugs and nuclear radiation, to chemical and
biological weapons.[922]
Interestingly, on August 29, six weeks after the TWA 800 crash, an American Airlines pilot reported seeing a missile pass by his 757 while
flying over Wallops Island, Virginia, the site of the NASA Wallops Flight Facility, which has a program for unmanned research rockets.Although it was a
dud, "the kinetic energy of the missile, flying at supersonic speed, was able to punch through the hull and slice into fuel lines, allowing the
still-burning rocket motor to ignite a deadly and explosive fire.

TWA 800 may have experienced an airborne version of this same fate."[921]
Gritz' claim that the military chose the area off of Long Island for testing jives with the well-documented fact of decades-long military testing
on unsuspecting civilians in hundreds of cities across the nation — including everything from drugs and nuclear radiation, to chemical and
biological weapons.[922]
Interestingly, on August 29, six weeks after the TWA 800 crash, an American Airlines pilot reported seeing a missile pass by his 757 while
flying over Wallops Island, Virginia, the site of the NASA Wallops Flight Facility, which has a program for unmanned research rockets.

Wallops Island is about 220 miles south of the TWA crash sight.[923]
Finally, as Ian Goddard reported, on May 13, 1997, Long Island's Southampton Press reported that resident Dede Muma accidentally
received a fax from Teledyne Ryan Aeronautical intended for the FBI's office in Calverton, Long Island (the two have similar phone
numbers).

The fax indicated that parts of a Navy missile target drone, a BQM-34 Firebee I manufactured by Teledyne, may have been found
in the wreckage.

The fax shows a diagram of what appears to be a missile, along with a breakdown of its tail section and a parts list...[924]
The near disintegration of the plane's number three engine, however, supports the theory of a heat-seeking SAM, suggesting that the plane
was destroyed by terrorists.

Recall that two major terrorist conferences were held during which it was announced that there would be increased attacks against U.S.

interests: one on June 20-23 in Teheran, and the other on July 10-15 in Pakistan.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Recall that two major terrorist conferences were held during which it was announced that there would be increased attacks against U.S. interests: one on June 20-23 in Teheran, and the other on July 10-15 in Pakistan. Intelligence officers and terrorist leaders from Hamas,
HizbAllah, and the PFLP-GC's Ahmed Jibril, who carried out the Pan Am 103 bombing, were in attendance. This was followed on June 25 by
the truck-bombing of the military housing compound in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.[925]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Also recall that immediately following the July 16th U.S.

Senate resolution for sanctions against Libya and Iran, the al-Hayat newspaper
received a warning from the Movement for Islamic Change:
The world will be astonished and amazed at the time and place chosen by the Mujahadeen.

The Mujahadeen will deliver the harshest reply
to the threats of the foolish American president.

Everyone will be surprised by the volume, choice of place and timing of the Mujahadeen's
answer, and invaders must prepare to depart alive or dead for their time is morning and morning is near.

The New York Post also reported that the FBI was looking into an anonymous threat received after conviction of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman,
the spiritual leader of the World Trade Center bombing cell, convicted of plotting to blow up major New York City landmarks.

The threat
warned that a New York area airport or jetliner would be attacked in retaliation for the prosecution of the sheik.[926]
A warning was also provided to the Israelis that Iran was likely to launch an attack against a U.S.

aircraft.

Thousands of Stinger missiles
were given to the Mujahadeen by the CIA in the 1980s.

According to former FAA investigator Rodney Stich, "At least a dozen were thus
obtained by the Iranian Revolutionary Guards from Yunis Khalis, a radical Muslim Afghani resistance leader.

One of them was fired by
Iranians at an American helicopter on patrol in the Persian Gulf on October 8th, 1987."
The U.S.

produced nearly 64,500 of these missiles for the military and other countries since 1980, including Angola, Egypt, France,
Germany, Iran, Israel, Kuwait, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and Turkey.

The Soviets are known to have sold their SAM-7 to China, North Korea,
India, Iran, Iraq, Cuba, Laos, Libya, Sudan and Syria, among others.[927] Stingers provided to the Mujahadeen via the CIA in Peshawar,
Pakistan, were often sold to terrorists and other groups.produced nearly 64,500 of these missiles for the military and other countries since 1980, including Angola, Egypt, France,
Germany, Iran, Israel, Kuwait, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and Turkey.

The Soviets are known to have sold their SAM-7 to China, North Korea,
India, Iran, Iraq, Cuba, Laos, Libya, Sudan and Syria, among others.[927] Stingers provided to the Mujahadeen via the CIA in Peshawar,
Pakistan, were often sold to terrorists and other groups.

"We have now spent more than a decade trying to retrieve those missiles," said Natalie Goldring, a defense analyst with the British-
American Security Information Council.

"Several hundred that were transferred during the Afghan war are nowhere to be found.

They are
very capable anti-aircraft missiles."[928]
According to Stich, the CIA has bumbled attempts to retrieve the missiles.

In a letter to Senator Arlen Specter dated October 20, 1995, Stich
writes:
Recent information provided to me by one or more of my contacts in the CIA community describes the dates, places, and people involved in
offering the missiles to the United States, and the rejection of this offer.

These sources provided me with precise details of the negotiations
to give the missiles to the United States, the agreement by Afghan rebel leader, General Rashid Dostom, and a CIA attorney.…
[One] possibility for CIA and Justice Department rejection of the Stinger missiles is that the CIA wants the missiles to fall into terrorists'
hands, and actually wants an airliner to be shot down.

The shoot-down of a commercial airliner could then be used to justify the continuation
of CIA activities.[929]
In fact, Israel intercepted unconfirmed reports that 50 of Stingers were smuggled into the country in 1995.

A letter reportedly presented to
members of the Senate Intelligence and Armed Services Committee after the shootdown of flight 800 not only claimed credit for the attack,
but provided the serial number of the missile that was used.The shoot-down of a commercial airliner could then be used to justify the continuation
of CIA activities.[929]
In fact, Israel intercepted unconfirmed reports that 50 of Stingers were smuggled into the country in 1995.

A letter reportedly presented to
members of the Senate Intelligence and Armed Services Committee after the shootdown of flight 800 not only claimed credit for the attack,
but provided the serial number of the missile that was used.

Naturally, government would trot out its usual stable of spokesmen to claim that the plane hadn't been downed by a missile, especially a
shoulder-launched SAM, which the Pentagon claimed couldn't down a jumbo-jet flying at 13,700 feet.

"There's no American official with half a brain who ought to be speculating on anything of that nature," said White House spokesman Mike
McCurry.

"There's no concrete information that would lead any of us in the United States government to draw that kind of conclusion."
Yet the State Department has catalogued 25 incidents between 1978 and 1993 in which commercial airliners were shot down by SAMs,
killing more than 600 people.

(Israeli commercial airliners, like the President's Air Force One, are equipped with special flares capable of
diverting surface-to-air missiles.) During the Vietnam War, Russian Grail missiles routinely shot down planes at altitudes of 11,000 and
12,000 feet.

Some SAMs — including the Stinger, and the Swedish-built Bofors RBS 70 and 90, which military and aviation analyst Ronald
Lewis, writing in Air Forces Monthly believes was used — are reportedly capable of reaching altitudes of between 15,000 and 18,000 feet.

[930]
It is for precisely this reason that the government kept changing the altitude of the plane, which they first reported at 8,500 feet, then 10,000
feet, and finally at 13,700 feet (Apparently they didn't take into account the range of the Bofors).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some SAMs — including the Stinger, and the Swedish-built Bofors RBS 70 and 90, which military and aviation analyst Ronald
Lewis, writing in Air Forces Monthly believes was used — are reportedly capable of reaching altitudes of between 15,000 and 18,000 feet. [930]
It is for precisely this reason that the government kept changing the altitude of the plane, which they first reported at 8,500 feet, then 10,000
feet, and finally at 13,700 feet (Apparently they didn't take into account the range of the Bofors). This is strikingly similar to their altering of
the size of the bomb in Oklahoma, originally stating it was 1,200 pounds, then 2,000 pounds, then 4,000 pounds, then finally 4,800 pounds,
to match their magic ANFO theory. Given the overwhelming evidence to the contrary, however, the talking heads would modify their statements. "They will be looking at all
three scenarios," said Former FBI Assistant Director Oliver "Buck" Revell, "and probably the least likely will be the missile, but it will be one
that is very carefully examined."[931]
Even the FBI's James Kallstrom was later forced to admit, "We do have information that there was something in the sky. A number of people

--- PAGE BREAK ---have seen it."[932] As the New York Post reported on September 22:
Law-enforcement sources said the hardest evidence gathered so far overwhelmingly suggests a surface-to-air missile — with the
sophisticated ability to lock on the center of a target rather than its red-hot engines — was fired from a boat off the Long Island coast to bring
down the airliner July 17.[933]
On December 17, the Washington Times quoted a congressional aide who verified that an unnamed DIA official confirmed the missile
attack: "'In his opinion, the plane was brought down by at least one shoulder-fired missile,'" said the congressional source, who spoke on the
condition of anonymity."[934]
Interestingly, the FBI focused part of its investigation on boats on Long Island that had been chartered or stolen.

One report that surfaced
early on reported that two Middle Eastern men had rented a boat.

A boat 30 or 40 feet in length would provide a stable enough platform for a
someone aiming a heat-seeking or laser guided SAM, even if the waters had not been perfectly calm.

Obviously, the government was perfectly capable of determining who, or at least what shot down TWA flight 800.

Aviation Week reported
that technology is available to establish, within hours, the exact composition of any explosive, even after days of submersion in sea water.

Yet months after the disaster, the government was still claiming it hadn't determined the cause of the crash.

At times, the explanations
offered by government officials bordered on the ridiculous.

On July 11, 1997, a NTSB official was heard postulating before members of
Congress that the plane may have been destroyed by errant "space junk."
It is hardly surprising that the government would want to cover up the truth, especially if flight 800 had been destroyed by a Stinger missile,
one given to the Mujahadeen by the Central [Stupidity] Agency.At times, the explanations
offered by government officials bordered on the ridiculous.

On July 11, 1997, a NTSB official was heard postulating before members of
Congress that the plane may have been destroyed by errant "space junk."
It is hardly surprising that the government would want to cover up the truth, especially if flight 800 had been destroyed by a Stinger missile,
one given to the Mujahadeen by the Central [Stupidity] Agency.

If the public learned that a commercial jet could be shot down by a hand-
held missile, one of many smuggled into this country, the airline industry would suffer huge financial loses.

In countries where tourism is
essential to the economy, such a revelation would be devastating.

Moreover, if TWA 800 had been downed by our own military, the government would be even more desperate to cover up the truth.

At a press conference on November 8, IWW reporter Hillel Cohen asked, "Why is the Navy not a suspect?" In response, Kallstrom said,
"Remove that man." As about 10 security guards swiftly removed Cohen from the room, as he shouted, "We want an independent
investigation!"
Nor were journalists investigating Oklahoma City immune from harassment.

Jayna Davis, the courageous KFOR reporter who tracked down
Hussaini and Khalid, received a warning from the Bureau that she was getting "too close" to the truth, and should drop her investigation.

Journalists and investigators who have attempted to interview rescue workers, including firemen, police and other city officials are denied
interviews.

Most workers say they've been told not to talk by their superiors or the FBI.

"…they're afraid of losing their jobs or being
subjected to abuse if they say something," said Jane Graham.

Nurse Toni Garret was one of many people who had volunteered to help tag dead victims that terrible morning.

Garret and her husband Earl
had just taken a break when they noticed federal agents arriving to set up a command post.Nurse Toni Garret was one of many people who had volunteered to help tag dead victims that terrible morning.

Garret and her husband Earl
had just taken a break when they noticed federal agents arriving to set up a command post.

"They acted like it was just a drill, like it was no
big deal, said Garret.

"They were kind of joking around and all that kind of stuff."
Approximately 20 minutes later, when the Garrets re-entered the makeshift triage center, they found many of the doctors and nurses gone,
and a completely different atmosphere prevailed.

"There was nobody helping anymore," said Earl.

"Before, there were people bringing in
food and medical supplies — just everything.

When we came back in, there was a cold, callous atmosphere.

I found out later that the FBI
had taken over.…"
But what really upset Toni Garret was the fact that the FBI and the Medical Examiner were suppressing the body count, which they had
claimed as only 22 dead.

Garret, who had personally tagged over 120 dead bodies that day, was shocked.

"I was being interviewed by a
lady from TBN (Trinity Broadcasting Network).

I told her that I was highly upset because the news media and the information they were
being given was not accurate information.

There were many more bodies than what they were saying on the news media and releasing at
the time.…"
"[The FBI] didn't like that Toni was being interviewed by the media," said Earl.

"An agent came [up] to me and said, 'Do you know her?'
pointing to Toni.

I said, 'Yes, she's my wife.' He said, "What is she?' I said, 'Well, she's been down here all day trying to get people out of this
building and help people.' He turned around to his friends and said, 'Well, we need to get her out of here.' Toni then told me that the agents
had told her that the FBI was taking over and all of us could get out.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"An agent came [up] to me and said, 'Do you know her?'
pointing to Toni. I said, 'Yes, she's my wife.' He said, "What is she?' I said, 'Well, she's been down here all day trying to get people out of this
building and help people.' He turned around to his friends and said, 'Well, we need to get her out of here.' Toni then told me that the agents
had told her that the FBI was taking over and all of us could get out. They told us to keep our mouths shut."
Said Toni, "When they came over to me, one of the agents was very pompous and arrogant about asking me who I was, what I was doing
there, if I was a civilian, where I worked, and what my name was. I didn't feel like any of that pertained to what was going on that day or what
had happened that day, and he wanted to know everything about me.…
"He said, 'Well, we're down here now, and we're taking over the building. It would be advisable and recommendable that you keep your
mouth shut."[935]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Norma Smith, who worked at the Federal Courthouse across from the Murrah building saw, along with numerous others, the Sheriff's bomb
squad congregated in the parking lot at 7:30 that morning.

Shortly after Smith's story appeared in a local newspaper, her house was broken
into — twice.

Smith, frightened, took early retirement and moved out of state.

She is currently too afraid to talk to anyone.

The bomb squad, incidentally, denied being there.

New American editor William Jasper learned from an OCPD officer that during a mandatory daily security briefing at the Murrah Building, he
and other assembled police/rescue/recovery personnel were told "in no uncertain terms" by one of the lead federal officials that it was
necessary for "security" reasons to provide the public with "misinformation" regarding certain aspects of the case, and that this "official line"
was not to be contradicted by any of those in attendance.[936]
"There's a lot that's being covered up, for some reason," charged a federal employee who narrowly escaped death but who lost many friends
in the terrorist attack.

Said a man who lost his father, "…I'm angry because I know I'm being lied to."
"Many of us are going to come forward and challenge what's going on as soon as we get some more of the pieces figured out," pledged a
law enforcement officer.[937]
This same police officer later told me he was called into the offices of OCPD Chief Sam Gonzales and U.S.

Attorney Pat Ryan and told to
"cease and desist."[938]
Another officer who was told to "cease and desist" was Sergeant Terrance Yeakey.

On May 8, 1996, only three days before Sergeant
Yeakey was to receive the Oklahoma Police Department's Medal of Valor, he "committed suicide." The 30 year-old cop was found in a field
near El Reno, not far from where El Reno Prison guard Joey Gladden "committed suicide." His wrists were slashed in numerous places, as
was his neck and throat.Attorney Pat Ryan and told to
"cease and desist."[938]
Another officer who was told to "cease and desist" was Sergeant Terrance Yeakey.

On May 8, 1996, only three days before Sergeant
Yeakey was to receive the Oklahoma Police Department's Medal of Valor, he "committed suicide." The 30 year-old cop was found in a field
near El Reno, not far from where El Reno Prison guard Joey Gladden "committed suicide." His wrists were slashed in numerous places, as
was his neck and throat.

Apparently not satisfied with this initial attempt to take his life, he got out of his car, walked a mile and-a-half over
rough terrain, then pulled out his gun shot himself in the head.

The media claimed Officer Yeakey "was wracked with guilt" over his inability to help more people that fateful morning.

They also claimed he
led a "troubled family life," having been recently divorced from his wife Tonia, and separated from his two daughters, aged two and four,
whom the Daily Oklahoman claimed he was not permitted to see due to a restraining order.

Other accounts suggest that Yeakey was reluctant to receive the Medal of Valor due to his "guilt" over being injured in the Murrah Building.

"He didn't like it," said his supervisor Lt.

Jo Ann Randall.

"There are some people that like to be heroes and some that don't.

He was not one
that wanted that."
"He had a lot of guilt because he got hurt," added fellow officer Jim Ramsey.[939]
Apparently, there was much more behind Officer Terrance Yeakey's reluctance to be honored as a hero.

"He kept telling me it wasn't what I thought it was," said his ex-wife, Tonia Rivera, "that they were only choosing officers who were not even
at the site, you know — who didn't see anything — to take public rewards, recognition, that sort of stuff.

"They started pressuring them into taking [the rewards]," added Rivera.

"There came a time about mid-year, where they were forcing him
into going to these award ceremonies.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"They started pressuring them into taking [the rewards]," added Rivera. "There came a time about mid-year, where they were forcing him
into going to these award ceremonies. As in, 'Yes, you could not go, but we'll make your life hell…'
The story of the reluctant hero, she added, was nothing more than a "real thin veil of truth" which covered up a "mountain of deceit."
"[T]erry wanted no part of it."[940]
His sister, Vicki Jones, agreed. "Terry hated that stuff. 'I'm no hero,' he would say. 'Nobody that had anything to do with helping those people
in that bombing are heroes."
Why would the Medal of Valor recipient make such a bizarre-sounding statement? In a letter he wrote to a bombing victim and friend
Ramona McDonald, the officer tells the real reason for his reluctance to be honored as a hero:
Dear Ramona,
I hope that whatever you hear now and in the future will not change your opinions about myself or others with the Oklahoma City Police
Department, although some of the things I am about to tell you about is [sic] very disturbing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---I don't know if you recall everything that happened that morning or not, so I am not sure if you know what I am referring to.

The man that you and I were talking about in the pictures I have made the mistake of asking too many questions as to his role in the
bombing, and was told to back off.

I was told by several officers he was an ATF agent who was overseeing the bombing plot and at the time the photos were taken he was
calling in his report of what had just went down!

I think my days as a police officer are numbered because of the way my supervisors are acting and there is [sic] a lot of secrets floating
around now about my mental state of mind.

I think they are going to write me up because of my ex-wife and a VPO.

I told you about talking to Chaplain Poe, well the bastard wrote up in a report stating I should be relieved of my duties!

I made the mistake of
thinking that a person's conversation with a chaplain was private, which by the way might have cost me my job as a police officer!

A friend at
headquarters told me that Poe sent out letters to everyone in the department!

That BITCH (Jo Ann Randall) I told you about is up to
something and I think it has something to do with Poe.

If she gets her way, they will tar and feather me!

I was told that Jack Poe has written up a report on every single officer that has been in to see him, including Gordon Martin and John Avery.

Knowing what I know now, and understanding fully just what went down that morning, makes me ashamed to wear a badge from Oklahoma
City's Police Department.

I took and oath to uphold the Law and to enforce the Law to the best of my ability.

This is something I cannot
honestly do and hold my head up proud any longer if I keep my silence as I am ordered to do.

There are several others out there who was [sic] what we saw and even some who played a role in what happened that day.This is something I cannot
honestly do and hold my head up proud any longer if I keep my silence as I am ordered to do.

There are several others out there who was [sic] what we saw and even some who played a role in what happened that day.

[Two Pages Missing]
My guess is the more time an officer has to think about the screw up the more he is going to question what happened… Can you imagine
what would be coming down now if that had been our officers' who had let this happen?

Because it was the feds that did this and not the
locals, is the reason it's okay.

You were right all along and I am truly sorry I doubted you and your motives about recording history.

You
should know that it is going to one-hell-of-a-fight.

Everyone was behind you until you started asking questions as I did, as to how so many federal agents arrived at the scene at the same
time.

Luke Franey (a ATF agent who claimed he was in the building) was not in the building at the time of the blast, I know this for a fact, I saw
him!

I also saw full riot gear worn with rifles in hand, why?

Don't make the mistake as I did and ask the wrong people.

I worry about you and your young family because of some of the statements that have been made towards me, a police officer!

Whatever
you do don't confront McPhearson with the bomb squad about what I told you.

His actions and defensiveness towards the bombing would
make any normal person think he was defending himself as if he drove the damn truck up to the building himself.

I am not worried for myself,
but for you and your group.

I would not be afraid to say at this time that you and your family could be harmed if you get any closer to the
truth.

At this time I think for your well being it is best for you to distance yourself and others from those of us who have stirred up to many
questions about the altering and falsifying of the federal investigation's reports.I would not be afraid to say at this time that you and your family could be harmed if you get any closer to the
truth.

At this time I think for your well being it is best for you to distance yourself and others from those of us who have stirred up to many
questions about the altering and falsifying of the federal investigation's reports.

I truly believe there are other officers like me out there who would not settle for anything but the truth, it is just a matter of finding them.

The
only true problem as I see it is, who do we turn to then?

It is vital that people like you, Edye Smith, and others keep asking questions and demanding answers for the actions of our Federal
Government and law enforcement agencies that knew beforehand and participated in the cover-up.

The sad truth of the matter is that they have so many police officers convinced that by covering up the truth about the operation gone wrong,
that they are actually doing our citizens a favor.

What I want to know is how many other operations have they had that blew up in their
faces?

Makes you stop and take another look at Waco.

I would consider it to be an insult to my profession as a police officer and to the citizens of Oklahoma for ANY of the City, State or Federal
agents that stood by and let this happen to be recognized as any thing other than their part in participation in letting this happen.

For those
who ran from the scene to change their attire to hide the fact that they were there, should be judged as cowards.

If our history books and records are ever truly corrected about that day it will show this and maybe even some lame excuse as to why it
happened, but I truly don't believe it will from what I now know to be the truth.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For those
who ran from the scene to change their attire to hide the fact that they were there, should be judged as cowards. If our history books and records are ever truly corrected about that day it will show this and maybe even some lame excuse as to why it
happened, but I truly don't believe it will from what I now know to be the truth. Even if I tried to explain it to you the way it was explained to me, and the ridiculous reason for having out own police departments falsify
reports to their fellow officers, to the citizens of the city and to our country, you would understand why I feel the way I do about all of this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---I believe that a lot of the problems the officers are having right now are because some of them know what really happened and can't deal
with it, and others like myself made the mistake of trusting the one person we were supposed to be able to turn to (Chaplain Poe) only to be
stabbed in the back.

I am sad to say that I believe my days as a police officer are numbered because of all of this….

Shortly after the bombing, Yeakey appeared at his ex-wife's.

"About two weeks before his death, he'd come into my home at strange times,"
said Rivera, "two-thirty in the morning, four in the morning, unannounced — trying to give me life insurance policies.… He kept telling me we
needed to get remarried immediately, or me and the girls would not be taken care of.

"I mean, why would a guy tell you to take a life insurance policy, knowing damn well it wouldn't pay for a suicide?

He obviously knew he was
in danger."
Yet Officer Terrance Yeakey was not the type of person to easily show his feelings.

He didn't want to tell his family anything that might get
them hurt.

"He told me enough to let me know that it was not what they were making it out to be," said Rivera, "and that he was disgusted and didn't
want any part of it, but he never went into detail.… It scared me."[941]
Within days of the bombing, according to a sympathetic government source who has spoken to Rivera, Yeakey began receiving death
threats.

He was at his ex-wife's apartment when the calls came.

Afraid for his family, he got up and left.

"When he came to my apartment two weeks prior, trying to give me these insurance policies," said Rivera, "he sat on my living room couch
and cried and told me how he had a fight with [his supervisors] Lt.

Randall and Maj.

Upchurch.

He did not tell me what that entailed, but he
was scared — he was crying so badly he was shaking.

"He wouldn't totally voice whatever it was," recalled Rivera.He did not tell me what that entailed, but he
was scared — he was crying so badly he was shaking.

"He wouldn't totally voice whatever it was," recalled Rivera.

"It was like he'd be just about to tell me — he'd want to spill his guts — and then
he stopped, and he just cried.

And that's when he kept insisting that I take the insurance policy."
Although Yeakey was concerned for his family, the marriage was not without abuse.

Rivera had filed a VPO (Victim's Protective Order)
against him slightly over two years ago.

In a fit of temper, Yeakey had once threatened to take his life and those of his wife and children.

"I think it was said in the haste of, well, he's going to kill all of us kind of thing — cop under pressure," said Rivera.

But that was over a year
and-a-half ago.

Yeakey had spent considerable time with his wife and children since then, taking them on family outings and so forth.

Nevertheless, the Oklahoma City Police Department (OCPD) attempted to use the incident to claim that Yeakey was suicidal.

It was on the
day of his death, around 1:30 p.m., that they called Rivera, trying to get her to file a VPO Violation based on the two-year-old report.

"They
wanted me to come down and make some statements against him," Rivera said.

On the same afternoon, in-between messages on his answering machine from his sister, Vicki Jones and his supervisor Lt.

Jo Ann Randall,
Yeakey had a message from Tonia.

"The message was like at 5:30 in the afternoon," recalled Rivera.

"I sound like I'm whispering, and I'm
apologizing for waking him up — at 5:30 in the afternoon — on Wednesday."
It seems the intent behind this cleverly-crafted deception was to convince the family and potential investigators that Rivera was an "evil
person," who was sleeping with him the night before, but "went down and filed a VPO the next day."
"That tape was planted," said Rivera.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"The message was like at 5:30 in the afternoon," recalled Rivera. "I sound like I'm whispering, and I'm
apologizing for waking him up — at 5:30 in the afternoon — on Wednesday."
It seems the intent behind this cleverly-crafted deception was to convince the family and potential investigators that Rivera was an "evil
person," who was sleeping with him the night before, but "went down and filed a VPO the next day."
"That tape was planted," said Rivera. "I never called his house."
It seemed the OCPD was playing an elaborate game to sow confusion and mistrust, and create the appearance that Rivera was responsible
for her ex-husband's death. "So it comes out in paper after paper how he's having problems with his ex-wife, how he's not allowed to see his children.… "They're trying
to play up the story of the bitch-ass wife whose trying to get him fired.…"
Yet Rivera claimed she never filed a VPO violation. "The OCPD wanted to file one," said Rivera. "But I never signed it." Rivera claimed she
had gone to the police station, but simply out of concern for her ex-husband, who had been acting strangely. "Nobody ever said, 'Mrs. Yeakey, Terry's missing. Do you know anyplace he might have gone to? They never told me that they weren't able
to locate him, that they were concerned, you know — nothing. I never knew he was missing."
If Officer Yeakey's death was anything more than a suicide, the OCPD didn't go to any great lengths to find out. While his death occurred in
El Reno, the OCPD took over the crime scene, squeezing the El Reno Police Department out of the picture. The OCPD's Media Relations
officer, Cpt. Ted Carlton, explained, "It was our police officer who was killed. It's not uncommon [to take over the investigation] in the case of

--- PAGE BREAK ---a smaller police agency."[942]
Although forensics are also standard procedure in the event of a violent or suspicious death, especially that of a police officer, Yeakey's car
was never dusted for prints.

"And the next day, they gave us the damn car!" said Mrs.

Jarrahi.

"It was full of blood."
When Yeakey's Brother-in-Law, Glenn Jones, inspected the dead man's car, he discovered a bloody knife stashed underneath the glove
compartment.

Yet according to the responding officer, Yeakey had apparently used a razor blade.

Where did the knife come from?

Since no
forensic investigation was conducted, this remains unclear.

No autopsy was ever conducted.

"There were common sense things that were wrong about the whole thing, that makes it so weird," added Mrs.

Jarrahi.

"It just doesn't seem
right.

Why would policemen and the authorities make such common mistakes that would leave questions?

It's just really weird."
If Yeakey's death was a suicide, he left no note.

Although he was upset over his divorce, according to the family, he was not suicidal.

It is
also unlikely that he abused drugs, as he was an instructor at DARE, a program designed to keep children off drugs.

Former Canadian County Sheriff Clint Boehler, who claims to have known Yeakey, doesn't concur with this analysis.

Boehler said that
Yeakey showed up at his house in El Reno on the afternoon of his death, his car stopped at an angle in the middle of the road.

When
Boehler and his girlfriend Kate Allen, a paramedic, ran outside, they found the police officer virtually passed out.

"He couldn't tell us his name initially," said Allen.

"He was ill, and he was very anxious.

His heart rate was rapid; he was sweaty.… He told us
he had been having concentration problems, he hadn't slept.

He had all the appearances, my first guess would be, of someone who was
having emotional problems.

And my second guess would be, of some kind of substance abuse problem.He had all the appearances, my first guess would be, of someone who was
having emotional problems.

And my second guess would be, of some kind of substance abuse problem.

But that's a pure guess."
Boehler added that Yeakey said he hadn't eaten, and was "throwing up, taking medication, and incoherent.

"He was taking medications for
his back," said Boehler.

"He had four or five medications in the car."
Boehler and Allen didn't know that Yeakey had Sickle-Cell Anemia — a blood-sugar-related condition that caused seizures.

It was these
seizures, Rivera explained, that would occasionally cause her ex-husband to act "out-of-sorts," or even to slip into unconsciousness.

In spite of his medical condition, Rivera insisted that Terrance Yeakey was a health fanatic.

The prescriptions were for his condition, she
said, but he used only the minimum amounts.

According to Canadian County Sheriff Deputy Mike Ramsey (no relation to OCPD Officer Jim Ramsey), who drove Yeakey home, Yeakey
was not suicidal.

"He didn't give me any indications that he was out to do harm to himself," said Ramsey.

"He seemed more disoriented,
tired…"[943]
There are many things about Officer Yeakey's death that remain a mystery.

While Boehler described a man on drugs, the Medical Examiner
claims they didn't bother to conduct a drug test because it "costs too much."[944]
The ME's field investigator, Jeffrey Legg, also reported that Yeakey "had been drinking heavily" the day before, based on statements made
by OCPD Homicide Detectives Dicus and Mullinex.

Yet Terrance Yeakey didn't drink, and their own report concluded that there was no
alcohol in the body at the time of death.[945]
Canadian County Sheriffs discovered the abandoned car, filled with blood, about two and-a-half miles from the old El Reno reformatory.

The
OCPD was notified, and Police Chief Sam Gonazles flew out by chopper.

Using dogs, they followed a trail of blood, and found the body in a
ditch, about a mile and-a-half from the car.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The
OCPD was notified, and Police Chief Sam Gonazles flew out by chopper. Using dogs, they followed a trail of blood, and found the body in a
ditch, about a mile and-a-half from the car. (Legg reported the body was 1/2 mile south of the car, when in fact it was 1 1/2 miles north-east
of the car.)
Apparently Yeakey had tried to cut himself in the wrists, neck, and throat, then, after losing approximately two pints of blood, got out of his
car (contentiously remembering to lock the doors), walked a mile and-a-half over rough terrain, crawled under a barbed-wire fence, waded
through a culvert, then lay down in a ditch and shot himself in the head.[946]
As is this weren't strange enough, Yeakey's diet-related condition would have made him too weak to walk the mile and-a-half from his car to
where his body was found — especially after losing two to three pints of blood. Nevertheless, the OCPD ruled it a suicide on the spot. Their investigation remained sealed. This reporter was unable to obtain it, and not
even the family was allowed to see it. "There were so many things that were weird," said Mrs. Jarrahi. "My daughter kept going back to the Police Department. She said, 'Well
what about this… we knew he had a camcorder, we knew he had a briefcase…'

--- PAGE BREAK ---"These are things we never got back.

The kid always carried camera and film.

[He] never went anywhere without his camera and briefcase.

He had all his important papers in there.… We got the camera back.

We never got the film back.

We never got the briefcase.

They said they
never saw it…."
In regards to Yeakey's videos, Detective Mullinex, who "investigated" the case for the OCPD, told Vicki Jones, "I really don't think you'll want
to see those; they contain pornography." Jones didn't believe him and didn't care.

"I want those tapes!" she demanded.

The Homicide detective finally told her she'd get them back after they had "examined the evidence."
"One minute the guy would say he had them," said Jones, "the next minute he'd say 'we don't have anything.…'"
According to Jones, Mullinex then said, "Now, we all loved Terry.

I hope you understand that, but I'm not going to let you see any pictures.

And I don't know anything about a briefcase, but if there's anything back there, I'll give you a call, and you can come back and get them."
"And I just sat there and looked at him, and said to myself, 'You're doing a great performance, but it's not working.…' Then he got really
uptight and said, 'Well, some of us hated Terry.' [Then] he kind of grabbed his face and said 'oh shit.'"
For his part, Mullinex had "no comment either way." He then told me, "I don't remember what I said to the lady, but I certainly was not rude to
her.… This comes as a big shock to me, because he was a police officer and a friend of mine.

It was a hard thing and hurt me to have to
work it."
Cpt.

Carlton likewise feigned shock at Jones' rebuffs, and said he would have to know who the officer was who made those statements.

He
then asked me to have the family contact the OCPD directly (as though they hadn't already done so numerous times), and he would meet
with them and discuss the case, but that Cpt.Carlton likewise feigned shock at Jones' rebuffs, and said he would have to know who the officer was who made those statements.

He
then asked me to have the family contact the OCPD directly (as though they hadn't already done so numerous times), and he would meet
with them and discuss the case, but that Cpt.

Danny Cockran, Chief of the Homicide Squad, would have to make the decision about whether
or not to let the family see the files.

Yet Carlton's statements fly in the face of the experiences of not only Yeakey's mother and sister, but those of his ex-wife.

In a letter to
Police Chief Sam Gonzales dated September 4, 1996, Rivera writes:
Needless to say, I have many questions regarding the investigation.

What type of weapon was used to inflict the gunshot wound to his
head?

Who located the body?

How could the cause of death be determined with such confidence with the multitude of injuries to his body
and how did he walk the distance indicated in People magazine with the great loss of blood from razor cuts not only to both wrists, but both
his forearms as well as two razor cuts to his neck?

Not only did he walk this distance, but he struggled with bobwire fencing to reach his
chosen destination to die then inflicted the gunshot wound to himself?

I request that a copy of the investigative report of his death be made
available to me.

Gonzales didn't respond.

Police officials eventually responded to Vicki Jones' complaints by telling her she needed to see a psychiatrist.

"They said, 'We're just trying
to protect you.'"
Exactly what were they trying to protect her from?

When I called Mrs.

Jarrahi, the telltale signs of a tapped phone were clearly present.

If
Terrance Yeakey's death was a simple suicide, why would law-enforcement agencies be tapping the family's phones?

The OCPD soon began conducting surveillance on the dead man's family.

"There was always an officer out there in front of our apartment," said Jones.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The OCPD soon began conducting surveillance on the dead man's family. "There was always an officer out there in front of our apartment," said Jones. Anywhere we went, we had an officer or someone in a marked
car following us around. It started right after I started going to the Police Department quite a bit."
They also tailed Rivera. When she confronted the officers, they ignored her, hid their faces, or sped off. Cars were parked outside her
childrens' school. When she spoke to school officials about the surveillance one afternoon, she went to work startled to find the conversation
on her office answering machine! Rivera had spoken to the school principal in person. How did the conversation wind up on her answering
machine?[947]
The harassment against Officer Yeakey's family wasn't limited to mere surveillance. After Rivera met with State Representative Charles Key,
her car was broken into. Her house was broken into twice. She finally moved to Enid when the heat became too hot. "I lived in an apartment on the third floor with a security alarm in it," said Rivera. "I'd come home and the alarm would be off. I'd notice things out of place. There'd be cabinets open that I'd have no reason to have opened."
About two weeks after Terry's death, Rivera went downstairs around 6:30 one morning to do some laundry, "and there was a man
downstairs with huge headphones on, at 6:30 in the morning, right behind my apartment.…"

--- PAGE BREAK ---The individual, who was wearing a jogging suit — wasn't jogging, and was not doing laundry.

"He looked startled when I came around the
corner," said Rivera.

"I came back down at 8:30 and the guy was still there."
It appears that what Rivera was describing was an audio technician with a "Shotgun Mic," a portable surveillance tool designed to pick up
conversations through windows and across fields.

They are commonly used by private detectives and law-enforcement agencies.

One day Rivera came home to find her front door open and off its hinges.

When the frightened single mother walked into her bedroom, she
found a balloon tied to her door.

It read: "Get well soon.

This will keep you busy until you do."[948]
It seems the OCPD and the FBI thought that Officer Yeakey had passed off some incriminating documents concerning the bombing cover-up
to his ex-wife, and were intent on obtaining the documents.

The surveillance, break-ins, and thinly-veiled threats soon escalated into more serious incidents.

Right before Yeakey's murder, the couple's
Ford Explorer began getting mysterious flats.

"And when I'd roll it into a shop," said Rivera, "they'd pull out like six or seven nails." This
occurred between eight and ten times, she claims.

Rivera explained that once during a quarrel, Terry had removed some fuses from her car to keep her from leaving.

The police knew about
the incident, said Rivera, who thought the subsequent events were created by the OCPD to sow mistrust and provide a convenient trail of
evidence to prove that Yeakey led a troubled family life.

Yet while Yeakey admitted to removing the fuses, he repeatedly and adamantly
denied that he had damaged the car — a car that was registered in his name and carried his cherished children to and from school.

On April 24, two weeks before he was found dead, the Explorer began acting strangely.

When Rivera pulled it into the local Aamco
Transmission Center, she found that it had been tampered with.On April 24, two weeks before he was found dead, the Explorer began acting strangely.

When Rivera pulled it into the local Aamco
Transmission Center, she found that it had been tampered with.

"Somebody who knew what they were doing pulled hoses from your car,"
said Todd Taylor, the chief mechanic.

"I'm sorry to tell this ma'am, but this is not just something you can pull randomly.…" Taylor also said
he though Rivera's brakes had been tampered with.[949]
About two weeks before this story went to press, the Ford's brakes went out suddenly while Rivera was traveling at 40 mph.

"I went to
brake," said Rivera, "and guess what?

No brakes!" The large 4 X 4 slammed into the back of smaller car, damaging it badly.

"The message
is 'we can get to you if we want to,'" she concluded.

Officer [Jim] Ramsey also began making his presence felt.

"All of the sudden, when we moved to Oklahoma City [from El Reno]," said
Jones, "there was Ramsey.

When we joined a new church, Ramsey was there.

Ramsey was everywhere.

You turn the corner, there was
Ramsey.… Everything we did, he was like the helpful old guy.

This went on for two months."
"He was keeping tabs on everyone," added Rivera.

"He was showing up in a lot of places… just casually, in fact, places where he knew that
people knew me just as well as they knew Terry, and weren't buying into the 'it's Tonia's fault' routine.

"[Ramsey] tried to claim it was his ex-wife and love for his children he couldn't see that made him commit suicide," she added.

He would talk
to her friends.

"'How's she taking it?

What does she think, blah, blah, blah.'"
Both Rivera and Jones feel the OCPD officer was sent to "baby-sit" them — to maintain an ever-present watchful eye.

"[When he showed
up]," Jones said, "I looked at him and said, that is not a friend of Terry's.

He was never at the house.

I never met him before."
Ramsey, who told People magazine that Yeakey was his "dear friend," also told the press that he was Terry's partner.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He was never at the house. I never met him before."
Ramsey, who told People magazine that Yeakey was his "dear friend," also told the press that he was Terry's partner. "That was a lie," declared Jones. Rivera concurred. The ex-wife said that not only was Ramsey never Yeakey's partner, but that the two men didn't even get along. "Terry
hated Jim Ramsey," said Rivera. "He put on a real good performance," she added. "He's hiding something, I believe.… It burns me up."[950]
For his performance, Ramsey was promoted to Detective, and made "Officer of the Year."
If Terrance Yeakey did have many friends in the Police Department, they were among the beat patrolmen, not the upper echelon. While
Detective Mullinex said everybody "loved Terry," according to Rivera, the brass "hated his guts." "Him and [Maj.] Upchurch had a hate-hate
relationship," she said. For his part, Mullinex claims he was "totally unaware" of any problems Yeakey was having in regards to what he knew about the bombing. "It
is my opinion as a fourteen-year homicide veteran that it was a suicide," said Mullinex.… If we thought it was anything [other than a suicide]
we would have pursued it to the ends of the earth. We're not hiding anything."[951]
Really? According to Rivera, three government sources, including a U.S. Attorney and a U.S. Marshal, hold a slightly different view. As relayed by

--- PAGE BREAK ---Rivera, the events on the morning of Officer Yeakey's death transpired as follows:
At 9:00 a.m., Officer Yeakey was seen exiting his Oklahoma City apartment with nine boxes of videos and files.

He then drove to the police
station where he had a fight with his supervisors.

He was told to "drop it" or he'd "wind up dead."
Yeakey was also due for a meeting with the heads of several federal agencies that morning.

He apparently decided to skip the meetings,
instead, driving straight to a storage locker he maintained in Kingfisher.

What he didn't realize was that the FBI had him under surveillance, and began pursuit.

The six-year OCPD veteran and former Sheriff's
Deputy easily eluded his pursuers.

Once at his storage facility, he secured his files.

What were in the files?

According to one of Rivera's sources, incriminating photos and videos of the bombed-out building.

Perhaps more.

On the way back, the feds caught up with him just outside of El Reno.

"He had nothing on him," at that point, said Rivera, "just copies of
copies."
While it is not known exactly what transpired next, Rivera's confidential source "described in intimate detail," the state of the dead man's car.

The seats had been completely unbolted, the floor-boards ripped up, and the side panels removed, all in an apparent effort to find the
incriminating documents.

There were also burn marks on the floor.

Apparently, the killers had used Yeakey's car to destroy what little evidence they had discovered.

[952]
At approximately 6:00 p.m.

that evening, Canadian County Deputy Sheriff Mike Ramsey was cruising the area near the old El Reno
reformatory when he noticed an abandoned vehicle in a field.

"Immediately [the] hair stood up on the back of my neck," said the deputy.

Ramsey came upon the empty car which he immediately recognized as Yeakey's.

There was blood on both seats, and a razor blade lying on
the dash.

Yeakey was nowhere to be found.There was blood on both seats, and a razor blade lying on
the dash.

Yeakey was nowhere to be found.

The deputy immediately called for a homicide investigator, and taped off the scene.

It wasn't until several hours later that police dogs finally
located Yeakey's body in a ditch, a mile and-a-half away.[953]
While it was a macabre scene, the Oklahoma City Medical Examiner's report was even more gruesome.

The report released from the
Medical Examiner described numerous "superficial" lacerations on the wrists, arms, throat, and neck, and a single bullet wound to the right
temple.

The report also showed another curious thing.

The bullet had entered just above and in front of the right ear, and had exited towards the
bottom of the left ear.

Apparently, whoever held the gun held it at a downward angle.

A person shooting themself would tend to hold the gun
at an upward angle, or at the most, level.

It would rather difficult for a large, muscle-bound man like Yeakey to hold a heavy service revolver
or other large caliber weapon at a downward angle to his head.

(See Appendix)
While it is true that a slug can alter its trajectory once inside the skull, a pathologist in the San Francisco Medical Examiner's office told me
that a 9mm or other large caliber weapon — the type commonly used by police officers — usually tends to travel in a straight line.

But perhaps the most revealing evidence was that the wound did not have a "Stellat," the tell-tale star shape caused by the dissipating gases
from the gun's muzzle.

At the close range of a suicide weapon, such markings would clearly be present, unless of course… the shooter used
a silencer.[954]
While Dr.

Larry Balding, Oklahoma City's Chief Medical Examiner, quickly ruled the death a "suicide," another Medical Examiner's report
would, according to Rivera, surface like an eerie, prescient message from the grave.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At the close range of a suicide weapon, such markings would clearly be present, unless of course… the shooter used
a silencer.[954]
While Dr. Larry Balding, Oklahoma City's Chief Medical Examiner, quickly ruled the death a "suicide," another Medical Examiner's report
would, according to Rivera, surface like an eerie, prescient message from the grave. This other report, quickly redacted and hidden from
public view, showed a face that was bruised and swollen; blood on the body and clothes that was not the dead man's blood type; and
multiple deep lacerations filled with grass and dirt, as though the body had been dragged a distance. Yet according to Rivera, Maj. Upchurch denied that Yeakey's throat was slashed at all. She was later told by a sympathetic police dispatcher
that his throat was indeed slashed — deeply. Dr. Larry Balding, who signed off on the Yeakey report, is adamant. "I can tell you unequivocally and without a doubt that there was no other
ME report."
Yet while attending a social function, Rivera claims her sister had a chance encounter with the mortician who worked on Yeakey's body. She
was discussing the strange inconsistencies of his death with someone at the party, when the mortician, not knowing the woman was Rivera's
sister, spoke up. "That sounds just like a police officer we worked on in Oklahoma City," he said. When asked if that man happened to be
Terrance Yeakey, the mortician "freaked."

--- PAGE BREAK ---When pressed, he told the shocked relative that the dead man's wrists contained rope burns and handcuff marks.

A former FBI agent and
police officer, the mortician said that Yeakey's lacerations were already sewn up when the body arrived from the Medical Examiner's office.

Dr.

Balding's response to this was that the marks were merely "skin slippage," resulting from the natural decomposition of the body.

Yet stranger still, the body was not supposed to go to this particular funeral home at all, but to one in Watonga.

While the OCPD was
supposed to pay the expenses of the funeral, no funds were ever allocated, according to Rivera.

"Vicki had to pay off the burial to Russ
Worm [Funeral Home].

So I wonder if we paid somebody off to do the job."[955]
Was that job to clean up Yeakey so that his manner of death wouldn't appear suspicious?

This incident is similar to the murder of President Kennedy, whose body was taken to Bethesda Naval Hospital instead of being examined by
the Dallas Medical Examiner as is standard procedure.

Once there, military pathologists and those controlling them were able to skew their
findings to the satisfaction of the murderers.

The chief pathologist burned his notes, and years later, when researchers went to examine
Kennedy's brain, it was found missing from the National Archives.

Apparently, Terrance Yeakey's murderers and those covering up his death had not counted on this particular mortician's testimony.

Was Terrance Yeakey tortured?

Was he murdered, then made to look like a suicide?

Did he know something he wasn't supposed to know,
or was he simply despondent over life's circumstances?

Said friend Kimberly Cruz, "I don't believe he would have done something like that.

He was always happy and joking a lot."
Another friend, Karen Von Tungeln, said, "[Terry and I] talked about a friend in high school… who had committed suicide, and how stupid
and selfish he was for having done so.… 'I just can't understand it man,' said Terry.Said friend Kimberly Cruz, "I don't believe he would have done something like that.

He was always happy and joking a lot."
Another friend, Karen Von Tungeln, said, "[Terry and I] talked about a friend in high school… who had committed suicide, and how stupid
and selfish he was for having done so.… 'I just can't understand it man,' said Terry.

'It makes no sense to me.'"[956]
If the officer was bent on taking his life, it would appear strange, since he had spent most of the previous month taking entrance exams for
the FBI.

Yeakey and best friend Barry McCrary were looking forward to becoming FBI agents.

Perhaps if he had known the role that the FBI
played in the bombing, perhaps even in his own death, he would have changed careers.

Like Dr.

Don Chumley, Terrance Yeakey was one of the first rescuers in the Murrah Building on April 19.

Had he seen something he wasn't
supposed to see?

Had he heard something he wasn't supposed to hear?

One afternoon, while the family was at Police Headquarters, an officer who Rivera described as Yeakey's "only true friend," pulled them off
to the side, and whispered "They killed him."[957]
Like Terrance Yeakey, the press claimed that Dr.

Don Chumley was saddened and disturbed that he hadn't helped more people that terrible
day.

Chumley, who ran the Broadway Medical Clinic about half a mile from the Federal Building, was one of the first to arrive at the bombing
site on April 19.

Shaun Jones, Chumley's step-son, was assisting him.

Jones recalled the scene:
"They had sent us around to the underground parking garage, where some people were trapped.

Suddenly, three guys come running out of
the basement yelling, 'There's a bomb!

A bomb!

It's gonna' blow!' Everybody panicked and ran screaming away from the building as fast as
they could."
Chumley, who was working with Dr.

Ross Harris, was one of the few doctors who actually went into the Federal Building, while the others
waited outside.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It's gonna' blow!' Everybody panicked and ran screaming away from the building as fast as
they could."
Chumley, who was working with Dr. Ross Harris, was one of the few doctors who actually went into the Federal Building, while the others
waited outside. He had helped many people, including seven babies, whom he later pronounced dead. Chumley was killed five months later when his Cessna 210 crashed near Amarillo, Texas in what Jones calls "mysterious circumstances."
"It's a pretty mysterious circumstance," said Jones. "There's no apparent reason — there's nothing we can think of."
Jones added that Chumley had been in a minor wreck during a landing a year earlier when his plane became trapped in a vortex caused by
a large jet landing nearby. The small plane was forced into a snow bank causing some damage to its left wing tip. The damage had been
repaired. Would this contradict Jones' hypothesis? "Well, from talking to pilots I that know, they say that can't cause a plane to crash. I mean, as good a pilot as he is, that's not going to cause
his plane to go straight down into the ground. Another pilot said, 'that's just like a car that's out of alignment — it happens all the time — it's just something you learn to fly with.' The plane
had been flown several times since that."

--- PAGE BREAK ---According to reports in The Daily Oklahoman, Chumley, who was on a hunting trip that weekend, had twice landed earlier — on Friday, due
to bad weather conditions.

The crash occurred three days later, on a Monday.

"The thing that's odd to me is that Don was perfectly healthy," said Jones.

"He was talking to the tower, and from one minute to the next he
just went straight smack down into the ground."[958]
Investigators said they could find no evidence of an explosion at the macabre scene.

Chumley's throttle was still set at cruise, and his gear
and flaps were up.

The FAA inspector stated there were "no anomalies with the engine or the airframe," and "pathological examination of the
pilot did not show any preexisting condition that could have contributed to the accident."[959]
"To me it's unusual because I know he was a good pilot," added Jones.

"Everything was fine, he was in the air for 15 minutes, he was
climbing, he had just asked permission to go from six to seven thousand feet.

They tracked him on the screen at 6,900 feet, and the radar
technician said he saw him on the radar, then he looked back and he was gone, and the plane came straight, straight down.

I mean, no
attempt to land… nothing, just straight down."
Chumley's hunting partner Joey Chief said in an interview in The Daily Oklahoman:
"He was the kind of guy who did everything right, always.

He was very cautious, very professional," Chief said, adding [that] Chumley's plane
was equipped with extra safety instruments.

Mike Evett, a Federal Public Defender, had known Don Chumley for over twenty years.

"I would never get into an airplane with anybody I
didn't know," said Evett, "and I would never be afraid to fly with Don.

For the life of me, this doesn't sit right with me."[960]
Yet Clint Boehler, a former FAA inspector, discounts that notion.

"That was an accident waiting to happen," said Boehler.

"He didn't have an
instrument rating, and he went out into adverse conditions."That was an accident waiting to happen," said Boehler.

"He didn't have an
instrument rating, and he went out into adverse conditions.

One of the classic symptoms of what's called stall-spin accidents, is people who
are in limited visibility or full IFR, meaning they can't see the propeller in front of their face.

And, they're not current or trained or in some way
up to speed on their operation.

And they'll get into some particular mode of flight, particularly a climb, and their body and mind tells them
their not doing what their instruments say they're doing, and they tend to react to that.

And the results is sometime they stall the airplane,
and not necessarily spin it, but what it then does is it rolls over to one side and begins a very tight, steep spiral that is gaining speed all the
way down.

And if they ever do come out of the clouds or obscuration or whatever it is, often they see the ground at low altitude and they pull
back on the wheel and overstress the airplane as it hits the ground.

And this is not an uncommon thing.

Its called spatial disorientation
followed by the graveyard spiral.

And I can cite numerous examples of that.

There was a local doc here went out west some time ago —
went out in a 210 — and had the same scenario exactly."[961]
Yet Boehler is incorrect.

The doctor did in fact have an instrument rating, and was an experienced pilot, having logged over 600 hours of
flying time.

Did Dr.

Don Chumley crash on the evening of September 25th due to bad weather?

Did he commit suicide due to his grief over what he saw
on the morning of April 19th.

Or was Don Chumley murdered?

The Daily Oklahoman article described how he had cried in front of his friend Jim Taylor on the day of the bombing, after tagging seven
babies, and was not satisfied he had done all he could, even after helping to organize a fund-raiser for the victims.

It was also rumored that Chumley was about to go public with some damning information.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Daily Oklahoman article described how he had cried in front of his friend Jim Taylor on the day of the bombing, after tagging seven
babies, and was not satisfied he had done all he could, even after helping to organize a fund-raiser for the victims. It was also rumored that Chumley was about to go public with some damning information. According to a local journalist who has
investigated the bombing, Chumley was asked to bandage two federal agents who falsely claimed to have been trapped in the building
morning. Since the pair was obviously not hurt, Chumley refused. When the agents petitioned another doctor at the scene, Chumley
intervened, threatening to report them. Chumley's crash is reminiscent of that of Dr. Ronald Rogers, whose plane went down on March 3, 1994 near Lawson, Oklahoma in good
weather. Clinton's former dentist, Rogers was on his way to be interviewed by Ambrose Evans-Pritchard of the London Sunday Telegraph,
where he intended to reveal evidence of Clinton's alleged cocaine use. He never made it. Like Rogers, Hershel Friday, a "top-notch pilot," died in the crash of his small plane only two days earlier during a light drizzle at his private
airstrip. Friday had been a member of Clinton's presidential campaign finance committee, and was a close associate of C. Victor Raiser,
another member of Clinton's presidential campaign, who died in a suspicious plane crash two years earlier.[962]
In fact, the list of those who had potentially damning evidence on everything from the Kennedy assassination to Clinton's improprieties is a
long one and sordid one, stretching to hundreds of names and spanning at least three decades. A few years after the Kennedy assassination, a disgruntled CIA official was on his way to Chicago to inform a journalist of the CIA's
complicity in the murder. His plane exploded and fell into Lake Michigan.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Another well-known crash was that of Gary Caradori, a private investigator who was hot on the trail of a pediophile ring being run by Larry
King and other prominent businessmen and politicians in Omaha, Nebraska.

Caradori and his eight-year-old son Andrew died when their plane crashed in July of 1990.

Caradori radioed that his compass was swinging
wildly just before he went down.

Moments later, the plane went into a steep dive from which it never recovered.[963]
What is interesting is that only several days earlier, the courageous investigator had informed a friend that he had obtained evidence which
threatened to break the case wide open.

Among those implicated in the child pornography ring was none other than George Bush.

Like Caradori, Rogers, and numerous other whistle-blowers, Don Chumley had evidently learned of the government's hastily planned cover-
up surrounding the Oklahoma City bombing.

Had he, like so many others, made the fateful decision to go public?

Glenn Wilburn, who lost his grandsons Chase and Colton in the bombing, was one of the very first to go public.

A staunch opponent of the
government's case, Wilburn had teamed up with reporter J.D.

Cash and State Representative Charles Key to investigate the crime.

Key and Wilburn petitioned for the County Grand Jury investigation.

Wilburn worked tirelessly to investigate the truth about what really
happened that fateful morning, and his evidence was proving more and more embarrassing to authorities.

About a year after he began his investigation, Wilburn, 46, came down with a sudden case of pancreatic cancer.

Initially recovering after
surgery, he died on July 15, 1997, the day after the County Grand Jury which he convened began hearing evidence.

Three weeks later, on August 5, Assistant U.S.

Attorney Ted Richardson was found in a church parking lot with a shotgun wound to the
chest.Three weeks later, on August 5, Assistant U.S.

Attorney Ted Richardson was found in a church parking lot with a shotgun wound to the
chest.

The Medical Examiner's report stated: "No powder residue is apparent, either on the external aspect of the wound or in the shirt." An
interesting observation considering Richardson had allegedly pushed a shotgun up to his chest and pulled the trigger.[964]
The death was ruled a "suicide."[965]
Yet the circumstances seemed to concur.

Richardson had been depressed.

He had been seeing a psychiatrist and was on Prozac.

He once
told a hunting buddy he "felt like ending it all."[966]
One sunny morning, Richardson rose, fed his two dogs, got in his car, drove to a church near his house, pulled out a shotgun and shot
himself through the heart.

He left no note.

Was Ted Richardson depressed enough to kill himself?

And if so, why?

The 49-year-old father of two had a happy marriage, and adored his
8-year-old son.

The two weeks he took off of work due to unexplained "pressures" may provide a clue.

Richardson was the bombing and arson specialist for
the Western District of Oklahoma.

He was inexplicably transferred to the bank robbery detail after the bombing — an area in which he had
no expertise.

As his brother Dan explained, "Ted should have gotten the bombing case."[967]*
Instead, the case was given to Joseph Hartzler.

Friends described Richardson as "one of the few good guys," and a man with a "strong sense of conscious."[968] It is uncertain if the same
can be said of Hartzler.

Given the Federal Government's conduct in this case, such labels might tend to render a man such as Richardson a
piranha.

Interestingly, Richardson was the U.S.

Attorney who prosecuted Sam Khalid in 1990 for insurance fraud.

It was rumored that he was looking
into Khalid's suspicious activities subsequent to the bombing, and was about to bring charges.

He decided to kill himself instead.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was rumored that he was looking
into Khalid's suspicious activities subsequent to the bombing, and was about to bring charges. He decided to kill himself instead. Is it a coincidence these individuals, who had witnessed events on April 19, or had been vocal opponents of the government's case, had
died? "Out of roughly 5,000 of us who were originally involved in Iran-Contra," said Al Martin, "approximately 400, since 1986, have committed
suicide, died accidentally or died of natural causes. In over half those deaths, official death certificates were never issued. In 187
circumstances, the bodies were cremated before the families were notified."[969]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Craig Roberts and John Armstrong, who investigated a similar spate of suspicious deaths for their book, JFK: The Dead Witnesses, revealed
that most of the deaths peaked in the months leading up to one of the investigations, with the deaths often coming days or even hours
before the person was supposed to testify.

In the three years following the Kennedy assassination, 18 material witnesses perished.

In the time period leading up to 1979, when the last
of the Kennedy investigations ended, over 100 witnesses had died.

Interestingly, most of the deaths coincided with one of the four main
investigations: The Warren Commission (1964-65); the Jim Garrison investigation (1965-69); the Senate Committee investigation (1974-76);
and the House Committee on Assassinations investigation (1976-79).

Naturally, the CIA had an answer for these mysterious deaths.

In a 1967 departmental memo, a CIA officer wrote:
Such vague accusations as that more than 10 people have died mysteriously can always be explained in some rational way: e.g., the
individuals concerned have for the most part died of natural causes; the [Warren] Commission staff questioned 418 witnesses — the FBI
interviewed far more people, conducting 25,000 interviews and re interviews — and in such a large group, a certain number of deaths are to
be expected.

Yet Roberts and Armstrong correctly note that if the CIA were not involved in any of the deaths, why was such a memo disseminated?

Then, to add further fuel to the fire, CIA technicians testified before the Senate Committee (Church Committee) in 1975 that a variety of
Termination with Extreme Prejudice [TWEP] weapons had been used throughout the years, and many were chosen because they left no
postmortem residue.

In one particular memo, the author states:
You will recall that I mentioned that the local circumstances under which a given means might be used might suggest the technique to be
used in that case.Then, to add further fuel to the fire, CIA technicians testified before the Senate Committee (Church Committee) in 1975 that a variety of
Termination with Extreme Prejudice [TWEP] weapons had been used throughout the years, and many were chosen because they left no
postmortem residue.

In one particular memo, the author states:
You will recall that I mentioned that the local circumstances under which a given means might be used might suggest the technique to be
used in that case.

I think the gross divisions in presenting this subject might be:
(1) bodies left with no hope of the cause of death being determined by the most complete autopsy and chemical examination;
(2) bodies left in such circumstances as to simulate accidental death;
(3) bodies left in such circumstances as to simulate accidental death;
(4) bodies left with residue that simulate those caused by natural death…
Regarding deaths that could be simulated to appear as "natural causes," the various assassination experts within the intelligence
communities of the world knew quite well of the effects of such chemical agents as sodium morphate, which caused heart attacks; thyon
phosphate, which is a solution that can suspend sodium morphate and provide a vehicle to penetrate the surface of the skin with the
chemical (which is used to coat something the victim might touch); and beryllium, which is an extremely toxic element that causes cancer
and fibrotic tumors.[970]
As the daughter of a CIA contract agent who worked with Oliver North told me: "They eliminated my father, and I know what they do in the
Agency.

I know how they work as far as the Mafia goes.… They have no scruples.

And they don't go by any law but their own.

There is no
conscious to these people; the end justifies the means.… They will shut anybody up that they possibly can.

They're amazing.

And they will
go through anything to make you look crazy, to make you appear to be a liar.…
"And they go into these operations, and they run amok.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They're amazing. And they will
go through anything to make you look crazy, to make you appear to be a liar.…
"And they go into these operations, and they run amok. They run amok. And then when it gets carried away or there's a leak, here comes
the damage control, and you have to make everybody else appear like they're crazy. I mean people out there drop like flies. How many
people can commit suicide for God's sake. How many people can be handcuffed behind their back, and they can call it suicide because they
were shot in the head?"[971]
Tip of the Iceberg
"Justice can kill or thwart any investigation at will, and it does so on a regular basis." - Former U.S. Senate investigator
"[Justice] has been engaged in sharp practices since the earliest days and remains a fecund source of oppression and corruption today. It is
hard to recall an administration in which it was not the center of grave scandal. - Publisher and scholar H.L. Mencken

--- PAGE BREAK ---As an experienced investigator once said, "A cover-up often proves the crime, and lifts the identities of the perpetrators into relief."
In this case, those covering up the Oklahoma City bombing appeared to be the Federal Government itself.

Law-enforcement officials,
including those at the local level, lied about their foreknowledge of the attack.

They rushed to destroy all forensic evidence of the site.

They
ignored dozens of credible witnesses and intimidated others.

They organized a media smear campaign against anyone who threatened to
reveal the truth.

And they murdered those with critical knowledge of the facts who had tried to come forward.[972]
Ironically, the letters "FBI" stand for "Fidelity, Bravery, and Integrity." A more appropriate definition might be "Federal Bureau of Intimidation."
As will be outlined in Volume Two, the FBI is guilty of an whole litany of crimes, ranging from obstruction of justice to outright murder.

It might be interesting to note that the FBI's current director, Louis Freeh, rose to his position on the victory of the Leroy Moody case.

Freeh's
chief witness, Ted Banks, later told an appeals court that Freeh threatened him into testifying against Moody.

Banks was subsequently
sentenced to 44 months in prison for "perjury."
For his part, Freeh was promoted to FBI Director, where he drew around him such figures as Tom Thurman, Roger Martz, and Larry Potts,
who led the murderous debacles at Waco and Ruby Ridge.

Freeh placed Potts in charge of the "investigation" in Oklahoma City.[973]
Overseeing the FBI is the Department of Justice (DoJ), undoubtedly the most misnamed federal agency ever created.Banks was subsequently
sentenced to 44 months in prison for "perjury."
For his part, Freeh was promoted to FBI Director, where he drew around him such figures as Tom Thurman, Roger Martz, and Larry Potts,
who led the murderous debacles at Waco and Ruby Ridge.

Freeh placed Potts in charge of the "investigation" in Oklahoma City.[973]
Overseeing the FBI is the Department of Justice (DoJ), undoubtedly the most misnamed federal agency ever created.

While purporting to be
a law-enforcement body independent of the legislative and executive branches, in reality it is little more than a political tool utilized by corrupt
leaders to cover up high crimes and intimidate and imprison whistle-blowers.[974]
Janet Reno, the current Attorney General, rose to her position on a wave of highly dubious child abuse cases, where the only abuse, it
appeared, was fostered by Reno herself.

In 1984, Reno, then Dade County District Attorney, prosecuted Ileana Fuster, a 17-year-old newlywed who helped her husband Frank by
operating a day-care out of their home.

To illicit the required confession from Ileana, Reno had her locked away in a solitary confinment.

Stephen Dinerstein, a private investigator employed by the Fuster's attorneys wrote in his report that the formerly bright, attractive 17-year-
old:
…appeared as if she was 50 years old.

Her skin was drawn from a large loss of weight.… She had sores and infections on her skin and
states that no sanitary conditions exist or are provided, that the shower, when received, is a hosing down in the cell.Stephen Dinerstein, a private investigator employed by the Fuster's attorneys wrote in his report that the formerly bright, attractive 17-year-
old:
…appeared as if she was 50 years old.

Her skin was drawn from a large loss of weight.… She had sores and infections on her skin and
states that no sanitary conditions exist or are provided, that the shower, when received, is a hosing down in the cell.

That she is in a cell with
nothing in it but a light in the ceiling and that she is often kept nude and in view of everybody and anybody." [Dinerstein also noted that
Ileana had become] a constantly crying, shaking, tormented person who understands little if anything about the whole process and is now
being threatened and promised and is totally in a state of confusion to the point of not having the slightest idea as to month and date.… Mrs.

Fuster's condition has deteriorated so badly she could hardly move and was very slow to respond to any questions.

When asked if Mr.

Van
Zamft (her attorney) was present, she could not even recall, but said simply that the woman State Attorney (Reno) was very big and very
scary and made suggestions as to problems that would arise if she didn't cooperate.

After almost a year kept in this deplorable condition, including visits by Reno to coerce her, and visits by psychiatrists to get her to confess,
Ileana cracked, "confessing" to a whole legion of imaginary acts.

After serving three out of a ten year sentence, she was deported to Honduras, where her mind now clear, she immediately recanted her
confession.

Only days before she was scheduled to retestify via satellite (the DA's office threatened to charge her with "perjury" if she returned), she
retracted her retraction in a letter to the Miami Herald.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After serving three out of a ten year sentence, she was deported to Honduras, where her mind now clear, she immediately recanted her
confession. Only days before she was scheduled to retestify via satellite (the DA's office threatened to charge her with "perjury" if she returned), she
retracted her retraction in a letter to the Miami Herald. Rosenthal believes she was threatened.[975][976]
Several weeks after Janet Reno was sworn in as Attorney General, she authorized a plan to flood the church at Waco (containing women
and children) with tear gas and ram it with battle tanks, based on allegations of "child abuse."
A 1988 Amnesty International report claimed that "CS gas contributed to or caused the deaths of more than 40 Palestinians — including 18
babies under 6 months of age — who had been exposed to tear gas in enclosed spaces."[977]* Reno's latest attempt to "save the children"
resulted in the deaths of 86 people, including 25 children. As for the allegations of child abuse, both the County Sheriff and the Texas Welfare Department, who were two of the first to interview
Davidian children, indicated that there was no signs of abuse. The FBI later acknowledged their own reports to be false.[978]
Representative James Traficant (D-OH) summed up the situation at "Justice" when he wrote to members of Congress on April 15, 1997:
There have been numerous case of prosecutorial misconduct, fraud and outright murder on the part of Justice Department personnel that

--- PAGE BREAK ---have gone largely unpunished.

The American people expect the Justice Department, more than any other federal agency, to be beyond
reproach when it comes to ethics and responsible behavior.

Something is seriously wrong in our democracy if criminal and unethical
behavior at the nation's top law enforcement agency goes unpunished.[979]*
The crimes Traficant's speaking of are legion.

The scandals covered up by corrupt DoJ officials are endless.

The cases of individuals who
have been singled out for prosecution by the so-called "Justice" Department would fill volumes.

Probably the most infamous case of DoJ corruption in modern history is the Inslaw affair, where DoJ officials conspired to steal software
from the small computer company, defraud them out of payments, then force them into bankruptcy.

The Inslaw case provides a perfect
example of how the DoJ regularly lies, destroys evidence, selectively prosecutes people, obstructs Congressional investigations, and
murders those who threaten to reveal their wrongdoing.

In 1982, the DoJ signed a $10 million contract with Inslaw to install an enhanced version of their PROMIS (Prosecutors Management
Information System) software in 42 U.S.

Attorneys offices.

Inslaw completed the project, but was never paid for their services.

Heavily in
debt, they had no choice but to file for bankruptcy.

It seemed that a rival firm named Hadron, had attempted to purchase PROMIS from Inslaw.

"We have ways of making you sell," said CEO
Dominic Laiti, who warned Inslaw owner Bill Hamilton that Hadron was connected to Attorney General Edwin Meese.

Both Meese and his
close friend, Earl Brian, had financial interests in Hadron.

After the DoJ refused to pay Inslaw, Meese handed the software over to his crony Brian, who had CIA contract agent Michael Riconosciuto
reconfigure the program with a special "trap door," allowing U.S.Both Meese and his
close friend, Earl Brian, had financial interests in Hadron.

After the DoJ refused to pay Inslaw, Meese handed the software over to his crony Brian, who had CIA contract agent Michael Riconosciuto
reconfigure the program with a special "trap door," allowing U.S.

intelligence agencies to monitor and manipulate accounts of banks and
intelligence agencies who subsequently purchased the program.

The profits, of course, went to Brian and his cronies at the DoJ.[980]
When Inslaw attempted to sue the DoJ, their attorney was threatened and dismissed from his firm.[981] In spite of the stonewalling and
harassment, Inslaw eventually won their case.

Judge George Bason, ruling in favor of the company, wrote:
[DoJ officials] took, converted, stole, [the plaintiff's property] by trickery, fraud and deceit.

[They made] an institutional decision… at the
highest level simply to ignore serious questions of ethical impropriety, made repeatedly by persons of unquestioned probity and integrity, and
this failure constitutes bad faith, vexatiosness, [a] fraudulent game of cat and mouse, demonstrating contempt for both the law and any
principle of fair dealing.[982]
After Judge Bason ordered the DoJ to pay Inslaw $6.8 million in licensing fees and roughly another $1 million in legal fees, he suddenly
discovered that he was not being reappointed to the bench.[983]
The Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, chaired by Senator Sam Nunn, agreed wholeheartedly with Judge Bason.

Yet the
committee's efforts to probe the Inslaw scandal were blocked by the DoJ, who refused to allow their personnel to testify under oath.[They made] an institutional decision… at the
highest level simply to ignore serious questions of ethical impropriety, made repeatedly by persons of unquestioned probity and integrity, and
this failure constitutes bad faith, vexatiosness, [a] fraudulent game of cat and mouse, demonstrating contempt for both the law and any
principle of fair dealing.[982]
After Judge Bason ordered the DoJ to pay Inslaw $6.8 million in licensing fees and roughly another $1 million in legal fees, he suddenly
discovered that he was not being reappointed to the bench.[983]
The Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, chaired by Senator Sam Nunn, agreed wholeheartedly with Judge Bason.

Yet the
committee's efforts to probe the Inslaw scandal were blocked by the DoJ, who refused to allow their personnel to testify under oath.

The
Senate report stated that it had found employees "who desired to speak to the subcommittee, but who chose not to, out of fear for their
jobs."[984]
Said a former Congressional investigator who dealt with the Justice Department for 15 years, "I've got to tell you, the bottom line is that the
DoJ as presently constituted is a totally dishonest organization, riddled with political fixes.

They know how to write the memo, how to make
the phone call, how to deny access to Congress.

The game over there is fixed."
The stonewalling by the DoJ during the Inslaw investigations paralleled that of the Oklahoma City bombing, where defense attorneys
encountered continuous denials in their requests for discovery.

The stonewalling of the Inslaw investigation, stated the Congressional report,
included, "restrictions, delays, and outright denials to requests for information… obstructed access to records and witnesses, [and] the
"illegal shredding of documents."
Yet the committee did nothing to punish those responsible, merely recommending that the DoJ request the Court of Appeals to appoint an
"independent" prosecutor.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The game over there is fixed."
The stonewalling by the DoJ during the Inslaw investigations paralleled that of the Oklahoma City bombing, where defense attorneys
encountered continuous denials in their requests for discovery. The stonewalling of the Inslaw investigation, stated the Congressional report,
included, "restrictions, delays, and outright denials to requests for information… obstructed access to records and witnesses, [and] the
"illegal shredding of documents."
Yet the committee did nothing to punish those responsible, merely recommending that the DoJ request the Court of Appeals to appoint an
"independent" prosecutor. While Attorney General William Barr initially refused, he eventually succumbed to media pressure, appointing one
of his old DoJ cronies, Nicholas Bua, to "investigate" the matter. Bua impaneled a Federal Grand Jury. But, as in the Oklahoma City case,
the prosecuting attorney, Bua's law partner Charles Knight, manipulated and controlled the witnesses. When the jury began giving credence
to the allegations against DoJ, Bua quickly dismissed the jury and impaneled another one.[985]
Not surprisingly, one of Bua's chief investigators was none other than Joseph Hartzler. In a letter Hartzler wrote to Assistant Associate
Attorney General John Dwire in October of 1994, the noble government prosecutor states:
I applaud your efforts and especially your conclusions. To paraphrase Theodore Roosevelt, we spent ourselves on a worthy cause….[986]
Hartzler's next "worthy cause" would be to serve as lead prosecutor in the Oklahoma City bombing case, assisting the DoJ in one of the
largest cover-ups of the 20th Century.

--- PAGE BREAK ---"I don't understand where they found him or why they chose him," says Michael Deutsch, who as an attorney in Chicago defended a Puerto
Rican terrorist in a 1985 bombing case prosecuted by Hartzler, a successful prosecution that is often cited as one of the reasons Hartzler got
the Oklahoma City job.…[987]
Deutsch is referring to the prosecution of four Las Fuerzas Armadas de Liberacion National Puertorriqueo (FALN) members, a Puerto Rican
nationalist group which the government claimed was responsible for more than 100 bombings or attempted bombings since 1970.

The
defense of the FALN paralleled that of the Oklahoma City bombing defendants, with crucial evidence being withheld — evidence that would
have implicated the FBI and ATF in COINTELPRO-style illegal activites directed against the Chicano and Puerto Rican Movements.

The
judge in the FALN case, Federal District Judge George Leighton, has reported connections to the CIA.[988]
Yet Hartzler claimed he volunteered for the role of lead prosecutor.

Whether or not that is true, Hartzler, a wheelchair-bound multiple
sclerosis victim, is the perfect choice — a man able to pander to the sympathies of a jury already overwhelmed by images of dead and
handicapped victims.

This astute observation was made obvious by none other than Newsweek, which wrote: "Some suggested that a
wheelchair-bound prosecutor would appeal to a jury in a case with so many maimed victims.…"[989]
As the Legal Times observed:
Having a lead prosecutor who maneuvers around the courtroom in a motorized scooter, some say, is a good tactic for gaining sympathy with
a jury — especially in a case where more than 500 people were injured.[990]
"Others saw a malleable personality easily micromanaged by superiors in Washington," added Newsweek.

A rather candid observation in a
case where "micromanaging" is key.

"I don't think that Joe is in charge of the prosecution team," said Stephen Jones.A rather candid observation in a
case where "micromanaging" is key.

"I don't think that Joe is in charge of the prosecution team," said Stephen Jones.

"The shots are called by [Deputy Attorney General] Jamie
Gorelick and [her top aide] Merrick Garland."
Justice Department officials scoff at such a notion, pointing out that they are too far away and too busy to micro-manage the trial team.

Hartzler, they say, is firmly in charge.…[991]
Interestingly, Hartzler was chief of both the civil and criminal division of the Chicago U.S.

Attorney's office during his 10-year term, a
jurisdiction not unknown for its share of corruption-ridden scandals.

His assistant, Scott Mendeloff, was accused by Sherman Skolnick of the Chicago-based Citizens' Committee to Clean Up the Courts of
covering up the murder of Wallace Lieberman, a Chicago Federal Bankruptcy Court official ready to finger several judges for bribery.

"The assassination of Lieberman, as Mendeloff knew, was tied to the corrupt activities of First National Bank of Cicero, a Mafia/CIA laundry,"
writes Skolnick.[992]
Naturally, Hartzler doesn't see any corruption in Oklahoma.

"I am 100 percent confident that when this case is resolved, everyone will think
that complete and fair due process was obtained by the defendants," Hartlzer told the American Bar Association Journal.

To facilitate this "complete and fair due process," the DoJ transferred Assistant U.S.

Attorney Ted Richardson from his position as chief
bombing and arson prosecutor for the Western District of Oklahoma to the bank robbery detail (where he had no experience).

As previously
noted, Richardson was the U.S.

Attorney who prosecuted Sam Khalid for insurance fraud.

It was rumored that Richardson, who friends claim
had a "very strong sense of conscious," was looking into Khalid's subsequent activities.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Attorney who prosecuted Sam Khalid for insurance fraud. It was rumored that Richardson, who friends claim
had a "very strong sense of conscious," was looking into Khalid's subsequent activities. On August 5, 1997, Richardson "committed
suicide."[993]
As previously noted, the number of suspicious deaths skyrocketed in the 1980s, as the government attempted to cover up an increasing
pattern of fraudulent and illegal activities. Even reporters weren't exempt from the DoJ hit-list. On August 10, 1991 reporter Danny Casolaro, who had been investigating the Inslaw
scandal and a related web of corruption he called "The Octopus," was found dead in his Martinsburg, West Virginia hotel room. Casolaro
was there to meet with a witness who was supposed to provide the key link between the DoJ and Inslaw. Like Sergeant Yeakey, Casolaro's wrists were slashed numerous times. Like Yeakey, his notes and briefcase were missing. And like
Yeakey, the death was immediately ruled a suicide by police, who made no attempt to contact Casolaro's family before ordering an
immediate and unprecedented embalming of the body. A team of contract cleaners was brought in to scour clean the hotel room from top to
bottom, eliminating all forensic evidence. The death of Casolaro led to an investigation by the Congressional Subcommittee on Economic and Commercial Law, headed by
Representative Jack Brooks (D-Texas). The report stated:

--- PAGE BREAK ---Instead of conducting an investigation into Inslaw's claims that criminal wrongdoing by high level government officials had occurred, Attorney
Generals Meese and Thornbugh blocked or restricted Congressional inquires into the matter, ignored the findings of two courts and refused
to ask for the appointment of an independent counsel.

These actions were taken in the face of a growing body of evidence that serious
wrongdoing had occurred which reached to the highest levels of the Department.

The evidence received by the committee during its
investigation clearly raises serious concerns about the possibility that a high level conspiracy against Inslaw did exist and that great efforts
have been expended by the Department to block any outside investigation into the matter.

The DoJ also prosecuted a key witness in the Inslaw case, Michael Riconosciuto, who was set up on phony drug charges to prevent him
from testifying.

The Congressional committee probing the matter noted:
[A DEA agent] reassignment in 1990 to a DEA intelligence position in the State of Washington, prior to Michael Riconosciuto's March 1991
arrest there on drug charges, was more than coincidental… The agent was assigned to Riconosciuto's home state to manufacture a case
against him.

Mr.

Coleman stated he believes this was done to prevent Mr.

Riconosciuto from becoming a credible witness concerning the U.

S.

government's covert sale of PROMIS to foreign governments.[994]
Another example of selective prosecution on behalf of DoJ is Juval Aviv, owner of the investigative firm Interfor.

A former Israeli intelligence
agent, Aviv was hired to look into the 1988 bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.

His report was directly at odds with the
government's "official" conclusions — that two Libyan terrorists were responsible for the bombing.

Aviv discovered that not only had U.S.His report was directly at odds with the
government's "official" conclusions — that two Libyan terrorists were responsible for the bombing.

Aviv discovered that not only had U.S.

officials been specifically warned of the ensuing attack, but may have had direct complicity in the murder of 270 people.

For his embarrassing disclosures, Aviv was targeted for prosecution, and investigated by the very same FBI agents who "investigated" the
Pan Am case.

To punish Aviv, DoJ fabricated evidence that Interfor had defrauded G.E.

Capital Corporation, a client who was completely
satisfied with Interfor's work, and hadn't even filed a complaint against the firm.

Nevertheless, in 1995, the DoJ indicted Aviv on three counts of defrauding G.E.

— charges for which he was unanimously acquitted.

In his
ruling opinion, the judge wrote:
The chronology of the investigation, the fact that it is resulting from no external complaint whatsoever but simply internally within the FBI as
far as any witness has testified, leads to an inference that it was generated from some other sources, and the only source in the record so
far for which any such purpose could be ascribed is the report in the other case, in the Lockerbie case.

Yet DoJ wasn't finished with Aviv.

They canceled their contract with Interfor and began a systematic campaign to intimidate his clients.

Interfor was financially devastated.

The U.S.

government, through the DoJ, believed that by intimidating people such as Juval Aviv, they
could prevent public knowledge of their complicity in the murder of 270 innocent people.

As in Oklahoma City, witnesses who knew too much about Pan Am 103, or those who possessed politically inconvenient facts, were
intimidated.

Five years on, volunteers and policemen who participated in the search remained recalcitrant — most so those who had
searched the area where the heroin was found.As in Oklahoma City, witnesses who knew too much about Pan Am 103, or those who possessed politically inconvenient facts, were
intimidated.

Five years on, volunteers and policemen who participated in the search remained recalcitrant — most so those who had
searched the area where the heroin was found.

The "Justice" Department also brutally attacked Pan Am's lawyers, attempting to sanction them with huge fines for daring to challenge the
government's case.

The government went after Allan Francovitch, producer of the award-winning documentary on Pan Am 103, The Maltese Double Cross,
which was due to premiere at the 1994 London Film Festival.

Strangely, for the first time in its 38 year history, the festival pulled the film at
the last minute.[995]
Suspiciously, a few weeks after the film previewed at London's alternative Angle Gallery, it suffered a major fire.

One day before the film was to air on Channel 4, both the Scottish Crown Office and the U.S.

Embassy sent every national and Scottish
newspaper a press pack smearing four of the film's interviewers.[996]
Within days of film being broadcast, Juval Aviv was indicted on fraud charges.

His attorney, Gerald Shargel, applied for a dismissal on the
grounds of selective prosecution.

Even the judge was forced to condemn the prosecution's arguments as "pathetic" and "dishonest."[997]
Allan Francovitch wasn't so lucky.

Within minutes of arriving in the United States to testify at Aviv's trial, he was detained by Customs agents
in a private interrogation room, and dropped dead on the spot.

All evidence and documents in Francovitch's brief case were found "missing"
from the scene.

Francovitch had been working on three other documentaries at the time, including a devestating exposé of the U.S.

atrocites
in Panama.

For his role in revealing the truth, former DIA agent Lester Coleman would be arrested on fabricated passport charges and forced to seek
asylum with his family in Sweden.--- PAGE BREAK ---

atrocites
in Panama. For his role in revealing the truth, former DIA agent Lester Coleman would be arrested on fabricated passport charges and forced to seek
asylum with his family in Sweden. In Oklahoma, ATF informant Carol Howe would be arrested on trumped up charges and forced to take refuge inside a jail cell, her testimony

--- PAGE BREAK ---to seek
asylum with his family in Sweden. In Oklahoma, ATF informant Carol Howe would be arrested on trumped up charges and forced to take refuge inside a jail cell, her testimony

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the bombing blocked from even her own trial.[998]
While reporter Danny Casolaro was murdered investigating matters related to Inslaw and BCCI, he was also checking on a lead provided to
him by Lester Coleman.
Curiously, Pan Am has never been able to review those documents which the government claims would merely show its "innocence." Like
so many other heinous crimes, the government sought to hide its wrongdoing under the catch-all of "national security." The government,
claiming it had nothing to hide, conspired with Federal Judge Thomas Platt to deny Pan Am's discovery requests on the grounds of "national
security." As Pan Am's lawyer, James Shaughnessy, wrote in opposition to the government's motion to dismiss the company's third party
liability suit:
The government has fought strenuously and successfully for three years to prevent any discovery of it.… Now, the government seeks
millions of dollars of sanctions to punish and bankrupt my firm and me for having the temerity not only to assert claims against the
government but also for even seeking discovery from the government.…
The government condemns as sanctionable any view of the facts that differs from its own. In effect, what the government condemns is
defendants' refusal to blindly adopt its version of the facts despite the government's refusal to produce the evidence from which defendants
could have determined whether the government's version of the facts was correct.…
The government expects this blind trust even though we had information from multiple sources that conflicted with the government's
sweeping assertions and that suggested the government was responsible for the failure to prevent the bombing.…
Seven years later, the DoJ and FBI would ask the victims in Oklahoma City for this same blind trust — lying about their prior knowledge of
the attack. Lying about the number of bombs found. Lying about the APB put out on the brown pick-up. Lying about the presence of other
suspects. Ignoring witnesses who saw those suspects and trying to get them to change their stories. Tapping people's phones and exhorting
them into not talking to the press and defense investigators. And intimidating several witnesses into silence.
In their attempt to frame ATF informant Carol Howe on phony explosives charges, the government was unsuccessful. In his closing
argument, Howe's attorney Clark Brewster waved his arms and passionately announced to the jury, "there was no bomb threat here, the
only threat here is what the government can do to people when they don't like what you say or what you might say…."
Howe was acquitted.
Many others wouldn't be so fortunate.
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.comat here is what the government can do to people when they don't like what you say or what you might say…."
Howe was acquitted.
Many others wouldn't be so fortunate.
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---government can do to people when they don't like what you say or what you might say…."
Howe was acquitted.
Many others wouldn't be so fortunate.
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7
The Connection
"It's a total conspiracy. It has government written all over it."
— Tom Posey, Civilian Military Assistance Group/Iran-Contra Player
April 19, 1995 was, like November 22, 1963, a day that devastated America. Stunned citizens everywhere watched anxiously as another
painful drama unfolded before them.
Within minutes of the brutal attack on Oklahoma City, an army of agencies leapt into action. In the White House Situation Room the
atmosphere was tense as officials from the National Security Council, the Secret Service, the FBI, ATF, NSA, and CIA all assembled to brief
the President.
This crisis team, led by the Justice Department, linked up to command centers around the globe, monitored by a plethora of intelligence
agencies on extra-high alert. The FBI, the CIA's Directorate of Operations and their domestic arm, the National Resources Division, sent
agents hither and yonder in a frantic and desperate search for information concerning the catastrophic attack.
In a quite Maryland suburb, one former CIA official sat back and calmly monitored the ensuing chaos. He picked up his pipe, casually
adjusted the volume on his television, and leaned back in his comfortable leather chair.
Two thousand miles away in Albuquerque, D'Ferdinand Carone, the daughter of former police detective, CIA operative, and Mafia bag-man,
"Big Al" Carone, picked up the telephone and dialed a very private number.
A half a continent away, the former CIA Deputy Director of Covert Operations tapped the contents of his pipe into an ashtray, hit the mute
button on his remote control, and answered the phone.
Carone had been trying to reach Theodore Shackley for over two weeks. As they talked, her attention was suddenly diverted by a horrible
scene. What appeared to be an office building lay smoldering in ruins. People and sirens were screaming in the background as bodies were
carted away by ambulance.
"I said, 'oh my God, they bombed Oklahoma!'
"This was about the time they were talking about the plane they stopped in Heathrow [with Abraham Ahmed], and I said, 'here we go again.'
Carone was referring of course to the World Trade Center bombing by a group of Mid-East terrorists. She assumed that this was more of the
same.
"And Ted said, 'Now wouldn't you find it interesting if you found out it was terrorists from here?'
"I said, 'excuse me?'
"And he said, 'just what I said.'
"Then it hit me like a ton of bricks. I got the distinct feeling that he knew who it was, and that it actually had something to do with the
Agency."[999]
While scores of intelligence and law-enforcement agencies scoured the globe for clues as to who had bombed the Alfred P. Murrah Building,
one man in a small office in Maryland seemed to have the answer.[1000]
How did he know?ce and law-enforcement agencies scoured the globe for clues as to who had bombed the Alfred P. Murrah Building,
one man in a small office in Maryland seemed to have the answer.[1000]
How did he know?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---8
Lockerbie — A Parallel
"The covert operators that I ran with would blow up a 747 with 300 people to kill one person.

They are total sociopaths with no conscience
whatsoever."
— Former Pentagon CID Investigator Gene Wheaton
On December 21, 1988, in the tiny town of Lockerbie, Scotland, 270 lives came to a traumatic and fiery end when Pan Am flight 103 was
blown out of the skies.

Two hundred and fifty-nine people plunged to their deaths, and 11 more died on the ground.

Several minutes before flight 103 took off from London's Heathrow airport, FBI Assistant Director Oliver "Buck" Revell rushed out to the
tarmac and pulled his son and daughter-in-law off the plane.[1001]
How did he know?

Perhaps Revell's intimate knowledge derived from his relationship with Lt.

Colonel Oliver North.

In March of 1986, North advised Attorney
General Edwin Meese to head off the FBI's ensuing investigation into Iran-Contra.

Meese informed Revell.

Consequently, North managed to
keep abreast of the FBI's investigation by conveniently receiving copies of all FBI files.[1002]
Widely known for his inestimable and illegal support of the Contras, North (along with General Richard Secord and Iranian Albert Hakim)
was a business associate of Syrian arms and drug runner Monzer al-Kassar.

For his role in shipping Polish arms to North's mercenary army,
al-Kassar became the recipient of North's undying gratitude [and laundered drug proceeds].[1003]
Like so many criminals, drug-dealers, and mass-murderers the CIA had cozied up to over the years, al-Kassar enjoyed the highly valued
status of CIA "asset."
Al-Kassar was also closely aligned with Rifat Assad, brother of Syrian dictator Hafez Assad.

Assad's daughter Raja was Kassar's mistress,
and had once been married to Abu Abbas, a colleague of the notorious terrorist Abu Nidal.For his role in shipping Polish arms to North's mercenary army,
al-Kassar became the recipient of North's undying gratitude [and laundered drug proceeds].[1003]
Like so many criminals, drug-dealers, and mass-murderers the CIA had cozied up to over the years, al-Kassar enjoyed the highly valued
status of CIA "asset."
Al-Kassar was also closely aligned with Rifat Assad, brother of Syrian dictator Hafez Assad.

Assad's daughter Raja was Kassar's mistress,
and had once been married to Abu Abbas, a colleague of the notorious terrorist Abu Nidal.

Rifat himself was married to the sister of Ali Issa
Dubah, chief of Syrian intelligence, who, along with the Syrian army, controlled most of the opium production in Lebanon's Bekka Valley.

The
drug profits financed various terrorist groups, including the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC), run
by former Syrian army officer Ahmed Jibril.[1004]
Al-Kassar also acted as middleman in the ransom paid by the French to effect the release of two hostages held in Beirut.

Given his
assistance in securing the release of those hostages, the CIA believed al-Kassar would prove invaluable in negotiating the release of the six
American hostages then being held in Lebanon.[1005]*
In return for this favor, al-Kassar's drug pipeline to the United States would be protected by the CIA.

This would not prove difficult, as the
DEA was already using Pan Am flights out of Frankfort, Germany for "controlled delivery" shipments of heroin.

Realizing they couldn't halt
the flow of drugs coming out of Lebanon, the DEA utilized the controlled shipments, escorted through customs by DEA couriers, as part of a
sting operation, with the intention of catching the dealers in the U.S.[1006]
Negotiation with individuals like Monzer al-Kassar had only one drawback: al-Kassar was closely linked, not only with the terrorist-
sponsoring Syrian government, but with groups such Ahmed Jibril's PFLP-GC.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This would not prove difficult, as the
DEA was already using Pan Am flights out of Frankfort, Germany for "controlled delivery" shipments of heroin. Realizing they couldn't halt
the flow of drugs coming out of Lebanon, the DEA utilized the controlled shipments, escorted through customs by DEA couriers, as part of a
sting operation, with the intention of catching the dealers in the U.S.[1006]
Negotiation with individuals like Monzer al-Kassar had only one drawback: al-Kassar was closely linked, not only with the terrorist-
sponsoring Syrian government, but with groups such Ahmed Jibril's PFLP-GC. Jibril, was also aligned with the Iranian-backed Hezbollah,
which had a somewhat different agenda than al-Kassar. On July 3, 1988, less than six months before the Pan Am 103 bombing, the U.S.S. Vincennes shot down an Iranian airliner over the Straits
of Hormuz, killing all 290 people on board. Assuming the plane was a hostile craft, the captain of the Vincennes, Will Rodgers III, gave the
command to fire. While the people of Iran grieved, the officer responsible for the fatal mistake was awarded a medal.[1007]†

--- PAGE BREAK ---Under Islamic law, the crime had to be avenged.

As Juval Aviv of Interfor stated in his report, "It was known at the time that the contract was
out to down an American airliner."
That contract — $10 million dollars — was given to Ahmed Jibril.[1008] Jibril had already established a base of operations in Neuss,
Germany, not far from Frankfort.

Central to his cell was one Marwan Abdel Razzack Khreeshat.

Khreeshat's specialty was in building small,
sophisticated bombs incorporating timing mechanisms capable of detonating at pre-determined altitudes.

By mid-October 1988, Jibril was ready.

Khreeshat had assembled five bombs, built into Toshiba radio-cassette players.

However, the
German police were watching Khreesat.

On October 26, Khreesat and 14 other PFLP-GC suspects were rounded up in an operation code-
named "Autumn Leaves." One of the bombs was seized.

Yet four more remained at large.

While in custody, Khreesat demanded to make a phone call, then refused to answer any questions.

Within hours, he was mysteriously
released.[1009]
The incident is strikingly similar to the arrest of "neo-Nazi terrorist" Andreas Strassmeir on traffic charges in February of 1992.

"Boy, we
caught hell over that one," recalled tow-truck driver, Kenny Pence.

"The phone calls came in from the State Department, the Governor's
office, and someone called and said he had diplomatic immunity.…"[1010]
Similar calls were made on behalf of Khreesat.

Former CIA agent Oswald Le Winter, who investigated the case, stated, "…pressure had
come from Bonn… from the U.S.

Embassy in Bonn… to release Khreesat."
It seems that both Strassmeir and Khreesat were operatives of U.S.

intelligence.Embassy in Bonn… to release Khreesat."
It seems that both Strassmeir and Khreesat were operatives of U.S.

intelligence.

"I had spoken to a German reporter who refuses to go on
camera," adds Le Winter, "but who is very close to federal intelligence sources in Germany, who assured me that Khreesat was an agent of
the Jordanian service, and an asset of the Central Intelligence Agency."[1011]
Given the close relationship between the Jordanians and the CIA, this is not surprising.

Yet it appeared Khreesat wasn't only reporting to the
Jordanians and the Americans; he was also reporting to Ahmed Jibril.

Two months before the bombing, Jibril and al-Kassar were spotted by a Mossad agent dining at a Lebanese restaurant in Paris.

Jibril was
hoping to use al-Kassar's controlled drug shipments through Frankfort to effect the delivery of a bomb.

The problem: how to protect the drug
shipments while at the same time extract revenge on the Americans?

Al-Kassar preferred the former option, but, due to political pressure, he
grudgingly agreed to the latter.

While a CIA team in Wiesbaden, code-named "COREA," was negotiating its secret deal with al-Kassar for release of the hostages (and
protecting his drug route), a second team, led by Major Charles McKee of the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), and Matthew Gannon, the
CIA's Deputy Station Chief in Beirut, had traveled to Lebanon to assess the odds for a military-style rescue operation.[1012]
According to Aviv's report, McKee's team had, while reconnoitering for the release of the hostages, stumbled onto the first team's illegal drug
operation.

McKee refused to participate.

When he and Gannon contacted their control in Washington, they received no reply.

Against orders,
they decided to fly home to blow the whistle.

According to Aviv:
They had communicated back to Langley the facts and names, and reported their film of the hostage locations.

CIA did nothing.

No reply.--- PAGE BREAK ---

CIA did nothing. No reply. The team was outraged, believing that its rescue and their lives would be endangered by the double dealing. By mid-December the team became frustrated and angry and made plans to return to the U.S. with their photos and evidence to inform the
government, and to publicize their findings if the government covered up. They never arrived. That night, Pan Am flight 103 was blown out of the skies. Was the death of McKee, Gannon, and five others on their team an unfortunate coincidence, or did someone want to ensure that they didn't
reveal the carefully guarded secrets of the Octopus?[1013][1014]
Given the ample and specific warnings received by the U.S. Government from the BKA, the Mossad, and a Palestinian informant named
Samra Mahayoun, it would seem the latter.[1015]*
Whatever the case, it is indisputable that U.S. authorities were warned of the attack, and failed to stop it. Was their failure deliberate? "Do I think the CIA was involved?" asked a government Mideast Intelligence specialist quoted in the financial weekly, Barron's. "Of course
they were involved. And they screwed up. Was the operation planned by the top? Probably not. I doubt they sanctioned heroin importation
— that came about at the more zealous lower levels. But they knew what was going on and didn't care." The expert added that his agency

--- PAGE BREAK ---has "things that support Aviv's allegation, but we can't prove it.

We have no smoking gun.

And until the other agencies of the government
open their doors, we will have no smoking gun."
The Lockerbie bombing was not the first time authorities were warned in advance of a pending terrorist attack.

The situation would repeat
itself five years later in New York City, and seven years later in Oklahoma.

It was an all too eerie coincidence.

Typically, U.S.

authorities disingeniously denied receiving any warnings, as they would later do in New York and Oklahoma.

Yet, as in those
cases, evidence of prior knowledge would eventually become known.

"It subsequently came to me on further inquiries that they hadn't
ignored [the warnings]," said a Pan Am security officer.

"A number of VIPs were pulled off that plane.

A number of intelligence operatives
were pulled off that plane."
Due to the warnings posted in U.S.

embassies by the State Department (but not forwarded to Pan Am), many government employees
avoided the flight.

In fact, the large 747 was only two-thirds full that busy holiday evening.

South African president Peter Botha and several
high-ranking officials were advised by state security forces to change their reservations at the last hour.

The South African State Security
forces have a close relationship with the CIA.[1016]
Just as they would do in Oklahoma, government officials promised a complete and thorough investigation.

Stated Oliver "Buck" Revell, who
headed up the Bureau's investigation: "All of us working on the case made it a very, very personal priority of the first order."
Fronting for the CIA, Vince Cannistraro chimed in: "I had personal friends on that plane who died.

And I assure you that I wanted to find the
perpetrators of that disaster as much as anyone wanted to."
As in Oklahoma City, this would become the catch-all phrase that would set everything right and prove the government had no involvement.Stated Oliver "Buck" Revell, who
headed up the Bureau's investigation: "All of us working on the case made it a very, very personal priority of the first order."
Fronting for the CIA, Vince Cannistraro chimed in: "I had personal friends on that plane who died.

And I assure you that I wanted to find the
perpetrators of that disaster as much as anyone wanted to."
As in Oklahoma City, this would become the catch-all phrase that would set everything right and prove the government had no involvement.

Of course, this would be somewhat difficult in Revell's case, since he pulled his son and daughter-in-law off the plane minutes before it took
off.

(This was suspiciously reminiscent of the ATF agents who were paged not to come into work on April 19.)
Interestingly, Revell was the FBI's lead investigator in the crash of an Arrow Air DC-8 which exploded on December 12, 1985 in Gander,
Newfoundland, with the loss of all 248 personnel.

As in Oklahoma City, that site was quickly bulldozed, destroying crucial forensic evidence,
with an Army official maintaining a watchful eye at all times.[1017]
Hiding behind the cover-up was the same cast of characters — Oliver North, Duane "Dewy" Clarridge, and Vince Cannistraro — who was
North's deputy at the NSC during Iran-Contra, and would later appear in Lockerbie.

The same cast of characters that lurked behind the
scandals in Nicaragua and Iran, and would appear like ghostly apparitions in the smoldering ruins of Oklahoma City.[1018]
It was also an act that the U.S.

Shadow Government, responsible for precipitating, was anxious to cover up.

Had the true cause of the crash
— North's double-dealing with the Iranians — been revealed, the Iran-Contra scandal would have surfaced two years before it did.

Oliver "Buck" Revell would be on hand to make sure it didn't.

Three years later, in Lockerbie, the government was still claiming it's hands were clean.Oliver "Buck" Revell would be on hand to make sure it didn't.

Three years later, in Lockerbie, the government was still claiming it's hands were clean.

Yet it vigorously protested Pan Am's attempts to
subpoena warning memos and other documents that would have revealed the government's foreknowledge, just as it did in Oklahoma.

Simply stated, the attack on Pan Am 103 was in retaliation for the downing of the Iranian airbus.

The reason for targeting Pan Am was
simple: the airline was regularly used by al-Kassar's operatives to ferry drugs.

It would be a simple matter to switch a suitcase containing
drugs for one containing a bomb.

That appears to be just what happened.

According to Lester Knox Coleman, III, a former DIA agent in Cyprus seconded to the DEA: "I knew
from the conversations around me in '88, that he (Lebanese drug courier Khalid Jaffar) was involved in the controlled deliveries.

There's no
doubt in my mind about that at all.

When I found he was on 103 and was killed, and there was a controlled delivery going through at the time,
and I knew the security problems the DEA had, and the relationships they had with the people in Lebanon, with the issues involving security,
it was very simple for me to put one and one together and get the big two — that the DEA's operation had a role in all this."[1019]
According to Juval Aviv, the drug suitcase was switched at Frankfort, where Turkish baggage handlers working for al-Kassar had been
regularly switching bags for those containing heroin.[1020]* As the Interfor report stated:
On December 21, 1988, a BKA surveillance agent watching the Pan Am flight's loading noticed that the "drug" suitcase substituted was
different in make, shape, material and color from that used for all previous drug shipments.

This one was a brown Samsonite case.

He, like
the other BKA agents on the scene, had been extra alert due to all the bomb tips.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This one was a brown Samsonite case. He, like
the other BKA agents on the scene, had been extra alert due to all the bomb tips. Within an hour or so before takeoff he phoned in a report
as to what he had seen, saying something was very wrong.[1021]
The BKA reported this to the CIA team in Wiesbaden, who, strangely, did not reply. According to Aviv, "[The CIA unit] reported to its control.

--- PAGE BREAK ---CONTROL REPLIED: DON'T WORRY ABOUT IT, DON'T STOP IT, LET IT GO." *
Apparently, the CIA team "did not want to blow its surveillance operation and undercover penetration or to risk the al-Kassar hostage release
operation," wrote Aviv.

It seemed the CIA figured the BKA would intercept the terrorists, keeping the CIA out of the picture, thereby
maintaining its cover.

Yet this explanation hardly seems credible.

The BKA had informed the CIA about the threat — a threat to one of its own planes.

They also
knew the Americans were running a sensitive undercover operation, and must have assumed the Americans would want to handle the
situation themselves.

Moreover, there is no indication that the CIA had instructed the BKA or any other German authorities to stop the bombing.

The question is:
why not?

Certainly the CIA wouldn't blow its cover by asking the BKA to intercede, as they were already aware of the CIA/DEA operation.

This raises even more disturbing questions.

Had the CIA "control" in Washington, monitoring the situation, purposely allowed the bombing to
occur?

Was the McKee team, about to blow the whistle on the Octopus, specifically targeted for elimination?

Had Middle Eastern terrorists
knowingly or unknowingly conspired with the Octopus in eliminating a group of pesky whistle blowers?[1022]†
Strangely, after the crash, large numbers of American "rescue" personnel began showing up rather quickly.

As one searcher, a member of a
mountain rescue team recalled: "We arrived within two hours [of the crash].

We found Americans already there."[1023]
The first to appear was an FBI agent.

According to George Stobbs, a Lockerbie police inspector, "[I] started to set up a control room, and
[between] eleven o'clock and midnight, there was a member of the FBI in the office who came in, introduced herself to me, and sat down —
and just sat there the rest of the night.We found Americans already there."[1023]
The first to appear was an FBI agent.

According to George Stobbs, a Lockerbie police inspector, "[I] started to set up a control room, and
[between] eleven o'clock and midnight, there was a member of the FBI in the office who came in, introduced herself to me, and sat down —
and just sat there the rest of the night.

That was it."[1024]*
Was this so-called FBI agent there to observe the Scottish police's investigation, and report any conflicting findings back to her superiors?

Tom Dalyell, a member of British Parliament, remarked: "…Absolutely swarms of Americans [were] fiddling with the bodies, and shall we say
tampering with those things the police were carefully checking themselves.

They weren't pretending, saying they were from the FBI or CIA,
they were just 'Americans' who seemed to arrive very quickly on the scene."
The scenario was eerily similar to that in Oklahoma City, where rescue workers and bomb squad technicians seemingly appeared out of thin
air.

Recall that Oklahoma City eyewitness Debra Burdick, who was near ground zero when the bomb went off, said: "And right after that, here
comes the Bomb Squad, before the ambulances and the Fire Department."
"They would have had to have had some kind of warning to respond that quick, said Burdick's husband, "because they would have had to
get in their gear and everything."[1025]
As mentioned previously, Burdick wasn't the only one who saw federal agents and rescue personnel arrive a bit too quickly.

J.D.

Reed, who
was in the County Office Building when the bomb went off, later wrote: "The paramedics and firemen were already at work.

How could they
move so quickly?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Reed, who
was in the County Office Building when the bomb went off, later wrote: "The paramedics and firemen were already at work. How could they
move so quickly? They were there by the time we got down to the street!"[1026]
Then there was Sergeant Yeakey's ominous letter to his friend Ramona McDonald, which stated: "Everyone was behind you until you started
asking questions as I did, as to how so many federal agents arrived at the scene at the same time.…"
In Lockerbie, a number of American agents — some wearing Pan Am jumpsuits — were desperately searching for something. As Dalyell
recalled: "It was… odd and strange that so many people should be involved in moving bodies, looking at luggage, who were not members of
the investigating force. What were they looking for so carefully? You know, this was not just searching carefully for loved ones. It was far
more than that. It was careful examination of luggage and indeed bodies."[1027]
Dr. David Fieldhouse, the local police surgeon, identified Major McKee early on. "I knew that [the identification of] McKee was absolutely
correct because of the clothing which correlated closely with the other reports and statements, and the computers that were linked up to
Washington."[1028]
This would subsume that Washington knew exactly what McKee — who hadn't told Control he was coming — was wearing. In other words, it
means he was under surveillance by the Octopus. Fieldhouse also tagged over 58 bodies. "I later learned that when the bodies were taken to the mortuary, all the labels which had been put
on them had been removed with the exception of two," said Fieldhouse, "but all the rest had been removed and discarded."[1029]
A similar incident would occur in Oklahoma City. After nurse Toni Garret took a break from tagging dead bodies, she walked back to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---makeshift morgue that had been set up in a nearby church.

"When we came back in, there was a cold, callous atmosphere," said Garret.

"I
found out later that the FBI had taken over.…"
Not only had the FBI taken over, but for some reason, they were suppressing the body count, which they originally claimed as only 22 dead.

This enraged Garret, who had personally tagged over 120 bodies.

While giving a news interview, FBI agents rushed over and told her to
stop.

Garret recalled the scene: "He said, 'Well, we're down here now, and we're taking over the building.

It would be advisable and
recommendable that you keep your mouth shut."[1030]
In Lockerbie, police officers and military personnel would be prohibited under the Official Secrets Act from talking about what they had
witnessed.

Just what had they seen that was so sensitive?

Jim Wilson knows.

A local farmer, Wilson told relatives of Pan Am victims that he was present "when the drugs were found." The
Tundergarth farmer had discovered a suitcase packed with heroin in one of his fields.

Worried that it might harm his sheep, he informed local
police, who notified the Americans, who then raced to the scene in an all-terrain vehicle.

Wilson noted that the Americans seemed extremely
angry that the drugs had not been discovered earlier by their own personnel.

One Scottish police officer who did speak out said that his department had been told to keep an eye out for the drugs early on.

He also
overheard American personnel say that there was a drug courier on the plane — Khalid Jaffar — one of the Lebanese informants used by
the DEA.[1031]
Had the heroin belonged to Jaffar?

Since the drug suitcase had been switched at Frankfort, it would seem unlikely.

A more probable
explanation is that it belonged to Gannon or McKee — evidence of the illegal operation being run by the Octopus.

It would certainly explain why U.S.

officials were so desperate to find the suitcase before the Scottish authorities did.It would certainly explain why U.S.

officials were so desperate to find the suitcase before the Scottish authorities did.

Once located, the
heroin was removed, and the bag placed back in its original position like nothing had happened.

In Oklahoma City, 10 hours after the blast(s), federal agents halted rescue efforts to remove files from the building.

While limited numbers of
rescue workers were constrained to the lower right side of the building, between 40 and 50 federal agents began carting away boxes of files
from the ATF and DEA offices.

"You'd think they would have let their evidence and files sit at least until the last survivor was pulled out," one angry rescue worker told the
New York Daily News.[1032]
Then, approximately 10 days after the blast, two white trucks pulled up to the postal annex across from the Murrah Building that was being
used to store emergency supplies.

A dozen men in black unmarked uniforms, wearing ski masks and carrying submachine guns, jumped out
and formed a protective corridor to the building.

Others, wearing blue nylon windbreakers and carrying hand-held radios, formed an outer
perimeter.

As a witness watched, he observed "box after box of what appeared to be files or documents in boxes [that] were loaded on the
unmarked trucks that looked like Ryder rental trucks, but were white."[1033]
The witness, a Tulsa Fire Captain who was filming the site of the explosion, was told by one of the agents to put down his camera.

His film
was later confiscated.

What were in the boxes — boxes that were originally stored in the Federal Building — that over a dozen mysteriously anonymous federal
agents armed with submachine guns were so anxious to secrete into hiding?

Were they files that were being taken away to be destroyed…
or to be protected?

And by whom?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Were they files that were being taken away to be destroyed…
or to be protected? And by whom? The public would never learn of this bizarre incident, just as they would never learn of the Mid-Eastern connection, the numerous John Does,
the prior warnings of Cary Gagan and Carol Howe, and the elaborate cover-up. The government had convicted their man — Timothy James
McVeigh — just as they had done with Lee Harvey Oswald 34 years ago. The victims who subscribed to the government's version of the
case could now begin to experience a sense of "closure," whether they had learned the truth or not. Five years before, the government had attempted to provide "closure" to the Pan Am bombing by announcing its newly discovered
"evidence" — a tiny piece of microchip allegedly linked to the bomb. This new evidence, discovered in a remote field ten months after the
crash, would conclusively prove, the government claimed, that Libyan terrorists had destroyed the plane. Like the evidence of McVeigh's racing fuel purchases which suddenly came to light 18 months after the bombing, or the startling new
"revelations" of Eldon Elliott, Thomas Manning, and Daina Bradley, this "new evidence" would help the government divert attention from the
true perpetrators of the crime. Interestingly, Tom Thurman, the FBI lab technician who matched the chip — a tiny charred fragment that had miraculously survived two
Scottish Winters — would later be accused of perjury in unrelated cases.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Nevertheless, the discovery was hailed as a major find.

Vince Cannistraro, the CIA Counter terrorism Chief on the National Security Council,
was the front-man for new "Libyan" theory.

"The principle avenues that led to identification of a foreign role in an act of terrorism," Cannistraro quipped with mock assurance, "was
forensic evidence recovered by the Scottish police at Lockerbie themselves.

Investigators and townspeople on their hands and knees,
crawling along the countryside, picking up minute bits of debris.

And one of those bits of debris turned out to be a microchip, which was
analyzed microscopically that led to the Libyan connection."
Like the Ryder truck axle in Oklahoma City that was allegedly discovered by several different people, so the microchip would have a
confusing and contradictory bevy of claimants.

"Three of his people (FBI agents) had sworn that they had found this piece in a piece of a
coat and had signed a paper to this effect," stated Bollier.

"I later heard that it was the Scottish police who had found the piece in a shirt that
came from Malta." Yet in spite of this, the Scotts would attempt to have a townsperson sign a statement that he had found the chip.[1034]
Yet the townsperson whom the FBI claimed had discovered the chip could not even recall finding it.

The man, named "Bobby," said "I got a
call from a policeman asking if he could come down to my home, and would I sign to say that I picked those [items] up.

He brought with him
three small bags about the size of an eight-by-five piece of paper, one of which contained an item of cloth, one of which contained a brown
piece which looked very much like a piece of plastic, the third piece I couldn't tell what it was."
Had the chip been planted by the FBI?

The Bureau admitted that it already possessed two such timers, confiscated from two Libyans in
Dakar and Senegal in 1986.He brought with him
three small bags about the size of an eight-by-five piece of paper, one of which contained an item of cloth, one of which contained a brown
piece which looked very much like a piece of plastic, the third piece I couldn't tell what it was."
Had the chip been planted by the FBI?

The Bureau admitted that it already possessed two such timers, confiscated from two Libyans in
Dakar and Senegal in 1986.

The incident was remarkably similar to the Oklahoma City bombing witnesses who were coerced into signing
statements that differed from what they actually saw.

Yet British authorities would willingly cooperate with the U.S.

as the result of a phone call made by President Bush to Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher.

According to Washington Post syndicated columnist Jack Anderson, the two heads of state agreed that the investigation
should be "limited" in order to avoid compromising the two nations' intelligence communities.[1035]
For his part, Cannistraro had developed, along with NSC staffers Howard Teicher and Oliver North, the Reagan-inspired propaganda policy
of destroying the Libyan regime of Colonel Muammar al-Qaddafi.

As Bob Woodward wrote in the Washington Post:
Vincent M.

Cannistraro, a veteran CIA operations officer and director of intelligence on the National Security Council staff, and Howard R.

Teicher, the director of the office of political military affairs in the NSC, supported the disinformation and deception plan….

"I developed the policy toward Libya," said Cannistraro.

"In fact, I even wrote the draft paper that was later adopted by the President."[1036]
In spite of the obvious propaganda ploy, the evidence against Libya was dubious at best.

Even more dubious was the government's theory
of how the bomb got on board."In fact, I even wrote the draft paper that was later adopted by the President."[1036]
In spite of the obvious propaganda ploy, the evidence against Libya was dubious at best.

Even more dubious was the government's theory
of how the bomb got on board.

According to "Buck" Revell, the bomb, built by two Libyan intelligence agents — Abdel Basset al-Megrahi and
Lamin Khalifah Fhima — was placed inside a suitcase and smuggled into the airport at Malta, and tagged for its final destination to JFK
airport in New York.

It then flew, unaccompanied, to Frankfort, where it changed planes, also unaccompanied, then flew to London, where it
managed to change planes again, only to explode over Lockerbie.

Like the specter of two lone amateurs with a fertilizer bomb, the government actually expects the public to believe that a sensitive altitude-
triggered time-bomb managed to pass through three countries unaccompanied, pass through security and customs checks, change planes
twice, then detonate at precisely the right moment over its target destination!

Such a suggestion, even to the uninitiated, is ridiculous.

And there was no evidence to support it.

According to Dennis Phipps, former head of security for British Airways: "…the records of handling
of that fight were made available for me to see.

There was no evidence of any unaccompanied bags.

All of the bags that were carried as
passenger baggage on that flight, had to be checked in by a passenger who actually traveled on the flight."
Said Michael Jones, Pan Am's London Security Chief: "I've never seen any documentation whatsoever, produced by Pan Am or anybody
else, showing there was any interlying baggage to Pan Am from the Air Malta flight…"
Even the FBI's own telex, dated October 23, 1989, stated:
To Director, FBI, Priority — Records there is no concrete indication that any piece of luggage was unloaded from Air Malta 100 sent through
the luggage routing at Frankfort airport then loaded on board Pan Am 103.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There was no evidence of any unaccompanied bags. All of the bags that were carried as
passenger baggage on that flight, had to be checked in by a passenger who actually traveled on the flight."
Said Michael Jones, Pan Am's London Security Chief: "I've never seen any documentation whatsoever, produced by Pan Am or anybody
else, showing there was any interlying baggage to Pan Am from the Air Malta flight…"
Even the FBI's own telex, dated October 23, 1989, stated:
To Director, FBI, Priority — Records there is no concrete indication that any piece of luggage was unloaded from Air Malta 100 sent through
the luggage routing at Frankfort airport then loaded on board Pan Am 103. In fact, it is absurd to suggest that trained intelligence agents or even clever terrorists would opt for such a far-fetched and risky plan. Especially given the security measures regarding unaccompanied bags, which would have surely aroused suspicion. This premise becomes
even more ludicrous considering the unexpected delays inherent in Winter holiday flights. How had the bomb, after passing through three
countries, managed to arm itself and detonate at precisely the right moment?

--- PAGE BREAK ---Miraculously, eight months after the bombing, a baggage print-out was obtained by the BKA showing an unaccompanied bag that had been
transferred from Air Malta.

The government finally had its "evidence."[1037]
Just as they had suddenly dropped the Middle Eastern lead in Oklahoma, the government was now switching tracks and blaming the
Libyans for the Pan Am bombing.

But why?

Why, after two years of solid evidence pointing to Syrian and Iranian involvement, was the
government now blaming Libya — and on such flimsy pretenses?

Naturally, like the theory of McVeigh's "revenge for Waco," the government had a handy explanation: Libya's motive for the attack stemmed
from the April, 1986 U.S.

air-raid on Tripoli and Benghazi, in which over 37 civilians, including Qaddafi's infant daughter, were killed.

That
raid was in retaliation for the bombing of the La Belle Discotheque in Berlin a year earlier, in which two U.S.

servicemen and a Turkish
woman were killed.[1038]
In fact, the involvement of Libya in the disco bombing was highly questionable.

It is also curious why Qaddafi would wait two-and-a-half
years to extract his revenge on the Americans for the Benghazi attack.[1039]
Essentially, government's desire to implicate Libya for the bombing of Pan Am 103 was no different than its desire to implicate the militia for
the bombing in Oklahoma City.

In that case, they claimed, the motive was revenge for the government's atrocities at Waco.[1040]
In fact, President Bush knew perfectly well who had bombed flight 103.

Six months after the bombing, Secretary of State James Baker
visited with Syrian Foreign Intelligence Minister Farouk al-Sharaa.

Baker asked:
"What are you doing about the GLC group?"
"What are you talking about," asked al-Sharaa.

"Jibril," answered Baker.

"We know they are responsible for Lockerbie.

What are you doing about them?"
"How do you know that?"
"We have the evidence," Baker replied."We know they are responsible for Lockerbie.

What are you doing about them?"
"How do you know that?"
"We have the evidence," Baker replied.

"And the evidence is irrefutable."[1041]
Nevertheless, the government lied to the American people.[1042] The investigation had turned political.

In July of 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait.

President Bush began forming his Gulf War coalition.

Syria, formerly viewed as a terrorist state, was now seen as a necessary ally.

Interestingly, Bush had been quietly making overtures to Syrian President Assad for years.

Assad was a bitter enemy of President Saddam
Hussein of Iraq.

In order to bring Syria into the coalition, all evidence pointing to them was dropped.

And, in November of 1991, the Libyan
theory became the "official" version of the bombing.[1043]
The real story appears somewhat different.

On December 20, an intercept of a call made to the Iranian embassy in Beirut confirmed that an American operative named David Lovejoy
(AKA: Michael Franks, Michael Schafer) had spoken to Iranian Chargé d'Affaires Hussein Niknam, and advised him that the McKee team
had changed its travel plans and booked passage on flight 103.

The next day, Niknam called the Interior Ministry in Teheran and passed on
Frank's information.[1044]
The DEA was also monitoring McKee, and separately informed the CIA in Washington, British MI6, and the CIA team in Wiesbaden.[1045]
Al-Kassar's operatives had also observed Gannon making travel arrangements in Nicosia, and reported this to their CIA handlers in
Wiesbaden.

This wasn't difficult, as the DEA's "controlled delivery" operation, run by DEA Station Chief Michael T.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The next day, Niknam called the Interior Ministry in Teheran and passed on
Frank's information.[1044]
The DEA was also monitoring McKee, and separately informed the CIA in Washington, British MI6, and the CIA team in Wiesbaden.[1045]
Al-Kassar's operatives had also observed Gannon making travel arrangements in Nicosia, and reported this to their CIA handlers in
Wiesbaden. This wasn't difficult, as the DEA's "controlled delivery" operation, run by DEA Station Chief Michael T. Hurley in Cyprus, utilized
Arab informants, some of whom, according to Coleman, were reporting back to Ahmed Jibril.[1046]
As one source familiar with the case said, "Every spook in Europe knew that McKee and Gannon were flying home on flight 103."
Yet while the McKee team was obviously compromised, the question begging to be answered is, who is Michael Franks? And why did
Franks inform the Iranian embassy, a bitter enemy of the U.S., of McKee's travel plans? An associate of Oliver North, Franks worked for Overseas Press Service (OPS) a television consultancy firm run by W. Dennis Suit. A former
CIA operative in Central America, Suit was an associate of North, William Casey, Jack Singlaub, Jack Terrell, and Contra leaders Adolfo and
Mario Calero. Lester Coleman aptly described him as a representative of North's "Georgia Mafia."

--- PAGE BREAK ---In other words, Franks worked for the Octopus.

Sent to Cyprus by OPS as a "cameraman," Franks was in a perfect position to monitor the activities of the DEA.

The other question begging to be answered is: who at the CIA Control in Washington (not their headquarters in Langley) told the CIA team in
Wiesbaden: "DON'T WORRY ABOUT IT, DON'T STOP IT, LET IT GO"?[1047]
It has been argued by apologists for the CIA that the Agency didn't stop the bombing because it didn't want to compromise its hostage-
rescue mission — an operation being run by the Octopus in collusion with Monzer al-Kassar.

Essentially, we are asked to accept the idea
that the CIA was ready to sacrifice the lives of 270 people so as not to risk the opportunity to free six people.

A more plausible explanation is that the Octopus didn't want to compromise its profitable drug and gun running operation — an operation
that traces its roots from the Corsican Mafia, through the Hmong tribesman in Laos, to the Mujahadeen in Pakistan and Afghanistan, and
finally to the cartels in Columbia and Mexico.

It is an enterprise run by many of the same spooks that ran the Cold War, channeling billions of
taxpayer dollars into the military/industrial establishment, while funneling thousands of tons of heroin and cocaine into our cities' streets.[1048]
As intelligence analyst Dave Emory notes, "When federal intelligence agencies in the United States decide to move in a particular direction
— or when a faction of them decides to move in a particular direction — they do so when to move in that direction would scratch a number of
different itches at different levels simultaneously."[1049]
By passing on the travel plans of the McKee team to the Iranians, Franks allowed Ahmed Jibril to bomb the plane, eliminating McKee and
Gannon in the process, and preventing exposure of the Octopus.A more plausible explanation is that the Octopus didn't want to compromise its profitable drug and gun running operation — an operation
that traces its roots from the Corsican Mafia, through the Hmong tribesman in Laos, to the Mujahadeen in Pakistan and Afghanistan, and
finally to the cartels in Columbia and Mexico.

It is an enterprise run by many of the same spooks that ran the Cold War, channeling billions of
taxpayer dollars into the military/industrial establishment, while funneling thousands of tons of heroin and cocaine into our cities' streets.[1048]
As intelligence analyst Dave Emory notes, "When federal intelligence agencies in the United States decide to move in a particular direction
— or when a faction of them decides to move in a particular direction — they do so when to move in that direction would scratch a number of
different itches at different levels simultaneously."[1049]
By passing on the travel plans of the McKee team to the Iranians, Franks allowed Ahmed Jibril to bomb the plane, eliminating McKee and
Gannon in the process, and preventing exposure of the Octopus.

At the same time, the Iranians got revenge for the shootdown of their
airliner, and the drug dealers kept their operation relatively intact.

Using the Iranians as proxies permitted the Octopus to maintain "plausible deniability."
Describing how proxies or "cut-outs" are used in assassination work, 25-year DEA veteran Mike Levine said, "…when you say 'they wouldn't
do it,' surely you don't think that the Sicilian Mafia (to use an example) sends out a couple of Italians to do a hit on a U.S.

Attorney that they
could link directly back?

No, absolutely not.

What they might do is use what's left of [August] Record's organization (a drug dealer in South
America), they might talk to an Italian who lives in Paraguay or Monte Madeo, he then talks to the son of a German who lives in Paraguay.

An arrangement is made.

They want them hurt.--- PAGE BREAK ---

An arrangement is made. They want them hurt. This organization finds out that this guy's wife is flying on a plane. Not that that's happened. I'm giving you a scenario… that's the way it's done. We're living in a world where murder has become very, very high-tech, very convoluted,
with cut-outs…
"TWA, Pan Am 103 — this is the perfect M.O. of this organization," adds Levine. "Not that they (Ricord) did it, but when they did things, there
was no way it would ever go back to them, because they would do it for someone else."[1050]
In the case of Pan Am 103, it appeared that the Octopus was more interested in covering up its involvement with drug smugglers than in
securing the release of American hostages. And it was willing to sacrifice 270 lives to do so. Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---9
The Sting
"There were people in a position of authority that knew something was going to come down, and they didn't do anything about it… and
people got killed."
— Tom G., 22-year CIA/DIA veteran
The logistical apparatus which allowed the PFLP-GC to bomb flight 103 was a controlled drug delivery at Frankfort airport — a sting
operation run with the full knowledge of American, German, and Israeli intelligence.

It was a sting operation that had been penetrated by
Middle Eastern terrorists intent on wrecking havoc.

In Oklahoma City, another sting operation was underway.

Like the DEA's controlled delivery of drugs through Frankfort, the ATF and the FBI
would seek to utilize a "controlled delivery" of a bomb in Oklahoma City.

As previously discussed, the FBI, ATF, and U.S.

Marshals, all had ample prior warning.

Not only had the Marshals Service been warned of a
Fatwa against American installations as a result of the World Trade Center convictions, but the FBI had received warnings from the Israelis,
the Saudis, the Kuwaitis, and their own informant, Cary Gagan, concerning threats against federal buildings in Phoenix, Denver, and
Oklahoma City.

Additionally, ATF informant Carol Howe had specifically warned authorities about a neo-Nazi plan to blow up a federal building in either
Tulsa or Oklahoma City as far back as November of '94.[1051]
As the fateful day drew closer, the warnings began pouring in.Not only had the Marshals Service been warned of a
Fatwa against American installations as a result of the World Trade Center convictions, but the FBI had received warnings from the Israelis,
the Saudis, the Kuwaitis, and their own informant, Cary Gagan, concerning threats against federal buildings in Phoenix, Denver, and
Oklahoma City.

Additionally, ATF informant Carol Howe had specifically warned authorities about a neo-Nazi plan to blow up a federal building in either
Tulsa or Oklahoma City as far back as November of '94.[1051]
As the fateful day drew closer, the warnings began pouring in.

Judge Wayne Alley, whose office sits across from the Murrah Building, was
warned several weeks prior to the blast by "security officials" to take "extra precautions." The federal judge, who was not in his office at the
time, but whose clerks were injured in the blast, told the Portland Oregonian, "Of all the days for this to happen, it's absolutely an amazing
coincidence." When asked to discuss the nature of the warnings, Alley said, "Let me just say that within the past two or three weeks,
information has been disseminated… that indicated concerns on the part of people who ought to be a little bit more careful."
This is not surprising.

Gagan had warned the FBI as far back as September that federal agents and judges were targeted for assassination.

As previously noted, Gagan had been deep inside the Middle Eastern cell involved in the bombing.

Gagan informed the feds on September
21, 1994 that his Arab comrades had been cruising Denver in a white Mercury photographing federal agents.

Gagan told the author that he
was instructed to assassinate Judge Lewis Babcock.[1052]
Had the feds warned Judge Alley?

"My subjective impression," said Alley, "was there was a reason for the dissemination of these concerns,
strongly suggesting an impending proximate event."[1053]
The Oklahoma City Fire Department, unlike Judge Alley, had the benefit of more specific warnings.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Gagan told the author that he
was instructed to assassinate Judge Lewis Babcock.[1052]
Had the feds warned Judge Alley? "My subjective impression," said Alley, "was there was a reason for the dissemination of these concerns,
strongly suggesting an impending proximate event."[1053]
The Oklahoma City Fire Department, unlike Judge Alley, had the benefit of more specific warnings. On Friday, April 14, the FBI placed a call
to Assistant Chief Charles Gaines to warn him of a potential terrorist threat within the next few days. When Glenn Wilburn confronted Gaines, he was met with a blanket of denial. Wilburn then walked down the hall and confronted Chief
Dispatcher Harvey Weathers, who unhesitatingly replied that they had in fact received a warning. Wilburn told him, "Well, you're going to be
surprised to learn that Chief Gaines' memory is failing. He says it never happened." Weathers replied, "Well, you asked me and I told you. I'm not going to lie for anybody. A lot of people don't want to get involved in this."[1054]
When Assistant Chief Jon Hansen was later interviewed by KFOR's Jayna Davis, he said he could no longer recall just exactly who had
called the Department, but convincingly reassured skeptics, "The FBI came in yesterday and told me it wasn't them."
Yet two reserve Sheriff's deputies on duty at the Murrah Building the night of the bombing, Don Hammons and David Kachendofer, signed
sworn affidavits that Representative Ernest Istook (R-OK) told them of the government's prior knowledge. Kachendofer was guarding the
northwest corner of the building when Istook approached and chated with him. Kachendofer relates the conversation: "[Istook] made the
comment to me, he says, 'Yeah, we knew this was going to happen.'

--- PAGE BREAK ---"And I said, 'Excuse me?'
"And he says, 'Yeah, we knew this was going to happen.

We got word through our sources that there is a radical fundamental Islamic group
in Oklahoma City and that they were going to bomb the Federal Building.'"[1055]
The day after the bombing, Oklahoma City FBI SAC Bob Ricks (of Waco infamy), managed to keep a straight face while announcing to
reporters: "The FBI and Oklahoma City has not received any threats that indicated that a bombing was about to take place."
Like the fox assuring the farmer that he hadn't made off with any chickens, the FBI's claims proved of little solace.

Fortunately for the FBI,
the audio logs of the Fire Department's incoming calls were mysteriously "erased."[1056]
As The Daily Oklahoman reported on August 14, 1997:
…Vance DeWoody, owner of Opal's Answering Service, and his employee, Pat Houser… received an anonymous telephone call saying that
a bomb was going to go off in the office of the U.S.

Secret Service on the ninth floor of the Murrah Building.…
Opal's… takes calls for the Secret Service.

The call came four days before the bombing.

Then, on the morning of April 19, the Executive
Secretariat's Office of the Justice Department received a mysterious call from someone claiming the Murrah Building had just been blown
up… 24 minutes before the blast!

ABC 20/20 quoted the official government document:
The Department of Justice… received a telephone call… twenty-four minutes prior to the bombing… The caller said, "The Federal Building
in Oklahoma City has just been bombed."[1057]
ABC anchor Tom Jarriel noted that "no action was apparently taken" by the Justice Department in response to that strange emergency call
minutes before the blast.[1058]
Not long after Bob Rick's announcement, Carol Howe and Cary Gagan would make their presence known — informing the public that the
government did indeed have prior knowledge of the attack.Then, on the morning of April 19, the Executive
Secretariat's Office of the Justice Department received a mysterious call from someone claiming the Murrah Building had just been blown
up… 24 minutes before the blast!

ABC 20/20 quoted the official government document:
The Department of Justice… received a telephone call… twenty-four minutes prior to the bombing… The caller said, "The Federal Building
in Oklahoma City has just been bombed."[1057]
ABC anchor Tom Jarriel noted that "no action was apparently taken" by the Justice Department in response to that strange emergency call
minutes before the blast.[1058]
Not long after Bob Rick's announcement, Carol Howe and Cary Gagan would make their presence known — informing the public that the
government did indeed have prior knowledge of the attack.

To cover themselves, the government only admitted that they had vague,
unspecified warnings of the impending plot.

As Stephen Jones wrote in his brief of March 25, 1997:
Soon the government's position will revert to the ridiculous and it will only deny any knowledge that the Murrah Building was specifically
targeted at 9:02 a.m.

on April 19, 1995, to be destroyed by a bomb delivered in a Ryder rental truck by Timothy McVeigh.… That is the
Federal Government playing word games in order to avoid what is potentially the single most embarrassing and humiliating situation since
the public found out that the FBI had an informant inside the terrorist group that bombed the World Trade Center in New York — an
informant that actually helped make the bomb — but they bungled the entire situation and did not prevent that tragedy.

Nevertheless, it wouldn't be long before a significant percentage of the population would learn about the suspicious activites in Oklahoma
City the morning of April 19.

Attorney Daniel J.

Adomitis was driving downtown around 7:30 a.m.Attorney Daniel J.

Adomitis was driving downtown around 7:30 a.m.

that morning when he noticed a white bomb
squad truck parked on the west side of the courthouse, close to the Murrah Building.

Adomitis told the Fort Worth Star/Telegram, "I
remember thinking as I passed that, 'Gee, I wonder if they had a bomb threat at the County Courthouse?'"
Norma Smith, who worked at the Federal Courthouse across from the Murrah Building, saw, along with numerous others, the Bomb Squad
congregated in the parking lot.

Smith recounted her story for her hometown Texas newspaper, the Panola Watchman:
The day was fine, everything was normal when I arrived at 7:45 to begin my day at 8 a.m., but as I walked through my building's parking lot, I
remember seeing a bomb squad.

I really did not think about it — especially when we did not hear more about it....

There was some talk about the bomb squad among employees in our office.

We did wonder what it was doing in our parking lot.

Jokingly, I
said, "Well I guess we'll find out soon enough"....[1059]
Renee Cooper, whose infant son was killed in the day-care center, was driving down Robinson Street when she saw several men in dark
jackets standing in front of the Federal Courthouse.

The men's jackets were inscribed with the words "Bomb Squad."
Reporter J.D.

Cash spoke with a woman whose brother worked in the Federal Building.

"Frantic with worry, Jackie Stiles said she talked to
an FBI agent at the scene who told her there had been a bomb threat made against the Murrah Building the previous week."
This fact was also confirmed by Michael Hinton, a former police officer who was staying across the street at the YMCA.

Hinton witnessed
what appeared to be a bomb threat evacuation of the Murrah Building two weeks earlier.[1060]
Naturally, the Bomb Squad denied being there.

In an interview with Jayna Davis, Sheriff J.D.

Sharp claimed that the Bomb Squad truck was
ten miles away at the time.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In an interview with Jayna Davis, Sheriff J.D. Sharp claimed that the Bomb Squad truck was
ten miles away at the time. "I can assure you from the testimony of witnesses and the bomb commander that our bomb unit was not
anywhere near the Murrah Building the morning of the blast," said Sharp.

--- PAGE BREAK ---When the author attempted to interview two members of the Bomb Squad, one of them became visibly nervous, and demanded that I speak
to his superior.

He denied removing additional bombs, or being at the Federal Building early that morning.

The Sheriff's Department later told NBC Extra's Brad Goode that the Bomb Squad was in fact deployed downtown for "training purposes,"
but claimed they were not in bomb attire.

At the same time, the OCPD told Extra the Bomb Squad was not there at all.[1061]
Reporter J.D.

Cash received a similar response from Bomb Squad Captain Robert Heady.

When confronted with the fact that at least two
eye-witnesses saw the Bomb Squad members in their black t-shirts with the words "BOMB SQUAD" emblazoned across their chests in
silver-white letters, the captain said, "We don't wear those type shirts."
Interestingly, a videotape made by Deputy Sheriff Melvin Sumter at the scene of the blast shows the Bomb Squad members, along with the
captain, in t-shirts with words "BOMB SQUAD" in large silver-white letters written across their chests!

Still, the Bomb Squad would attempt to maintain this duplicitous charade.

When he was summoned before the County Grand Jury
reinvestigating the blast, Deputy Bill Grimsley claimed that the bomb squad was indeed downtown that morning.

Grimsley claimed that he
had left the county jail at 7:00 a.m., stopped at the nearby courthouse for a few minutes to take care of an errand, went to McDonald's for
breakfast, then drove to the bomb training site ten miles away.

Yet Norma Smith saw the Bomb Squad truck downtown at 7:45 a.m.

Renee Cooper saw it five minutes after eight — hardly in keeping with
Grimsley's story.

Others, like Oklahoma Private investigator Claude Criss and County Appraiser J.D.

Reed saw the Bomb Squad downtown in full gear.

"The
presence of law enforcement was in the air," said Criss.Reed saw the Bomb Squad downtown in full gear.

"The
presence of law enforcement was in the air," said Criss.

"It was everywhere downtown that morning."
As previously discussed, Debra Burdick was sitting at a red light at 10th and Robinson, five blocks from the Murrah Building.

"…as the light
changed, we started through the intersection," recalled Burdick, "and [that's when] the bomb went off… And right after that, here comes the
Bomb Squad, before the ambulances and the Fire Department." As Burdick's husband remarked, "they would have had to have had some
kind of warning to respond that quick, because they would have had to get in their gear and everything."
J.D.

Reed, who rushed out of the County Office Building when the bomb went off, later wrote in a company newsletter: "The paramedics and
firemen were already at work.

How could they move so quickly?

They were there by the time we got down to the street!"[1062]
The testimony of Burdick and Reed dovetails with that of Criss, who arrived at his office at 8:58 a.m.

"I heard a lot of sirens at that time," he
said.

"A lot of sirens, coming from the west, approaching downtown.

There was approximately seven trucks that were traveling at a high rate
of speed.

When they reached the top of that hill right there, the explosion went off."[1063]
When ABC's Extra contacted the Oklahoma City Fire Department to inquire about Criss's claim, they replied, "We can't really confirm or
deny that claim."[1064]
As Sergeant Yeakey, one of the first rescue workers at the scene later wrote to bombing survivor Ramona McDonald:
Everyone was behind you until you started asking questions as I did, as to how so many federal agents arrived at the scene at the same
time.… For those who ran from the scene to change their attire to hide the fact that they were there, should be judged as cowards.There was approximately seven trucks that were traveling at a high rate
of speed.

When they reached the top of that hill right there, the explosion went off."[1063]
When ABC's Extra contacted the Oklahoma City Fire Department to inquire about Criss's claim, they replied, "We can't really confirm or
deny that claim."[1064]
As Sergeant Yeakey, one of the first rescue workers at the scene later wrote to bombing survivor Ramona McDonald:
Everyone was behind you until you started asking questions as I did, as to how so many federal agents arrived at the scene at the same
time.… For those who ran from the scene to change their attire to hide the fact that they were there, should be judged as cowards.

Rodney Johnson, who almost hit McVeigh and John Doe 2 as they ran from the scene minutes before the blast, didn't miss the presence of
law-enforcement officers who seemed to materialize out of thin air.

Where had they come from?

Associated Press photographer Pat Carter, who was at the scene within one hour of the blast, said that ATF agents were wearing full
combat gear.

Had they been preparing for a bust?[1065]
HUD worker V.Z.

Lawton was on the eighth floor of the Murrah Building when the bomb(s) went off.

Lawton described four men who gave
him a ride home that afternoon.

They told him they were General Services Administration (GSA) employees out of Fort Worth, and were
there doing a "routine" security check on the Federal Building.

The men told Lawton this "security check" was conducted in the wee hours of
the morning.[1066]
Two of the men, Dude Goodun and Brent Mossbarger, later told the Daily Oklahoman they did not take Lawton home that day.[1067]
Even more interestingly, it was alleged that no ATF agents (as opposed to clerical workers) were in the Murrah Building at the time of the
blast.

Word of this quickly spread when Bruce Shaw, whose wife worked in the third-floor credit union, ran up to an ATF agent anxiously
asking of her whereabouts.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The men told Lawton this "security check" was conducted in the wee hours of
the morning.[1066]
Two of the men, Dude Goodun and Brent Mossbarger, later told the Daily Oklahoman they did not take Lawton home that day.[1067]
Even more interestingly, it was alleged that no ATF agents (as opposed to clerical workers) were in the Murrah Building at the time of the
blast. Word of this quickly spread when Bruce Shaw, whose wife worked in the third-floor credit union, ran up to an ATF agent anxiously
asking of her whereabouts. Shaw told KFOR's Brad Edwards that the agent "started getting a little bit nervous. He tried reaching someone
on a two-way radio. [But] couldn't get anybody. I told him I wanted an answer right then. He said they were in debriefing, that none of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---agents had been in there.

They'd been tipped by their pagers not to come to work that day.

Plain as day out of his mouth.

Those were the
words he said."[1068]
The second witness, Shaw's boss Tony Brasier, was present when the agent made those comments, and confirmed to KFOR the accuracy
of Shaw's testimony.[1069]
The third witness was Tiffany Bible, a paramedic.

When she asked an ATF agent on the scene (dressed in a black "Ninja" suit) if any of his
fellow agents were still in the building, she was told they "weren't here" at the office that morning.

When she asked, "who would want to
bomb a building in Oklahoma?" he replied that it was in retribution for the massacre at Waco.

How did he know?

"It's clear to me that the ATF knew in advance something was about to happen," says a man whose wife was seriously injured that morning.

[1070]
In an attempt to steer suspicious eyes away from ATF culpability, Lester Martz, regional head of the ATF, put out a press release stating that
several agents — Vernon Buster, Luke Franey, and Alex McCauley — had been trapped inside the building during the bombing:
ATF's Resident Agent in Charge Alex McCauley was with a DEA agent (David Schickedanz) in the elevator when the bomb exploded.

The
elevator dropped in a free fall from the eighth floor to the third.

The two men were trapped in the smoke-filled elevator.

The emergency
buttons and the phone were inoperable.

On their fourth attempt they managed to break through the doors and escape from the elevator.[1071]
Yet according to elevator repairman Duane James, who, along with several co-workers was checking equipment across the street that
morning, Martz's statement is "pure fantasy." James, who was interviewed by J.D.

Cash and ABC's 20/20, said five of the building's six
elevators had frozen in place when the blast occurred, their doors blown inward.

"Once that occurs, the doors cannot be opened — period,"
said James.Cash and ABC's 20/20, said five of the building's six
elevators had frozen in place when the blast occurred, their doors blown inward.

"Once that occurs, the doors cannot be opened — period,"
said James.

"What I and some others did was kick in the ceilings on each of those elevators and determined that no one was in them."
James claims the remaining elevator was sitting at the third or fourth floor level and had no one in it.

"Certainly it had not 'free fallen,' nor had
any of the others." James explained that modern elevators cannot 'free fall' due to counterbalancing weights on them which prevent such
occurrences.

The elevators are also equipped with automatic safety switches that cut speed and power if the elevator starts accelerating too
fast.[1072]
"None of those switches were tripped on any of the elevators in that building," said James.

"I, along with other men with our company,
checked the equipment several times.

Absolutely no elevators dropped that morning."
Oscar Johnson, James' boss, told the Daily Oklahoman that when the elevator was found, a wall was pushed against the top of it "and there
is no way you could have gotten the doors open.

Our guys were the first ones there to open the top emergency access, and there was no
one in it."[1073]
Federal elevator inspector Dude Goodun told the Daily Oklahoman that he agreed with Johnson.[1074]
So does former ATF agent Rick Sherrow.

"This elevator business was garbage — about Franey being trapped in the elevator — because it
didn't happen" said Sherrow.

"Franey I pretty much believe was there, [but] this free-fall business, it just didn't happen."[1075]
Naturally, Martz insisted five ATF employees were inside the Murrah Building.

Valerie Rowden, the office manager, was cut all over.

Jim
Staggs was hospitalized with head wounds.

Vernon Buster, they claimed, had a nail driven through his arm, and his name showed up on a
list of the injured.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Jim
Staggs was hospitalized with head wounds. Vernon Buster, they claimed, had a nail driven through his arm, and his name showed up on a
list of the injured. But according to David Hall, owner and manager of KPOC-TV in Ponca City, who checked with local hospitals, both Buster
and Martz are lying.[1076]
According to a reporter who interviewed Joe Gordon, an ATF agent from Colorado Springs, there was at least one ATF agent from out-of-
town (believed to have been Dallas) who was injured in the blast, that the ATF hasn't admitted to. While Buster's name showed up on the list
of the injured, his name didn't.[1077]
Another reporter from New York developed information that the Dallas ATF office — Martz's office — was also suspiciously vacant that
morning. Was the ATF running a combined operation out of Dallas and Oklahoma City? This would make sense, since Martz is the regional
director.[1078]
DEA Assistant Agent in Charge Don Webb called the allegations against the ATF "bull-shit." Webb told the author that McCauley and
Schickedanz were indeed in the elevator when the bomb went off. He also said that "Luke Franey was on the phone" at the time of the
bombing (although Webb admitted to me that he himself was at a golf tournament that morning).[1079]
According to Sergeant Yeakey, Franey was not in the building:

--- PAGE BREAK ---Luke Franey was not in the building at the time of the blast, I know this for a fact, I saw him!

I also saw full riot gear worn with rifles in hand,
why?[1080]
Yeakey also wrote that Franey ran into the building.

While news footage showed Franey standing in a blown-out window on the 9th floor
shortly after the blast, he appeared surprisingly neat and clean.

His appearance contrasted sharply with other survivors who were covered in
dust and debris.

In the photos, Franey is holding a box in one hand, and a walkie-talkie in the other.

Interestingly, Franey later showed up at Glenn Wilburn's house with a bandaged arm.

Was Franey one of the agents who Dr.

Chumley
refused to bandage?

According to a federal law-enforcement supervisor who works in the Federal Protective Services, Franey "was a bloody
mess.

He had a big gash on his forehead."[1081]
Whatever the true story, it is generally agreed that the Federal Building was suspiciously empty that morning.

Wendy Greer, the Sister-in-
Law of senior FBI Agent Jim Volz (retired), told me her brother said that the FBI's offices at 50 Penn Place (several miles from the Murrah
Building) also appeared to be suspiciously vacant that morning.

If these agents weren't in their offices, just where were they?

Some FBI agents, it appeared, were at a Special Olympics golf tournament in
Shawnee (Webb told me he saw no ATF agents at the tournament).

Yet this still wouldn't account for the strange activities on April 19.[1082]
In the early morning of April 19, Bob Flanders and his wife were driving east on I-44 at approximately 3:30 a.m., when they saw a strange
team of men near the State Fairgrounds.

The men, dressed in government black and driving black cars, were in the grass alongside the
road, operating "hoops" — circular-shaped, radio beacon directional finders.Yet this still wouldn't account for the strange activities on April 19.[1082]
In the early morning of April 19, Bob Flanders and his wife were driving east on I-44 at approximately 3:30 a.m., when they saw a strange
team of men near the State Fairgrounds.

The men, dressed in government black and driving black cars, were in the grass alongside the
road, operating "hoops" — circular-shaped, radio beacon directional finders.

Flanders recalled that the devices were about the size of a car
steering wheel, and the men held them over their heads, slowly rotating them in a circular pattern.[1083]
At around 4:00 a.m., a man who was driving home after work saw another team operating these unusual looking devices, this time by the
Alfred P.

Murrah Building.

As he approached 5th Street, he was directed to one lane.

The person directing traffic was not a police officer,
and was standing next to a white vehicle with a yellow stripe.

As the man drove by, he saw several men on the sidewalk holding these hoop-
like devices above their heads, slowly turning them in different directions.

As the man passed through, a roadblock was set up behind him,
and all traffic was diverted from the area.

The equipment these witnesses are describing matches that of RDF direction finding antennas that are used to home in on electronic
transmitters.

Was there a concealed radio transmitter on the one of the Ryder trucks, sending out a signal to these teams?

It is likely, given
the requirements of a successful sting operation, that they were electronically tracking the Ryder truck.

The location of the team at the
fairgrounds, high on a hill overlooking the city, is a clue to its intended mission.

Yet why were they tracking the truck?

Had their quarry eluded them?

Is it possible that one of the bombers, perhaps one of their own trusted
undercover agents, turned off the transmitter, resulting in the loss of the signal?Had their quarry eluded them?

Is it possible that one of the bombers, perhaps one of their own trusted
undercover agents, turned off the transmitter, resulting in the loss of the signal?

If so, it seems that the agents would have had what's known
in law-enforcement parlance as a "loose tail," and, it appeared, they were frantically trying to find the truck.

Andreas Strassmeir, McVeigh's friend and alleged government operative, admitted that much in an interview with the London Sunday
Telegraph's Ambrose Evans-Pritchard:
The truck had a transmitter, so they could track it with a radio receiving device.

I don't know how they could have lost contact.

I think there
was misinformation that the operation had been canceled.

According to KPOC's David Hall, the plan was to arrest the bombers at 3:30 in the morning.

Given the ATF's past publicity stunts, it is likely
that they were hoping to arrest the suspects at or near the Murrah Building to ensure a highly publicized bust.

As Strassmeir told Evans-
Pritchard:
"It's obvious that it was a government 'op' that went wrong, isn't it?

The ATF had something going with McVeigh.

They were watching him —
of course they were," he asserted, without qualification.

"What they should have done is make an arrest while the bomb was still being made
instead of waiting till the last moment for a publicity stunt.

They had everything they needed to make the bust, and they screwed it up."[1084]
[1085]
Strassmeir added that the ATF thought that the bomb was set to go off at 2 or 3 a.m., but somehow the plan was changed.

"McVeigh made
some changes in the plan," said Strassmeir.

"He is a very undisciplined soldier, you know...

In retrospect, the ATF should have made the
bust when the bomb was being built in Junction City."[1086]
The bombers, according to the former Elohim City security chief, were to be captured "during the night, when no one was there — that's why
the ATF had the building staked out from midnight until 6:00 a.m.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"He is a very undisciplined soldier, you know... In retrospect, the ATF should have made the
bust when the bomb was being built in Junction City."[1086]
The bombers, according to the former Elohim City security chief, were to be captured "during the night, when no one was there — that's why
the ATF had the building staked out from midnight until 6:00 a.m. Later, the informant believed that the bombing was off for the day and
reported that... the ATF lost control of the situation, and McVeigh and the others were able to bomb the building."[1087]
While Strassmeir heaps most of the blame on the ATF, he does task the FBI for its failure:

--- PAGE BREAK ---The different agencies weren't cooperating.

In fact, they were working against each other.

You even had a situation where one branch of the
FBI was investigating and not sharing anything with another branch of the FBI.… Whoever thought this thing up is an idiot, in my opinion.

[1088]
While Strassmeir continually protested that he himself was not involved in the plot, as either a suspect or a provocateur, he did say that the
plotters consisted of "four [men], plus the informant and McVeigh."
"They probably were going to entrap whoever was coming in," said Sherrow.

"They had enough intelligence that they were going to set up
an operation to pop this guy, whether it was McVeigh or whoever else, and something fell through the cracks.…
"Talking from the perspective of a former ATF man, say they're going to buy explosives, or let somebody plant a bomb… they will let the deal
go until the last second, before making the arrest."
Somehow, the deal went wrong.

While this startling evidence would soon make itself known to investigators, bombing victims, and a limited segment of the public — the
"Justice" Department, federal prosecutors, and the ATF all rushed to refute the evidence.

"Can you imagine if we had known that… and let that happen?" said ATF agent Harry Eberhardt.

"I had a lot of friends in that building — a
lot of friends.… We never would have let that happen."[1089]
Dewy Webb, the current ATF RAC, concurred.

"They had so many friends they lost in the bombing — they had to pick which funeral they
could go to."[1090]
Athough Eberhardt's reasoning sounds valid, it is likely his concern is overrated.

While it is doubtful the ATF, FBI, or local officials would
purposefully allow such a catastrophic event to occur, it is likely — highly probable in fact — that through their stupidity and negligence, such
an event did occur.[1091]
Said Sherrow, "I've got agents in their court testimony saying that they don't care about the public's safety.

They don't consider it.While it is doubtful the ATF, FBI, or local officials would
purposefully allow such a catastrophic event to occur, it is likely — highly probable in fact — that through their stupidity and negligence, such
an event did occur.[1091]
Said Sherrow, "I've got agents in their court testimony saying that they don't care about the public's safety.

They don't consider it.

They
arranged to meet with a guy here in Phoenix who allegedly had hundreds of pounds of explosives, and they chose a crowded shopping
center parking lot, running around with MP-5 [sub-machineguns] and handguns and everything else.

"This happened before Oklahoma, and it continues to happen.

We had a case in Pennsylvania where a guy wanted to sell a small amount of
explosives.

He wanted to meet [the agents] way out in the country.

Instead they decided to meet him on an Interstate rest stop that was
jammed with people, and brought the media.

They endanger the public right and left and they don't care about it."[1092]
Sherrow's analysis is based on more than historical precedent and informed opinion.

While ATF agents refused to admit their involvement in
the bungled operation, Martz met with local TV producers behind closed doors shortly after the bombing.

His intent was to convince the
journalists that what was underway was a sensitive undercover operation, and that they should take pains not to reveal it.

This is most interesting considering that ATF agent Angela Finley-Graham's report of August 30 stated that their investigation of Elohim City
was classified as "SENSITIVE" and "SIGNIFICANT" (as opposed to routine), and the investigation concerned "terrorist/extremist"
organizations.

According to former ATF official Robert Sanders, such classifications mean that all reports would automatically be sent to Washington, as
well as being routinely routed to Martz at the Dallas Field Office, which in fact, it was.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is most interesting considering that ATF agent Angela Finley-Graham's report of August 30 stated that their investigation of Elohim City
was classified as "SENSITIVE" and "SIGNIFICANT" (as opposed to routine), and the investigation concerned "terrorist/extremist"
organizations. According to former ATF official Robert Sanders, such classifications mean that all reports would automatically be sent to Washington, as
well as being routinely routed to Martz at the Dallas Field Office, which in fact, it was. Sanders, who held every possible supervisory position including that of ATF Assistant Director, told The New Americanmagazine that the
activities cited in the ATF reports have "such a high potential for affecting national security" that they would have most likely been sent to the
heads of the Treasury and Justice Departments as well as the White House and National Security Council.[1093]
As if finally stating the obvious, Martz admitted to the incredulous reporters was that there was indeed a sting operation underway on the
night of the 18th that was called off at 0600 hours (6:00 a.m.). When reporters asked Martz if the operation involved Timothy McVeigh, he
replied "I can neither confirm or deny that."[1094][1095]
David Hall attended the closed-door meeting with Martz. "I don't believe that the ATF wired the building and blew it up. I do believe that they
knew that there was going to be a possible bomb threat to the building, because they had set it up themselves, with their informants and
different people they were working with. And somebody really slipped it to 'em."[1096]
Hall had also been long-time friends with Harry Eberhardt, and was one of the first to develop inside information regarding the ATF's
activities that morning. While Martz held fast to his claim that three ATF agents were in the Murrah Building at the time of the blast, Hall
insists, "that's an outright lie."[1097]

--- PAGE BREAK ---The seasoned investigative journalist contends that at least eight of the ATF's regular compliment of 13 agents were on assignment away
from the Federal Building that morning.

"Three agents (Don Gillispie, Delbert Canopp and Tim Kelly) were in federal court in Newkirk, on an
arson case that occurred in Ponca City….

Two agents (Karen Simpson and Harry Eberhardt) were in federal court in Oklahoma City.

Three
more were in Garfield County at a hearing.

The other five were out on surveillance."[1098]
Just who were they surveilling?

"As far as can be determined," said Sherrow, "they had an undercover sting operation.

They had a sting operation going that night, with
about six agents involved, and they terminated it at six in the morning.

Martz has admitted to this, then since backed off.… given the
circumstances, it's reasonable to assume that the person they were surveilling was McVeigh."
Hall concurs.

"We developed from our sources inside the ATF that five agents were up on surveillance all night long.

We have to assume at
that point, basically probably surveilling either McVeigh — and let me say this about McVeigh — there's a good chance that McVeigh could
be the informant in this operation."
According to Glenn Wilburn, the ATF's plans changed at the last minute, and they stood down at 6:30 a.m.

Then the Bomb Squad came on
the scene at 6:30, checked the building for bombs, then stood down at 8:30.

When the building blew up at 9:02 a.m., all the agents and
police, who were already on the scene or nearby, quickly responded.

Yet it appears there is more to the story.

Hall claims that on the night before the bombing, several witnesses saw McVeigh meet with ATF
agent Alex McCauley and two other individuals of Middle Eastern descent in an Oklahoma City McDonalds at approximately 9:30 p.m.

"He
was a known ATF agent," said Hall.

"[And] money changed hands."
Could this money have been the $2,000 that was discovered on McVeigh at the time of his arrest?"He
was a known ATF agent," said Hall.

"[And] money changed hands."
Could this money have been the $2,000 that was discovered on McVeigh at the time of his arrest?

Terry Nichols was interviewed by Hall early on, and was told that McVeigh had met with "men" who had provided him with a $2,000 pay-off.

Nichols left the restaurant at approximately 9:45 p.m.

and drove back to his home in Herrington, Kansas.

Hall interviewed Nichols' neighbors
who claimed he arrived early that morning.[1099]
Another witness, an unidentified homeless man, contacted KTOK reporter Jerry Bonnen, and told him McVeigh drove past the McDonalds
and yelled "Hey, want to have a few beers?" McVeigh then gave the man some cash, whereupon he purchased two quarts at the Total
convenience store across the street.

A Total employee, Ron Williams, reported that a Ryder truck was parked at the McDonalds.[1100]
An anonymous informant who contacted Representative Key, claiming to be a friend of the brother one of those involved in the bombing,
said that McVeigh had indeed met federal agents at an unnamed restaurant in Oklahoma City, and had rendezvoused with at least four of
them prior to the bombing.

Key taped the conversation:
"This guy here, he has a recording — a video recording — a camcorder recording that shows this same DEA agent and… McVeigh in the
parking lot of a restaurant.

And this is was shot about dusk.

And two people in suits go over to the car, McVeigh and this DEA agent get out
and they're standing back by the trunk.

And the DEA agent's patting McVeigh on the shoulder, and then one of the two men in suits passes
McVeigh a white envelope and then they leave, And he has this on tape."[1101]
While Representative Key never did get the videotape, another source close to the investigation told him that McVeigh was indeed an
informant.

What he didn't explain was the reason for the presence of the DEA.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And the DEA agent's patting McVeigh on the shoulder, and then one of the two men in suits passes
McVeigh a white envelope and then they leave, And he has this on tape."[1101]
While Representative Key never did get the videotape, another source close to the investigation told him that McVeigh was indeed an
informant. What he didn't explain was the reason for the presence of the DEA. KFOR's Brad Edwards developed similar information," said Hall, "from totally different sources. "So we have four different sources telling us
this. He also has the same name of the agent (McCauley). "I think that when this is all said and done, that we're going to find out — and this
is what I've said from the beginning — that this was a sting operation gone sour."
But do you really need two tons of explosive in order to set up a sting? Yes, according to Hall. Ammonium-nitrate isn't illegal in Oklahoma,
and a few hundred pounds won't convince prosecutors there was a serious bomb threat in the works. "I think the intent there was to show
that it was going to do some damage, rather than, you know, a pipe bomb. It wouldn't bring the intention here in Oklahoma."[1102]
Strassmeir agrees. "I am told they thought it would be better to put a bigger bomb in there. The bigger the better. It would make them more
guilty.…"[1103]
While Martz would not confirm who the actual target of the sting was, one person who did confirm it was a man who spoke with bombing
survivor and activist Ramona McDonald. McDonald had formed a group called Heroes of the Heart. Through her numerous meetings with
paramedics and police, firefighters and even some federal agents, McDonald began learning the sickening truth about what really happened
that day.

--- PAGE BREAK ---As the meetings wore on, a consensus was reached that the truth needed to be told.

The question was how.

As McVeigh's trial approached,
McDonald and her group were gearing up for a trial of their own.

McDonald had contacted former Pentagon counter-terrorism analyst Jesse
Clear, and Clear had contacted a young fire-brand attorney named Joseph Camerata.

Camerata's intent was to gather together survivors
and family members, and bring a negligence suit against the Federal Government.

In August of 1996, about a month before Camerata came to Oklahoma to interview his prospective clients, McDonald received a mysterious
phone call.

Although the caller didn't identify himself by name, McDonald thought she recognized the voice of as that of Representative
Ernest Istook (R-OK).

The caller was concerned.

"What do we have to do to get you to drop this?" he asked McDonald.

Although he didn't realize it, McDonald was taping the conversation.

The scenario the caller lays out is, to the uninitiated, both startling and
frightening.

He describes in almost precise detail how the operation was a sting gone bad; how federal agents allowed a truck with a
powerful bomb to be driven through a crowded city and parked next to a building containing hundreds of people.

And, revealing the mystery
of the elusive John Doe 2, he explains how he was an undercover agent, supposed to diffuse the bomb at the last minute… and failed to do
so.[1104]
Caller: "I don't think they expected the truck to blow up.

I believe, and I've believed this for a long time… I believe that number two — John
Doe #2 — was a federal agent working undercover.

And I believe that he helped McVeigh steal the goods and helped buy the equipment,
and I believe that he helped McVeigh make the bomb, and I believe that his whole task in this whole thing… his only real task was to render
the device safe so that the federal agents could pretend to remove it and move in.I believe, and I've believed this for a long time… I believe that number two — John
Doe #2 — was a federal agent working undercover.

And I believe that he helped McVeigh steal the goods and helped buy the equipment,
and I believe that he helped McVeigh make the bomb, and I believe that his whole task in this whole thing… his only real task was to render
the device safe so that the federal agents could pretend to remove it and move in.

They did not want to move in until he was cleared of the
scene so that they wouldn't tip their hands.

See what I'm saying?

And the odds are pretty good that whole reason behind this is because
they were after someone bigger than McVeigh, which means they probably think he was linked to somebody in the Militia movement or
something like that.

"So I think what you're saying… you know I understand what you're saying… but I don't think you see the big picture.

I don't think that , you
know, I'd only divulge a look at the big picture if that's the actual scenario.

If that's the actual scenario, which I believe it to be, I think there
really is no claim that the agent, that was John Doe #2, did not render the bomb safe.

Which he very well may have rendered the bomb safe,
and then McVeigh may have put in a second fail-safe which he didn't know about.

Which is probably what's happened.…
"I would bet money on that's, in fact, the way this whole thing came down.

Yes, they stood out in front of the building.

Yes, they followed him
directly to the building.

Yes, they watched him get out of the building… get out of the truck.

Yes, they watched him drive off.

That's not …
that was their plan.

I don't believe they ever planned to apprehend him anywhere near the building.

I believe that John Doe #2 was a federal
witness.

His job was to render the device safe.

Therefore, the only thing sitting out in front of that building was a bomb… a truck loaded with
a bomb that would not go off.

And I think that's the situation.Therefore, the only thing sitting out in front of that building was a bomb… a truck loaded with
a bomb that would not go off.

And I think that's the situation.

In fact I know it is."
McDonald: "Okay… so… so why didn't they just come out and explain that to everybody?"
Caller: "The public doesn't have to know that.

When it comes to the national security and things like this, the public does not have to know…
the public is not required to know.

First of all, by doing that, they would've, uh, put their witness, which is the federal agent John Doe #2, they
would have blown his cover, first of all.

Which possibly he's involved in something right now that you have no idea about.

You know, there
very well may have been numerous plots involving numerous buildings.

See what I'm saying?

You don't have the whole picture… without full
knowledge… what you may do may cost them their lives.

You should be very aware of that."
McDonald: "Okay.

Well, that's what I've been trying to be very careful of.

I don't want to see anyone else get hurt.

At the same time…"
Caller: "…Well, if that guy's cover's been blown, he'd dead already."
McDonald: "Do you think so?"
Caller: "Sure… I'm sure.

Once you have gone up to this point, it has gotten out, which I'm sure it has, because there are moles
everywhere… the chances are good that he's been terminated already and this whole thing has blown up in their face.

I don't believe that,
out of an act of negligence, these highly trained professionals would have allowed that man to leave that truck out in front of that building
with its live bomb in it."
McDonald: No, no, no.

It stood out there for the whole time, from the time it pulled up until it went off."
Caller: "That's what I'm saying.

They would not have allowed it.

The only reason they allowed the truck to sit there so long, is because in my
opinion they were under the impression that that bomb was rendered safe.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They would not have allowed it. The only reason they allowed the truck to sit there so long, is because in my
opinion they were under the impression that that bomb was rendered safe. And I'd say that there was no rush… there was no reason… to
evacuate the building. There was no rush to make an arrest. The truck was just going to sit out there until they went and towed it off. So I
don't think they thought it was an emergency and I think either that John Doe #2 made a mistake in rendering the bomb safe, or McVeigh
was smart enough to plant a second fail-safe. Which most bomb makers do."
McDonald: "Do you think that's why they didn't tell anybody?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---Caller: "No.

The bomb was safe as far as they knew."
McDonald: "Okay.

Well, that explains why there was so many of them (federal agents) there so fast."
Caller: "Exactly.

They followed him to the building, their agent was in the truck with him when they followed him to the building, everything
was under control, as far as they thought, all they had was the man who built the bomb that was not going to go off, because their agent had
rendered it safe.

And their whole thing was not a problem.

Let him drive his truck right in front of his target, then they allowed him to drive off.

"Once he drives off, he renders the truck safe, and then we can have the trooper arrest him on the interstate for bogus charges.

Which they
did, and this was all planned out 100 percent.

I… I… I don't believe they allowed that truck…"
McDonald: "You don't think they intentionally let the bomb go off?"
Caller: "No, that's right.

I'll never believe that."
McDonald: "Well, I mean, that's the only thing about this that I found so hard to believe."
Caller: "They… they thought the bomb was safe.

They thought that their agent, who was in the truck and who helped prepare the bomb,
would set it so it would not go off.

Now, whether McVeigh went back to the truck… where the agent did not know… and put a second fail-
safe… or the agent made a mistake and did not actually render the bomb safe like he was supposed to… that's what's going on here."
McDonald: "Well, see, that's it then.

I wanted someone that would be able to tell us for a fact if this was, like, deliberate or not.

You know
what I'm saying?"
Caller: "I'm not gong to tell you that.

Let me tell you something.

I'm sure they had… everything was under surveillance there.

So I'm sure
they do have pictures of the building blowing up, and I'm sure they do have pictures of federal agents, and I'm sure they do have audio tapes
of them saying: Let 'em go, let 'em go… Wait, wait, wait…" there was no rush in their mind.I'm sure they had… everything was under surveillance there.

So I'm sure
they do have pictures of the building blowing up, and I'm sure they do have pictures of federal agents, and I'm sure they do have audio tapes
of them saying: Let 'em go, let 'em go… Wait, wait, wait…" there was no rush in their mind.

In their mind, there was no rush to get that truck
away from that building… that bomb… was not supposed to go off.

"Therefore, everything they did, fits, if you think about it.

they followed it, they allowed it to drive up there knowing that there was a bomb in
the truck.

Their idea was to let John Doe #2 — their federal agent — they would be able to use him in further investigations of these
bombings of these groups that are in militia groups.

And this was a perfect entry in, because he could have went through there.

"After McVeigh was arrested, John Doe #2 would have become a hero to the cause of the militias.

And the militias would have taken him in
and hid him, which would have made him part of the infrastructure of the militias.

Which is what their goal was for this whole thing… was to
bust the militias.

If you take the big picture, and look at the big picture, there were very few mistakes made on this sting operation.

(except
blowing up a building and killing 169 people - ed.) With the exception that John Doe #2, the federal agent, did not render the bomb safe.

Just
think of it this way, Ramona."
McDonald: "I've always been a big fan of the United States and that, but then… I've always been… this was the one thing that bothered me."
Caller: "They didn't let the building fall intentionally.

Their opinion was that this bomb was rendered safe and this bomb would not go off.

And
their whole thing on this thing… if you think about it… it makes sense from a tactical standpoint.

You would follow the truck to the building.

You allow your lead suspect to get away from the building because it didn't blow up, because it's not supposed to.--- PAGE BREAK ---

You would follow the truck to the building. You allow your lead suspect to get away from the building because it didn't blow up, because it's not supposed to. You take John Doe #2…
he gets away, which is your federal agent. John Doe #1 — McVeigh — is arrested on a bogus charge and then later proven that he's the one
who planted the bomb that did not go off."
McDonald: "But you honestly don't think that they really intended…"
Caller: "Not at all. Not at all. They would not have to. No.… Basically, what happened is, this was a mistake. Someone screwed up and the
only one that screwed up… The agents on the scene? They didn't screw up. They did exactly what their orders were: Wait… allow the
suspect to leave the scene. Once the suspect had left the scene, then render the truck safe, which is already safe. All they have to do is get
in, give it a hot-wire, and drive it off to a safe location and then open up the back and disarm the bomb. Which was supposedly rendered
safe to begin with. Okay? "And then, from there… they charge in… See, the plan… this plan was put in motion before the bomb ever went off. Their intent was to allow
McVeigh to be arrested later on… John Doe#2 to get away… and then, John Doe #2, the Federal Government would have released a
sketch or picture. And then, that man would have had to go underground and hide. Where would he hide? He would have hid with the
militias. The militias would take him in as a hero. The militias would give him hero status in the Militia movement, which would allow him to
be privy to information that the government could use later on…
"…they did not want that building to blow up. I guarantee you this… their whole intent was that that bomb was rendered safe before it was
ever parked in front of that building… otherwise, they would have quietly…"

--- PAGE BREAK ---McDonald: "…Got everybody out of the building?"
Caller: "Got everybody out of the building, before the bomb ever even pulled up in front of the building.

There was no reason for them to do
that, because according to their plan, the bomb was safe now.

There was no reason to evacuate the building and the panic… because there
was a truck loaded with a bomb that was not going to blow up.…"
McDonald: "Okay."
Caller: "See what I'm saying?

And John Doe#2.… By going this far with it… Let me explain something to you.

Your actions have
consequences.

There are a lot of witnesses.

There are a lot of agents right now in the hills that are infiltrating these militia groups, and… all
these people will get killed.

Their blood will be on your hands.

I understand that you want… If I really thought that the government allowed
the building to blow up, I would be with you 100 percent.

But I know… and I believe… they were horrified when the bomb went off… really
horrified."
McDonald: "Yeah, they all looked like they were in shock."
Caller: "They figured, as soon as McVeigh got free, as soon as he got… drove off in his car… and I'll tell you something they did.

Do you
what they did?"
McDonald: "What?"
Caller: "They stole his license plate off that car.

You know why?

So they'd have probable cause to stop him on the interstate.… They stole
his plate.

Why do you think the plate was never found?

His plate was stolen from the vehicle and the Federal Government stole the plate
from the vehicle, so that he would be arrested… John Doe #2 would go free, they would put a sketch out that would make him 'America's
Most Wanted.' The only place that a man that would be wanted by the government can hide would be to be hid by the militia groups inside
their infrastructure.

"But once he infiltrates the infrastructure… and he's in… all of a sudden he's a hero.His plate was stolen from the vehicle and the Federal Government stole the plate
from the vehicle, so that he would be arrested… John Doe #2 would go free, they would put a sketch out that would make him 'America's
Most Wanted.' The only place that a man that would be wanted by the government can hide would be to be hid by the militia groups inside
their infrastructure.

"But once he infiltrates the infrastructure… and he's in… all of a sudden he's a hero.

And right now, you know, these groups probably believe
that they have John Doe #2 and that they're hiding him from the government and they're doing the patriotic thing… and they believe that the
building should have blown up.

So they're holding him.

Now, this man's privy to all kinds of information about future bombings, which we
don't even know how many bombs they have stopped because the agents… how many lives have been saved because that agent's now in
the militia.

And if this comes to light… this operation…"
What the caller does is attempt to instill guilt in McDonald over her efforts to reveal the truth.

Yet McDonald did not allow 169 innocent
people to be killed through her negligence and stupidity.

The government did.

This ridiculous and immoral rationale is similar to that used by Winston Churchill during WWII.

Churchill knew the German Luftwaffe were
going to bomb the city of Coventry, because the British had cracked the German code using a device called the "Enigma" machine.

Churchill
feared that by evacuating Coventry on the night in question, the Germans would realize their codes had been broken and change them, thus
hampering British intelligence efforts.

Churchill, having knowledge of the forthcoming raid, let it proceed, at the cost of thousands of lives and
millions in property damage, in order not to compromise their source — in this case — the Enigma machine.Churchill
feared that by evacuating Coventry on the night in question, the Germans would realize their codes had been broken and change them, thus
hampering British intelligence efforts.

Churchill, having knowledge of the forthcoming raid, let it proceed, at the cost of thousands of lives and
millions in property damage, in order not to compromise their source — in this case — the Enigma machine.

In a similar vein, the Feds would cover up the truth of the Oklahoma City bombing so as not to compromise their undercover agent — John
Doe 2 — and ultimately, reveal their own negligence.

Nevertheless, McDonald's caller makes the case that she should respect these agents, who he terms "highly trained professionals,"
conducting an operation that has already resulted in the criminally negligent deaths of 169 people, and allow it to continue unabated, when it
was undoubtedly government agents who acted as provocateurs and goaded the suspects into carrying out the bombing in the first place!

Of course, these "highly trained, dedicated professionals" he talks so admiringly about are the same "highly trained, dedicated professionals"
who murdered 86 innocent men, women and children at Waco; who practically murdered an entire innocent family at Ruby Ridge; who
dropped a bomb on the MOVE housing activists in Philadelphia, killing 11 people, including five children; and who bungled the World Trade
Center sting operation, resulting in the deaths of six people and the injury of over 1,000.

What nitwit is supposed to buy the story that "highly trained, dedicated professionals" would drive a truck laden with explosives around a
busy city — a bomb that could explode at any minute?

More likely, the caller is using the "federal agent in danger" line with McDonald as a
ruse to cover up the fact that these "highly trained, dedicated professionals" are nothing more than a bunch of highly dangerous, out-of-
control, self-serving lunatics.--- PAGE BREAK ---

What nitwit is supposed to buy the story that "highly trained, dedicated professionals" would drive a truck laden with explosives around a
busy city — a bomb that could explode at any minute? More likely, the caller is using the "federal agent in danger" line with McDonald as a
ruse to cover up the fact that these "highly trained, dedicated professionals" are nothing more than a bunch of highly dangerous, out-of-
control, self-serving lunatics. "The government must, and I say must, take responsibility for their sting operation going sour," said HUD worker Jane Graham.… "We are
not expendable for their cause.…"[1105]
As of this writing, the tape is being analyzed by an audio forensics expert. Those Oklahomans who have listened to the tape, however,
strongly believe that it is Representative Ernest Istook. Istook sits on the Subcommittee on National Security, which would tend to explain his

--- PAGE BREAK ---rationale that "the public doesn't have to know.… When it comes to the national security and things like this, the public does not have to
know.…"
Istook also voted for the 1995 Crime and Anti-Terrorism bills, and is reportedly very friendly with Senator Orin Hatch, one of the original
drafters of the latter.

Istook is also on close terms with the FBI, which would go a long way towards explaining his apologetic tone.

He lives in
the same Congressional district and neighborhood (Warr Acres) as McDonald.[1106]
This scenario is also reinforced by a second individual — a police officer named Bob Cancemi.

He told McDonald he knows "for a fact" that
authorities knew in advance specifically when and how the Ryder truck-bomb was to arrive at the Federal Building.

But, he says, something
went "very wrong;" the bomb was supposed to have been disarmed.

"I feel pretty confident that they knew exactly what was going on," he
said, "and just… things didn't go according to plan."[1107]
Cancemi's information, and that of McDonald's caller, is backed up by Daina Bradley.

Peering out the window of the Social Security office
minutes before the blast, Bradley caught a glimpse of a stocky, dark-skinned man exiting the passenger side of the Ryder truck.

She said the
man walked to the back of the truck to open the door, then spun around, looking "very nervous, almost confused." He then ran down 5th
Street in the opposite direction and jumped into a brown pick-up which sped away.

Could the man's confused expression have been the
result of an unexpected occurrence?

Perhaps when he lifted the rear gate he saw a second timing device attached to the bomb that he didn't
know how to disarm?

And not knowing what to do, he fled.

Yet while the caller admits the government's involvement in the bombing, he fails to take into account the additional bombs placed inside the
building.

He fails to explain why the government quickly demolished the bomb site, destroying all forensic evidence.Yet while the caller admits the government's involvement in the bombing, he fails to take into account the additional bombs placed inside the
building.

He fails to explain why the government quickly demolished the bomb site, destroying all forensic evidence.

And his story does not
account for the Middle Eastern and numerous other suspects.

The caller's explanation also goes a long way towards explaining a statement made by Terry Nichols after his arrest.

When Lana Padilla
asked her ex-husband during a prison visit about John Doe 2, he said, "If they want to find John Doe 2, they should look in their own
backyard."[1108]
What is clear is that the government could take no chances in allowing any of their undercover operatives and informants — Strassmeir,
Brescia, Howe, Gagan, Hussaini, and others — to testify at trial.

To cover their butts, federal law enforcement agencies ignored, discredited,
and even killed those who attempted to reveal the truth.

As Officer Terrance Yeakey wrote before he was murdered:
I took an oath to uphold the Law and to enforce the Law to the best of my ability.

This is something I cannot honestly do and hold my head
up proud any longer if I keep my silence as I am ordered to do.

My guess is the more time an officer has to think about the screw up the more he is going to question what happened… Can you imagine
what would be coming down now if that had been our officers' who had let this happen?

Because it was the feds that did this and not the
locals, is the reason it's okay.

The sad truth of the matter is that they have so many police officers convinced that by covering up the truth about the operation gone wrong,
that they are actually doing our citizens a favor.

What I want to know is how many other operations have they had that blew up in their
faces?

Makes you stop and take another look at Waco.What I want to know is how many other operations have they had that blew up in their
faces?

Makes you stop and take another look at Waco.

I would consider it to be an insult to my profession as a police officer and to the citizens of Oklahoma for ANY of the City, State or Federal
agents that stood by and let this happen to be recognized as any thing other than their part in participation in letting this happen.…
Finally, while those who said the bombing was an excuse to destroy the Militia movement were dismissed as self-deluded paranoiacs,
McDonald's caller admits the entire operation was to ensnare the Militia movement!

Of course, McDonald's caller makes no distinction
between militias and neo-Nazi groups.

militia groups angrily denounced the bombing, as any self-respecting citizen would, and certainly no
militia member would consider a person who killed 169 innocent people a hero.

If the bombing of the Alfred P.

Murrah Building was merely a failed sting operation, where did it go wrong?

Those who remember the World
Trade Center bombing, may recall that it, too, was a fouled sting operation.

In that case, the FBI's original plan to entrap the Al-Gama'a al-Islamiya group was to have their undercover operative, Emad Eli Salem,
substitute a harmless powder for the real explosive, which he would help them build.

Instead, due to a "disagreement," the FBI pulled Salem
off the case.

Like Cary Gagan, who tried to warn the FBI of the Oklahoma City bombing, and Samra Mahayoun, who tried to warn officials of the Pan Am
103 attack, Salem, they insisted, was just not credible.

Several weeks later, a truck-bomb detonated under the World Trade Center, killing
six people and injuring 1,000 more.

Unbeknownst to the FBI, Salem, a former Egyptian Army colonel, had secretly recorded his conversations with his FBI handlers.[1109]
Portions of the tapes were made public and reprinted in the Wall Street Journal and the New York Times..--- PAGE BREAK ---

Several weeks later, a truck-bomb detonated under the World Trade Center, killing
six people and injuring 1,000 more. Unbeknownst to the FBI, Salem, a former Egyptian Army colonel, had secretly recorded his conversations with his FBI handlers.[1109]
Portions of the tapes were made public and reprinted in the Wall Street Journal and the New York Times.. In broken English, Salem talks
with the unnamed FBI supervisor who pulled him off the case:

--- PAGE BREAK ---"We'll be going building the bomb with a phony powder, and grabbing the people who was involved in it.

But since you, we didn't do that."
When Salem decided to complain to FBI headquarters, FBI supervisor John Anticev dissuaded him: "He said, I don't think that the New York
people would like the things out of the New York Office to go to Washington, D.C."
Salem's immediate handler, agent Nancy Floyd, is heard on the tapes agreeing with the Egyptian's account, saying, "Well, of course not,
because they don't want to get their butts chewed."
In one conversation, Salem tells Floyd:
"Since the bomb went off, I feel terrible.

I feel bad.

I feel here is people who don't listen."
Ms.

Floyd seems to commiserate, saying: "Hey, I mean it wasn't like you didn't try, and I didn't try."
…Salem recounts another point in the conversation he said he had with Anticev, saying:
"I said, 'Guys, now you saw this bomb went off, and you both know that we could avoid that.'"
…Salem talks of the plan to substitute harmless powder for explosives during another conversation with Agent Floyd.

In that conversation,
he recalls a previous discussion with Anticev.

Mr.

Salem says he told the other agent:
"Do you deny that your supervisor is the main reason of bombing the World Trade Center?"
Mr.

Salem said that Anticev did not deny it.[1110]
What is also interesting to note is that not only did the FBI "foul up" the operation, but they had Salem act as a provocateur, recommending
potential targets, teaching the terrorists how to build the bomb, then teaching them how to drive the truck used in the bombing!

As the Wall Street Journal reported in regards to Salem's activities inside the Sheik's group immediately following the World Trade Center
bombing:
Mr.

Salem helped organize the "battle plan" that the government alleged included plots to bomb the United Nations and FBI buildings in New
York, and the Holland and Lincoln tunnels beneath the Hudson River.As the Wall Street Journal reported in regards to Salem's activities inside the Sheik's group immediately following the World Trade Center
bombing:
Mr.

Salem helped organize the "battle plan" that the government alleged included plots to bomb the United Nations and FBI buildings in New
York, and the Holland and Lincoln tunnels beneath the Hudson River.

Working with a charismatic Sudanese man named Siddig Ali, a
follower of Sheik Omar, Mr.

Salem recruited seven local Muslims to scout targets, plan tactics and obtain chemicals and electrical parts for
bombs, the government alleged.

The FBI supplied a safehouse in Queens.[1111]
As Floyd later explained to her superior, "Emad had the information about the bombs and where they wanted to have them placed.

If we had
done what we were supposed to have done, we would have known about it… we would have used our heads and come up with the solution
of trying to neutralize the situation."[1112]
When these "highly-trained, dedicated professionals" pulled Salem off the case, the bombers contacted Ramzi Yousef, an Iraqi agent and
expert bomb maker.

Mujahadeen veteran and World Trade Center bomber Mamud Abouhalima met Yousef in Afghanistan in 1988, and
brought him and co-conspirator Ahmed Ajaj to the U.S.

in September of 1992.

Far from building a harmless device, Yousef constructed a
sophisticated, powerful bomb, capable of causing extensive damage.

Had patsy driver Mohammed Salemeh parked the truck next to a key
column, they might have toppled the 110 story Twin Towers, killing as many as 20,000 people!

As William Norman Grigg writes in the February 19, 1997 issue of the New American:
Shortly after Yousef's arrival, the FBI subpoenaed two dozen of Sheik Omar's followers and questioned them about the sheik, Nosair, and
Abouhalima.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Had patsy driver Mohammed Salemeh parked the truck next to a key
column, they might have toppled the 110 story Twin Towers, killing as many as 20,000 people! As William Norman Grigg writes in the February 19, 1997 issue of the New American:
Shortly after Yousef's arrival, the FBI subpoenaed two dozen of Sheik Omar's followers and questioned them about the sheik, Nosair, and
Abouhalima. However, no arrests were made, no grand jury investigation was launched, and the FBI chose to downgrade its scrutiny of
Omar's network — just as plans were being finalized for the Trade Center bombing. This curious decision is even more peculiar in light of
the fact that the FBI had obtained intelligence on the network's capabilities and intentions from Emad A. Salem, a former Egyptian Army
officer and FBI informant who served as Omar's security guard. The FBI defended themselves by alleging that Salem had refused to cooperate with FBI guidelines and procedures. He didn't want to wear a
body-wire they claimed, and refused to testify against his so-called terrorist comrades in court. Salem was summarily dismissed. When these
"highly-trained, dedicated professionals" pulled Salem off the case, they lost control of the situation, and the bombers made their move. The FBI claimed the exact same thing about one of their informants in the Oklahoma City bombing case — Cary Gagan. Although the
Justice Department granted Gagan a Letter of Immunity, they and the "highly-trained, dedicated professionals" of the FBI failed to follow up
on the informant's apparently credible information. Gagan hadn't just contacted the FBI and the Marshals Service once or twice regarding
the plot, but had informed them on numerous occasions of the terrorists' plans. To the Gagan's knowledge, none of this information was

--- PAGE BREAK ---followed up.

After the bombing, the Justice Department tried to maintain that Gagan wasn't credible.

The U.S.

Attorney's Office revoked his Letter of
Immunity, ignored his information, and apparently tried to assassinate him.

In order to prove their bogus allegations, they removed reports
from his informant file that showed Gagan had assisted the DEA in recovering critical information.

The government's conduct in dealing with Gagan paralleled their treatment of Carol Howe.

As discussed previously, Tulsa ATF Agent
Angela Finley-Graham had placed Howe inside Elohim City, where she reported on the activities of Mahon, Strassmeir, and others allegedly
involved in the plot.

It was recently learned that Howe had secretly taped conversations with her ATF handler as Salem had.

Those tapes
have not been made public as of this writing.

Still, the government would try to cover its tracks by claiming that Howe's information was unspecific, and that she was emotionally unstable.

Yet two days after the bombing, the ATF renewed its contract with her, and sent her back to Elohim City to collect additional information.

In
the aftermath of the World Trade Center bombing, the FBI renewed its association with Emad Salem, paying him a reported $1 million to
infiltrate Sheik Omar's group once again.

Given the Tulsa ATF's interest in Strassmeir and Elohim City, it is highly likely that they were the initial target of the sting.

ATF agent Angela
Finley -Graham conferred with her superiors about raiding the compound in February of '95 and arresting Strassmeir, but FBI and DoJ
officials advised against it.[1113]
The ATF's actions at Elohim City were a curious parallel to those of the FBI's in New York.

As the London Sunday Telegraph's Ambrose
Evans-Pritchard stated, "It appears that the local BATF had stumbled on a bigger operation being run by the grown-ups at the Justice
Department."[1114]
If the Arabs had plotted with neo-Nazis to blow up the Federal Building.ATF agent Angela
Finley -Graham conferred with her superiors about raiding the compound in February of '95 and arresting Strassmeir, but FBI and DoJ
officials advised against it.[1113]
The ATF's actions at Elohim City were a curious parallel to those of the FBI's in New York.

As the London Sunday Telegraph's Ambrose
Evans-Pritchard stated, "It appears that the local BATF had stumbled on a bigger operation being run by the grown-ups at the Justice
Department."[1114]
If the Arabs had plotted with neo-Nazis to blow up the Federal Building.

It is a foregone conclusion that they were under surveillance by the
ATF and FBI.

Recall that Timothy McVeigh and Sam Khalid were both investigated by the FBI.

McVeigh in 1993, and Khalid in 1990.

Since Mike Khalid
was investigated for espionage by Army CID, it is reasonable to assume that attention was focused on his brother as well.

Said David Hall, "I felt like… that probably the agencies involved in this, their intent was to tie together some Patriot groups and to tie in
some other terrorist groups.

I think the intent here was to say — go to Congress and say — that we have domestic and foreign terrorist
groups, Mideast or foreign, working together and trying to blow up buildings here in the United States."
It is likely that the FBI became aware of collusion between the two groups — neo-Nazis and Arabs — as early as 1994, when Cary Gagan
reported that Terry Nichols had met with "Iranians" in Henderson, Nevada.

With the involvement of the Arabs, and the white supremacists at
Elohim City, the sting became a joint ATF/FBI operation.

Interestingly, Hall learned that the FBI and the ATF got into a shouting match while debriefing Janet Reno.

According to Hall, when Reno left
the room, the FBI and ATF began yelling at each other, angrily accusing each other for the tragedy.

Somewhere along the line in Oklahoma City, the FBI and ATF lost control of the situation, and the bombers were able to make their move.According to Hall, when Reno left
the room, the FBI and ATF began yelling at each other, angrily accusing each other for the tragedy.

Somewhere along the line in Oklahoma City, the FBI and ATF lost control of the situation, and the bombers were able to make their move.

As in the World Trade Center case, someone who had infiltrated the operation in Oklahoma had substituted a real bomb for a phony one, or
had placed a redundant timer on the bomb, or had simply provided false information to the agents in charge, preventing them from stopping
the attack.

Were the FBI and ATF double-crossed by one of their own informants?

Or, as in the Pan Am case, did someone in a position of authority
look at the situation and say, "Don't stop it, let it go"?

If the FBI and ATF were double-crossed, it may have been by one of their own agents.

Recall that Michael Franks, a rogue American agent
with connections to the Octopus, had provided the key information that allowed Ahmed Jibril to target Pan Am 103.

Former FBI SAC Ted Gundersen (head of the Los Angeles field office) described to me what he called a "unilateral transfer" of CIA agents
into various federal law-enforcement agencies in the early 1980s.

The purpose of this Reagan/Bush covert policy was to permit the CIA to
head off any inconvenient investigations that such agencies might be undertaking.

If so, it would go a long way towards explaining the FBI's
curiously timed fit of incompetence.

There are precedents.

In 1971, Louis Tackwood, an agent provocateur working out of the LAPD's Criminal Conspiracy Section (CCS),
charged that the CCS "had been set up on the same basis as the CIA." Tackwood disclosed that CCS agents — approximately 125 of whom
were agent provocateurs — were sponsored by federal intelligence agencies.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There are precedents. In 1971, Louis Tackwood, an agent provocateur working out of the LAPD's Criminal Conspiracy Section (CCS),
charged that the CCS "had been set up on the same basis as the CIA." Tackwood disclosed that CCS agents — approximately 125 of whom
were agent provocateurs — were sponsored by federal intelligence agencies. As researcher Alex Constantine notes in his book, Blood,
Carnage, and the Agent Provocateur, the CSS was directly linked to the Washington, D.C.-based Inter-Agency Group on Domestic
Intelligence and Internal Security, a little-known covert operations unit made up of Right-wing agents from the FBI, CIA, DIA, NSC, Army, Air
Force, and local police departments.[1115]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ligence and Internal Security, a little-known covert operations unit made up of Right-wing agents from the FBI, CIA, DIA, NSC, Army, Air
Force, and local police departments.[1115]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The CCS's spying activities came to a head in 1973 with the publication of Tackwood's The Glass House Tapes, and the unit was summarily
disbanded. In its place evolved the Organized Crime Intelligence Division (OCID), which, interestingly enough, maintains no files on
organized crime, but plenty on local citizens and politicians.
The OCID also still maintains its ties with the federal intelligence apparatus. According to Pasadena City Council member Michael Zinzin,
who won a $3.8 million dollar lawsuit against the LAPD's Anti-Terrorist Division, that apparatus is the same secret cabal involved in the Iran-
Contra imbroglio.
In other words, the Octopus.
Mike Rothmiller, a former OCID detective, stumbled upon the connections and subsequently fell prey to an assassin's bullet. At the time,
Rothmiller had been investigating one Robert Terry, an arms and drug smuggler with links to the CIA.[1116]
Gundersen's "unilateral transfer" could easily explain how intelligence operatives were able to manipulate the sting operation in Oklahoma
City. If there were duplicitous agents inside the ATF and FBI, they would have known when and where the bomb was to be delivered. They
would have known how [one of] the FBI's undercover agent(s) — John Doe 2 — was to disable the bomb. They would have had full and
detailed knowledge of the plot.
Like Michael Franks, they could have easily informed those who had an interest in changing that plot — those who had an interest in seeing
that the building, and possibly some of those inside it — was destroyed.
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---10
[E: This chapter was omitted from the printed edition.]
The Octopus
"This underground empire is controlled by a handful of people for money — that's the only secret of the temple."
— Investigative reporter Danny Casolaro, prior to his murder by the Octopus
The nomenclature of the Lockerbie and World Trade Center bombings provide a unique and unparalleled insight into the dynamics of the
Oklahoma City bombing.

Each event gives the reader a glimpse of how the Shadow Government operates, utilizing drug dealers, criminals,
and terrorists to do its bidding.

All three bombings were sting operations that utilized, and were utilized by, terrorists bent on causing destruction.

But the question still remained: who was controlling the terrorists?

To understand that, one must peer through the doorway of time stretching
from WWII to the present.

To prepare for the invasion of Sicily during WWII, the OSS (which later became the CIA) collaborated with the Corsican Mafia.

The
arrangement permitted the Mafia use the port of Marseilles for heroin smuggling in exchange for its assistance in defeating the Nazis.[1117]
After WWII, the heroin operation moved to Vietnam and Laos, then to Afghanistan and Pakistan, as the CIA embroiled itself in a covert war
against the Soviets.

Assistant Secretary of Defense for National Security Affairs Richard Armitage sat on the "208 Committee," which
oversaw military aid to the Mujahadeen.

Fazoe Haq, the governor of the Northwest Frontier Province (the largest heroin growing province in
Afghanistan), who was originally worth $100,000, was suddenly was worth $200 million after the war.

Armitage was his main contact.[1118]
Vince Cannistraro (Mr.

"Libya done it") also sat on the 208 Committee, representing National Security Advisor Robert "Bud" McFarlane,
Oliver North's supervisor.[1119]
Shortly after the start of the Afghani operation, the CIA began arming the Contras in Nicaragua.Armitage was his main contact.[1118]
Vince Cannistraro (Mr.

"Libya done it") also sat on the 208 Committee, representing National Security Advisor Robert "Bud" McFarlane,
Oliver North's supervisor.[1119]
Shortly after the start of the Afghani operation, the CIA began arming the Contras in Nicaragua.

Cannistraro himself [along with Duane
"Dewy" Clarridge, then Chief of the CIA's Latin American Division] headed Casey's original operation to arm the Contras, based on Reagan's
March, 1981 decision.

As former Green Beret Andrew Eiva said, "Cannistraro was up to his ears by 1985." This is significant, considering
the Boland Amendment, prohibiting aid to the Contras, was passed in 1984.[1120]
Some of these are the same players who moved into other Central American countries, setting up security services (death squads) for U.S.-
backed dictators, and profiting handsomely from the cocaine trade.

If anyone thinks these are outrageous allegations, consider the statements of Mike Levine, one of the DEA's most highly decorated veterans:
"For decades, the CIA, the Pentagon, and secret organizations like Oliver North's Enterprise have been supporting and protecting the
world's biggest drug dealers," including the Mujahadeen in Afghanistan, the Contras in Central America, the DFS in Mexico, the Shan United
Army in the Golden Triangle of Southeast Asia, and "any of a score of other groups and/or individuals like Manuel Noriega.

Support of these
people has been secretly deemed more important than getting drugs off our streets."[1121]
Or consider the words of Lt.

Col.

Bo Gritz, former commander of the Special Forces in Latin America and the most decorated soldier in
Vietnam.

Gritz made a trip to the Golden Triangle in 1983 to search for American POWs, a mission that was ultimately stonewalled.

Gritz
believes the POWs are being used as drug mules, and the government doesn't want them returned alive, for fear they would expose the
Octopus.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Gritz made a trip to the Golden Triangle in 1983 to search for American POWs, a mission that was ultimately stonewalled. Gritz
believes the POWs are being used as drug mules, and the government doesn't want them returned alive, for fear they would expose the
Octopus. As Gritz said: "[They] would not want the American POWs to come home. Because when they do, there will be an investigation as
to why they were abandoned. At that time we will uncover this secret organization and its illicit drug money and financing. The Secret Team
would then be exposed."[1122]
As Gritz later wrote in Called to Serve:

--- PAGE BREAK ---If Richard Armitage was, as Khun Sa avowed, a major participant in parallel government drug trafficking, then it explained why our efforts to
rescue POWs had been inexplicably foiled, time after time...

If it was true, Richard Armitage would be the last man in the world who would
desire to see prisoners of war come home alive.[1123]
As "Special Consultant to the Pentagon on the MIAs," in Bangkok in 1975, Armitage reportedly spent more time repatriating opium profits
then recovering POWs.

In 1976, when Khun Sa was still selling heroin to CIA officials, the head of the CIA was none other than George
Bush.[1124]
Former presidential candidate H.

Ross Perot, who was appointed presidential investigator for POW/MIA affairs, came upon the same
information, and was warned by former Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci to stop pursuing the connections to Armitage.

As he sadly
explained to a group of POW/MIA families in 1987: "I have been instructed to cease and desist."[1125]
Ironically, between 1987 and 1991, Vice-President Bush served as head of the South Florida Drug Task Force, and later as chair of the
National Narcotics Interdiction System, both set up to "stem" the flow of drugs into the U.S.

While Bush was drug czar, the volume of cocaine
smuggled into the U.S.

tripled.[1126]
Celerino "Cele" Castillo, the DEA's head agent in El Salvador and Guatemala from 1985 to 1991, told reporters and Senate investigators of
numerous known drug traffickers who used hangers controlled by Oliver North and the CIA in El Salvador's Ilopango military airbase.

When
Castillo naively tried to warn Bush at a U.S.

embassy party in Guatemala, Bush "just shook my hand, smiled and walked away…"[1127]
"By the end of 1988," added Castillo, "I realized how hopelessly tangled the DEA, the CIA, and every other U.S.

entity in Central America
had become with the criminals.

The connections boggled my mind."[1128]
"The CIA — they're making deals with the Devil," adds Mike Levine.entity in Central America
had become with the criminals.

The connections boggled my mind."[1128]
"The CIA — they're making deals with the Devil," adds Mike Levine.

"Unfortunately, the Devil is smarter than they are."[1129]
Some of those devils, like Monzer al-Kassar — "business partner" of Richard Secord and Oliver North — would be utilized to do the
Octopus's dirty work.

Another name Khun Sa mentioned repeatedly was Ted Shackley.[1130] A long-time CIA player, Theodore G.

Shackley (known as "The Blond
Ghost") began his Agency career as CIA Station Chief in Miami, where he directed the CIA's JM/WAVE Operation, a post-Bay of Pigs
attempt to assassinate Fidel Castro and wreck havoc within that sovereign nation.

Utilizing Cuban expatriates, the CIA conducted hundreds
of sabotage raids against Cuba in direct violation of the U.S.

Neutrality Act.

Shackley also worked in close partnership with Mob figures John
Roselli, Sam Giancana, and Santos Trafficante.[1131]
While the operation was shut down in 1965, due mainly to revelations of organized crime connections and drug smuggling, many of the
participants remained in Miami, continuing their illegal activities.

Later, as Station Chief of Laos, Shackley directed Major General Richard Secord's air wing in tactical raids against the Communist Pathet
Lao, who happened to be General Vang Pao's main competition in the opium trade.

By keeping the Pathet Lao busy with the help of the CIA
and the American military, Pao's Hmong tribesmen were able to become the region's largest heroin producers.[1132]
Of course, Shackley, his deputy Tom Clines (who supervised the air base in Long Tieng), and their colleagues in CIA front companies like
Air America were only too happy to help, smuggling heroin to the U.S.Later, as Station Chief of Laos, Shackley directed Major General Richard Secord's air wing in tactical raids against the Communist Pathet
Lao, who happened to be General Vang Pao's main competition in the opium trade.

By keeping the Pathet Lao busy with the help of the CIA
and the American military, Pao's Hmong tribesmen were able to become the region's largest heroin producers.[1132]
Of course, Shackley, his deputy Tom Clines (who supervised the air base in Long Tieng), and their colleagues in CIA front companies like
Air America were only too happy to help, smuggling heroin to the U.S.

in the gutted bodies of dead GIs (with the assistance of their old Mob
buddy Santos Trafficante, who had helped form their ZR/RIFLE assassination team, and Vietnamese Air Force General Nguyen Cao Ky),
and laundering the profits in the Nugan-Hand bank.

As a 1983 Wall Street Journal article stated:
Investigations following Mr.

Nugan's death and the failure of the bank revealed widespread dealings by Nugan-Hand with international heroin
syndicates, and evidence of massive fraud against U.S.

and foreign citizens.

Many retired high-ranking Pentagon and CIA officials were
executives of or consultants to Nugan-Hand.[1133][1134]*
Shackley, along with Nugan-Hand's attorney — former CIA Director William Colby — directed the infamous "Phoenix Program," a largely
successful attempt to "neutralize" by torture and murder approximately 40,000 Vietnamese civilians suspected of being Viet Cong
sympathizers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

and foreign citizens. Many retired high-ranking Pentagon and CIA officials were
executives of or consultants to Nugan-Hand.[1133][1134]*
Shackley, along with Nugan-Hand's attorney — former CIA Director William Colby — directed the infamous "Phoenix Program," a largely
successful attempt to "neutralize" by torture and murder approximately 40,000 Vietnamese civilians suspected of being Viet Cong
sympathizers. One Phoenix operative, testifying before Congress, stated that Phoenix was "a sterile, depersonalized murder program… it
was completely indiscriminate." The assassinations would continue in Nicaragua under the code-name "Operation Pegasus."[1135][1136]
After becoming the head of the CIA's Western Hemisphere operations (Latin American Division) in 1972, Shackley supervised the overthrow
of the Chilean government ("Operation Track II") by murdering democratically elected President Salvador Allende. With the backing of the
CIA under Shackley, the military led a violent coup by Right-wing General Augusto Pinochet, which resulted in the abolishment of the
Constitution, the closing of all newspapers save for two Right-wing dailies, the outlawing of trade unions, the suppression of all political
parties, and the arrest, torture, and execution of thousands.[1137]

--- PAGE BREAK ---After a brief stint as Director of the Far East Division, Shackley directed CIA agent Edwin Wilson in training the Shah of Iran's notorious
secret police, the Savak, who routinely tortured and murdered the Shah's opponents.

Later Shackley would assist more directly in these
efforts.[1138]
In 1975, Shackley became Associate Director in the Directorate of Operations, which put him in charge of Covert-Operations, Counter-
Intelligence, and ironically, Counter-Narcotics, all under the command of George Herbert Walker Bush.

These associations naturally led to Shackley playing a role in the formation of the "Secret Team," (to coin a phrase invented by Col.

L.

Fletcher Prouty) the covert and illegal enterprise that was the driving force behind the Iran-Contra operation.

Donald Gregg, one of
Shackley's subordinates during his Saigon tenure, would later become Assistant National Security Advisor during Iran-Contra, reporting
directly to Vice-President Bush.

It was against this backdrop that Shackley served as a "consultant" to players such as Bush, Secord, North, and Casey in their illegal and
bloody guns-for-drugs network that resulted in tens of thousands of deaths and the flooding of our streets with tons of drugs.

As Wall Street Journal reporter Jonathan Kwitny writes about Ted Shackley in his book, The Crimes of Patriots:
Looking at the list of disasters Shackley has presided over during his career, one might even conclude that on the day the CIA hired
Shackley it might have done better hiring a KGB agent; a Soviet mole probably could not have done as much damage to the national
security of the United States with all his wile as Shackley did with the most patriotic of intentions.It was against this backdrop that Shackley served as a "consultant" to players such as Bush, Secord, North, and Casey in their illegal and
bloody guns-for-drugs network that resulted in tens of thousands of deaths and the flooding of our streets with tons of drugs.

As Wall Street Journal reporter Jonathan Kwitny writes about Ted Shackley in his book, The Crimes of Patriots:
Looking at the list of disasters Shackley has presided over during his career, one might even conclude that on the day the CIA hired
Shackley it might have done better hiring a KGB agent; a Soviet mole probably could not have done as much damage to the national
security of the United States with all his wile as Shackley did with the most patriotic of intentions.

Between Shackely's Cuban and Indochinese campaigns, more dope dealers were probably put onto the payroll of the United States
Government, and protected and encouraged in their activities, than if the government had simply gone out and hired the Mafia — which, in
the case of the Cuban campaign, it did.

CIA Director Admiral Stansfield Turner forced Shackley to resign from the Agency in 1979, due to his "unauthorized" dealings with rogue
agent Edwin Wilson, who was selling plastic explosives to Libya (with Shackley's approval).

Had he not left, Shackley would likely have
become head of the Agency.[1139]
George Bush, who headed the Agency in 1976, strongly desired to continue in that post.

He was not reappointed when Jimmy Carter took
office.[1140]*
Moreover, Turner, who had little faith in HUMNIT (Human Intelligence) sources, decided to reshape the CIA along more advanced
technological lines.

As a result of Turner's infamous "Halloween Massacre," the CIA cut its field agents from several thousand to just over
300.He was not reappointed when Jimmy Carter took
office.[1140]*
Moreover, Turner, who had little faith in HUMNIT (Human Intelligence) sources, decided to reshape the CIA along more advanced
technological lines.

As a result of Turner's infamous "Halloween Massacre," the CIA cut its field agents from several thousand to just over
300.

As President Jimmy Carter would later state, "We were aware that some of the unqualified and incompetent personnel whom he
discharged were deeply resentful."[1141]
The old hands of the Agency, who formerly had at their disposal almost unlimited "Black Budget" funds for covert operations, were suddenly
forced into retirement, or forced into lockstep with Turner's new guidelines.

Although CIA Director William Casey hired 2,000 new covert operators in 1980, many CIA critics felt Turner's actions had already caused the
secret cells of the good-old-boy networks to bury themselves — and their illegal activities — even deeper.

It is this element, birthed in the hysteria of the Cold War, legitimized by the paranoia of the National Security state, and nurtured by the
politics of greed, that has buried itself in the core of American politics.

As long-time Army Criminal Investigator Gene Wheaton defines it: "An elite, very clandestine, very covert group within the intelligence
community….

The CIA and DIA is just the lightening rod for the people who really control things."
Those who could accept the idea of government foreknowledge of the Oklahoma City bombing would be hard-pressed to accept the notion
that certain factions within the government might have orchestrated the bombing itself.

Those who have a difficult time accepting this are
stymied by what they perceive as "government."
As Wheaton explains, "The government is just a bunch of monuments, office buildings, computers, and desks.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The CIA and DIA is just the lightening rod for the people who really control things."
Those who could accept the idea of government foreknowledge of the Oklahoma City bombing would be hard-pressed to accept the notion
that certain factions within the government might have orchestrated the bombing itself. Those who have a difficult time accepting this are
stymied by what they perceive as "government."
As Wheaton explains, "The government is just a bunch of monuments, office buildings, computers, and desks. They don't see the crazies in
the government — the little conspiratorial cliques within the government."[1142]
These little conspiratorial cliques — the same players that Shackley intersects with, going back to Cuba, Laos, Afghanistan and Nicaragua
— have been involved for decades in everything from drug and gun-running, to assassinations, covert warfare, and outright terrorism. It is a
terrorism that increasingly has no particular face, no ideological credo, no political goal. It is a terrorism motivated by power and greed.[1143]
By no means the lone man behind the curtain, Ted Shackley represents one of the more visible of this lexicon of covert operators upon
whom the powers that be depend on for their endless supply of "black ops" and dirty tricks. Perhaps this is how Shackley knows, or seems
to know, the complex truth behind Oklahoma City. It is a truth that remains hidden behind a sophisticated labyrinth of covert operatives, all of

--- PAGE BREAK ---whom converge at similar times and places.

They are, as David Corn writes, "the little faceless gray men we never see and seldom hear
about." Those we call the "Shadow Government," the "Parallel Government," the "Enterprise," the "Octopus," or a half-a-dozen other names,
are carefully hidden behind an endless roster of official titles and duties, and a plethora of familiar-sounding organizations and institutions.

These same faceless little gray men would pop up in the Oklahoma City bombing conspiracy like interminable weeds between the cracks of
the pavement.

From the Bay of Pigs to Iran-Contra to Oklahoma City, the names, faces, and players would coalesce for a brief moment in
time into an indistinguishable menagerie of politicos and spooks, terrorists and assassins — to commit their terrible deed, then fade into the
seamless world were little distinction is made between assets and criminals.[1144]
Ted Shackley was officially forced to resign from the CIA due to his dealings with friend and renegade agent Edwin Wilson.

Wilson and
former CIA employee Frank Terpil had smuggled two tons of C-4 to Libya, and at the behest of Shackley, had set up terrorist training camps
there utilizing Green Berets led to believe they were working for the Agency.

The ostensible purpose of this maneuver was to permit the CIA
to gather information on Soviet and Libyan weapons and defense capabilities, and to learn the identities of foreign nationals being trained for
guerrilla warfare.Wilson and
former CIA employee Frank Terpil had smuggled two tons of C-4 to Libya, and at the behest of Shackley, had set up terrorist training camps
there utilizing Green Berets led to believe they were working for the Agency.

The ostensible purpose of this maneuver was to permit the CIA
to gather information on Soviet and Libyan weapons and defense capabilities, and to learn the identities of foreign nationals being trained for
guerrilla warfare.

Upon obtaining their passports and travel plans, Shackley would alert their home country's secret police, who would then
assassinate them upon their return.[1145]
While Wilson was sentenced to a long prison term, Terpil fled to Cuba, and has since been involved in numerous dealings with the PLO and
other terrorists, supplying them with sophisticated assassination weapons, detonators, and communication systems.[1146]
Terpil also supplied torture devices to Ugandan Dictator Idi Amin, who used a bomb supplied by Terpil to assassinate Kenyan cabinet
member Bruce McKenzie.[1147]*
One month later, Terpil was implicated in the murder of three executives of the IBEX corporation — a high-technology company that was
doing business with the Savak.

John Harper, IBEX's former director of security, said that while in Tripoli, he saw a mock-up of the ambush
site at the training facility that Terpil and Wilson had set up.[1148]†
Readers will recall this is the same Frank Terpil that was seen by Cary Gagan in Mexico City with Omar (Sam Khalid?), six months before
the Oklahoma City bombing.

"I saw him down in Mexico," recalled Gagan, "in November of '94, in Mexico City… with Omar."
Gagan said he and Omar met Terpil at the Hotel Maria Isabelle in the Zona Rosa district.

Gagan didn't know who Terpil was at the time, but
described him as a fat, balding, 60ish fellow, who was "terribly dressed." In other words — Frank Terpil."I saw him down in Mexico," recalled Gagan, "in November of '94, in Mexico City… with Omar."
Gagan said he and Omar met Terpil at the Hotel Maria Isabelle in the Zona Rosa district.

Gagan didn't know who Terpil was at the time, but
described him as a fat, balding, 60ish fellow, who was "terribly dressed." In other words — Frank Terpil.

"I heard the name because I knew Wilson's name from the Florence Federal Penitentiary in Colorado." Gagan said that one of his
intelligence contacts, a man named Daniel, told him about Terpil.

"The conversation came up in reference to the Gander, Newfoundland
crash," said Gagan.

Was Terpil in Mexico to supply explosives to Omar?

While Gagan wasn't privy to the conversation, he believes that was the purpose of the
meeting.

When Wilson and Terpil were selling arms and explosives to Libya, they were reporting to none other than Ted Shackley.

Kwitny notes that
Wilson and Terpil were hiring anti-Castro Cubans from Shackley's old JM/WAVE program [and Green Berets] to assassinate President
Qaddafi's political opponents abroad:
Some U.S.

Army men were literally lured away from the doorway of Fort Bragg, their North Carolina training post.

The GIs were given every
reason to believe that the operation summoning them was being carried out with the full backing of the CIA.…[1149]
Readers will also recall that while Timothy McVeigh was still in the Army, he wrote his sister a letter telling her that he had been picked for a
Special Forces (Green Beret) Covert Tactical Unit (CTU) that was involved in illegal activities.

These illegal activities included "protecting
drug shipments, eliminating the [Octopus's drug] competition, and population control."
This is exactly what Shackley, Clines, and Secord did in Laos — assassinating and bombing Vang Pao's opium competition out of existence.

Could this CTU McVeigh claims he was recruited for be a latter-day version of Shackley's assassins?--- PAGE BREAK ---

These illegal activities included "protecting
drug shipments, eliminating the [Octopus's drug] competition, and population control."
This is exactly what Shackley, Clines, and Secord did in Laos — assassinating and bombing Vang Pao's opium competition out of existence. Could this CTU McVeigh claims he was recruited for be a latter-day version of Shackley's assassins? Former federal grand juror Hoppy
Heidelberg said McVeigh's letter indicates that he turned them down, while former FBI SAC Ted Gundersen claims McVeigh actually worked
for the group for a while, then became disenchanted.[1150]
If McVeigh had actually been recruited for such a group, the question arises of what cover-story he was given. As discussed, it is highly likely
he was told that he was on an important mission — to infiltrate a terrorist organization and prevent a bombing. Considering McVeigh's
background and character, it is unlikely he is a terrorist who set out to murder 169 innocent people. Also recall that McVeigh was seen with Hussain al-Hussaini. The Iraqis would provide a convincing and plausible excuse if McVeigh was led
to believe he was part of a sting operation: "Son, you were a hero in the Gulf War. Your country needs you now in the fight against
terrorism." It is a story a young, impressionable man like McVeigh would fall for.

--- PAGE BREAK ---It is also possible that McVeigh was sheep-dipped as disgruntled ex-GI for infiltration into the neo-Nazi community, which would provide a
doorway into the bombing conspiracy through places like Elohim City.

Or perhaps, as a result of his becoming "disenchanted" and "leaving" the CTU, he became targeted for "termination," and was set up as a
fall-guy.

Such is standard operating procedure for those who attempt to leave the world of covert operations.

Either way, the fact that there appeared to be two "Timothy McVeighs," just as there were two Oswalds, would suggest a sophisticated
intelligence operation, one that was designed to put McVeigh in the wrong place at the wrong time.

Like Oswald, McVeigh probably believed himself to be a government agent, part of a secret project.

Like Oswald, McVeigh was not told what
the plan really involved, and was trapped, framed, and made a patsy.

This goes a long way towards explaining why an armed McVeigh didn't shoot and kill Officer Charles Hanger when he was stopped on the
Interstate after the bombing.

Why would a man who had just killed 169 men, women, and children balk at killing a cop (a member of the
system that McVeigh allegedly hated) on a lonely stretch of highway?

The only possible answer is that McVeigh believed he was part of a
sting operation — a government asset — and would be protected.

Whatever McVeigh's actual purpose and intent, it is curious, to say the least, that Ted Shackley would tell D'Ferdinand Carone that the
perpetrator of the bombing was somebody from here.

How did he know?

Roger Moore, the mysterious gun dealer whom the government claimed McVeigh and Nichols robbed to "finance" the bombing, ran a
company next to Bahia Mar Marina in South Florida (a popular hang-out for the Iran-Contra crowd), which manufactured high-speed boats.How did he know?

Roger Moore, the mysterious gun dealer whom the government claimed McVeigh and Nichols robbed to "finance" the bombing, ran a
company next to Bahia Mar Marina in South Florida (a popular hang-out for the Iran-Contra crowd), which manufactured high-speed boats.

The boats — sold through Intercontinental Industries of Costa Rica (an Ollie North "cut-out") — were used to mine Nicaragua's harbors in
"Operation Cordova Harbor."[1151]
One source I spoke to said Moore had direct contact with Oliver North.

"I don't know who his [Moore's] contact was on Iran-Contra beyond
Don Aranow.

I know he had access and would talk directly to Oliver North.

He knew Felix Rodriquez pretty well, he knew Nester Sanchez,
Manny Diaz, all those guys around Jeb [Bush] pretty well."
This source also claimed that Moore was a "paymaster" for Tom Posey's Civilian Military Assistance (CMA) — the covert paramilitary
operation that served as the primary nexus for arming the Contras.

A retired CIA/DIA agent I spoke to in Arkansas, said "[Moore] was an Agency contractor."
Other sources say Moore was an informant for the FBI.

He allegedly tried to sell heavy weapons to the Militia of Montana (MOM) as part of
an FBI sting operation.

A call to MOM indicated that Moore had indeed stopped by for a friendly chat.

He told Randy Trochmann, one of
MOM's leaders, that he was traveling the country meeting with militia groups in an attempt to verify black helicopter sightings and rumors of
UN troop movements.

This seems a peculiar pastime for a man who worked for a network of spooks devoted to bypassing and subverting
the Constitution.[1152]*
What is also peculiar is a letter written by Moore to McVeigh in early 1995.He told Randy Trochmann, one of
MOM's leaders, that he was traveling the country meeting with militia groups in an attempt to verify black helicopter sightings and rumors of
UN troop movements.

This seems a peculiar pastime for a man who worked for a network of spooks devoted to bypassing and subverting
the Constitution.[1152]*
What is also peculiar is a letter written by Moore to McVeigh in early 1995.

Introduced at the trial of Terry Nichols, the letter, speaks of "a
plan… to bring the country down and have a few more things happen."[1153]
Robert "Bud" McFarlane went on to form his own consulting firm, and joined the board of American Equity Investors (AEI), founded by
Prescott Bush.

AEI's board of directors reads like a Who's Who of the spook world, including former CIA officials George Clairmont and
Howard Hebert, and CIA lawyer Mitch Rogovin, who was George Bush's legal counsel when he was Director of the Agency.[1154]
AEI invested in a Tulsa, Oklahoma company: Hawkins Oil and Gas, from 1988 to 1991.

McFarlane was a "consultant" for Hawkins and
several other companies on the Ech power project in Pakistan, which required frequent trips to that country.[1155] This was during the tail end
of the largest covert operation the U.S.

ever conducted — the arming of the Mujahadeen, who trained in Pakistan.

McFarlane sat on the
"208 Committee," who's job it was to procure weapons for the Mujahadeen, and arms contracts for the Pakistani government.

Recall that Richard Armitage, who was the contact for Fazoe Haq, governor of the Northwest Frontier Province, also sat on the "208
Committee." As Alfred A.

McCoy writes in The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia:
It's known that the CIA paid the Afghan guerrillas, who were based in Pakistan, through BCCI.… That the Pakistan military were in fact
banking their drug profits, moving their drug profits from the consuming country back to Pakistan though BCCI.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Recall that Richard Armitage, who was the contact for Fazoe Haq, governor of the Northwest Frontier Province, also sat on the "208
Committee." As Alfred A. McCoy writes in The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia:
It's known that the CIA paid the Afghan guerrillas, who were based in Pakistan, through BCCI.… That the Pakistan military were in fact
banking their drug profits, moving their drug profits from the consuming country back to Pakistan though BCCI. In fact the boom in the
Pakistan drug trade was financed by BCCI.…
BCCI also served as a conduit for the Iran-Contra operation, largely through Gaith Pharon, former head of Saudi Intelligence, who operated

--- PAGE BREAK ---akistan drug trade was financed by BCCI.…
BCCI also served as a conduit for the Iran-Contra operation, largely through Gaith Pharon, former head of Saudi Intelligence, who operated

--- PAGE BREAK ---

out of Islamabad, Pakistan. The Saudis played a major role in funding the Mujahadeen and [via the request of Secord and McFarlane] the
Contras.
McFarlane — who former Mossad official Ari Ben Menashe claims is a Mossad asset — worked with the president of Hawkins' International
Division, Mujeeb Rehman Cheema, on the Ech project. Was Hani Kamal's supposed statement that Khalid was connected to the Mossad
accurate? A prominent Muslim community leader, Cheema claims he does not know Sam Khalid.[1156]
Interestingly, Gagan said that at one point, Terry Nichols rendezvoused with his Middle Eastern friends at the Islamic society of Nevada.
Cheema is chairman of the Islamic Society of Tulsa. Is there a connection? And what of Cheema's links to McFarlane? Was McFarlane
using Hawkins as a front for CIA activities in Pakistan?
It is perhaps prophetic that many of the terrorists implicated in the major bombings of the last decade attended the terrorist conference held
in the Northwest Frontier Province town of Konli, Pakistan in July of 1996. As noted, Osama bin Ladin, a Saudi who funded the Mujahadeen
and was implicated in the Riyadh and Dhahran bombings, (a close associate of Sheik Abdel Omar Rahman, implicated in the World Trade
Center bombing), Ahmed Jibril (who bombed Pan Am 103), and senior representatives of Iranian and Pakistani intelligence, and Hamas,
HizbAllah, and other groups attended the conference.[1157]
Stephen Jones claimed he had learned through the Saudi Arabian Intelligence Service that Iraq had hired seven Pakistani mercenaries —
Mujahadeen veterans — to bomb targets in the U.S., one of which was the Alfred P. Murrah Building.[1158]
Just who were these "Pakistani mercenaries," and were they really working for Iraq?
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.como bomb targets in the U.S., one of which was the Alfred P. Murrah Building.[1158]
Just who were these "Pakistani mercenaries," and were they really working for Iraq?
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---11
The Covert Cowboys
The use of former enemy soldiers, criminals, and terrorists for their dirty work is also a time-honored tradition among intelligence agencies,
who stand to gain the "plausible deniability" so coveted in the world of covert operations.[1159]
At the close of WWII, the U.S.

Government helped thousands of Nazi war criminals escape justice, integrating them into its scientific/military/
intelligence establishment.

Reinhard Gehlen, Hitler's senior intelligence officer on the Eastern Front, and other high-ranking Nazis, were
spirited out of Germany with the aid of the OSS and the Vatican, then installed in top-secret, sensitive posts in the U.S.

and abroad.

Gehlen's SS officers had been instrumental in the mass extermination of Gypsies and Jews, and Gehlen was personally responsible for the
torture, interrogation, and murder by starvation of some 4 million Soviet prisoners of war.

Gehlen later boasted of teaching the newly formed CIA everything it knew.

Many of the world's deadliest terrorists were in fact trained by agencies such as the CIA and KGB, who went on to commit mayhem and
murder on an unprecedented scale.

A prime example is Shackley's JM/WAVE anti-Casto campaign of the mid-1960s, which trained Cuban
exiles in techniques of assassination and terror, then unleashed them on their native country.

The most infamous of these "Cuban
Cowboys," Luis Posada Carriles (AKA: Ramon Medina), a member of the anti-Casto group CORU (also a member of the CIA's ZR/RIFLE
assassination team under the command of E.

Howard Hunt), killed 78 people in October of 1976 by bombing a Cuban airliner.[1160]*
Carriles said he planned the bombing at the CIA's instigation.

As one of CORU's members explained in a CBS interview, "We use the tactics that we learned from the CIA because we — we were trained
to do everything.Howard Hunt), killed 78 people in October of 1976 by bombing a Cuban airliner.[1160]*
Carriles said he planned the bombing at the CIA's instigation.

As one of CORU's members explained in a CBS interview, "We use the tactics that we learned from the CIA because we — we were trained
to do everything.

We are trained to set off a bomb, we were trained to kill… we were trained to do everything."[1161]
The mastermind of the bombing, Orlando Bosch, responsible for more than 50 anti-Castro bombings in Cuba and elsewhere, was released
from prison at the behest of George Bush's son Jeb, who has strong ties to both the Cuban expatriate community and the Contras.

As Vice-President, Bush also headed the Task Force on Combating Terrorism.

Proudly displaying his condemnation of terrorism, Bush
pardoned Bosch, giving him special permission to live in Miami.[1162][1163]
The CIA's support of the Afghani Mujahadeen between 1979 and 1989 resulted in a huge wave of well-armed and trained Muslim extremists
bent on venting their political and ideological rage against the U.S.

At the same time, the overflow from the Afghani operation resulted in one
of the largest pools of potential recruits for covert operations.

One of the main operatives the CIA had utilized in its war against the Soviets was Sheik Abdel Omar Rahman.

The CIA utilized Rahman
because of his influence over the Mujahadeen, then brought him into the U.S.

on a CIA-sponsored visa.

While the Sheik was eventually
convicted for conspiracy to bomb targets in the U.S., prosecutors encountered resistance in pursuing him and other World Trade Center
bombing suspects because of their ties to the Mujahadeen, and their ties to U.S.

intelligence.

As Jack Blum, investigator for the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee, put it: "One of the big problems here is that many suspects in
the World Trade Center bombing were associated with the Mujahadeen.--- PAGE BREAK ---

intelligence. As Jack Blum, investigator for the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee, put it: "One of the big problems here is that many suspects in
the World Trade Center bombing were associated with the Mujahadeen. And there are components of our government that are absolutely
disinterested in following that path because it leads back to people we supported in the Afghan war."[1164]
A staunch anti-Western crusader, Rahman became a shining light for thousands of Muslim extremists after the war in their crusade for the
holy Jihad. Nearby Peshawar, Pakistan became the staging area for tens of thousands of radicals, many of whom went on to form smaller
cells around the world, including the U.S. The groups that flocked to Pakistan's terrorist training centers included the Egyptian Al-Gama'a al-
Islamiya, the Palestinian Hammers, the Algerian Al-Jihad, and the Filipino Moro Liberation Front. World Trade Center mastermind Ramzi Yousef also spent considerable time in Pakistan. As one Western diplomat noted: "The United

--- PAGE BREAK ---States created a Moscow Central in Peshawar for these groups, and the consequences for all of us are astronomical."[1165]
As Mary Ann Weaver writes in the May, 1996 issue of The Atlantic Monthly: "…the CIA helped to train and fund what eventually became an
international network of highly disciplined and effective Islamic militants — and a new breed of terrorist as well."
To the CIA, which pumped more than $2 billion into the fourteen-year Afghani resistance effort, Sheik Omar was what intelligence officials
call "a valuable asset."[1166][1167]
El Sayyid Nosair, a core member of the Al Salaam Mosque run by Rahman, shot and killed the radical Right-wing Rabbi Meir Kahane in
November of 1990.

During a conversation between a 20-year veteran FBI agent and one of his top undercover operatives, the operative
asked:
"Why aren't we going after the Sheik [Adbel Rahman]?" demanded the undercover man.

"It's hands off," answered the agent.

"Why?" asked the operative.

"It was no accident that the Sheik got a visa and that he's still in the country," replied the agent, visibly upset.

"He's here under the banner of
national security, the State Department, the NSA, and the CIA."
The agent pointed out that the Sheik had been granted a tourist visa, and later a green card, despite the fact that he was on a State
Department terrorist watch-list that should have barred him from the country.

He's an untouchable, concluded the agent.…"[1168][1169]
It was also revealed during the Sheik's conspiracy trial that in 1989 the U.S.

Army had sent Special Forces Sergeant Ali A.

Mohammed to
Jersey City to provide training for Mujahadeen recruits, including Nosair and Mahmud Abouhalima, a convicted World Trade Center bomber.Army had sent Special Forces Sergeant Ali A.

Mohammed to
Jersey City to provide training for Mujahadeen recruits, including Nosair and Mahmud Abouhalima, a convicted World Trade Center bomber.

Interestingly, this was at the same time the pair were under surveillance by the FBI as suspected terrorists.[1170][1171]*
The experiences of the CIA's expatriated Nazis, Anti-Castro Cubans, and Mujahadeen veterans were strikingly similar to that of the Ku Klux
Klan, which for decades remained on the end of a long leash controlled by FBI Director J.

Edgar Hoover.

One of the most infamous examples of FBI-orchestrated terror-murder were the brutal 1963 KKK attacks on civil rights workers in
Birmingham, Alabama, led by FBI informant Gary Rowe.

It seems that Rowe was no mere informant.

As Curt Gentry writes in J.

Edgar Hoover: The Man and the Secrets: "Klan members stated he
had veto power over any violent activity contemplated by the Eastview 13 Klavern."[1172][1173]
Rowe also participated in the 1965 murder of civil rights marcher Viola Liuzzo.

As the National Review reported, "The 1978 investigation
implicated [Rowe] as an agent provocateur.… Three other Klansmen testified that it was Rowe who had actually shot Viola." While Rowe
was indicted on first degree murder, a federal judge blocked Rowe's extradition, claiming that a federal agent has rights that protect him
when "placed in a compromising position because of his undercover work." A Federal Appeals Court upheld the ruling.

The FBI informant was also accused of helping plant the bomb that killed four black girls in a Birmingham church.

Although Rowe failed lie-
detector tests regarding his complicity in that and the Viola murder, he was never prosecuted, and instead was given a $20,000 "reward" by
the FBI.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The FBI informant was also accused of helping plant the bomb that killed four black girls in a Birmingham church. Although Rowe failed lie-
detector tests regarding his complicity in that and the Viola murder, he was never prosecuted, and instead was given a $20,000 "reward" by
the FBI. A similar case of government-orchestrated terror-murder would come about in 1979 in Greensboro, North Carolina with the murder of five
Communist Workers Party members by KKK and Nazi Party goons — led by FBI operative Edward Dawson and ATF informant Bernard
Butkovich. Both the Washington Post and the New York Times reported that Butkovich "offered to procure explosives," and "offered to train
them in activities such as making pipe bombs and fire bombs."[1174]
Even more suspiciously, the tactical squad assigned to monitor the march was reportedly "out to lunch" at the time, and a patrol car that
happened to be in the area, was told to "clear the area as soon as possible."[1175]
The incident is suspiciously similar to the ATF agents in Oklahoma who were paged not to come into work on the morning of the blast. Echoing the factitious rants of ATF chief Lester Matz, Governor Frank Keating, and other federal officials in Oklahoma, FBI Director William
Webster called the charges of federal complicity "utterly absurd." Although the killers had been recruited, organized and led on their
murderous rampage by ATF and FBI operatives, none ever served a day of jail-time.[1176]
Like the FBI's KKK mules, or the ATF's pet Nazis at Elohim City, the Pakistani/Afghani Mujahadeen and Iraqi veterans resettled into the U.S. represent the next wave of "covert cowboys" — ready and willing to do the CIA/FBI's dirty work.

--- PAGE BREAK ---As Gene Wheaton observes: "Every major Middle-Eastern terrorist organization is under surveillance and control of the intelligence agencies
in the U.S.

None of these guys move around as freely as they'd like you to think."[1177][1178]
Ali Hassan Salameh, the leader of the PLO splinter group Black September, which carried out the 1972 Munich Olympics massacre, was put
on the CIA's payroll.

That is, until the Mossad caught up with him in 1979.

Even so, the Israelis checked with the CIA before killing him.

A Pakistani named Ali Ahmand was standing directly behind Senator Robert Kennedy when he was shot.

Former CIA contract agent Robert
Morrow saw Ahmand holding a Nikon camera, and recalled seeing Nikon cameras that fired bullets while at the CIA.

Another "valuable asset," Mir Aimal Kansi, had been recruited by the CIA to assist in the smuggling of weapons to the Mujahadeen.

Kansi,
who had a "financial misunderstanding" with the Agency, resolved the issue by opening fire with an AK-47 outside of CIA headquarters in
January of 1993, killing two Agency employees.

Like World Trade Center bomber Ramzi Yousef, he fled to Pakistan.[1179][1180]
Curiously, Hussain al-Hussaini — who had been seen speeding away from the bombing in a brown pick-up — would make no similar
attempt to flee.

Was he part of a government-sanctioned operation?

As Professor Bruce Hoffman at the Center fo the Study of Terrorism and
Political Violence at St.

Andrew's University in England noted, there have been various attempts to infiltrate Islamic terrorist teams in
Oklahoma.[1181]
Could this be why FBI Agent Jeffrey Jenkins "cringed" when he saw KFOR's televised report on Hussaini?[1182]*
Did Hussaini and Khalid, like Timothy McVeigh casually pulling over for Patrolman Hanger, believe they were protected?

The FBI's refusal to look at Khalid strongly points to such a possibility.Andrew's University in England noted, there have been various attempts to infiltrate Islamic terrorist teams in
Oklahoma.[1181]
Could this be why FBI Agent Jeffrey Jenkins "cringed" when he saw KFOR's televised report on Hussaini?[1182]*
Did Hussaini and Khalid, like Timothy McVeigh casually pulling over for Patrolman Hanger, believe they were protected?

The FBI's refusal to look at Khalid strongly points to such a possibility.

Khalid's ability to monitor the activities of a group of Middle Eastern
immigrants (through giving them jobs and renting them homes), and his status as a former felon, make him a likely candidate as an
operative or informant.

And why had McVeigh met with Hussaini in the first place?

Like Carol Howe and Andreas Strassmeir, were they both acting as undercover
operatives, without each other's knowledge?[1183]*
Like McVeigh, Hussaini was most likely recruited into a covert intelligence unit after his resettlement into the U.S.

Believing he was working
for the government, he was given a cover story that he was preventing a bombing.

It is likely, given the necessary compartmentalization of covert operations, that each was on a "need-to-know" basis.

While McVeigh,
Hussaini, and their pals parked the Ryder truck in front of the Murrah Building, the real bombers were the third component of the
compartmentalized operation.

Recall that five days before the bombing, HUD worker Jane Graham saw three men in the garage who she thought were telephone
repairmen.

They had plans of the building, and were holding what appeared to be C-4 plastic explosive.

"It was a putty color," said Graham,
"a solid piece of block.… they had that and they had this wiring.

"The man in the brown shirt obviously knew what he was doing and was in charge…" said Graham.

"He reminded me of a surveyor or
construction foreman except that I doubt that they would have been in that good of shape.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"The man in the brown shirt obviously knew what he was doing and was in charge…" said Graham. "He reminded me of a surveyor or
construction foreman except that I doubt that they would have been in that good of shape. These men were definitely physically well
trained."[1184]
Physically well-trained does not sound like McVeigh or Nichols. The men looked "uncomfortable" when they saw Graham, and quickly put the items into a paper bag and hid it in their car — which was
clearly not a utility company vehicle.[1185][1186]
Another witness saw several men working on the pillars in the garage, in the dark, without lights. When they were questioned by this visitor,
they said, "We're just putting things right again."
Were they, or were they placing explosive charges to be activated later? This bizarre activity was seen by at least two other witnesses — IRS worker Kathy Wilburn, and a HUD worker named Joan. None of the
"repairmen" matched the description of Timothy McVeigh, Terry Nichols, or Hussain al-Hussaini.[1187]*
Then, on the day of the bombing, twenty minutes before the blast, Michael Linehan saw McVeigh's yellow Mercury run a red light and slip
quickly into the building's garage. Why did "McVeigh" need to enter the building moments before the blast? To place secondary charges or
activate remote detonators, perhaps?[1188]†

--- PAGE BREAK ---uickly into the building's garage. Why did "McVeigh" need to enter the building moments before the blast? To place secondary charges or
activate remote detonators, perhaps?[1188]†

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Several minutes later, a woman riding the elevator saw a young Arab man with a backpack frantically pushing the lobby button, as though
trying to exit the building.
After the blast, Kay H. was almost run over by a brown pick-up driven by Hussain al-Hussaini. There were three suspects in the truck. At
least two of them were Arabs.
Seconds later, Gary Lewis ran outside to see a Middle Eastern man grinning from ear to ear.
Approximately 15 minutes later, HUD employee Germaine Johnston came across McVeigh and John Doe 2 in an alley near the Murrah
Building. "They were just standing there watching," she said. McVeigh then asked Johnston if anyone had been killed, and both men looked
sad when she told them that children had died.[1189][1190]
If McVeigh had blown up the building — a building he knew to contain a day-care center — as an act of revenge, why would he appear sad?
And if Hussain al-Hussaini had conspired with McVeigh for similar motives, why did he cry upon learning that children had been killed?
Moreover, why would he be casually hanging around near the scene of the crime? "…I ask you, does that sound like a man who was
running?" said Johnston's friend and co-worker Jane Graham. "I don't think so. It sounds like a plan that went awry or something he did not
know was going to happen."[1191]
And those federal agents who had been surveilling the building all night long… why did they appear so shocked when the bomb(s) went off?
Because they didn't expect them to go off. As Representative Istook said, John Doe 2, [one of] the government's undercover agents, did not
know how to disarm the truck-bomb, which contained a redundant timing device. They didn't know about the charges inside the building.
And the Army leg who helped place the shaped C-4 charges on the building's columns was not advised that he had a zero-time-delay
detonator and was going to be vaporized. The leg was on the wrong side of the column when the detonator was activated.[1192]*
Fortunately for the conspirators, the crime scene was leveled to preclude any independent forensic analysis. Federal agents and local
officials quickly scrambled to initiate their damage-control operation.[1193]
Those who threatened to reveal the "sting gone bad" were told to keep quiet for "the good of the country." Yes, it was a terrible tragedy. But
brave undercover agents like John Doe 2 were safely on the job, just waiting to prevent more "militiamen" like Timothy James McVeigh from
blowing up more babies.
Honest law-enforcement personnel like Sergeant Terrance Yeakey, who didn't go along with the cover-up… "committed suicide."
And the American public, was fed a completely different lie. A disgruntled racist and latent neo-Nazi and his anti-government friend, angry
over Waco, using a homemade bomb, had vented their rage in a brutal and vicious act of revenge.
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.comled racist and latent neo-Nazi and his anti-government friend, angry
over Waco, using a homemade bomb, had vented their rage in a brutal and vicious act of revenge.
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---12
The Motive
"Governments, in order to perpetuate themselves, will sacrifice 400-500 people without a second thought."
— 14-year DEA veteran Basil Abbott
To understand the motive behind the Oklahoma City bombing, one must understand the political situation in the country at the time.

In 1989, with the fall of the Berlin Wall, the Cold War was officially over.

The intelligence community was in danger of losing its
appropriations; it needed a new mission.[1194][1195]
In 1963, the Kennedy administration was said to have commissioned a select group of analysts and scholars to evaluate the problems
inherent in a post-Cold War society.

Entitled Report from Iron Mountain on the Possibility and Desirability of Peace, its conclusions and
validity have been hotly debated since its "unauthorized" publication in 1967.

Although featured on the front page of the New York Times and subsequently translated into 15 different languages, many establishment
icons and media pundits would only acknowledge the work as a "clever satire."
The Times, which received a "no comment" response from the LBJ White House while attempting to verify its authenticity, wrote that the
possible hoax was a possibly suppressed report.[1196]
Others, such as Colonel L.

Fletcher Prouty (Ret.), former Chief of the Special Operations Division for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, quoted from
the document in his book, The Secret Team.

And renowned economist, author, and professor John Kenneth Galbraith wrote "As I would put
my personal repute behind the authenticity of this document, so I would testify to the validity of its conclusions.

My reservations relate only to
the wisdom of releasing it to an obviously unconditioned public."
As late as 1995, The Nation was still denigrating the report as a "hoax," while the Wall Street Journal was seriously debating its merits.And renowned economist, author, and professor John Kenneth Galbraith wrote "As I would put
my personal repute behind the authenticity of this document, so I would testify to the validity of its conclusions.

My reservations relate only to
the wisdom of releasing it to an obviously unconditioned public."
As late as 1995, The Nation was still denigrating the report as a "hoax," while the Wall Street Journal was seriously debating its merits.

As
Robert Tomsho wrote in the May 9, 1995 edition of the Journal:
Given the tumultuous times when the document surfaced and the air of respectability surrounding those involved with it, few readers were
willing to dismiss the mysterious headline-grabbing book as a hoax.[1197]
Whether or not Report from Iron Mountain was in fact a hoax, the report's conclusions, even its detractors will admit, lend a somewhat
prescient and frightening measure of truth to contemporary 20th century reality.[1198]*
Written in cold, empirical think-tank language, the report postulates that war is the fundamental basis for all political, social, and economic
unity.

The report also suggests, in somewhat Machiavellian fashion, initiating "ritual blood games," renewing "slavery," and creating an
"omnipotent" international police force as mitigating substitutes for the alleged socio-economic void created by a post-Cold War society.

The
report defined the sociological implications thusly:
War, through the medium of military institutions, has uniquely served societies, throughout the course of known history, as an indispensable
controller of dangerous social dissidence and destructive antisocial tendencies….

No modern political ruling group has successfully
controlled its constituency after failing to sustain the continuing credibility of an external threat of war.

The war system makes the stable government of societies possible.--- PAGE BREAK ---

No modern political ruling group has successfully
controlled its constituency after failing to sustain the continuing credibility of an external threat of war. The war system makes the stable government of societies possible. It does this essentially by providing an external necessity for a society to
accept political rule.… An effective substitute for war would require "alternate enemies".…[1199]
A paranoid and fascistic national security establishment, no longer primarily focused on the "external necessity" of an outward military threat
(e.g: the Soviet Union), must inevitably turn its attention towards the ever-present specter of an internal threat — the "alternate enemy." As

--- PAGE BREAK ---the report states:
…the motivational function of war requires the existence of a genuinely menacing social enemy.… The "alternate enemy" must imply a more
immediate, tangible, and directly felt threat of destruction.…[1200]
The Oklahoma City bombing, occurring as it did in the "heartland" of America, served as no other "terrorist" act has in the history of the
United States in channeling the attention of the American people towards the "immediate, tangible, and directly felt threat of destruction."
More significantly, it did so by directing the attention of the public towards an "alternate enemy" — in this case — an "internal" one.

Such mass-psychological manipulation by the ruling elite is simply the war spirit refocused.

This ubiquitously American quality, so effectively
used against the Germans in the 1940s, the Communists in the 1950s, and the Iraqis in the 1990s, would now be directed inward — against
the Patriot/Militia movement.

By linking Timothy McVeigh to the Militia movement through a massive media propaganda campaign, the Militia movement is seen as the
primary motivational force behind the bombing.

The movement, becomes, by proxy, the new "alternate enemy."
By substituting what it terms a "fictive model" for war, the Plutocracy engages the false sentiments of the masses, creating, as it states, "a
sociomoral conflict of equally compelling force and scope." From the perspective of the ruling elite, this sociomoral conflict must:
… justify the need for taking and paying a "blood price" in wide areas of human concern.… The fictive models would have to carry the weight
of extraordinary conviction, underscored with a not inconsiderable actual sacrifice of life.[1201]
That shocking revelation was written in 1963.

Thirty-two years later, former presidential advisor Arthur Schlesinger, Jr.The movement, becomes, by proxy, the new "alternate enemy."
By substituting what it terms a "fictive model" for war, the Plutocracy engages the false sentiments of the masses, creating, as it states, "a
sociomoral conflict of equally compelling force and scope." From the perspective of the ruling elite, this sociomoral conflict must:
… justify the need for taking and paying a "blood price" in wide areas of human concern.… The fictive models would have to carry the weight
of extraordinary conviction, underscored with a not inconsiderable actual sacrifice of life.[1201]
That shocking revelation was written in 1963.

Thirty-two years later, former presidential advisor Arthur Schlesinger, Jr.

would write in Foreign
Affairs, the journal of the Council on Foreign Relations, that mouthpiece of the plutocratic establishment:
We are not going to achieve a new world order without paying for it in blood as well as in words and money.[1202]
Quite a profound statement, coming as it did less than two months after the Oklahoma City bombing.

Was this "blood price" carried out on April 19, 1995?

As will be explored in Chapter ?, the utilization of barbaric acts of mass-terror-murder by governments in order to manipulate political
objectives is hardly new.

Deliberately manipulated outrage-incidents such as the sinking of the Lusitania, the burning of the Reischtag, and
the attack on Pearl Harbor, as precursors to elite-planned military campaigns has historically held several functions: it triggers the built-in
nationalistic war spirit, channels the resulting righteous wrath toward the nominated enemy, and concentrates power in the executive branch,
where elite control is unhampered by popular influence.

As President Franklin D.

Roosevelt, who allowed 2,403 servicemen to be slaughtered at Pearl Harbor to initiate America's entry into WWII,
said: "In politics, nothing happens by accident.As President Franklin D.

Roosevelt, who allowed 2,403 servicemen to be slaughtered at Pearl Harbor to initiate America's entry into WWII,
said: "In politics, nothing happens by accident.

If it happens, you can bet it was planned that way."
The American public, brainwashed by the conventional wisdom of history, with an attention span as long as the latest TV sitcom, is oblivious
to this fact.

A public consumed by materialism and stultified by television poses no serious threat to the ruling plutocracy.

A savvy populace,
intimately aware of the corruption in government, and threatening to expose or even depose the powers behind it, poses a very serious
threat to the ruling elite.

The primary group which stands in the way of plans of the transnational corporate fascist cabal today is a group of Americans who call
themselves Patriots.

These Patriots — numbering roughly five million men and women — are comprised of approximately 400,000
individuals who belong to the militant arm: the militia.

These individuals are increasingly opting out of the federal system.

They are establishing precedents for their own governance, with names
like Sovereign Citizenship, States' Rights and County Rule.

Some are relinquishing their Social Security cards.

Others refuse to pay income taxes, which they insist are in direct contravention of the
Constitution, and an illegal outgrowth of the privately-owned Federal Reserve.

Many are buying gold and silver.

Some are even issuing their
own currencies.

They point out the importance our founding fathers attributed to the Second Amendment — the right to bear arms — as the first and final
bastion against a tyrannical government.

Ultimately, they are willing to defend themselves against a increasingly oppressive federal system.

To the government, such a movement must not be allowed to grow teeth, as did the Anti-War movement of the 1960s, or the anti-corporate
labor movement of the 1930s.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ultimately, they are willing to defend themselves against a increasingly oppressive federal system. To the government, such a movement must not be allowed to grow teeth, as did the Anti-War movement of the 1960s, or the anti-corporate
labor movement of the 1930s. Distrusting the Federal Reserve, believed by some to have engineered the Great Depression, many of these
communities began issuing their own money — as many as 1,500 different currencies. As journalist Jon Rappaport notes:

--- PAGE BREAK ---These events created anxiety for the wealthy one percent of the country.

Things might have gotten out of hand.

There was a danger of mass
rebellion, decentralization, a power shift downward, and so on.

World War Two not only solved a job crises, it reunified the nation around an
external threat.

It temporarily eliminated the possibility of the disintegration of the body politic.[1203]
Like the aforementioned outrage-incidents, the Plutocracy required a tragedy to manipulate public opinion.

The Oklahoma City bombing
served this purpose in the most sublime fashion.

In the aftermath of that tragedy, the ruling elite sought to unify the nation around an internal
threat — dressed up and repackaged in the form of the Patriot/Militia Movement.

Many liberal and Left-wing intellectuals and media pundits have dismissed the notion of the Oklahoma City bombing as a deliberately
engineered act to discredit the militia as preposterous, self-deluded paranoia.

Yet as former CIA Director William Colby stated to his friend,
Nebraska State Senator John DeCamp, literally days before the bombing:
"I watched as the Anti-War Movement rendered it impossible for this country to conduct or win the Vietnam War.

I tell you, dear friend, that
this Militia and Patriot movement in which, as an attorney, you have become one of the centerpieces, is far more significant and far more
dangerous for America than the Anti-War Movement ever was, if it is not intelligently dealt with.

And I really mean this."[1204]
In the absence of war, with the "motivational forces governing human behavior" no longer "translated into binding social allegiance," the
ruling elite required a substitute.

By demonizing the Patriot/Militia Movement, the Plutocracy seeks, both to divide and conquer, and to
distract, the population.[1205] As professor and dissident intellectual Noam Chomsky writes:
Over the last ten years, every year or two, some major monster is constructed that we have to defend ourselves against.And I really mean this."[1204]
In the absence of war, with the "motivational forces governing human behavior" no longer "translated into binding social allegiance," the
ruling elite required a substitute.

By demonizing the Patriot/Militia Movement, the Plutocracy seeks, both to divide and conquer, and to
distract, the population.[1205] As professor and dissident intellectual Noam Chomsky writes:
Over the last ten years, every year or two, some major monster is constructed that we have to defend ourselves against.

There used to be
one that was always available: the Russians.

But they're losing their attractiveness as an enemy, and it's getting harder and harder to use
that one, so some new ones have to be conjured up… They've got to keep coming up, one after another.

You frighten the population,
terrorize them, intimidate them.… That's one of the ways in which you can keep the bewildered herd from paying attention to what's really
going on around them, keep them diverted and controlled....[1206]
There is yet still another dimension to the situation largely unrealized.

The U.S.

banking system is home to trillions of dollars in foreign
investment capital, resident in buildings, real estate, and industry (The Japanese government currently holds roughly $200 billion in U.S.

Treasury securities).

The ruling elite must keep these foreign investors happy.

Should one of them decide to withdraw their funds, it would be
"inconvenient."[1207]
But were there a rumor of civil war, all foreign investors might decide to withdraw their investments.

The resulting collapse would make the
crash of 1929 look like a summer picnic.

Like U.S.

industrialists' investments in places such as El Salvador and Guatemala, foreign investors realize that their money is safest in
countries with a happy, or at least docile and subservient work force.Like U.S.

industrialists' investments in places such as El Salvador and Guatemala, foreign investors realize that their money is safest in
countries with a happy, or at least docile and subservient work force.

A population threatening to withdraw from the system and talking of
revolution, represents a risk many foreign investors would prefer not take.

As William Colby pointed out, such events have important people
worried.

Another financial collapse such as the Great Depression, always looming over the horizon, or the threat of civil war, requires that the ruling
elite have in place a system that allows them to maintain order.

The Anti-Terrorism Bill, the Domestic Insurgency Act, the militarization of our
police forces, operations like Garden Plot and Rex-84-Alpha, and the murderous violations of the Posse Comitatus Act in places such as
Waco and Ruby Ridge, are all test runs preparing for this eventuality.

A dramatic event like Oklahoma City, used to crush the political life out of the militias, would go a long way towards calming the ruling elite
and their foreign investors.

Reassured that the Federal Government is still in control of the population, these investors would hopefully leave
their investment capital in place.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A dramatic event like Oklahoma City, used to crush the political life out of the militias, would go a long way towards calming the ruling elite
and their foreign investors. Reassured that the Federal Government is still in control of the population, these investors would hopefully leave
their investment capital in place. Interestingly, FBI Director Louis Freeh stated before the Senate Judiciary Committee two days after McVeigh's conviction: "Most of the militia
organizations around the country are not, in our view, threatening or dangerous."[1208]
Yet on May 13, Freeh stated before the Senate Appropriations Committee that the focus of the government's domestic anti-terrorism efforts
are "various individuals, as well as organizations, some having an ideology which suspects government of world-order conspiracies —
individuals who, for various reasons, have organized themselves against the United States." The chief domestic "enemy," said Freeh,
consists of "individuals who espouse ideologies inconsistent with principles of Federal Government."[1209]
Freeh's alarmist comments impart the genuine concern which the ruling elite have for the growth of the Patriot/Militia Movement. As Colby
told DeCamp:
"It is not because these people are armed, that America need be concerned," Bill explained to my surprise. "It is not that these people
stockpile weapons and have para-military training sessions, that they are dangerous" Colby continued.…

--- PAGE BREAK ---"They are dangerous, John, because there are so many of them.

It is one thing to have a few nuts or dissidents.

They can be dealt with,
justly or otherwise, so that they do not pose a danger to the system.

It is quite another situation when you have a true movement — millions
of citizens — believing something, particularly when the movement is made up of society's average, successful citizens."[1210]
Further evidence of the concern that the ruling elite have for this popular and growing phenomenon lie in the slanderous comments of
President Clinton, the huge wave of media propaganda, and the increase in undercover sting operations aimed at destroying this largely
popular movement.

While the so-called Justice Department was busy covering up evidence of the bombing, Clinton ardently sought to smear those on the far-
Right — the "purveyors of hatred and division, the promoters of paranoia," as he put it.

"They do practice and they do preach violence
against those who are of a different color, a different background, or who worship a different God.

They do feed on fear and uncertainty.

They do promote paranoia...."
Challenging the American people to follow him in a campaign of divide and conquer, Clinton charged: "These people attack our government
and the citizens who work for it who actually guarantee the freedoms they abuse....

They can certainly snuff out innocent lives and sow fear
in our hearts.

They are indifferent to the slaughter of children.

They threaten our freedoms and our way of life, and we must stop them."[1211]
Echoing and amplifying Clinton's defamations were the mainstream media, which, all but ignoring the relevant evidence, launched
unceasing, vitriolic attacks against the Patriot/Militia community.

Leading the charge were the ADL and the SPLC, whose connections to the
Mossad, U.S.

law-enforcement, and infiltration of the Patriot/Militia community have been well documented.Leading the charge were the ADL and the SPLC, whose connections to the
Mossad, U.S.

law-enforcement, and infiltration of the Patriot/Militia community have been well documented.

The ADL's ties to the FBI, in
fact, had been forged long ago.[1212]*
At the same time, all legitimate expressions and concerns are ignored.

Militia members are portrayed as mostly gun-crazed racists with
overly conspiratorial views.

As Relevance magazine notes:
If anyone dares to make a suggestion that serious crimes by high-ranking federal officials or an agency of government have been
committed, that suggestion instantly becomes, almost by definition, a conspiracy theory, which is itself (almost by definition) beyond the pale
of responsible discussion.[1213]
Any attempts by the Left and Right to join together are explained away by establishment intellectuals as a sort of strange symbiotic
aberration.

In a June 19, 1995 New Yorker article entitled "The Road to Paranoia," author Michael Kelly describes "views that have long
been shared by both the far Right and the far Left, and that in recent years have come together, in a weird meeting of the minds, to become
one, and to permeate the mainstream of American politics and popular culture.

You could call it fusion paranoia."[1214]
Yet in spite of the continual barrage of government and media-orchestrated propaganda, the movement has grown.

This is because the
actions of the Plutocracy and its intelligence/law-enforcement minions have become so bold, so brazen, so outrageous in recent years that it
is hard for the average person not to take notice.

Increasing political scandals, one following on the heals of the other, catastrophic financial
debacles, and the murderous actions of the Federal Government in places such as Waco and Ruby Ridge, have pushed the average
American out of the sonombulic comfort of their easy chair.This is because the
actions of the Plutocracy and its intelligence/law-enforcement minions have become so bold, so brazen, so outrageous in recent years that it
is hard for the average person not to take notice.

Increasing political scandals, one following on the heals of the other, catastrophic financial
debacles, and the murderous actions of the Federal Government in places such as Waco and Ruby Ridge, have pushed the average
American out of the sonombulic comfort of their easy chair.

Now the average citizen watches the FBI march into Waco with tanks and burn women and children, while President Clinton and the mass-
media dismiss them as "just a bunch of whackos." At the same time he turns around and watches his neighbor's door kicked in by goon
squads to seize piddling amounts of contraband, while his home and assets are seized without ever being charged with a crime, then given
to law-enforcement agencies who divide up the bounty amongst themselves.

Compelled to take a closer look at the Patriot/Militia movement, he begins to understand that the Federal Reserve is a sham.

He realizes
that the politics of the nation were corporatized long ago, that his vote has no meaning.

He begins to understand that the country is actually controlled by corporate concerns who use the military and intelligence apparatus to do
its bidding.

He learns how the CIA has illegally intervened and destroyed the sovereignty of dozens of nations around the world, and assisted in the
murder of countless millions.

He watches with alarm as new laws are being added every day to restrict his Constitutional rights.

While his pay check is no longer enough to support his family, he wonders what happened to the Savings and Loans, and to those wealthy
few who were never prosecuted.

While he sees his job being sent overseas to take advantage of some poor peasant who slaves for pennies a day, his own country is slowly
being sold off piecemeal.--- PAGE BREAK ---

While his pay check is no longer enough to support his family, he wonders what happened to the Savings and Loans, and to those wealthy
few who were never prosecuted. While he sees his job being sent overseas to take advantage of some poor peasant who slaves for pennies a day, his own country is slowly
being sold off piecemeal. Unlike the mass of dumbed-down, TVed-out, passive citizens, he finally decides to join a group of people who are willing to do something

--- PAGE BREAK ---about it.

Contrary to popular opinion, the Patriot/Militia Movement is more than just a fringe element of Right-wing conspiracy nuts.

While it still
contains individuals who are somewhat myopic concerning social welfare issues and environmental concerns, younger people are coming
into the movement every day.

Increasingly, this group represents a broad spectrum of Americans concerned about governmental corruption and the loss of their
Constitutional rights.

Far from being impotent, as Louis Freeh asserts, the Patriot/Militia Movement represents a threat to an establishment
seeking to maintain corrupt control over its citizenry at all costs.[1215]
While it cannot be said for certain that the Alfred P.

Murrah Building was destroyed as part of a preconceived plan to create the illusion of a
domestic terrorist threat within America — as a foundation for destroying political dissent — it is clear that the investigation was politically
crafted for just that purpose.

In March of 1994, there began an extensive media campaign to portray the militias as Right-wing terrorists.

Numerous sensationalistic
stories appeared in the media, largely orchestrated by the ADL, Political Research Associates (PRA), and the SPLC.

Then in March of 1995, Congressman Steve Stockman (R-TX) learned that a nation-wide, early-morning paramilitary raid against militia
groups was planned for March 25.

It seemed that a couple of concerned ATF agents had informed the National Rifle Association (NRA)
about the plan, code-named Operation ROLLING THUNDER.

Stockman immediately fired off a letter to Attorney General Janet Reno:
It has come to my attention through a number of reliable sources that an impending raid, by several Federal agencies, against the "citizen's
militias" groups, is scheduled for March 25 or 26 at 4:00 a.m.It seemed that a couple of concerned ATF agents had informed the National Rifle Association (NRA)
about the plan, code-named Operation ROLLING THUNDER.

Stockman immediately fired off a letter to Attorney General Janet Reno:
It has come to my attention through a number of reliable sources that an impending raid, by several Federal agencies, against the "citizen's
militias" groups, is scheduled for March 25 or 26 at 4:00 a.m.

A paramilitary style attack against Americans who pose no risk to others, even
if violations of criminal law might be imputed to them, would run the risk of an irreparable breach between the Federal Government and the
public, especially if it turned out to be an ill considered, poorly planned, but bloody fiasco like Waco.…[1216]
Stockman's letter went unanswered, and two Senators who confronted the Assistant Secretary of Defense were thrown out of his office.

What is interesting to note, however, is that the raid was scheduled just one month prior to the Oklahoma City bombing, that launched the
largest anti-militia media campaign ever witnessed.[1217]
Yet the tension surrounding the Militia Movement wasn't the only pressure beginning to boil the political pot.

Even more interesting events
were to occur just prior to the bombing.

On Monday, April 17, a Special Federal Grand Jury in Little Rock, AK handed down a sealed indictment charging Hillary Clinton with bank
fraud — misappropriating or embezzling some $47 million dollars from a federally insured S&L, and benefiting from secret offshore accounts
payable to Vincent Foster, Jr., her former law partner, as purported payment for "handling" Jonathan Pollard.[1218]
That same evening, April 17, a military C-21 Lear Jet carrying several high-ranking military officials, including a supervisor to the NSA,
crashed near Alexander City, Alabama.

The disaster, which occured on a clear day, appeared to be more than a simple accident.On Monday, April 17, a Special Federal Grand Jury in Little Rock, AK handed down a sealed indictment charging Hillary Clinton with bank
fraud — misappropriating or embezzling some $47 million dollars from a federally insured S&L, and benefiting from secret offshore accounts
payable to Vincent Foster, Jr., her former law partner, as purported payment for "handling" Jonathan Pollard.[1218]
That same evening, April 17, a military C-21 Lear Jet carrying several high-ranking military officials, including a supervisor to the NSA,
crashed near Alexander City, Alabama.

The disaster, which occured on a clear day, appeared to be more than a simple accident.

The highly
experienced crew reported "fuel management" problems, a classic sabatogue technique.

Witnesses Miranda Wyckoff and Jimmy Keel claim
they heard multiple explosions while the plane was airborne.[1219]
One story has the passengers as part of a military coup, to arrest, under the military code, their Commander-in-Chief, William Jefferson
Clinton, for various acts of treason, including the cover-up of Foster's murder.

Another story has an American POW from Laos onboard.

Like
Major Charles McKee, they planned to bring him to the attention of the public.

The plane crashed not far from a secret Delta Force base in Alabama.

It has been rumored that elements of the 20th Special Operations
Group (SOG) guarded Mena airport during the Iran-Contra drug-running.

A Special Federal Grand Jury in Alabama was blocked from
investigating the crash.[1220]*
The Mena drug-running, intimately connected with the activities of the Iran-Contra Octopus, was also on the Congressional investigative
agenda, as were the activities of the ATF and FBI at Waco.

The investigations were scheduled to start in May.

Yet on April 19, two days after the crash, the Oklahoma City Federal Building was bombed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The investigations were scheduled to start in May. Yet on April 19, two days after the crash, the Oklahoma City Federal Building was bombed. The bombing conveniently shifted the attention
from Clinton's activities at Whitewater, the ATF and FBI's murderous actions at Waco, and the Octopus' drug-running at Mena… onto
Oklahoma City, and "the new enemy in our midst."
Were these occurrances coincidences? And was it a coincidence that two weeks after the bombing, a group of anonymous, black-hooded,
machinegun-toting federal agents began loading files removed from the Murrah Building onto two unmarked trucks? What were in the files that a over dozen heavily-armed agents were so anxious to hide? Given the timing of the aforementioned events, it is
likely the files were either records incriminating the Octopus for its drug-running at Mena, or records incriminating the ATF for their actions at

--- PAGE BREAK ---the aforementioned events, it is
likely the files were either records incriminating the Octopus for its drug-running at Mena, or records incriminating the ATF for their actions at

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Waco.
It may be more than a coincidence that the ATF agents who raided Waco… wore black uniforms with no identifying badges.[1221]
Interestingly, on the May 14, 1995 edition of "Face the Nation," White House Chief of Staff Leon Panetta denounced those chairing the
Waco hearings, claiming that they "wanted to take attention away from the tragedy of Oklahoma City."
Panetta also called them "despicable." Curiously, Republican legislators complained bitterly about the Executive Branch's tardy and
disorganized production of documents. For instance, Representatives could not find in their 48,000 documents a copy of any April 19 Waco
operation plan.[1222] [1223]*
It has also been suggested that the files removed were records implicating George Bush and company for their role in selling Iraq biological
weapons that have infected large numbers of American troops and their families. Peter Kawaja, who served as Louis Champon's chief of
security at his Product Ingredient Technologies in Boca Raton, FL — which was secretly being used by his business partner Ishan Barbouti,
an Iraqi arms dealer, to produce Cyanide shipped to Iraq — claims that documents implicating Bush, Secretary of State James Baker, and
others involved in the "Iraqgate" scandal were moved to the Alfred P. Murrah Building.[1224]
Whatever the case, someone was obviously very uptight about some files in the Federal Building — uptight enough to send a team of
hooded, heavily-armed agents to wisk them away.
Several days after the bombing, President Clinton sent his much fabled Anti-Terrorism Bill to Congress. The legislation, originally introduced
after the World Trade Center bombing, had been languishing on the Congressional shelf. On June 7, the Senate passed the sweeping
measure by a vote of 91 to 8.[1225]†
Concurrent with the new legislation was a massive smear campaign against the militias, trumpeted by President Clinton. As the Sunday
Telegraph's Washington correspondent, Ambrose Evans Pritchard, noted:
The momentum of Republican "revolution" drained away overnight, as people drew back from the anti-government rhetoric of the Right,
unleashing the startling decline in its fortunes. President Clinton told reporters that he owed his political comeback to that bomb. "It broke the
spell," he said.[1226]
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.comshing the startling decline in its fortunes. President Clinton told reporters that he owed his political comeback to that bomb. "It broke the
spell," he said.[1226]
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13The Politics of Terror
"Power concedes nothing without a demand… it never did, and it never will.

Find out just what the people will submit to, and you have found
out the exact amount of injustice and wrong which will be imposed upon them.…"
— Frederick Douglass, August 4, 1857
[Yet the FBI wasn't [and isn't] the only agency practicing counter-insurgency techniques to discredit and eliminate its political opponents.]
Ten years after Report from Iron Mountain was published, Theodore Shackley published The Third Option: An Expert's Provocative Report
on an American View of Counterinsurgency Operations.

Shackley was one of the original proponents of "low intensity conflict," which manifested itself as the Phoenix Program in Vietnam, and as
death squads in South and Central America.

Shackley euphemistically describes this concept as "the third option."
Senior intelligence officers like myself, who had experience in paramilitary operations, have always insisted that the United States should
also consider the third option: the use of guerrilla warfare, counter-insurgency techniques and covert action to achieve policy goals.…
Political warfare is very often the stitch in time that eliminates bloodier and more costly alternatives.

[1227]
Gene Wheaton calls Shackley's Third Option the "operational manual" for the covert intelligence "lunatic fringe." This same lunatic
intelligence crowd, states Wheaton, "as far back as the early 1980s, wanted to create a domestic terrorist threat in America so the people
would become so frightened that they would give up some civil liberties and Constitutional rights, and give the CIA and Pentagon covert
operators major domestic counter-terrorism powers."
As Wheaton writes:
The Third Option is not to have peace in the world, and not to have a full-scale world war.Shackley euphemistically describes this concept as "the third option."
Senior intelligence officers like myself, who had experience in paramilitary operations, have always insisted that the United States should
also consider the third option: the use of guerrilla warfare, counter-insurgency techniques and covert action to achieve policy goals.…
Political warfare is very often the stitch in time that eliminates bloodier and more costly alternatives.

[1227]
Gene Wheaton calls Shackley's Third Option the "operational manual" for the covert intelligence "lunatic fringe." This same lunatic
intelligence crowd, states Wheaton, "as far back as the early 1980s, wanted to create a domestic terrorist threat in America so the people
would become so frightened that they would give up some civil liberties and Constitutional rights, and give the CIA and Pentagon covert
operators major domestic counter-terrorism powers."
As Wheaton writes:
The Third Option is not to have peace in the world, and not to have a full-scale world war.

Instead, they wanted to cause worldwide
instability, chaos and civil unrest in order to manipulate and control people and governments, including the United States; thus the creation
of the domestic terrorist threat.[1228]
Notice that Wheaton calls this the creation of the domestic terrorist threat.

Wheaton states what has been known for centuries by the so-
called "enlightened ones" — the Illuminati, the Masons, the Rhodes Round Table, and their successors: the CFR, the Bilderbergers, and the
Trilateral Commission — that out of chaos will come order (Ordo Ab Chao.

)[1229]
Otherwise known as the "Hegelian Principle," this is the technique by which a normally repugnant idea (in this case a totalitarian police-state)
is offered as the only viable solution to a intractable problem (in this case domestic terrorism), deliberately engineered by the state itself.13

Wheaton states what has been known for centuries by the so-
called "enlightened ones" — the Illuminati, the Masons, the Rhodes Round Table, and their successors: the CFR, the Bilderbergers, and the
Trilateral Commission — that out of chaos will come order (Ordo Ab Chao. )[1229]
Otherwise known as the "Hegelian Principle," this is the technique by which a normally repugnant idea (in this case a totalitarian police-state)
is offered as the only viable solution to a intractable problem (in this case domestic terrorism), deliberately engineered by the state itself. As
New American editor William Jasper notes:
…history is replete with examples of ruthless and corrupt politicians who have shamelessly exploited and manipulated tragic events and the
criminal acts of a few to advance their own lust for power. In cases too numerous to mention, tyrants and aspiring despots have gone even
further, engaging agents provocateurs to carry out assassinations, foment riots and rebellion, precipitate financial panics, attempt palace
coups, feign foreign invasion, initiate acts of terrorism, and perform other infamous acts — all for the purpose of establishing a mass
psychology of fear, a sense of "crisis," of imminent danger requiring the government to suspend normal liberties and seize vast new powers
to deal with the "emergency."
Hitler came to power in precisely this manner, by burning down the German Parliament, the Reichstag, then blaming it on his enemies — in
this case, the Communists. He then passed the Enabling Act (a form of anti-terrorism bill) for the "protection of the people and the state."
History is now repeating itself. As Adam Parfrey writes in Cult Rapture:
By definition, a terrorist must take credit for his violence, or else there is no compelling reason to commit a crime. The specific purpose of
terrorism is gaining leverage on a specific political objective through the ability of threatening future terrorist acts. No one has claimed creditg reason to commit a crime. The specific purpose of
terrorism is gaining leverage on a specific political objective through the ability of threatening future terrorist acts. No one has claimed credit

--- PAGE BREAK ---for the Oklahoma City bombing.

Militia groups produced particularly vehement public statements condemning the crime.

"If the bombing was not terrorism," asks Portland Free Press editor Ace Hayes, "then what was it?

It was pseudo-terrorism, perpetrated by
compartmentalized covert operators for the purposes of state police power."[1230]
The Portland Free Press editor has studied the secret state for decades and can say that the OKC crime has all the characteristics of state-
planned and-executed propaganda.

It is not different from the bogus Viet Cong units that were sent out to rape and murder Vietnamese to
discredit the National Liberation Front.

It is not different from the bogus "finds" of Commie weapons in El Salvador.

It is not different from the
bogus Symbionese Liberation Army created by the CIA/FBI to discredit the real revolutionaries.

Probably the most well-known case was the Reichstag fire, which led to the rise of Nazi Germany through the implementation of sweeping
legislative powers.

On February 27, 1933, a fire tore through the German parliament building, the Reichstag.

The Nazis immediately
accused a Dutch Communist named Marinus van der Lubbe of the crime, and subsequently executed him.

The parallels between the Reichstag fire and the Oklahoma City bombing are eerily similar, both in the likeness of the crime, and in their
political ramifications.

As author William Shirer writes in his epic, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich:
The idea for the fire almost certainly originated with Goebbels and Göering.The parallels between the Reichstag fire and the Oklahoma City bombing are eerily similar, both in the likeness of the crime, and in their
political ramifications.

As author William Shirer writes in his epic, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich:
The idea for the fire almost certainly originated with Goebbels and Göering.

Hans Gisevius, an official in the Prussian Ministry of the Interior
at the time, testified at Nuremberg that "it was Goebbels who first thought of setting the Reichstag on fire," and Rudolf Diels, the Gestapo
chief, added in an affidavit that "Göering knew exactly how the fire was to be started" and had ordered him "to prepare, prior to the fire, a list
of people who were to be arrested immediately after it." General Franz Haider, Chief of the German General Staff during the early part of
World War II, recalled at Nuremberg how on one occasion Göering had boasted of his deed:
"At a luncheon on the birthday of the Fuehrer in 1942 the conversation turned to the topic of the Reichstag building and its artistic value.

I
heard with my own ears when Göering interrupted the conversation and shouted: 'The only one who really knows about the Reichstag is I,
because I set it on fire!' With that he slapped his thigh with the flat of his hand."
[Marinus] Van der Lubbe, it seems clear, was a dupe of the Nazis.

He was encouraged to try to set the Reichstag on fire.

But the main job
was to be done — without his knowledge, of course — by the storm troopers.

Indeed, it was established at the subsequent trial at Leipzig
that the Dutch half-wit did not possess the means to set so vast a building on fire so quickly.

Two and a half minutes after he entered, the
great central hall was fiercely burning.

He had only his shirt for tinder.

The main fires, according to the testimony of experts at the trial, had been set with considerable quantities of chemicals and gasoline.He had only his shirt for tinder.

The main fires, according to the testimony of experts at the trial, had been set with considerable quantities of chemicals and gasoline.

It was
obvious that one man could not have carried them into the building, nor would it have been possible for him to start so many fires in so many
scattered places in so short a time.

Van der Lubbe was arrested on the spot and Göering, as he afterward told the court, wanted to hang him
at once.[1231]
Shirer may just as well have been describing the bombing in Oklahoma City.

Timothy McVeigh appears as a modern-day Van der Lubbe —
a dupe who could have not possibly destroyed the Murrah Building with his crude homemade fertilizer bomb.

Yet he was set up in exactly
the same manner as the Dutch Communist, arrested instantly, and proclaimed the ultimate societal enemy — representing a group that
threatened the continuity of the state — just as Clinton did with the militias in the aftermath of the Oklahoma City bombing.

Although Göering didn't admit at Nuremberg that his agents set the fire, the Nazis seized on the event, claiming Lubbe's act was the
precursor of a Communist invasion.

Chancellor Hitler persuaded President Hindenburg to sign an emergency decree — Article 48 of the
Weimar Constitution, "for the Protection of the People and the State" — which immediately abrogated most of the German peoples'
constitutional protections.

A supplemental decree created the SA (Storm Troops) and SS (Special Security) federal police agencies.

These decrees (similar to
executive orders of the President of the United States), gave Hitler and his goons the ability to ruthlessly suppress all opposition in the
upcoming elections.

As a result, the Nazis gained a 44 percent plurality in the Parliament, and [soon-to-be] Luftwaffe General Herman
Göering declared that there was no further need for state governments.--- PAGE BREAK ---

These decrees (similar to
executive orders of the President of the United States), gave Hitler and his goons the ability to ruthlessly suppress all opposition in the
upcoming elections. As a result, the Nazis gained a 44 percent plurality in the Parliament, and [soon-to-be] Luftwaffe General Herman
Göering declared that there was no further need for state governments. The Nazis were successful in eliminating the states' authority in the same manner — instigating disorder, then quelling it by replacing local
governments with Nazi-appointed Reich Commissioners. This precedent was officially established on March 23 when the "Enabling Act" transferred the power of the states to the central Nazi-run
government — making the federal government responsible for all law-enforcement, and conferring on Hitler the legal status of dictator. Hitler immediately appointed Joseph Goebbels as Minster of Propaganda, and as Interior Minister — the top police post — Hitler appointed
Herman Göering. Göering immediately filled the ranks of the Prussian police with loyal SA and SS members. As Suzanne Harris of the The
Law Loft notes:
All of the key strategic moves were made by Göering in setting the stage for a take-over. Why? Because in order to take over a government,
you have to eliminate your political enemies before they strike, not after. This means that you have to transform the police from a crime-

--- PAGE BREAK ---detecting and punishing apparatus to a crime preventing apparatus.

You have to expand the definition of key crimes so that you can identify
and incarcerate your enemies before they strike.

You have to transform the attitudes of the police so that they view the public as the enemy
and not as citizens with rights.

You have to have tactical police units in place that will execute your orders rapidly without question.[1232]
Soon Nazi storm troopers were roaring through the streets at all hours, rounding up suspected dissidents, including politicians, who were
then hauled off to makeshift concentration camps and tortured or killed.

As William Shirer writes:
Just to make sure the job would be ruthlessly done, Göering on February 22 established an auxiliary police force of 50,000 men, of whom
40,000 were drawn from the ranks of the S.A.

and the S.S.… Police power in Prussia was thus largely carried out by Nazi thugs.

It was a
rash German who appealed to such a "police" for protection against the Nazi terrorists.[1233]
Hitler's promises that "the government will make use of these powers only insofar as they are essential for carrying out vitally necessary
measures" were belied by the ruthless tally of history.[1234]
In a manner faintly reminiscent of Hitler's assurances concerning the 1933 "Enabling laws," FBI Director Louis Freeh recently sought, and
won, tentative agreement on a package of anti-terrorism measures that would expand wiretapping authority.

Freeh assured legislators that
the proposals would not give the government "expansive powers."[1235]
Like the CIA's announcement to investigate itself for it's own drug-running, the wolf now seeks to reassure the public that it has no intention
of invading the hen house.It was a
rash German who appealed to such a "police" for protection against the Nazi terrorists.[1233]
Hitler's promises that "the government will make use of these powers only insofar as they are essential for carrying out vitally necessary
measures" were belied by the ruthless tally of history.[1234]
In a manner faintly reminiscent of Hitler's assurances concerning the 1933 "Enabling laws," FBI Director Louis Freeh recently sought, and
won, tentative agreement on a package of anti-terrorism measures that would expand wiretapping authority.

Freeh assured legislators that
the proposals would not give the government "expansive powers."[1235]
Like the CIA's announcement to investigate itself for it's own drug-running, the wolf now seeks to reassure the public that it has no intention
of invading the hen house.

One year to the day after the Oklahoma City bombing, President [K]linton signed the Anti-Terrorism Bill, "for the protection of the people and
the state." Clinton railroaded Congress into passing the draconian legislation in the same manner that Hitler stampeded the German people
into passing the Enabling Act.

"We can't be so fixated on our desire to preserve the rights of ordinary Americans," Clinton was quoted in USA TODAY in March of 1993.

[1236]
"…a lot of people say there's too much personal freedom," Clinton stated on MTV in March of 1994.

"When personal freedom's being
abused, you have to move to limit it."[1237]
Clinton's Anti-Terrorism Bill includes plans to establish a new FBI counterterrorism center with 1,000 new "anti-terrorist" agents.

One
proposal, harking back to the days of COINTELPRO, would add 25 intelligence analysts, 190 surveillance specialists with 143 support
personnel, 31 engineers and mathematicians for intercepting digital communications, and various other experts and analysts."When personal freedom's being
abused, you have to move to limit it."[1237]
Clinton's Anti-Terrorism Bill includes plans to establish a new FBI counterterrorism center with 1,000 new "anti-terrorist" agents.

One
proposal, harking back to the days of COINTELPRO, would add 25 intelligence analysts, 190 surveillance specialists with 143 support
personnel, 31 engineers and mathematicians for intercepting digital communications, and various other experts and analysts.

The Bill also
includes a $66 million windfall for the ATF for "anti-terrorism" efforts.[1238]
Now the FBI has now unveiled its "Critical Incident Response Group." Divided into five units, the "Undercover Safeguard Unit" selects
recruits for [even more] undercover agents to be sent amongst the American people; the "Aviation and Special Operations Unit" which
creates an FBI Air Force for both logistics and spying; the "Investigative Support Unit," which permits the FBI's flawless crime lab to become
available for every law-enforcement agency in the country; and the "Crisis Management Unit" which helps the Bureau cover up such
incidents as Ruby Ridge and Waco while lying to the press.

Then there is the "SWAT Training Unit," and the "Tactical Support" Division, which includes the infamous "Hostage Rescue Team," which
"rescued" a nursing mother by shooting her in the face, and "rescued" 86 men, women, and children by gassing, shooting, and burning them
alive.

Finally, there is the "Abducted Children and Serial Killers Unit," which should provide a measure of relief to those concerned about out-of-
control criminals who gas and incinerate children while committing mass-murder.[1239]
One recent manifestation of America's drift toward a national police force is the final report of the National Performance Review (NPR)
headed by Vice President Al Gore.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then there is the "SWAT Training Unit," and the "Tactical Support" Division, which includes the infamous "Hostage Rescue Team," which
"rescued" a nursing mother by shooting her in the face, and "rescued" 86 men, women, and children by gassing, shooting, and burning them
alive. Finally, there is the "Abducted Children and Serial Killers Unit," which should provide a measure of relief to those concerned about out-of-
control criminals who gas and incinerate children while committing mass-murder.[1239]
One recent manifestation of America's drift toward a national police force is the final report of the National Performance Review (NPR)
headed by Vice President Al Gore. Said to be a blueprint for "reinventing government," this report recommends "the designation of the
Attorney General as the Director of Law Enforcement to coordinate federal law enforcement efforts."
This was the same Attorney General who, along with Deputy Attorney General Webster Hubbell and President Bill Clinton, gave the "final
solution" order at Waco. The FBI was the agency that carried it out, gassing and incinerating 86 men, women and children. Now, under H.R. 97 (the "Rapid Deployment Strike Force Act"), Clinton, Reno and Freeh are calling for a 2,500-man "Rapid-Deployment"
force composed of FBI and other federal agents, all under the supervision of the Attorney General.[1240] The bill states:
On application of the Governor of a State and the chief executive officer of the affected local government or governments...and upon finding
that the occurrence of criminal activity in a particular jurisdiction is being exacerbated by the interstate flow of drugs, guns, and criminals, the
Deputy Assistant Director may deploy on a temporary basis a unit of the Rapid Deployment Force.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Judiciary Committee spokesmen interviewed by Relevance Magazine said the Rapid-Deployment Strike Force "would also serve as a model
unit for local officers to emulate." A comforting thought, considering the "exemplary" actions of federal "law enforcement" at Ruby Ridge and
Waco.

Such a Göering-inspired national police force has the potential to become an American Gestapo.

Joe Hendricks, Chief of Police of Windsor, Missouri, expressed his concern over this trend in the June, 1997 issue of the Idaho Observer:
Unfortunately, at the present time, an agent of the FBI could walk into my office and commandeer this police department.

If you don't believe
that, read the Crime Bill that Clinton signed into law in 1995.

There is talk of the feds taking over the Washington, D.C.

Police Department.

To me this sets a dangerous precedent.[1241][1242]
Said Joseph McNamara, former police chief in San Jose and Kansas City, now at the Hoover Institute at Stanford University: "Despite the
conventional wisdom that community policing is sweeping the nation, the exact opposite is happening,"[1243]
Charles "Bud" Meeks, executive director of the National Sheriff's Association, adds, "By passing statutes in an effort to make [the crime
situation] better," he observed, "we're getting closer to a federal police state."[1244]
"In SWAT units formed since 1980, their use has increased by 538 percent," said police researcher Peter Kraska.

Originally designed to
control armed, barricaded suspects, SWAT teams are now being routinely used in the so-called "War on Drugs," and in places like Fresno,
are being deployed full-time as roaming patrols.

"The drug war created the atmosphere for this kind of pro-active policing," Kraska said.Originally designed to
control armed, barricaded suspects, SWAT teams are now being routinely used in the so-called "War on Drugs," and in places like Fresno,
are being deployed full-time as roaming patrols.

"The drug war created the atmosphere for this kind of pro-active policing," Kraska said.

"We have never seen this kind of policing, where
SWAT teams routinely break through a door, subdue all the occupants and search the premises for drugs, cash and weapons."
While the average citizen has to pay a several hundred dollar fine or serve jail time for possessing a small amount of marijuana, the biggest
drug dealers in the country — the CIA — have been pumping tons of heroin and cocaine into this country for decades.

Now the "War on
Drugs," which even many in the law-enforcement community admit is a sham, is being used to wage war on the American people.

"It's a very dangerous thing, when you're telling cops they're soldiers and there's an enemy out there," adds McNamara.

"I don't like it
all."[1245]
Yet maybe the cops won't have to worry about looking like soldiers.

On October 5th, 1994, the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime and
Criminal Justice held hearings on the Justice Department's proposed "Use of the National Guard in Domestic Law Enforcement."[1246]
One increasing manifestation of this trend are Multi-Jurisdictional Task Forces (MJTF) training for urban guerrilla warfare (UGW).

As
numerous newspaper articles have noted over the past few years, sweeps by Army helicopters in towns and cities across America in
conjunction with paramilitary police raids and training exercises have been increasing.

The following incident was reported by Jim Keith and
verified by the author:
During the Summer of 1993, residents of Midtown, Atlanta, Georgia were shocked in the early hours of the morning as three military
helicopters came churning through their high-rise condo canyons as part of military Special Operations Command practice raids.As
numerous newspaper articles have noted over the past few years, sweeps by Army helicopters in towns and cities across America in
conjunction with paramilitary police raids and training exercises have been increasing.

The following incident was reported by Jim Keith and
verified by the author:
During the Summer of 1993, residents of Midtown, Atlanta, Georgia were shocked in the early hours of the morning as three military
helicopters came churning through their high-rise condo canyons as part of military Special Operations Command practice raids.

In the same
area in July of 1994, automatic weapons fire and explosions echoed off an abandoned state office building on Peachtree Street.

Employees
of a Kinko's copy center at 793 Peachtree Street saw men in battle gear atop the building.

An employees remember a bullet shattering the
store's window during the exercise.

During January of 1994, troops from the U.S.

Army Special Operations Command, which includes the Green Berets, Rangers, and
psychological warfare specialists, were seen rappelling off the empty 11-story St Moritz Hotel in Miami, firing paint pellets in mock assault
exercises.[1247] In Fort Lauderdale during November of 1996, troops from the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment from Fort
Campbell, Kentucky, along with Special Forces, Rangers, Navy SEALSs, and psychological warfare specialists, practiced "night urban
navigation training."
In Houston, the crash of an Army helicopter alerted citizens to troops practicing UGW exercises with helicopters, small arms fire and
explosives in vacant buildings.[1248]
Similar exercises were practiced near Detroit during the Summer of 1994.

In Van Buren township, citizens were treated to the sound of
explosions and automatic gunfire.

When residents complained, they were told by police, "Don't worry about it.

The MJTF and Van Buren PD
SWAT teams were practicing."
Resident Bridget Tuohey wasn't reassured.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When residents complained, they were told by police, "Don't worry about it. The MJTF and Van Buren PD
SWAT teams were practicing."
Resident Bridget Tuohey wasn't reassured. "I have two little kids here who are semi-hysterical," Tuohey told the Detroit News. When Van
Buren resident Mark Spencer went to investigate, he saw men in Ninja-style black uniforms with no markings practicing mock assaults on
abandoned houses. Although the live ordnance found at the scene had already been photographed by local Detroit television crews, Wayne County Police

--- PAGE BREAK ---spokesman claimed that it did not exist.[1249]
As Spencer recalls, "Never in 25 years of living in this area have I ever heard automatic weapons fire.

Never have I heard explosives training
being done here.

Never have I seen men dressed in black battle dress roaming the wooded areas of my home."[1250]
On June 6, 1996, the Washington Times reported:
Nine Army helicopters swooped into Pittsburgh in the middle of the night this week and turned parts of the city into war zones, complete with
sounds of explosions and gunfire that frightened residents and sent one pregnant woman into labor.

What are these troops training for?

According to a report in the March, 1995 issue of Soldier of Fortune, about 40 Army and Air Force legal
and other personnel attended a secret "research symposium" at XVIII Airborne Corps between December 6th and 8th, 1994, to strategize
and study for the deployment of U.S.

personnel and resources to aid civilian authorities in "the suppression of domestic civil unrest." Army
lawyers repeatedly brushed aside Airborne officers concerns that such deployment would violate the Posse Comitatus Act.

One lawyer,
responding somewhat cryptically said, "Not anymore, it doesn't."[1251]
Then, in early March of 1966, dozens of defense industry leaders, government policy makers, and military analysts met with federal law
enforcement officials at the Ritz-Carlton in McLean, Virginia.

Their purpose was to strategize for the "Operations Other Than War/Law
Enforcement" (OOTW/LE) initiative, designed to increase coordination between law-enforcement and the military — a trend which has been
accelerating in recent years.

As Sources EJournal reported:
In hearings on the joint Pentagon/law enforcement OOTW program in June, 1994, Dr.

Anita K.As Sources EJournal reported:
In hearings on the joint Pentagon/law enforcement OOTW program in June, 1994, Dr.

Anita K.

Jones, director of defense research and
engineering, told the House Armed Services Committee that she foresees the military increasingly being called upon to respond to "rising
violence on our city streets" and to deal with the "widespread availability of increasingly powerful weapons."[1252]
One particularly frightening aspect of this trend is the transfer of new Orwellian-style weapons and surveillance gear to domestic law
enforcement.

The Orange County Register of March 19, 1993 reported that Camp Pendleton Marine base in southern California recently
added an $8.4 million facility to train for urban warfare.[1253]
While the DoD claims these exercises are training for "overseas" commitments, Major General Max Baratz dropped the ball when he wrote
in the Summer, 1994 issue of Army Reserve Magazine:
In addition to providing fully ready units for our international missions, we'll have an enhanced capability to support domestic actions,
[including] regional planning related to Military Support to Civilian Authorities and FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) activities.

[1254]
As William Jasper reported in the October 31, 1994 issue of The New American, soldiers are currently undergoing training in disarming
civilian militias at the $12 million Military Operations on Urban Terrain (MOUT) complex at Ft.

Polk, Georgia.[1255]
This plan came to fruition in February of 1995, when a source inside the Nevada National Guard said that the FBI had asked for 400
National Guardsmen to help "put down" the Nevada State's Rights Movement.

When the Guard refused, the FBI threatened to bring in
federal troops.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Polk, Georgia.[1255]
This plan came to fruition in February of 1995, when a source inside the Nevada National Guard said that the FBI had asked for 400
National Guardsmen to help "put down" the Nevada State's Rights Movement. When the Guard refused, the FBI threatened to bring in
federal troops. One National Guardsman who had participated in "Desert Massacre" told an observer his outfit was being trained to "attack urban buildings."
When asked for clarification, he said, "If they told us there were guns or drugs in a house, we know how to take it down."
Interestingly, Oliver North and "Buck" Revell helped develop the policy of militarizing our law-enforcement. One example is the FBI — now
being given sniper training by the military. That training helped the Bureau massacre 86 men, women, and children at Waco. It was the first
time in recent history that the government violated the Posse Comitatus Act by using federal troops on American citizens.[1256]
To put some perspective on FEMA's connections to the lunatic fringe, note that Oliver North served on the Reagan-created Emergency
Mobilization Preparedness Board, which oversaw FEMA's planning and operations. North was assigned there from 1982 to 1984 by Robert
"Bud" McFarlane.[1257]
Raymond "Buddy" Young, President Clinton's former Director of Security, was appointed director of FEMA's Region IV post. Young, who has
reportedly participated in and covered-up the Octopus's various illegal doings at Mena, Arkansas, no doubt was given the well-paying job as
a reward for his silence. He later showed up in the aftermath of the Oklahoma City bombing, directing FEMA traffic and holding press
conferences. Former Assistant Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci (Richard Armitage's pal) signed a Directive permitting senior military commanders to
declare martial law "when unlawful obstructions or rebellion against the authority of the United States renders ordinary enforcement means
unworkable...."[1258]mitting senior military commanders to
declare martial law "when unlawful obstructions or rebellion against the authority of the United States renders ordinary enforcement means
unworkable...."[1258]

--- PAGE BREAK ---North himself proposed a suspension of the Constitution upon the planned U.S.

invasion of Nicaragua.

In fact, North testified during the Iran-
Contra hearings that they were prepared "to suspend the Constitution in the event of mass immigration and domestic political unrest."
The plan was called Operation Rex-84-Alpha (Readiness Exercise 1984, Exercise Plan).

Rex-84, which ran concurrently with the first annual
show of U.S.

force in Honduras in April 1984, was designed to test FEMA's ability to round up 400,000 undocumented Central American
immigrants and domestic protesters in the event of an invasion by U.S.

forces, and its ability to distribute hundreds of tons of small arms to
State Defense Forces (SDF).

Reagan and North planned to utilize the SDFs to control and imprison American citizens and Central American
refugees.

As General Frank Salcedo, Chief of FEMA's Civil Security Division, stated in 1982, at least 100,000 U.S.

citizens, from survivalists to tax
protesters, pose serious threats to civil security.[1259]
Rex-84 (along with other joint-mobilization exercises as "Proud Saber/Rex-82," "Operation Garden Plot," and "Operation Night Train") was
practiced with 34 other agencies such as the CIA, FBI and the Secret Service.

Ben Bradlee, in his book, The Rise And Fall of Oliver North,
writes that the Rex exercise was designed to test FEMA's readiness to assume authority over the DoD, the National Guard, and "a number
of state defense forces to be established by state legislatures." The military would then be "deputized," making an end run around the Posse
Comitatus Act.

This was the same Posse Comitatus Act that was breached at L.A.

and Waco.[1260]
Detainment camps (concentration camps) were set up on U.S.

soil to deal with the expected flood of refugees and political dissenters.

Some
informed sources say they still exist.soil to deal with the expected flood of refugees and political dissenters.

Some
informed sources say they still exist.

Such well-documented operations represent a frightening precedent for the Shadow Government to suspend Constitutional rights (or what
little we have left) in the case of political dissent.

This probability was raised by a CIA agent in conversation with DEA veteran Mike Levine.

Levine recalls the discussion in his book, Triangle of Death:
"Don't you realize that there are factions in your government that want this to happen — an emergency situation too hot for a constitutional
government to handle."
"To what end?" I asked
"A suspension of the Constitution, of course.

The legislation is already in place.

All perfectly legal.

Check it out for yourself.

It's called FEMA,
Federal Emergency Management Agency.

'Turn in your guns, you bloody bastards, from here on out, we're watching you, you anti-
government rabble rousers.' And who would be king, Michael?"[1261]
"CIA," I said.

While Levine supposedly had this conversation with the Argentine CIA Station Chief in 1991, he told me the actual discussion took place
with a drunk CIA agent in Buenos Aries twelve years earlier.

As Levine recalls: "He told me America should be more like Argentina.

That
Americans have more rights than they should have.… He said, 'Give Americans a car, a TV set, a home, and they're happy.' He told me all
you had to do was create a situation of fear and anarchy so that Americans will give up their rights.… I believe this is part of what's
happening now."[1262]
A prime example was the 1992 L.A.

riots.

While the beating of black motorist Rodney King was not part of a preconceived plan, many insist
that the riots were allowed to rage out of control to test the government's plans for martial law, and provide an excuse for further erosion of
our civil rights.--- PAGE BREAK ---

riots. While the beating of black motorist Rodney King was not part of a preconceived plan, many insist
that the riots were allowed to rage out of control to test the government's plans for martial law, and provide an excuse for further erosion of
our civil rights. It was widely reported that Police Chief Daryl Gates deliberately held back his officers, some of whom literally cried as they
watched the ensuing chaos.[1263]
Even that bastion of the establishment, the New York Times, reported:
Emerging evidence from the first crucial hours… provides the strong indication that top police officials did little to plan for the possibility of
violence and did not follow standard procedures to contain the rioting once it began.…
The police… violated the basic police procedure for riot-control by failing to cordon off the area around one of the first trouble spots and not
returning to that area for hours. Police 911 dispatchers attempted to send squad cars to the scene of the first violent outbreaks, but were repeatedly ignored or overruled. [1264]
One deputy chief, commenting on the hundreds of officers (and National Guardsmen) who were deliberately held back, told the Los Angeles
Times, "This is alien to everything we're supposed to do in a situation like this."[1265][1266]
Others, such as Compton City Councilwoman Patricia Moore, publicly stated that the police themselves started the riots. Backing up Moore

--- PAGE BREAK ---was CIA operative Frederick George Celani (AKA: Fred Sebastian), who insisted that the riots were "fomented by federal agents."[1267]*
It is also interesting to note the similarity to the 1965 Watts riots.

Police Chief William Parker testified that the Watts escalation was part of an
"organized effort." Parker backed up his claim by citing reports of clandestine radio messages which interrupted regular police channels as
"further evidence of organization."[1268]
The McCone Commission, charged with the task of investigating the Watts riots — like its predecessor, the Warren Commission — typically
found no evidence of organization.

John McCone was CIA Director at the time of the Kennedy assassination.

The Christopher Commission, organized by Secretary of State Warren Christopher to investigate the L.A.

riots, would make similar findings,
this time laying the blame on L.A.'s street gangs — the Crips and the Bloods.

Christopher is an attorney for IBM and Lockheed Corp., closely
aligned with the CIA.[1269]
The Kent State riots of 1970 are another interesting example.

As one student recalled on a KPFK radio interview: "The ROTC building is
about 200 feet from the police station, right across the courtyard.

All these self-styled revolutionaries who were burning down the ROTC
building took 45 minutes to get it started.

All the time, the police never attempted to stop them.

In fact, it was almost as if they wanted them
to burn down the ROTC building.

From this point on, they used this as an excuse to stop the movement that students were involved in — the massive opposition to the war in
Vietnam."[1270]
The Watts uprising also saw a sharp increase in domestic police and military intelligence gathering, and gave rise to modern law-
enforcement tactics such as the SWAT team.In fact, it was almost as if they wanted them
to burn down the ROTC building.

From this point on, they used this as an excuse to stop the movement that students were involved in — the massive opposition to the war in
Vietnam."[1270]
The Watts uprising also saw a sharp increase in domestic police and military intelligence gathering, and gave rise to modern law-
enforcement tactics such as the SWAT team.

Ever since the riots, writes former UCLA professor Donald Freed, "domestic counter-
insurgency has become a 'growth industry.' Forty thousand fast-growing police agencies, containing more than 400,000 men and women,
are becoming chief customers for many defense industry contractors."[1271]
The situation would be repeated in Los Angeles, where the riots presented a prime opportunity for the ruling elite to put 10,000 troops,
including 1,508 Marines and 2,023 GIs on the streets of an American city while practicing FEMA-style martial law.[1272]
Should a situation such as Levine refers to actually take place, the first to be "detained" would be those who oppose the current system —
dissidents, radicals, and primarily, those in the Patriot/Militia movement.

The movement represents a threat to the existing power structure in
the same way that the Anti-War movement represented a threat to the military-industrial establishment, or the Sandinistas and the FMLN
represented a threat to their U.S.-backed fascist dictators.

Used to viewing challenges to its authority on an counterinsurgency model, the ruling elite regard the Patriot/Militia movement along the
same lines.

Such counterinsurgency training originated in Vietnam under the infamous Phoenix Program of CIA Director William Colby and Ted
Shackley.Used to viewing challenges to its authority on an counterinsurgency model, the ruling elite regard the Patriot/Militia movement along the
same lines.

Such counterinsurgency training originated in Vietnam under the infamous Phoenix Program of CIA Director William Colby and Ted
Shackley.

Not surprisingly, Shackley uses examples such as Phoenix and the later-day death squads of Latin America as splendid examples
of how to curb an "insurgency." Shackley refers to the poor, common people of these countries as little more than sinister insurgents out to
destroy all vestiges of democracy, when in fact, any semblage of democracy, if it ever existed, would be quickly extinguished to protect the
interests of U.S.

industrial cartels.

Now our own democracy, largely a sham to begin with, is beginning to follow the model of these third-world countries.

Shackley's "Third
Option" has become the model for the counterinsurgency program now being waged against the American people.

As Hayes writes:
The Imperial State is planning for war with the American people.

It is planning to win that war.

There is no other possible explanation for the
frenzied framing of a fascist police state.[1273]
The Shadow Government's willingness to kill large numbers of foreigners in its bloody wars and covert operations is now being extended to
the American people, as its goals shift from controlling third-world populations to controlling American citizens.

The same techniques of
propaganda, torture, and other coercion that was field-tested by the CIA against "Communists" and other insurgents in South and Central
America will ultimately be used on American citizens as the U.S.

moves closer and closer politically and economically to its third-world
cousins.

A Special Forces combat veteran who coached desert warfare exercises said, very matter-of-factly, that such training would be used on
American citizens.--- PAGE BREAK ---

moves closer and closer politically and economically to its third-world
cousins. A Special Forces combat veteran who coached desert warfare exercises said, very matter-of-factly, that such training would be used on
American citizens. "I don't know [when]," he said, "but sooner or later, it's inevitable."
As nationalism becomes less and less the defining factor, the ethical and moral equation shifts with it. It is a short leap from rationalizing the
killing of hundreds of thousands or even millions of foreigners to killing a few hundred or a few thousand Americans, if the policy objectives
deems it necessary. These deaths are simply viewed as "collateral damage" by the ruling elite. While this may sound like a drastic concept, the basic idea underlying it is the same. Governments need to control their people. In Latin

--- PAGE BREAK ---America, Red China, Turkey, and Indonesia, they do it through repressive laws, incarceration, torture, and death squads.

In "civilized"
countries such as the United States, the techniques are the same, they only differ in the degree that they are used.

Such techniques were used at Waco.

In an attempt to demoralize Church members, bright lights, religious chants, sounds of dying animals,
and Church members' own voices were blasted at the compound 24 hours-a-day.

The "Justice" Department brought in Dr.

Igor Smirnov, a
Russian specialist at the Moscow Medical Academy, to study Koresh's mind and devise appropriate mind-control techniques.

It was also
reported that ultra-low frequency sound waves, which cause nausea, irritability and other physical symptoms, were employed.

FBI agents
who were prone to using more basic techniques would hurl "flash-bang" grenades into the courtyard, terrorizing the women and children.

[1274]
After the Branch Davidians were appropriately demonized by a complient mass-media, the FBI rolled in with tanks and higly-flamable CS-
sas (which was banned by the Geneva Convention as too inhumane to be used on foreign enemies), and massacred 86 men, women, and
children.

While American citizens were being ruthlessly slaughtered by out-of-control federal agents, the national news media fed us the banally
repetitious soap opera drama of a former football player accused of murdering his ex-wife, which played itself out in endless talk shows,
tabloid "news" programs, and magazine articles for over two years — while the brutal massacre of 86 American citizens by lunatic "law-
enforcement" personnel was marginalized as a relatively unimportant issue.[1274]
After the Branch Davidians were appropriately demonized by a complient mass-media, the FBI rolled in with tanks and higly-flamable CS-
sas (which was banned by the Geneva Convention as too inhumane to be used on foreign enemies), and massacred 86 men, women, and
children.

While American citizens were being ruthlessly slaughtered by out-of-control federal agents, the national news media fed us the banally
repetitious soap opera drama of a former football player accused of murdering his ex-wife, which played itself out in endless talk shows,
tabloid "news" programs, and magazine articles for over two years — while the brutal massacre of 86 American citizens by lunatic "law-
enforcement" personnel was marginalized as a relatively unimportant issue.

What the Plutocracy revealed in that case is that the American people could be persuaded — through government disinformation and a
subservient media (and their own stupidity) — that the massacre was "justifiable." How many Americans can be heard parroting the official
government line when asked about Waco?

The Branch Davidians were "religious nuts," or "whackos," we are told, and hence deserved their
fate — to be tortured, gassed, shot, and burned to death — women, children, pets and all.[1275]
What is painfully clear by these examples is that Ted Shackley's "Third Option," originally a model for counterinsurgency against the third-
world, is now being put to the test in the U.S.

— a program of counterinsurgency against the American people.

While the U.S.— a program of counterinsurgency against the American people.

While the U.S.

escalates in its use of repressive laws, imprisonment, torture, and murder, the main tool has always been propaganda, in the
form of the corporate-controlled press.[1276] As Shackley writes:
There are cases in which a cause supported, a newspaper campaign initiated, or a particular candidate encouraged in an election could
mean (and in the past has meant) that the crisis in which our vital interests might be at stake never arises.[1277]
Adolph Hitler expressed similar sentiments in Mein Kampf: "The task of propaganda lies… in directing the masses towards certain facts,
events, necessities, etc., the purpose being to move their importance into the masses' field of vision.…"[1278]*
Lt.

Col.

Michael Aquino — a U.S.

Army mind-control expert — certainly has no aversion to practicing the techniques utilized by the Nazis.

The self-avowed Satanist (and reported head of the CIA's Operation MONARCH, which utilizes children for mind-control), once performed a
Satanic ritual in the Hall of the Dead at Germany's Westphalian castle.

The site was an occult sanctuary for Henrich Himmler's SS elite.[1279]
As the San Francisco Examiner reported:
[A]quino once urged the Pentagon, in a controversial psychological warfare study entitled "Mind War," to overwhelm enemies by mobilizing
every means of domestic and foreign propaganda, including brainwashing the U.S.

public.[1280]
Such techniques were certainly employed in Oklahoma, where a massive propaganda campaign accusing Timothy McVeigh of the bombing
and linking him to the Militia Movement led to the passage of the Anti-Terrorism Bill.

The Anti-Terrorism Bill, and the Crime Bills introduced concurrently, permit an increasingly oppressive Federal Government to maintain an
unprecedented level of control over the American people.--- PAGE BREAK ---

public.[1280]
Such techniques were certainly employed in Oklahoma, where a massive propaganda campaign accusing Timothy McVeigh of the bombing
and linking him to the Militia Movement led to the passage of the Anti-Terrorism Bill. The Anti-Terrorism Bill, and the Crime Bills introduced concurrently, permit an increasingly oppressive Federal Government to maintain an
unprecedented level of control over the American people. Ensconced in the Anti-Terrorism Bill's cryptic language are provisions which would allow the President and the Justice Department to define
which groups are subject to the increasingly broad definition of "terrorist." It would allow expanded use of wiretaps and allow illegally-seized
evidence to be used in court. It would permit federal and local police agencies to trace financial information without obtaining evidence of a
crime. It would allow expanded use of current laws prohibiting fund-raising for terrorist organizations, denial of visas, increased cooperation
with other governments on money laundering and asset seizures. It would permit "no-knock" searches in certain cases. And it would allow
the military to intervene in certain domestic situations deemed a national security threat. In short, it guts the First, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Eighth Amendments to the Constitution, lays the framework for an entrenched police state,
and gives the Federal Government full power to target anybody who is deemed a threat to its authority. With the bombing accompanied by 100 times more footage about dead children than the media mustered for Waco, it wasn't hard to
convince a gullible public about the "threats" posed by militias. While the final version rammed through Congress was watered down
somewhat, it was just the beginning of a wave of "anti-militia" legislation introduced in the wake of the bombing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---No doubt, future engineered "acts of terrorism" will serve to reinstate the deleted provisions of the Anti-Terrorism Bill.

On November 2, Representative Charles Schumer (D-NY) introduced H.R.

2580, his attempt to "cleanse the illness of violent extremism"
from America's political culture by outlawing militias.[1281]
H.R.

2580 followed on the heels of its sister bill, H.R.

1544, the "Domestic Insurgency Act," introduced by Representative Nadler.

The
Domestic Insurgency Act purports to prevent two or more individuals from engaging in any paramilitary group who possess "any weapons
capable of causing death or injury with the intention to unlawfully oppose the authority of the United States." Such a paramilitary group could
conceivably include a pair of senior citizens with Swiss Army knives at a church picnic discussing their unhappiness with the Social Security
Administration.

In this sense, the Omnibus Anti-Terrorism Bill can be seen as little more than an "Enabling Law," similar to Hitler's repressive legislation that
allowed the German government to override their own constitutional protections.

Not surprisingly, it was Shackley who first recommended the concept of an Anti-Terrorism Bill:
Guide governments in the preparation of anti terrorist laws.

When the cadre phase begins to unfold, many countries find they do not have
laws on the books to deal with the threat….

it is better to be able to arrest and convict subversives on the basis of a law then on an executive
order.When the cadre phase begins to unfold, many countries find they do not have
laws on the books to deal with the threat….

it is better to be able to arrest and convict subversives on the basis of a law then on an executive
order.

If such laws cannot be passed expeditiously, the party in power should mount an education campaign to rally public opinion on behalf
of their enactment.[1282]
Since Shackley was the first to come up with the concept of an Anti-Terrorism Bill, and since he was also one of the first to run a major CIA-
sanctioned drug-running operation, one could effectively argue that the controls offered by the Anti-Terrorism Bill will go a long way towards
assisting these bands of covert operators and international criminals in their illegal enterprises.

The General Services Administration, for example, noted that the Digital Telephony Bill would "make it easier for criminals, terrorists, foreign
intelligence and computer hackers to electronically penetrate the public network and pry into areas previously not open to snooping." One
only need look at the activities of Casey, Shackley, Armitage, and North, et al., and the blanket of "national security" they operated under, to
realize the staggering implications of this.

President Reagan's Executive Order 12333 also assisted in this development by permitting the "privatizing" of intelligence gathering.

Not
surprisingly, Shackley, Casey, and Bush attended the December 5, 1980 meeting to draft E.O.

12333, which states:
Agencies within the Intelligence Community are authorized to enter into contracts or arrangements for the provision of goods or services with
private companies or institutions in the United States and need not reveal the sponsorship of such contracts or arrangements for authorized
intelligence purposes.…
Not that the government needed a new law to conduct its criminal activities — it simply codified what had already been established.Not
surprisingly, Shackley, Casey, and Bush attended the December 5, 1980 meeting to draft E.O.

12333, which states:
Agencies within the Intelligence Community are authorized to enter into contracts or arrangements for the provision of goods or services with
private companies or institutions in the United States and need not reveal the sponsorship of such contracts or arrangements for authorized
intelligence purposes.…
Not that the government needed a new law to conduct its criminal activities — it simply codified what had already been established.

By
privatizing covert operations, the government gets to maintain "plausible deniability."
Front-companies such as EATSCO, Stanford Technologies, Intercontential Industries, E-Systems, Southern Air Transport, and a bewildering
array of others, allow the Octopus to make large amounts of money while providing the Plutocracy with an "off the shelf" capability to
conduct covert operations, while at the same time, skirting Congressional oversight.

As former CIA agent Victor Marchetti writes:
With the cooperation of an acquiescent, ill-informed Congress, and the encouragement and assistance of a series of Presidents, the cult has
built a wall of laws and executive orders around the CIA and itself, a wall that has blocked effective public scrutiny.[1283]
One example is the security firm Wackenhut, which built dossiers on Americans suspected of being Communists or Left-leaning
"subversives," including anti-war protesters and civil-rights demonstrators.

As Frank Donner writes in The Age of Surveillance:
By 1965, Wackenhut was boasting to potential investors that the company maintained files on 2.5 million suspected dissidents — one in 46
American adults then living.As former CIA agent Victor Marchetti writes:
With the cooperation of an acquiescent, ill-informed Congress, and the encouragement and assistance of a series of Presidents, the cult has
built a wall of laws and executive orders around the CIA and itself, a wall that has blocked effective public scrutiny.[1283]
One example is the security firm Wackenhut, which built dossiers on Americans suspected of being Communists or Left-leaning
"subversives," including anti-war protesters and civil-rights demonstrators.

As Frank Donner writes in The Age of Surveillance:
By 1965, Wackenhut was boasting to potential investors that the company maintained files on 2.5 million suspected dissidents — one in 46
American adults then living.

in 1966… Wackenhut could confidently maintain that with more than 4 million names, it had the largest privately
held file on suspected dissidents in America.[1284]
William Corbett, an 18-year CIA veteran told John Connolly writing in the September, 1992 issue of Spy, "For years Wackenhut has been
involved with the CIA and other intelligence organizations, including the DEA.

Wackenhut would allow the CIA to occupy positions within the
company [in order to carry out] clandestine operations." Other former agents and operatives confirmed Corbett's statement.

"When they [the
CIA] need cover, Wackenhut is there to provide it for them," said former CIA contract employee Richard Babayan.

Phillip Agee, a former CIA
agent who wrote his exposé, Inside the Company in 1975, told Spy, "I don't have the slightest doubt that the CIA and Wackenhut overlap."
The private "security" agency's board of directors reads like a Who's Who of the intelligence community.

Former FBI Director Clarence Kelly,
former CIA Director William Rabor, and former Deputy CIA Directors Frank Carlucci and Bobby Ray Inman (of E-Systems, another quasi-
civilian covert contractor), are all featured prominently on the company's membership roster.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Phillip Agee, a former CIA
agent who wrote his exposé, Inside the Company in 1975, told Spy, "I don't have the slightest doubt that the CIA and Wackenhut overlap."
The private "security" agency's board of directors reads like a Who's Who of the intelligence community. Former FBI Director Clarence Kelly,
former CIA Director William Rabor, and former Deputy CIA Directors Frank Carlucci and Bobby Ray Inman (of E-Systems, another quasi-
civilian covert contractor), are all featured prominently on the company's membership roster. Also taking a special place on the Wackenhut

--- PAGE BREAK ---board was one William Casey, the former CIA Director who had a proclivity for extralegal covert operations such as Iran-Contra.

Like E-Systems and Continental Shelf, Wackenhut was deeply enmeshed in covert technological procurement and murder-for-hire, including
the 1982 assassination of Cabazon tribal leader Fred Alvaraz and his two companions.

Alvaraz had made the mistake of criticizing
Wackenhut operations, begun in 1979 by a spook named John Philip Nichols.[1285]
The goals of these "Secret Teams" naturally overlap with the agendas of the corporate-financial elite.

"[Roy] Godson estimates that
international crime groups outperform most Fortune 500 companies.

They deliver drugs, illegal aliens, and laundered money, and provide
services like violence and extortion — all with organizations that resemble General Motors more than they resemble the traditional Sicilian
Mafia." Godson should know.

As a member of the National Strategy Information Center, founded by former CIA Director William Casey,
Godson helped Oliver North raise funds for the drug-running Contras.[1286]
Another example of the symbiotic relationship between the private sector and the covert community is Peregrine International in Dallas,
Texas.

Founded by Guy S.

Howard and Ronald R.

Tucker, Peregrine was most recently run by George Petrie, a veteran the Army's secret
Delta-Force.

Petrie told the Dallas Morning News that his company "consults" with foreign governments on terrorism.

Petrie displays pictures
of him with George Bush and other prominent politicians.[1287]
As reported in the Philadelphia Inquirer, Peregrine conducted covert ops with Defense Department approval from 1981 until 1984, when the
company folded (although Texas Secretary of State records indicate the company was still active as of 1996).

As the Inquirer wrote:
The company hired both retired and active duty military personnel on leave to act as "guns" — guys who had no qualms about blowing
people away.Petrie displays pictures
of him with George Bush and other prominent politicians.[1287]
As reported in the Philadelphia Inquirer, Peregrine conducted covert ops with Defense Department approval from 1981 until 1984, when the
company folded (although Texas Secretary of State records indicate the company was still active as of 1996).

As the Inquirer wrote:
The company hired both retired and active duty military personnel on leave to act as "guns" — guys who had no qualms about blowing
people away.

Their assassination targets include planning to kill drug smugglers in Peru, Honduras, Belize, and Caribbean nations; armed
and train Contras, and arm and train official military commando units in El Salvador, Honduras and Peru.[1288]
Was Peregrine's plan to kill drug smugglers part of a program to clean up the drug trade?

Or was it an extension of Shackley's program to
eliminate the CIA's heroin competition, as it had in Laos?

Perhaps that is what Timothy McVeigh's letter (about being recruited for a Covert Tactical Unit) meant about "eliminating the competition."
Navy SEAL Team commander Robert Hunt, who used to teach assassination teams for the CIA, described the activities of ANV, which
served as an umbrella for Peregrine.

As Rodney Stich writes in Defrauding America:
Shareholders in the company were present and former CIA personnel, reportedly involved in some aspect of CIA-related drug trafficking.

They included, for instance, Theodore Shackley, who was heavily involved in the CIA Far East drug trafficking and then in the drug trafficking
from Central and South America….

Hunt stated there were numerous ties between the groups and the Richard Secord-Theodore Shackley-
and Thomas Clines Associates, all of whom were reportedly associated with the opium trade and assassination program in Laos.

ANV is the "action arm" of Continental Shelf Associates (formerly Perry Submarines/Perry Off-Shore) of Jupiter, Florida.Hunt stated there were numerous ties between the groups and the Richard Secord-Theodore Shackley-
and Thomas Clines Associates, all of whom were reportedly associated with the opium trade and assassination program in Laos.

ANV is the "action arm" of Continental Shelf Associates (formerly Perry Submarines/Perry Off-Shore) of Jupiter, Florida.

A former CIA
proprietary, it was operated by Robert "Stretch" Stevens, who had served as Shackley's Maritime Operations Chief from the Bay of Pigs to
South East Asia (Shackley sits on the board of CSA).

In this regard, the activities of organizations like ANV and Peregrine are no different
than those of groups like the CIA's old ZR/RIFLE, set up to assassinate Fidel Castro and Che Guevera.

ANV (also known as the "Fish Farm") specializes in training foreign nationals for commando-type mercenary operations and assassinations
— rented to various groups and governments around the world.

On the board of ANV is Bill Hamilton, former Director of Navy special
operations who attempted to establish the "Phoenix Battalion," a privately-funded, covert group that would launch "preemptive strikes"
against organizations it defined as "terrorist."[1289]
Could Hussain al-Hussaini and his associates have been some of the foreign nationals trained by ANV?

According to Wheaton, this same group of covert operators controls a secret base on Andros Island in the Bahamas operated by the super-
secret NRO (National Reconnaissance Office), the USMC, and the Navy.

Named AUTEC, it is an underground/underwater computerized
facility for tracking both friendly and enemy ships and subs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to Wheaton, this same group of covert operators controls a secret base on Andros Island in the Bahamas operated by the super-
secret NRO (National Reconnaissance Office), the USMC, and the Navy. Named AUTEC, it is an underground/underwater computerized
facility for tracking both friendly and enemy ships and subs. Wheaton claims that an "illegal secret operation buried within the complex is a
covert intelligence project, database and operation directed against the civilian population of the United States.…"[1290]
Wheaton claims the facility "is central control for Ted Shackley's 'Third Option' and the project to create domestic unrest, chaos, and the
illusion of a domestic terrorist threat within America."[1291]
While operations from super-secret high-tech bases may sound like the stuff of Ian Flemming novels, Shackley allegedly directed the
overthrow of Australia's Prime Minister Gough Whitlam — the first Labor Prime Minister in over two decades — from the super-secret Pine
Gap facility run by the CIA. As the Sheehan Affidavit states:
On November 2, 1975, Whitlam publicly accused the CIA of subsidizing his opposition, and named National Country Party chief Doug
Anthony as a collaborator. The Next day, the Australian Financial Review reported that the super-secret U.S.-Australian "space study

--- PAGE BREAK ---n, and named National Country Party chief Doug
Anthony as a collaborator. The Next day, the Australian Financial Review reported that the super-secret U.S.-Australian "space study

--- PAGE BREAK ---

station" in Australia, known as Pine Gap, was actually a CIA electronic intelligence facility. The article also identified Richard Stallings,
former director of Pine Gap and friend of Anthony, as a CIA agent. Pine Gap's true function shocked not only the Australian public, but also
top government officials, including the Prime Minister.…[1292]
The corollary between the situation in the U.S. and that in Australia may be significant, since that country is now undergoing wholesale gun
confiscation of its citizenry under "Operation Cabin Thrust" — the first step to total control of its population.
In the Philippines, "anti-terrorism" legislation has already been passed, further restricting peoples' rights. In England, laws mandating
wholesale handgun confiscation have recently been implemented.
Primarily targeted is America, "land of the free," as new restrictions on privacy, free speech, and self-defense are invoked in the wake of the
World Trade Center and Oklahoma City bombings.
Zbigniew Brezinsky, Executive Director of the Trilateral Commission and National Security Advisor to Jimmy Carter [and four other
presidents], explained it best: "The technotronic era involves the gradual appearance of a more controlled society. Such a society would be
dominated by an elite, unrestrained by traditional values."
The reader has already been given a glimpse of this "elite" and their so-called "values." Dominating society will be a Plutocracy controlling
everything from politics and media, education, commerce and industry, even private property. Such plans calls for more governmental
programs, more governmental controls, and more and more government-imposed order.
Carol J. Quigley, former Professor of International Affairs at Georgetown University and Bill Clinton's mentor, grasped the Orwellian
implications of this over 30 years ago. As Quigley observes in Tragedy and Hope: "[The individual's] freedom and choice will be controlled
within very narrow alternatives by the fact that he will be numbered from birth and followed, as a number, through his educational training,
his required military or other public service, his tax contributions, his health and medical requirements, and his final retirement and death
benefits."
Utilizing their minions in the media and the alphabet soup of federal agencies — the FBI, ATF, DEA, CIA, NSA, IRS, INS, FDA, BLM,
FINCEN, and FEMA — the elite seek total control over our family, our health, our finances, our education, our thoughts, and ultimately, our
very lives. What is sought is nothing less than a global plantation run by the transnational corporate elite — a modern day form of world-wide
fascism.
To accomplish their nefarious ends, covert intelligence operations, highly sophisticated propaganda efforts, and a reorganization of the law-
enforcement community is being combined with subtle and invasive legislative changes, all largely unnoticed by public eyes.[1293]
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.coms, and a reorganization of the law-
enforcement community is being combined with subtle and invasive legislative changes, all largely unnoticed by public eyes.[1293]
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---14
A Strategy of Tension
"The Chickens are coming home to roost." — Malcolm X
Like the Reischtag fire, the Oklahoma City bombing served as the catalyst to impose a new wave of draconian legislation on the American
people.

The bombing also dovetailed perfectly with the policy of blaming pre-arranged groups, developed in early 1980s by the CIA's Vince
Cannistraro working in tandem with Oliver North to develop the policy that was used to divert attention onto Libya in the Lockerbie bombing.

The CIA had established a precedent for such policies more than forty years ago in Italy and Greece, when the OSS intervened in those
countries' elections by supporting fascist collaborators who would attack the population and disrupt political proceedings.

Through Operation
SHEEPSKIN, the CIA worked with former Nazi collaborators in Greece to institute a campaign of black propaganda, terrorist bombings and
other provocations to be blamed on the Left, resulting in a fascist coup and the murder and repression of thousands.

The CIA helped create a "Strategy of Tension" in Italy through collaboration with the Mafia, corrupt Italian secret services, and fascists
working through Masonic Mafia-linked societies such as Licio Gelli's Propaganda Due (P2 Lodge).

Gelli (AKA: the "Puppet Master") had
been friends with fascists such as Italian Dictator Benito Mussolini, Croatia's Dr Pavlic, and Juan Peron of Argentina, and had also fought
with the fascist Italian Blackshirt division during the Spanish Civil War.

Gelli's P2 and elements within the Vatican (such as Father Krujoslav Dragonovic, a Croatian Catholic priest — one of many who had helped
the CIA export Nazi war criminals out of Germany through its Rat Lines), working in conjunction with the CIA, aligned itself with criminals,
corrupt police, and high government officials to discredit the emerging Left and stage a fascist coup.Gelli (AKA: the "Puppet Master") had
been friends with fascists such as Italian Dictator Benito Mussolini, Croatia's Dr Pavlic, and Juan Peron of Argentina, and had also fought
with the fascist Italian Blackshirt division during the Spanish Civil War.

Gelli's P2 and elements within the Vatican (such as Father Krujoslav Dragonovic, a Croatian Catholic priest — one of many who had helped
the CIA export Nazi war criminals out of Germany through its Rat Lines), working in conjunction with the CIA, aligned itself with criminals,
corrupt police, and high government officials to discredit the emerging Left and stage a fascist coup.

"The Vatican's fear was clear:
Communism posed a threat to its religious, political, and economic strength."[1294]
On behalf of democracy, the Mafia enlisted as their agent Salvatore Giuliano.

He and his cousin Gaspere Pisciotta led their men into Portella
della Ginestra.

Without prejudice, they shot and killed a dozen people and wounded more than fifty others.

New elections were held, and the
Christian Democratic party won a resounding victory.

Later, at the orders of the Mafia, Pisciotta murdered Salvatore Giuliano.

At his trial,
Gaspere Pisciotta said of the massacre, "We were a single body: bandits, police, and Mafia, like the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost."[1295]
P2 — essentially a Right-wing parallel government, was aligned with a super-secret Italian organization called Il Gladio — set up in 1956
with the help of British Intelligence and the CIA.

Gladio was part and parcel of MI5 and the CIA's 1948 efforts to establish a European "Stay
Behind" network of guerrilla fighters who would conduct covert operations after a Soviet invasion — using arms and explosives which had
been previously cached.

This network was conceived by the U.S.

Joint Chiefs of Staff, and organized by the NSC, which set up the Office of Policy Co-ordination to
run it, staffed and funded by the CIA.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This network was conceived by the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, and organized by the NSC, which set up the Office of Policy Co-ordination to
run it, staffed and funded by the CIA. Like Operation SHEEPSKIN, most of the so-called "freedom fighters" it recruited were little more than
fascist collaborators from WWII. And like the Nazi organization ODESSA with which it often collaborated, its tentacles extended throughout
Europe and Latin America, and even the United States.[1296]
While the main focus of Gladio was to resist a potential Soviet invasion, its fascist roots and violent history indicate it has served mainly as a
policy instrument to resist internal subversion — through terrorist means. This goal was revealed in a briefing minute of June 1, 1959, which
stated Gladio's concern with "internal subversion" and it's determination to play a role in the "politics of emergency." This emergency would
come about during the 1960s and 1970s with the emergence of the anti-Capitalist movement, and the shift from the Center to the Left by the
ruling Christian Democratic Party.[1297]
The covert objectives of Gladio were to spread panic and unrest through the implementation of "terrorist outrages," and also to directly attack
the Left in an attempt to provoke them into an armed response. The purpose of this strategy was to demonize the Left and isolate them from
popular support, while providing an excuse to curtain civil liberties. As a 1969 memo from Aginter Press, a fascist front group, explained:
Our belief is that the first phase of political activity ought to be to create the conditions favouring the installation of chaos in all of the regime's

--- PAGE BREAK ---structures.

This should necessarily begin with the undermining of the state economy so as to arrive at confusion throughout the whole legal
apparatus.

This leads on to a situation of strong political tension, fear in the world of industry and hostility towards the government and the
political parties.… In our view the first move we should make is to destroy the structure of the democratic state, under the cover of
communist and pro-Chinese activities.

Moreover, we have people who have infiltrated these groups and obviously we will have to tailor our
actions to the ethos of the milieu — propaganda and action of a sort which will seem to have emanated from our communist adversaries and
pressure brought to bear on people in whom power is invested at every level.

That will create a feeling of hostility towards those who
threaten the people of each and every nation, and at the same time we must raise up a defender of the citizenry against the disintegration
brought about by terrorism and subversion.…[1298]
General Gerardo Serravalle, head of "Office R" from 1971-1974 (the secret service office that controlled Gladio), revealed that at a Gladio
meeting in 1972, at least half of the upper echelons "had the idea of attacking the Communists before an invasion.

They were preparing for
civil war."[1299] As the 1969 dispatch added:
The introduction of provocateur elements into the circles of the revolutionary left is merely a reflection of the wish to push this unstable
situation to breaking point and create a climate of chaos…[1300]
One early Gladio-precipitated incident was the December, 12, 1969 bombing of the Banca Nazionale del' Agricultura in Milan's Piazza
Fontana.

The attack killed 16 people and wounded 88.

Police immediatly arrested and blamed anarchists.

One anarchist leader, Giuseppe
Pinelli, took the fall for the bombing, literally, when police tossed him out the window of the local precinct headquarters.Police immediatly arrested and blamed anarchists.

One anarchist leader, Giuseppe
Pinelli, took the fall for the bombing, literally, when police tossed him out the window of the local precinct headquarters.

In addition to this, the Procurator General of the Republic, De Peppo, ordered the one unexploded bomb found in the wreckage to be
detonated immediately.

As in Oklahoma, the destruction of this evidence destroyed the single best chance at uncovering the true
perpetrators of the deadly attack.[1301]
Nevertheless, police eventually discovered the real perpetrators — two fascists: Franco Freda and Giovanni Ventura.

Ventura, it seems, was
in close contact with Colonel Guido Giannettinni of the SID (part of the secret services), who was a fervent supporter of MSI.

The trial of
Ventura and Freda was delayed for 12 years, when they were finally given life sentences, only to be cleared on appeal.[1302][1303]
Former Gladio agents also attributed the 1969 Piazza Fontana bombing and the 1974 [and subsequent 1980] Bologna bombings, which
resulted in over 113 deaths and 185 injured, to P2.

These attacks include the Mafia's involvement in the Red Brigade's kidnap and murder of
Italian Prime Minister Aldo Moro in 1978.

The P2 organization was also suspected of the 1976 assassination of Italian magistrate Vittoria
Occorsio.

Occorsio was investigating P2 links to neo-Nazi organizations at the time.

His death conveniently terminated any further
investigation.[1304]
This "strategy of tension," organized around a brutal campaign of terror and murder, resulted in the deaths of hundreds of people during the
decades of the 1970s and '80s.

The wave of terror led to the severe restriction of civil rights, with the 1975 law restricting popular
campaigning and radical political discussion.

Many people were locked up under "anti-terrorist" legislation (sound familiar?) or expelled from
the country.The wave of terror led to the severe restriction of civil rights, with the 1975 law restricting popular
campaigning and radical political discussion.

Many people were locked up under "anti-terrorist" legislation (sound familiar?) or expelled from
the country.

As the Left (the Red Brigades) resorted to armed struggle to defend themselves, it only strengthened Gladio/P2's position.

The Red
Brigades, which had been systematically infiltrated by the secret services, were repeatedly blamed for the attacks, all the while unknowingly
serving the agenda of the fascist P2 establishment.

One unforgetable example of this wave of terror was the Bologna railway bombing in 1980, that killed 80 people and injured over 160.

While
reportedly masterminded by P2 members Stefano Delle Chiaie and Licio Gelli, the attack was blamed on the Red Brigades to discredit the
Italian Communist party.

According to author Steve Mizrach:
Some Italian political analysts believe that P2 and "Ordine Nuova" (New Order) may have cooperated with the CIA [to bomb the railway
station].… There are clearly overlapping circles of membership between P2, the CIA, and the Knights of Malta, a "sovereign military order
descended from the Knights of St.

John-Hospitallers," and whose membership in the U.S.

has included Bill Casey, Alexander Haig, and
Prescott Bush [and reportedly George Bush].[1305]
This covertly-orchestrated "strategy of tension" would repeat itself in Belgium in the mid-80s, in a bizarre series of killings called the
"Supermarket Massacres," in which hooded gunmen walked into crowded supermarkets and began firing away.

The massacres,
orchestrated by a group calling itself the "Killers of Brabant," were later discovered to be linked to Belgium's Gladio unit.

The Supermarket massacres occurred during the period when the U.S.

was pushing a plan to base the Euro-Missiles (nuclear-tipped Cruise
missiles) in different European countries.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Supermarket massacres occurred during the period when the U.S. was pushing a plan to base the Euro-Missiles (nuclear-tipped Cruise
missiles) in different European countries. The plan led to huge demonstrations in Europe, with certain countries threatening to break ranks
with NATO. Belgium was one of those countries. The Belgian Parliament, which investigated the incidents, felt that they were another
attempt to sow confusion and fear among the populace, thereby generating public outcries for a law-and-order government which would be
amenable to the Euro-Missles.[1306]
Proof surfaced when a former gendarme, Madani Bouhouche, who worked for state security and was a member of a neo-Nazi paramilitary

--- PAGE BREAK ---group Westland New Post (WNP), was arrested with one of the murder weapons.

The next day, Bouhouche's friend and fellow Right-wing
militant Jean Bultot fled to Paraguay (a popular respite for Nazis).

While in Paraguay, Bultot admitted to Belgian journalist René Haquin that
the killings were a state security destabilization operation with government participation "at every level."
On January 25, 1988, another former gendarme, Robert Beyer, who police caught with a file of state security agents and addresses of
garages filled with stolen arms, stated on Belgian television that state security had provided the weapons used by the killers.[1307]
One of the attacks, the 1982 bombing of a Synagogue on the Rue de la Régence in Brussels, was linked to a security guard for the
Wackenhut Corporation — Marcel Barbier.

An ardent anti-Semite and member of the WNP, Barbier had been guarding the synagogue when
it was attacked.

In August of 1993, police discovered plans of the synagogue in Barbier's home, with detailed points of access.

The Belgian
director of Wackenhut at the time was Jean-Francis Calmette, a member of the WNP.[1308]
The parallel to the European "Strategy of Tension" is strikingly similar to the Oklahoma City bombing.

The U.S.

establishment, which has
sought to demonize the Patriot/Militia Movement in the aftermath of the attack, is following the exact same path that Gladio/P2 followed a
decade earlier.

Their links and associations to P2 (which will be detailed in Volume Two) make the parallel all the more ominous.

In 1994, a car-bomb blew up a Jewish community center in Buenos Aires, killing 87 people.

Police blamed the attack on unnamed Arab
militants.

Yet in July of 1996, Argentine authorities arrested 17 police officers in connection with the attack.[1309]
On October 3, 1980 the Paris synagogue on rue Copernic was bombed, killing four people and injuring 24 others.Police blamed the attack on unnamed Arab
militants.

Yet in July of 1996, Argentine authorities arrested 17 police officers in connection with the attack.[1309]
On October 3, 1980 the Paris synagogue on rue Copernic was bombed, killing four people and injuring 24 others.

In media reports
suspiciously similar to the Oklahoma City bombing, it was announced that "Right-wing" extremists were involved.

Yet French intelligence
pointed fingers at the Mossad.

One French Intelligence report stated:
On April 6, 1979, the same Mossad terror unit now suspected of the Copernicus carnage blew up the heavily guarded plant of CNIM
industries at La Seyne-sur-Mer, near Toulon, in southeast France, where a consortium of French firms was building a nuclear reactor for
Iraq.… The Mossad salted the site of the CNIM bomb blast with 'clues' followed up with anonymous phone calls to police — suggesting that
the sabotage was the work of a conservative environmentalist group….

Two years later, six people were killed and 22 injured when terrorists attacked Goldenberger's Deli in Paris.

Again, "Right-wing extremists"
were blamed.

Implicated in the attack was one Jean-Marc Rouillan, leader of a mysterious Left-wing group called Direct Action.

While the
real facts were being covered up by the government, angry French intelligence officers — some who had quit in disgust — decided to leak
the story to the Algerian National News Service.

Rouillan, it turns out, had been operating in the Mediterranean under the cover name of
"Sebas" and had been linked to the Mossad.[1310]
Illustrating the concept of trained killers who work on a "need-to-know" basis, former Mossad Agent Ari Ben-Menashe describes how Abu
Abbas launched an attack on the Greek Cruise ship Achille Lauro in 1985.While the
real facts were being covered up by the government, angry French intelligence officers — some who had quit in disgust — decided to leak
the story to the Algerian National News Service.

Rouillan, it turns out, had been operating in the Mediterranean under the cover name of
"Sebas" and had been linked to the Mossad.[1310]
Illustrating the concept of trained killers who work on a "need-to-know" basis, former Mossad Agent Ari Ben-Menashe describes how Abu
Abbas launched an attack on the Greek Cruise ship Achille Lauro in 1985.

According to Ben-Menashe, Rafi Eitan, the director of Lakam, a
super-secret agency in the Israeli Ministry of Defense, gave orders to former Jordanian Army Colonel Mohammed Radi Abdullah,[Libel - 1391]
who passed on instructions to Abu'l Abbas, leader of the Tunis-based PLF, who in turn was receiving millions from Israeli intelligence officers
posing as Sicilian dons.

Abbas' orders were to "make it look bad," and to show what a deadly, cutthroat bunch the Palestinians were." The
"terrorists" complied by killing Leon Klinghoffer, an elderly Jewish man in a wheelchair, then throwing his body overboard.

As Ben-Menashe
states, the entire operation was nothing more than an "Israeli 'black' propaganda operation."[1311]
Nidal began his long and bloody career in the PLO, only to become a bitter rival of Yasser Arafat.

It was a situation that the Israeli Mossad,
in a manner similar to their CIA cousins, would seek to exploit.

As Middle East expert Patrick Seale writes:
Israeli penetration of Palestinian organizations was common, but it was clearly not the whole story.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was a situation that the Israeli Mossad,
in a manner similar to their CIA cousins, would seek to exploit. As Middle East expert Patrick Seale writes:
Israeli penetration of Palestinian organizations was common, but it was clearly not the whole story. Most intelligence sources I consulted
agreed that it was standard practice to use penetration agents not simply to neutralize or destroy the enemy but to try to manipulate him so
that he did one's bidding without always being aware of doing so.…
Whatever jobs [Abu Nidal] might have done for Arab sponsors, and they had been numerous and nasty, he had done many other jobs from
which Israel alone appeared to benefit."[1312]
Confirming Seale's theory are top Middle East terrorism experts, including intelligence officers in Arab countries, and even within Abu Nidal's
own organization. One French terrorism expert stated: "If Abu Nidal himself is not an Israeli agent, then two or three of his senior people
most certainly are. Nothing else can explain some of his operations…"
A former senior Jordanian intelligence officer said: "Scratch around inside Abu Nidal's organization and you will find Mossad."
Backing up these reports was a former member of Abu Nidal's own Justice Committee, who told Seale that Mossad agents captured by Abu
Nidal were usually killed very quickly to prevent them from confessing their true motives. Abu Iyad, former chief of PLO Intelligence, added, "Every Palestinian who works in intelligence is convinced that Israel has a big hand in
Abu Nidal's affairs."[1313]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Nidal's organization has been responsible for some of the most brutal acts of terrorism in the world.

According to the State Department, Abu
Nidal has carried out more than 100 acts or terrorism that have resulted in the deaths of over 280 people.

Some of these attacks include the
1986 grenade and machine-gun assaults on El Al counters at the Rome and Vienna airports, attacks on synagogues, and assassinations of
Palestinian moderates.

He (Iyad) had told me that Abu Nidal's murdering Palestinian moderates was connected with [former Israeli Prime Minister] Begin's
determination never to negotiate with Palestinians for fear of losing the West Bank.

For Begin (who had once called the Palestinians "two-
legged animals" worthy of extinction), the moderates, who wanted to negotiate, were the real danger and had to be eliminated.

If the Israelis
had in fact infiltrated Abu Nidal's organization, perhaps some spymaster in Jerusalem had said, 'We've got someone who can do the job for
us.'
Abu Nidal's most well-known attack was on a Greek cruise ship in 1988 that left nine people dead and 80 wounded.

As Seale points out
regarding the attack on the vessel City of Poros, "no conceivable Palestinian or Arab interest was served by such random savagery." In fact,
Greece was the European country most sympathetic to the Palestinian cause, its prime minister, Andreas Papandreou, often defending
Arabs against Israel's charges of terrorism.

After the attack, Greece was furious with the Palestinians, who had damaged the Greek tourist
trade and hastened the fall of the Papandreou regime.

The motive, as in the Achille Lauro attack, was apparently to cast the Palestinians as
heartless murderers.

Several sources that Seale consulted were convinced the attack was a typical Mossad operation.[1314]
What is curious is that Israel has never punished Abu Nidal's organization.

Israel has a long-standing policy of launching immediate and
massive retaliation against any terrorist attack.Several sources that Seale consulted were convinced the attack was a typical Mossad operation.[1314]
What is curious is that Israel has never punished Abu Nidal's organization.

Israel has a long-standing policy of launching immediate and
massive retaliation against any terrorist attack.

While Israeli forces have bombed, shelled and raided Palestinian and Shi'ite positions in
Lebanon, and have sent hit teams to kill Palestinian guerrilla leaders in other countries, they have never attacked Abu Nidal.

Given Israel's
harsh and unrelenting policy of retribution against terrorist attacks, this seems more than a bit bizarre.

As Seale concludes:
Abu Nidal is a professional killer who has sold his deadly services certainly to the Arabs and perhaps to the Israelis as well.

His genius has
been to understand that states will commit any crime in the name of national interest.

A criminal like Abu Nidal can flourish doing their dirty
work.[1315]
Former DEA agent Mike Levine described how an organization called the "Triangle of Death," founded by Nazis, would blow up whole
planes to kill one person.

The organization, based in Paraguay, ran heroin and cocaine, and committed murders for the French Secret
Service.

"The quid pro quo agreement they had with the CIA and the French Secret Service," said Levine, "is that you protect us and we'll do
you favors.

And they did, and they got their protection.[1316]
One of the most recent examples of the use of "false flags" (scapegoats) was the November 4, 1995 assassination of Israeli Prime Minister
Yitzhak Rabin."The quid pro quo agreement they had with the CIA and the French Secret Service," said Levine, "is that you protect us and we'll do
you favors.

And they did, and they got their protection.[1316]
One of the most recent examples of the use of "false flags" (scapegoats) was the November 4, 1995 assassination of Israeli Prime Minister
Yitzhak Rabin.

In a classic case of political demonizing strikingly similar to the Oklahoma City bombing, the gunman, Yigal Amir, was held
out to be a "Right-wing fanatic." As William Jasper writes:
The alleged gunman, Yigal Amir, was said to be a "fanatic Jewish fundamentalist." What's more, we were told repeatedly, he was part of a
conspiracy of "religious extremists" — a conspiracy so nefarious and immense, mind you, that it had achieved meteorological significance,
creating a "climate of hate" and an "atmosphere of violence." According to Time magazine, Rabin's opponents had created climatologically
"the equivalent of the Right-wing milieu that led to the Oklahoma City bombing." In fact, said Time, even if Amir had acted alone, "he had
many ideational conspirators."[1317]
But unlike the massive cover-up obsfucating the Oklahoma City bombing, it didn't take long for investigators to discover that Amir was
actually a paid informant for the Israeli security service, the Shabak.

Amir had been inexplicably allowed through Rabin's protective security
perimeter, and his suspected accomplice — leader of the Right-wing extremist group Eyal, Avishai Raviv, turned out to be a Shin Bet
operative (General Security Service, the Israeli equivalent to the FBI).

Rabin's controversial peace talks with the Palestinians — which would have sacrificed significant amounts of land and compromised Israel's
security — had made him highly unpopular with Right-wing elements, including traditional Jews and many military officials.

In fact, Hamas
suicide bombers were wrecking havoc with Israel's population.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rabin's controversial peace talks with the Palestinians — which would have sacrificed significant amounts of land and compromised Israel's
security — had made him highly unpopular with Right-wing elements, including traditional Jews and many military officials. In fact, Hamas
suicide bombers were wrecking havoc with Israel's population. A writer in the Jerusalem Post wrote: "If Yizhak Rabin were alive .... he would
probably have been asked to resign."
The irony was that the Shin Bet was controlled by Rabin himself, who had personally selected its head, and served as its supreme chief. In a
policy suspiciously similar to the Oklahoma City situation, instead of employing the Shin Bet to protect Israelis from Arab terrorists — its
primary task — Rabin employed them to infiltrate and smear his Right-wing opponents. Politicizing the Shin Bet for his own purposes, Rabin
began orchestrating an Israeli version of COINTELPRO (the FBI's program of infiltrating and compromising the anti-war and New Left
movements of the 1960s and '70s, and which is going on today against the militias). This included setting up phony Right-wing militant
groups such as Raviv's Eyal. As Rabin's popularity ratings dropped to a mere 32 percent, he escalated his dirty-tricks campaign, using agents provocateur to attack and
smear the Prime Minister, who would then publicly criticize them for planning public disorder. Raviv's job was to distribute fervid "anti-
government literature" which contributed to the "climate of hate" that allegedly motivated Amir. The coup de etat in this covert campaign
would come in the form of a phony assassination attempt on Rabin himself. The Shin Bet would foil the gunman at the last moment, and all
the world would see first-hand evidence of the crazy Right-wing conspirators.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Yet, like the disastrous sting attempt in Oklahoma City, this covert operation went horribly wrong.

When Amir realized that his mentor, Raviv,
was a Shin Bet operative, he cleverly fed him false information.

Certain that the boastful and talkative Amir would inform his trusted mentor
of the moment of his attack (as the FBI assumed with Emad Salem in the World Trade Center bombing), the Shin Bet dropped their guard,
and Rabin paid the price for his mendacity.

At least that is what is obvious.

What is not obvious is why the Shin Bet, who not only controlled Raviv but had ample notice of the threat on
the Prime Minister's life, failed to prevent the assassination.

As authors Uri Dan and Dennis Eisenberg note: "No human shield was formed
around Rabin, surveillance of the crowd was lax, Rabin wasn't wearing a bullet-proof vest, and an [apparently] unknown 25-year-old was
able to gain unobstructed access to Rabin."[1318] The parallels to the Oklahoma City bombing are all too familiar.

Naturally, Prime Minister Shimon Peres, like his counterpart, President Clinton in regards to Oklahoma, would promote the idea that Rabin
was killed by a pair of disgruntled "Right-wingers.

And like his American counterpart, Peres promised to crack down on "political
dissent."[1319]
On his August 19, 1995 radio address, President Clinton complained that Congress still had not passed "his" Anti-Terrorism Bill.

"It's hard to
imagine what more must happen to convince Congress to pass that bill," Clinton warned, in the manner of an ominously veiled threat.

Then just two months later, on October 9, the nation witnessed its first attack on a passenger train, when Amtrak's "Sunset Limited" was
derailed while enroute from Phoenix to San Diego.

The derailment, caused by sabotage, resulted in over 100 injuries, including one death.Then just two months later, on October 9, the nation witnessed its first attack on a passenger train, when Amtrak's "Sunset Limited" was
derailed while enroute from Phoenix to San Diego.

The derailment, caused by sabotage, resulted in over 100 injuries, including one death.

The terrorists left behind a cryptic note, calling themselves the "Sons of the Gestapo." The mainstream press quickly jumped on this latest
"terrorist" attack, coming as it did only six months after the Oklahoma City bombing.

While no one, including law-enforcement officials, had
ever heard of the "Sons of the Gestapo," the purveyors of deception immediately played it up as the obvious work of a "Right-wing" militia
group.

FBI officials were more cautious however, speculating that the attack may have been the result of a "disgruntled employee." Exhaustive
searches through numerous data-bases revealed no group called "Sons of the Gestapo," and only someone with the technical knowledge
necessary to disable a warning system on a railroad track would be capable of executing such a stunt.

It may not have mattered however.

In the aftermath of the Oklahoma City bombing, any such attack on American citizens would be excuse
enough to push the Anti-Terrorism Bill through Congress.

And the press and anti-militia activists such as the ADL and the SPLC were eager
to jump on the militia connection.

"Sons of the Gestapo," they asserted, could only be the pseudonym for a Right-wing hate-group.

Yet law-enforcement officials had only an enigmatic message to guide them.

The note left behind by the saboteurs rallied against the ATF
and FBI for their actions at Waco and Ruby Ridge, and stated, "This is not Nazi Germany."
Why anyone would attack a passenger train to exact revenge on government officials for killing innocent civilians (or blow up babies as
revenge for killing children) is beyond credulity.Yet law-enforcement officials had only an enigmatic message to guide them.

The note left behind by the saboteurs rallied against the ATF
and FBI for their actions at Waco and Ruby Ridge, and stated, "This is not Nazi Germany."
Why anyone would attack a passenger train to exact revenge on government officials for killing innocent civilians (or blow up babies as
revenge for killing children) is beyond credulity.

Yet, as in the Oklahoma City case, this was the message that the saboteurs — and the
government-controlled press — wanted us to believe.

America was filled with hateful Right-wing extremists who would do anything — kill
anyone, women, children, babies — to pursue their violent anti-government agenda.

As Attorney General Janet Reno announced in the Oklahoma City case, so the local U.S.

Attorney, Janet Napolitano would declare: "We are
going to pursue every bit of evidence and every lead very thoroughly… until we find the person or persons who committed this crime."[1320]
While the FBI swarmed through Maricopa County, interrogating local residents and harassing the few isolated "desert rats" who inhabited
the surrounding countryside, a real investigation was being conducted by a lone Maricopa County Sheriff.

With the assistance of Craig
Roberts, a retired Tulsa police officer with military intelligence experience who worked on the Oklahoma City investigation, the Sheriff was
able to uncover some amazing information.

What they found was that other than rescue vehicles, there were no vehicle tracks entering or exiting the crash site.

Moreover, the site itself
was extremely remote, being near the summit of the rugged Gila Bend Mountains, which surrounded the site to the east, north, and west.

It
was there, along a sharp S-curve, that the perpetrators had pulled 29 spikes from the tracks, causing the fatal crash.

Why had the perpetrators chosen such a remote location, Roberts wondered?--- PAGE BREAK ---

It
was there, along a sharp S-curve, that the perpetrators had pulled 29 spikes from the tracks, causing the fatal crash. Why had the perpetrators chosen such a remote location, Roberts wondered? Had they picked a more accessible spot, he reasoned, it
would have surely lessened their chances of being caught, as all they would have had to do was drive to the nearest highway. In this case,
the nearest road was Highway 8, 38 miles away, necessitating a difficult drive over rugged terrain, at the same time as law-enforcement
officers would surely be on a heightened state of alert. What Roberts and his sheriff partner also discovered was that 90 minutes away by air, in Pinal County, was a mysterious air-base known as
Marana. The locked-down facility was owned by Evergreen, Inc., a government contractor reportedly involved in drug smuggling during the
Iran-Contra period. The base, located off of Highway 10 between Phoenix and Tucson, was the site of strange night-time training maneuvers
involving black and unmarked military-type helicopters. Passersby had also witnessed black-clad troops dropping into the desert en mass,
using steerable black "Paracommander" parachutes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---This began to raise some interesting possibilities.

Had the perpetrators been dropped into the site by air, then picked up by chopper?

Both
Roberts and his colleague at the Sheriff's Department were experienced military pilots.

They observed that it would have been easy for a
helicopter to fly low through the mountain passes, avoiding radar, and insert and extract a team.

As Roberts noted, "A full moon, wind out of
the south at 8 knots, and a clear sky… would be an ideal night for air operations."[1321]
The possibilities of a covert paramilitary commando team being responsible for the attack raised more than a few eyebrows at the Maricopa
County Sheriff's Department, until they began investigating a lead provided by a sympathetic FBI agent that several hikers had seen a small
group of parachuters drop into the desert that night.

They also discovered the following information:
…a VFR target squawking 1200 that left Tri-City airfield in Albuquerque on a southwest course, climbed to 10,500 feet, then, when it was
exactly due east of the Amtrak site, turn due west and flew a course line that took it one mile south of the site.

But just before arriving over
the site, it dropped to 8,500 feet.

After crossing the target zone, it turned on a southwesterly course towards California at 8,500 feet.

Albuquerque contacted the Los Angeles Center which tracked the aircraft to a landing at Montgomery Field in San Diego.… It crossed the
valley south of the bridge at 1940 hours (7:40 p.m.)
Since the winds that night were at 8 knots out of the south, a drop one mile from the target site would compensate for wind drift.

Moreover,
such a flight is not required to file a flight plan listing its passengers, and an aircraft flying out of Albuquerque, squawking on transponder
1200 wouldn't look particularly suspicious.

When they checked with the refueler at Montgomery Field, the records indicated that the "N" number checked to a Beachcraft, registered to
Raytheon.Moreover,
such a flight is not required to file a flight plan listing its passengers, and an aircraft flying out of Albuquerque, squawking on transponder
1200 wouldn't look particularly suspicious.

When they checked with the refueler at Montgomery Field, the records indicated that the "N" number checked to a Beachcraft, registered to
Raytheon.

Raytheon owns E-systems.

Like Evergreen, E-Systems, based in Greenville, Texas, is a covert government contractor, reportedly
involved in drug-running.

The NSA contractor allegedly developed sophisticated systems to create electronic "holes" which would allow
planes to cross the border without tripping the NORAD Early Warning Systems.

E-Systems, which is reputed to have "wet-
teams" (assassination teams), was directed by former NSA Director and CIA Deputy Director Bobby Ray Inman.

While it is possible a jump was made from the twin-engine Beechcraft, a plane commonly used for such purposes, it still left the problem of
the team's extraction.

With the radar track information, the Maricopa Sheriff then went to the Air Force at Yuma, who monitor the Aerostat
radar drug balloons.

The DEA balloons have "look-down" capability for detecting low-flying aircraft.

The Master Sergeant at Yuma agreed to
help out.

A short time later he called back.

"Sorry," he said.

"We can't help you out."
"What?

Why?" asked Jack.

"The plug's been pulled."
"What does that mean?"
The sergeant sounded very uncomfortable when he replied.

"We really wanted to check this out, but all I can say is the balloons were down
that night."
"Why?" asked Jack.

"Maintenance."
"All of them?" asked Jack, incredulously.

"Yes, sir." The sergeant sounded very nervous.

"Why?"
"All I can tell you is that they were ordered down for maintenance.

It came from above my pay grade."
One has to wonder what "above my pay grade" means.

Why would all the balloons be ordered down for maintenance?

Obviously, a cover-
up was in progress.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Why would all the balloons be ordered down for maintenance? Obviously, a cover-
up was in progress. It was beginning to sound suspiciously like the hurried demolition of the Oklahoma Federal Building, to prevent any independent forensic
analysis of the bomb site. Or the Secret Service removing President Kennedy's protective bubble from his limousine; failing to secure the
windows and rooftops along the parade route; and changing the route at the last minute. Like the two foregoing examples, only the government — or shadow elements within the government — had the capability of pulling that off. No "lone nut" or criminal syndicate could order such last-minute changes, or orchestrate such a massive and well-executed cover-up. Moreover, no militia group could order all the radar balloons down on the night of the attack.

--- PAGE BREAK ---As a Maricopa County resident stated to the Arizona Republic regarding the FBI's so-called militia theory, "Buddy, you can't get three people
out here to get together on what kind of pickup to drive, and you think we're going to form a militia?"
Obviously, no militia would benefit from such an attack.

And what about the "Sons of the Gestapo?" As Roberts wrote: "…as an old
Southeast Asia hand (a marine sniper during Vietnam), I remember that one of the terms used by Phoenix Program assassins working under
MACV-SOG (Military Advisory Command, Studies and Observations Group) was a twisted bar-room version of the last acronym.

"Yeah," a
drunk trooper would mention.

"I'm SOG… a son of the Gestapo."[1322]
The Phoenix assassination program, as previously discussed, was organized by the CIA's William Colby, Ted Shackley, and fielded by
General John Singlaub.

Singlaub commanded Second Lieutenant Oliver North.

Shackley, Singlaub, and North would go on to orchestrate
the secret and illegal Iran-Contra operation, smuggling drugs into this country at such places as Mena, Arkansas… and Marana.[1323]
Curiously, whenever Iran-Contra drug shipments came in for the California run, the drug balloons under "Operation Watchtower" were shut
down.

Could this be the same mechanism that shut them down the night of the attack?

Then, in September of 1997, a confidential FBI memo intended for the U.S.

Attorney's Office in Phoenix was accidentally faxed to the
Arizona Republic, the Associated Press, and other news media.

The memo states that the FBI's prime suspect is "a man with law
enforcement and firefighting experience who recently moved out of Arizona."[1324]
Apparently, the "Sons of the Gestapo" note left behind was a "false flag," a distraction designed to serve a political purpose.

In this case, that
purpose — like the Oklahoma bombing which preceded it — was to connect the Amtrak attack with the Patriot/Militia movement.The memo states that the FBI's prime suspect is "a man with law
enforcement and firefighting experience who recently moved out of Arizona."[1324]
Apparently, the "Sons of the Gestapo" note left behind was a "false flag," a distraction designed to serve a political purpose.

In this case, that
purpose — like the Oklahoma bombing which preceded it — was to connect the Amtrak attack with the Patriot/Militia movement.

Considering
the reaction of the mainstream press, it appears they have largely succeeded.

Interestingly, the same year as the Oklahoma City bombing, a grenade exploded near the Citibank building in Manila.

Another hit the Shell
Petroleum building.

Four people were injured.

The military claimed the blasts were political statements from the leftist Alex Boncayao
Brigade (ABB).[1325] Yet five Philippine Congressmen accused the military of carrying out the attack to justify the passage of anti-terrorism
legislation.

The strongest accusation came from Makati Congressman Joker Arroyo, who said the bombings could not have been staged by the
insurrectionary group, the Alex Boncayao Brigade or bank robbers.

"I don't think it is the ABB nor a bank robbery group as what the police investigators said.

Only the military has the capability of using
grenade launchers," Arroyo commented.[1326]
The U.S.

certainly had its own share of manufactured incidents, ranging from the sinking of the Lustitania to the Gulf of Tonkin incident.

Yet
in the recent annals of CIA-connected provocations, probably no better example exists than the 1985 bombing of the La Belle Discotheque.

The April 5th attack in Berlin killed two U.S.

servicemen and a Turkish woman, and left 200 others injured, including 50 G.I.s.

Lybia was quickly blamed by the U.S.

for the attack.

Propagandized by the American press as the preeminent sponsor of terrorism, Lybia
had early on incurred the wrath of the U.S.

by attempting to throw off the yoke of British and U.S.

imperialism.by attempting to throw off the yoke of British and U.S.

imperialism.

Libyan President Muammar al-
Qaddafi, who came to power in 1969, nationalized oil production and shut down U.S.

military bases.

Qaddafi began using the wealth
formerly exported to multinational corporations to improve the living standards of his own people.

Huge strides were made in education,
housing, medicine and agriculture in a county in which the literacy rate had increased tenfold since 1969.

While actually having the gall to
defer to his own people instead of the multinationals, Qaddafi made the mistake of supporting national liberation and social justice
movements — assisting such groups as the Sandinistas, the Basques, the Kurds, and the Palestinians.[1327] This, unfortunately, also
included such terrorists as Abu Nidal.

In 1980, Ronald Reagan came to power on a pledge to restore U.S.

military might and prestige around the world (and also by making a deal
with the Iranians to hold the hostages until after his election.

This little scandal was known as "October Surprise.").

He had also pledged to combat terrorism (apparently, terrorism sponsored by Reagan in Nicaragua and El Salvador was exempt from such
a pledge), and on the top of his hit-list was Libya.

One of Reagan's first acts was to order the CIA to destabilize, overthrow, and assassinate
Qaddafi.

The attempts not only failed, but resulted in a covert battle of nerves and dead bodies scattered across Europe.

After Abu Nidal's
attacks on the Rome and Vienna airports in December of 1986, Reagan imposed sanctions and asset freezes on Libya.[1328] Still this was
not enough for the man who had pledged to vanquish terrorism from the face of the earth (or at least certain parts of it).

Angry over the recent terrorist bombings, frustrated by the CIA's failure to eliminate Qaddafi, and still smarting from Israeli rumors of a
Libyan hit-squad sent to assassinate him, the President opted for a military-style assault.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After Abu Nidal's
attacks on the Rome and Vienna airports in December of 1986, Reagan imposed sanctions and asset freezes on Libya.[1328] Still this was
not enough for the man who had pledged to vanquish terrorism from the face of the earth (or at least certain parts of it). Angry over the recent terrorist bombings, frustrated by the CIA's failure to eliminate Qaddafi, and still smarting from Israeli rumors of a
Libyan hit-squad sent to assassinate him, the President opted for a military-style assault. All the White House needed was an excuse, and
this came in the form of an attack on the La Belle Discotheque. Nine days later, Reagan ordered U.S. planes to attack the Libyan cities of
Tripoli and Benghazi, which resulted in over 37 dead, including Qaddafi's infant daughter. Unfortunately for Reagan, Qaddafi survived the
attack.[1329]

--- PAGE BREAK ---But had Lybia actually bombed the disco?

The White House was adamant.

The National Security Agency (NSA) had intercepted coded
exchanges between Tripoli and the East Berlin Libyan Peoples Bureau that purportedly said, "We have something that will make you happy."
A second cable, hours after the bombing read, "An event occurred.

You will be pleased with the result."[1330] What is interesting is that under
orders from the NSC, the raw coded intercepts were sent straight to the White House, bypassing normal NSA analysis channels, drawing
criticism from at least one NSA officer.

A West German intelligence official who later saw the cables, said they were "very critical and
skeptical" of U.S.

intelligence blaming the Libyans.[1331]
The U.S.'s evidence hinged on reports in Stassi (East German police) files passed on to West German officials.

The Stassi reports, based
on three separate informants, indicated the attack was planned by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command
(PFLP-GC), which had met in Tripoli a month earlier.

A member of that group, living in Berlin, Youddeff Chraidi (code-named "Nuri"), had
carried out the attack.

Yet the "Libya did it" theory quickly fell apart during the trial of Imad Mahmoud, another member of Nuri's group (Nuri could not be found), as
the Stassi informants' contradictions and inconsistencies cast doubts on the case.

Moreover, one informant, Mahmoud Abu-Jabber (code
named "Faysal") was, according to KGB files, a CIA informer.

One KGB report indicated that Faysal had met with his CIA contact two days
prior to the attack, and told them the price of the bombing would be $30,000, and not $80,000 as previously agreed.[1332]
Stassi defector Colonel Frank Weigand, based on a PLO Security Report, concluded that Nuri was an agent for the West German police.Moreover, one informant, Mahmoud Abu-Jabber (code
named "Faysal") was, according to KGB files, a CIA informer.

One KGB report indicated that Faysal had met with his CIA contact two days
prior to the attack, and told them the price of the bombing would be $30,000, and not $80,000 as previously agreed.[1332]
Stassi defector Colonel Frank Weigand, based on a PLO Security Report, concluded that Nuri was an agent for the West German police.

Other evidence which seemed to back this up was that while Nuri was wanted for the murder of a Libyan CIA informer, he managed to
repeatedly cross Checkpoint Charlie (the East-West Berlin border crossing), one of the most tightly-guarded border crossings in the world.

When German authorities finally located Nuri in Lebanon in 1994, U.S.

officials failed to provide the evidence needed to extradite him,
despite repeated pleas by West German officials.[1333]
Ultimately, West German officials concluded that the CIA was responsible for the bombing.

Weigand recalled one phone conversation intercept where a high-ranking West German intelligence officer spoke with the Berlin official
responsible for the La Belle investigation.

According to Weigand, the investigator, when pressed for his conclusion, told the West German
spook, "Well, when I add it all up, I think the Yanks did this thing themselves."[1334]
Weigand also cited a PLO Security Report indicating that the U.S.

knew in advance of the late March bombing of the German-Arab Society.

The implications of this, like those of the Oklahoma City attack, were that authorities knew about the bombing beforehand, and failed to stop
it.

While Nuri may have ultimately been responsible for the bombing, the question of who he was working for hung over the case like a dark
cloud.

As Weigand said.While Nuri may have ultimately been responsible for the bombing, the question of who he was working for hung over the case like a dark
cloud.

As Weigand said.

"I never could get [the CIA thesis] off the table, and you know, the one theory does not exclude the other."
A similar government-orchestrated outrage-incident was the Octopus' 1985 plot to bomb the American embassy and presidential offices in
Costa Rica as a pretext for a full-scale U.S.

invasion of Nicaragua.

The plan was an offshoot of Operation Pegasus, the CIA's program of
political assassinations, similar to the Phoenix Program.

The conspiracy was akin to the many American-engineered provocations of the past.

The U.S.

— through the skullduggery of the CIA —
would bomb their own embassy, cleverly blaming it on the Sandinistas.

Civilian Military Assistance (CMA) leader Tom Posey and his band of mercenaries — Steven Carr, Robert Thompson, Rene Corvo, and
Costa Rican-American land-owners John Hull and Bruce Jones — arranged for a patriotic Cuban-American, Jesus Garcia, to take part in the
plot.

According to Leslie Cockburn (Out of Control ) Posey showed Garcia the blueprints of the embassy.

"They came to me with a plan to hit
the American embassy in Costa Rica," recalls Garcia.

"They had an idea this would start a war between Nicaragua and the United States."
In addition to bombing the embassy, they were to "take out" the American ambassador, Lewis Tambs, a vocal opponent of the Colombian/
Contra cocaine trade, and collect the $1 million reward that the Ochoa clan had placed on his head.

The CIA-led group, which had been
funding their covert operations through arms and drug trafficking, would solve the problem of an American official who had dared interfere
with their profitable business, while at the same time, serving the lofty goals of U.S.

foreign policy.[1335]
According to CMA mercenary Jack Terrell, the plan was to place C-4 in a light-box outside the embassy and detonate it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The CIA-led group, which had been
funding their covert operations through arms and drug trafficking, would solve the problem of an American official who had dared interfere
with their profitable business, while at the same time, serving the lofty goals of U.S. foreign policy.[1335]
According to CMA mercenary Jack Terrell, the plan was to place C-4 in a light-box outside the embassy and detonate it. When Tambs ran
outside, he would be shot. A Nicaraguan would then be killed and fake documents placed on his person to incriminate the Sandinistas.[1336]
While Garcia refused to participate in the plot, he recalled, "The embassy plan was blessed from the White House. There were too many big
people involved in this. In order to hit a U.S. embassy even us Cubans who are here in Miami would normally out of courtesy notify the CIA."
Considering the players involved, it appeared that the CIA knew fully well of the plot, as it drew members from Brigade 2506, Ted Shackley's
old JM/WAVE anti-Castro Cuban mercenary group.[1337]
A second plot designed to draw the U.S. into the war involved the bombing of Los Chiles, a small town along the border of Costa Rica. The
plan was to use a plane painted to look like a Sandinista craft to drop bombs on the unarmed townspeople. Terrell described it as a
"continuous undercurrent of… really terrorist activity to try to draw the United States Government into direct conflict with the Nicaraguans

--- PAGE BREAK ---because they were to be made to look like they were committing overt acts against a neutral and unarmed country, Costa Rica."[1338]
Garcia later learned that another hit was planned, this time on the Cuban and Soviet embassies in Nicaragua.

The plan was proposed to
Garcia by Major Alan Saum, a confederate of Posey's and General Vernon Walters, U.S.

ambassador to the UN and former Deputy Director
of the CIA.

As Garcia later testified in court, "Saum had come from the White House." Saum told Garcia the plan was "Vice-President Bush's
baby."
While neither plot was carried out, the Octopus did manage to successfully murder eight people, mostly reporters, at La Penca, Costa Rica
on May 30, 1984.

The target was Eden Pastora, a Contra leader who wasn't going along with the plan, and was about to announce his
misgivings at a press conference.

CIA Deputy Director Dewy Clarridge had recently relayed a message to Pastora through Alfonso Robelo
(who had previously met with Bud McFarlane at the White House) that his story would be "stopped" if he did not acquiesce.[1339]
The bombing was carried out by Amac Galil, who posed as a photographer, carrying a bomb inside a camera case.

CIA "hit-man" Felipe
Vidal told Terrell that Galil was a Mossad agent.

He allegedly received his explosives training from John Harper, and his C-4 courtesy of
John Hull.

Vidal also told Terrell, "…we put a bomb under him and it didn't work because of bad timing."
As Terrell later stated: "…if anything happens to these people, whether they were carrying out directly or indirectly any plan of our
government, it's easy to be at arm's length and have this great big beautiful deniability factor."[1340]
Naturally, the Washington Post and New York Times blamed the bombing on the Sandinistas.[1341][1342]
Yet Garcia knew better.

"There are people here who are above the Constitution," recalled Garcia.

"I didn't know the federal system was like
this."There are people here who are above the Constitution," recalled Garcia.

"I didn't know the federal system was like
this.

I never dreamed."[1343]
Garcia was eventually set up by Saum on a federal gun charge, he figured, either because he refused to go along with the first plot, or
simply because of his knowledge of it.[1344]
John Mattes, Garcia's defense lawyer, while investigating Garcia's story, began uncovering North and Casey's twisted web of gun and drug
smuggling.

While Mattes was eager to present the evidence in court, he never got the chance.

The "Justice" Department, which initially
started a probe, suddenly switched tracks.

They "weren't interested" in going any further with it, Mattes said.

He and his investigator were
later called into the U.S.

Attorney's office in Miami and told, "Get out.

You're out.

Stay out.

You've crossed the line.

You've gone too
far." (The U.S.

Attorney threatened the public defender with "obstructing justice.")[1345]
During testimony, Saum admitted that he had operated "under orders" to bring about Garcia's arrest.

Saum's wife told Cockburn that he was
working for the CIA.

Terrell would eventually express his misgivings to the press.

As he writes in Disposable Patriot:
During an operation, the gravity of what you are doing is obscured by the determination to do whatever it is you have been programmed to
do.

If you whack a bunch of people, blow up cars or hotels, or murder children, it doesn't make any difference.

Something in your character
sets you apart from normal people, and once it's trained and propagandized to where you start believing what people are telling you, you
lose your sense of right and wrong, and in some cases, your sense of morality.If you whack a bunch of people, blow up cars or hotels, or murder children, it doesn't make any difference.

Something in your character
sets you apart from normal people, and once it's trained and propagandized to where you start believing what people are telling you, you
lose your sense of right and wrong, and in some cases, your sense of morality.

In the end, when the veil of perceived sanction is lifted and
you no longer have the protection of the invisible barrier that justifies all your actions, then those unspeakable acts committed in the name of
freedom and democracy, come back in a more objective retrospect.

Finally, you understand the impact.

You say to yourself, did I do that?

Usually, you did.[1346]
Former CIA officer Victor Marchetti discovered this unfortunate truth long ago.

As Marchetti writes in The CIA and the Cult of Intelligence:
The "clandestine mentality" is a mind-set that thrives on secrecy and deception.

It encourages professional amorality — the belief that
righteous goals can be achieved through the use of unprincipled and normally unacceptable means.

Thus, the cult's leaders must
tenaciously guard their official actions from public view.

To do otherwise would restrict their ability to act independently; it would permit the
American people to pass judgment on not only the utility of their policies, but the ethics of those policies as well.…
Finally, there was the blatantly uninhibited statement of former OSS Colonel George White, one of the original founders of the CIA:
"I toiled wholeheartedly in the vineyards because it was fun, fun, fun.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thus, the cult's leaders must
tenaciously guard their official actions from public view. To do otherwise would restrict their ability to act independently; it would permit the
American people to pass judgment on not only the utility of their policies, but the ethics of those policies as well.…
Finally, there was the blatantly uninhibited statement of former OSS Colonel George White, one of the original founders of the CIA:
"I toiled wholeheartedly in the vineyards because it was fun, fun, fun. Where else could a red-blooded American boy lie, kill, cheat, rape and
pillage with the blessings of all the highest?"[1347]
Ten years later the Octopus would demonstrate similar ethics by bombing the Federal Building in Oklahoma, taking out two potential whistle-
blowers in the process — Secret Service agents Alan Whicher and Mickey Maroney, while blaming it on Timothy James McVeigh — a
"disposable patriot."

--- PAGE BREAK ---Were Whicher and Maroney — like Gannon and McKee — a "strong secondary target?" As HUD employee Jane Graham said, "Maybe
there was a sting within a sting… to eliminate agents who knew too much."
Whicher formerly served on the White House detail, and was reportedly involved in a little-known incident involving electronic bugging of the
White House by the Japanese.

Whicher was subsequently transferred to the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.[1348]
It was also rumored that the Secret Service agent had talked to his wife just minutes before the blast, telling her that he had to get off the
phone because he was told to wait for an important call.

Apparently… that call never came.

Maroney served on Clinton's presidential campaign and transition detail, and told friend and bombing survivor V.Z.

Lawton about some of
the many Clinton-related improprieties he witnessed.

Maroney, described by Lawton as a "Christian person" and a "super guy," said that the
Clinton's were "two of the most foul-mouthed… low-lifes" he had ever been around.

In one humorous incident, he recalled how Hillary threw
an ashtray at Bill, only to miss and have it strike a Secret Service Agent (who no doubt courageously threw himself between the President
and the deadly ashtray).

One has to wonder however if Maroney witnessed more than just obscene word play.[1349][1350]
Yet perhaps most interestingly, it was rumored that one of the charges that destroyed the Murrah Building was beneath the Secret Service
office.

This possibility became all the more apparent when The Daily Oklahoman recently reported that a warning call was placed to an
answering service several days before the bombing, claiming that an explosive charge was placed inside the Secret Service office:
…Vance DeWoody, owner of Opal's Answering Service, and his employee, Pat Houser… received an anonymous telephone call saying that
a bomb was going to go off in the office of the U.S.One has to wonder however if Maroney witnessed more than just obscene word play.[1349][1350]
Yet perhaps most interestingly, it was rumored that one of the charges that destroyed the Murrah Building was beneath the Secret Service
office.

This possibility became all the more apparent when The Daily Oklahoman recently reported that a warning call was placed to an
answering service several days before the bombing, claiming that an explosive charge was placed inside the Secret Service office:
…Vance DeWoody, owner of Opal's Answering Service, and his employee, Pat Houser… received an anonymous telephone call saying that
a bomb was going to go off in the office of the U.S.

Secret Service on the ninth floor of the Murrah Building.…[1351]
Opal's Answering Service… has a contract with the Secret Service.

It seems the deaths of Whicher and Maroney can be added to the growing list of approximately 40 victims involved with or knowledgeable of
Clinton's financial, extra-marital, and drug-related activities at Mena, Arkansas who have met violent and untimely deaths.

The murders of Whicher and Maroney also have ominous parallels to the deaths of Major Charles McKee and Agent Matthew Gannon
aboard Pan Am flight 103.

Describing how an organization might blow up an airplane or a building to kill one or two people, former DEA Agent Mike Levine says: "Once
you arrange a death, once you employ one of these organizations that do this sort of thing, it's out of your control."[1352]
The deaths of Whicher and Maroney also meant two less witnesses to testify about the Octopus' drug-running and related skull-duggery.

While scratching that itch, the Octopus managed to remove sensitive files, conceivably implicating it in its illegal and murderous activities.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Describing how an organization might blow up an airplane or a building to kill one or two people, former DEA Agent Mike Levine says: "Once
you arrange a death, once you employ one of these organizations that do this sort of thing, it's out of your control."[1352]
The deaths of Whicher and Maroney also meant two less witnesses to testify about the Octopus' drug-running and related skull-duggery. While scratching that itch, the Octopus managed to remove sensitive files, conceivably implicating it in its illegal and murderous activities. Finally, with the destruction of the Oklahoma City Federal Building, the Federal Government could point to a new "terrorist threat" in our
midst, while effectively halting political dissent, and successfully arguing for a whole new spate of laws and regulations that threaten to do
away with what little freedoms Americans have left. Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---15
Let Them Eat O.J.

["All men will see what you seem to be; only a few will know what you are, and those few will not dare to oppose the many
who have the majesty of the state on their side to defend them."
— Niccolo Machiavelli, 1532 A.D.]
McVeigh is sentenced to death.

We are all saved.

Anyone who believes this is brain dead and deserves the consequences.

Lies beget new lies.

Crimes beget new crimes.

Murder begets new murder.

Nothing has changed in people's thinking in five thousand years.

If there is a blood sacrifice for
the gods, all is well.

The rule of ritual blood sacrifice is supplanting the rule of law, due process and constitutional rights under
the rubric of "victims' rights." The regression to social barbarism is matched by individual regression to infantile magical
thinking and The Lord of the Flies is the ultimate destination.[1353]
On June 2, 1997, Timothy McVeigh was convicted of all 11 counts in the federal indictment: eight counts of murdering federal agents, and
one count each of possessing a weapon of mass destruction; of conspiring to use a weapon of mass destruction; and of destroying federal
property with a weapon of mass destruction.

The sentence was death by lethal injection.

In the trial, which was hailed as "brilliant," "textbook," and "close to perfect" by government legal pundits, prosecutors presented largely
circumstantial evidence combined with emotional tales from bombing victims, and won immediate convictions.

In the last murder "trial of the century," prosecutors displayed an impressive array of hard, solid evidence against former football star O.J.

Simpson and were met with acquittal.[1354]
Federal prosecutors introduced no witnesses who could have placed McVeigh in Oklahoma City on April 19… because McVeigh was always
seen in the company of other suspects — a can of worms the government, and the defense, could not afford to open.In the last murder "trial of the century," prosecutors displayed an impressive array of hard, solid evidence against former football star O.J.

Simpson and were met with acquittal.[1354]
Federal prosecutors introduced no witnesses who could have placed McVeigh in Oklahoma City on April 19… because McVeigh was always
seen in the company of other suspects — a can of worms the government, and the defense, could not afford to open.

Yet while prosecutors
interspersed relatively circumstantial evidence with heart-wrenching and completely irrelevant tales from tearful bombing victims, the
defense wasn't allowed to present any expert witnesses debunking the government's "single bomb" theory, or any evidence linking other
suspects to the crime!

Finally, just one month before the start of McVeigh's trial, the Dallas Morning News "leaked" alleged documentation that McVeigh had
"admitted" to a defense team member Richard Reyna that he alone drove the Ryder truck to the Alfred P.

Murrah Building (hardly a credible
assertation at this point).

Like the startling revelations of McVeigh's racing fuel purchases a year and-a-half after the fact, this well-timed ruse
was engineered to resuscitate the government's rapidly deteriorating case.

While Jones' superbly crafted and highly revealing Writ of Mandamus barely registered a blip on the official radar screen of the mainstream
press, McVeigh's highly dubious "confession" became the immediate focus of tabloid attention.

In documents recently discovered by the National Globe, it was learned that Lee Harvey Oswald made a "confession" to Dallas Police on
November 22, in which he states that he, a) Acted alone; b) Had no ties with any mob or intelligence organizations; and c) Was mad at the
President and wanted to make a political statement.

"That should put this controversy to rest for all time," said former president and Warren Commission member Gerald Ford.

Lee Harvey Oswald didn't live to tell the truth.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"That should put this controversy to rest for all time," said former president and Warren Commission member Gerald Ford. Lee Harvey Oswald didn't live to tell the truth. Timothy McVeigh chose not to speak it. Yet, as Stephen Jones noted, if McVeigh dies, the
truth may die with him. While Judge Richard Matsch bared much of the relevant evidence pertaining to the case, he permitted numerous victims' completely
irrelevant testimony about their personal trauma, obviously designed to sway the emotions of an ignorant and confused jury. Matsch also barred ATF informant Carol Howe's testimony as "irrelevant," saying that it "would confuse or mislead the jury." Howe's

--- PAGE BREAK ---attorney, Clark Brewster, said his client could have given "compelling testimony in support of a potential conspiracy theory."
The trial was also one of the most secretive ever held.

According to the Associated Press, a "review of 1,000 documents filed between Feb.

20 and Sept.

5 found 75 percent of the records have been at least partially sealed."[1355]
Given the mainstream media's largely acquiescent attitude towards the government's fairy tale, it would hardly have mattered.

One of the
most important and revealing documents in the case, McVeigh's Writ of Mandamus, was dismissed as a concoction of conspiracy theories
designed to cast doubt on McVeigh's guilt.

Judge Matsch would have no part of "conspiracy theories." He ordered all important exhibits of
McVeigh's Writ sealed.

While Jones and the government both decided that McVeigh couldn't receive a fair trial in Oklahoma, critics argued that the case was moved
to Denver to put it under the careful control of federal lap-dog Richard Matsch.

In one of the most controversial environmental cases ever,
Matsch used a one-sided hearing to brush aside charges that radioactive contamination from the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant near
Denver was adversely undermining the health of area residents.

A Nixon appointee, Matsch also presided over the Silverado Savings and Loan case, involving George Bush's son Neil — a case thick with
dirty covert operatives and shady criminals linked to the CIA and the Iran-Contra operation.

Bush walked.[1356]
McVeigh's defense lasted little more than a week.

In that regard the trial was little different than the trial of the surviving Branch Davidians,
who were not allowed to introduce evidence that they had acted in self-defense.Bush walked.[1356]
McVeigh's defense lasted little more than a week.

In that regard the trial was little different than the trial of the surviving Branch Davidians,
who were not allowed to introduce evidence that they had acted in self-defense.

The superficial two day defense, presented after weeks of
bogus evidence presented by the government, resulted from Judge Smith who said he would not allow the defense to "put the government
on trial." Yet in fact several jurors expressed their opinions that the government should have been on trial — not the surviving Branch
Davidians.

While he wasn't allowed to introduce evidence of a broader conspiracy, Jones did spend considerable time focusing on the disembodied leg,
clothed in camouflage military garb, found amid the rubble of the Federal Building.

Jones introduced expert testimony that such a leg could be left intact from a blast that disintegrated the remaining body.

It was this leg,
which wasn't matched to any other victim, Jones suggested, that belonged to the real bomber.

Yet Judge Matsch wasn't about to allow Jones reveal his knowledge of a wider plot, as was portrayed in his Writ of Mandamus:
The theory of the prosecution in this case, not the Grand Jury's theory, is that the two named Defendants constructed a simple device
capable of toppling a nine-story building at a public fishing lake and that one of them transported this device over two hundred miles without
blowing himself up.

That is the heart of the prosecution's case.

Any evidence concerning the participation of others, the complexity of the
device, or foreign involvement takes away the heart of the government's case and there is therefore an institutional interest on the part of the
government in keeping such evidence shielded from the defense and the public.That is the heart of the prosecution's case.

Any evidence concerning the participation of others, the complexity of the
device, or foreign involvement takes away the heart of the government's case and there is therefore an institutional interest on the part of the
government in keeping such evidence shielded from the defense and the public.

Some critics argued that Jones' decision to wait until one week before the start of his client's trial to file the important and revealing
document ensured that the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals would reject the motion.[1357]
Other, such as prominent "Patriot" attorney Nancy Lord, insisted that Jones "should have violated the judge's order, presented evidence of a
larger conspiracy to the jury, and gone to jail for contempt.

If I would have been the defense attorney, some things are important enough to
go to jail for," Lord said.

"I am shocked at Stephen Jones' conduct in this case."
An attorney on Jones' legal team rated his defense as "no better than a C-minus," although he added, "I think he had some high-points."[1358]
As Jones solemnly stated in November of 1995, "Some day, when you know what I know and what I have learned, and that day will come,
you will never again think of the United States of America in the same way."
The American public never learned what Stephen Jones knows.

Yet on the day of his sentencing, Timothy McVeigh finally spoke out: "Our
government is the potent and omnipresent teacher for good or for ill," McVeigh boldly if somewhat enigmatically announced to the court.

"It
teaches the whole people by its example.

That's all I have to say."[1359]
Naturally, the government and many of the bombing victims took this as a sign of McVeigh's confession.

The rest of the quote may shed
some light on the meaning:
"Crime is contagious.

If the government becomes a lawbreaker, it breeds contempt for the law; it invites every man to become a law unto
himself; it invites anarchy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The rest of the quote may shed
some light on the meaning:
"Crime is contagious. If the government becomes a lawbreaker, it breeds contempt for the law; it invites every man to become a law unto
himself; it invites anarchy. To declare that in the administration of the criminal law the end justifies the means — to declare that the
government may commit crimes in order to secure the conviction of a private criminal — would bring terrible retribution."
McVeigh also accused Jones of lying and screwing up. "The truth is this guy only succeeded in getting [me] the death sentence," said
McVeigh, "and now he doesn't want to let go."

--- PAGE BREAK ---Asked what lies Jones told him, McVeigh was not specific: "It's for Congress, the bar, and the judiciary to investigate and discover.

You
would not believe some of the things that have occurred in this case.

The man has repeatedly lied to me in the past."[1360]
Obviously, Timothy McVeigh is holding his cards close to his vest.

As Jones stated during his closing argument: "Two people share a terrible
secret.

One will not talk, the other is bound by law and can not talk."
The public still hasn't learned what that terrible secret is.

Other rumors abound that Jones — who stands to make millions in legal fees from the government — purposely threw the case.

"He is the most dishonest person I've ever met, including all the criminals I've defended," says his onetime law partner Alec McNaughton,
who nevertheless describes Jones as "brilliant."[1361]
As a young attorney in 1964, Jones began his career working for a lawyer named Richard Milhous Nixon.

His clients have run the gamut
from '60s radicals such as Abbie Hoffman to establishment politicians such as Governor Frank Keating.

Jones and Nichols' attorney Michael Tigar share a common bond through the late Edward Bennett Williams, senior partner of Williams &
Connolly (later Williams, Wadden & Stein).

Williams' client roster included Senator Joseph McCarthy, Mafia don Frank Costello, Teamster
Jimmy Hoffa, industrialist Armand Hammer, and Texas Governor John Connally.

A man on intimate terms with the CIA, Williams was offered the post of CIA director by two presidents, a job which he declined, probably
because he was already a de facto CIA official.[1362]
While Jones openly admires Williams, Tigar was actually employed by him in the late '60s and mid 70s.Williams' client roster included Senator Joseph McCarthy, Mafia don Frank Costello, Teamster
Jimmy Hoffa, industrialist Armand Hammer, and Texas Governor John Connally.

A man on intimate terms with the CIA, Williams was offered the post of CIA director by two presidents, a job which he declined, probably
because he was already a de facto CIA official.[1362]
While Jones openly admires Williams, Tigar was actually employed by him in the late '60s and mid 70s.

Williams often referred to Tigar as
his "most brilliant protégé."
A University of Texas Law School professor, Tigar himself claims an interesting bevy of clients, ranging from "Chicago Seven" member
Angela Davis, who was tried for conspiracy to incite riots at the 1968 Democratic Convention, to John Demjanjuk, accused of being the
notorious Nazi concentration camp guard "Ivan the Terrible."
Jones and Tigar have collaborated before, defending a controversial Oklahoma City psychotherapist.[1363]
"Tigar is a passionate defender of people who have been oppressed by the government," said 24-year Oklahoma City attorney Jim
Bellingham, who thinks the possibility of Jones and Tigar running "damage control" for the government is "hogwash."
"I can't imagine the man selling out, and nobody's going to tell him how to run his defense," said Bellingham.[1364]
But former Nebraska State Senator John DeCamp, who investigated a child abuse ring run by high government officials, doesn't put much
faith in Stephen Jones.

DeCamp believes Jones actually made a deal with the feds.

DeCamp represented a bombing victim in an early
action against the Federal Government and was just about to file a motion to preserve the building as evidence.

As he wrote in The Franklin
Cover-Up:
Only hours before I was to file the legal papers for a civil action to keep the building standing, I was contacted by Timothy McVeigh's
attorneys, who presented me with two major requests.--- PAGE BREAK ---

DeCamp represented a bombing victim in an early
action against the Federal Government and was just about to file a motion to preserve the building as evidence. As he wrote in The Franklin
Cover-Up:
Only hours before I was to file the legal papers for a civil action to keep the building standing, I was contacted by Timothy McVeigh's
attorneys, who presented me with two major requests. First, they asked that I allow them to file the motions to keep the building standing so that the investigation could be conducted. They had
cogent legal arguments for this request: because McVeigh was/is under federal criminal charges, he had the definite legal right to keep the
building standing under the federal rules of evidence which grant criminal defendants the right to preserve evidence that would significantly
impact their defense. It was clear that if McVeigh's attorneys believed, or even suspected government cover-up, they would definitely want
the building examined. Their second request was that I release from retainer the bomb investigation team I had assembled — John A. Kennedy and Associates —
which, they claimed, they wanted to hire. I granted these requests to McVeigh's attorneys. A few hours later, I watched in horror as CNN and all the national news channels reported that McVeigh's attorneys had no intent to file any
motions to keep the Federal Building standing. They had "just reached agreement with the government," the reporters explained, to permit
the building to be destroyed almost immediately. Angry beyond belief, I called McVeigh's attorney and asked what they were doing. Since this all occurred on a weekend, I could take no

--- PAGE BREAK ---legal action to stop the building's destruction.

McVeigh's attorney told me, "Oh yes, we are going to allow the building to be destroyed."
"Why?" I demanded.

"Because we could not afford to pay the retainer fee that the Kennedy and Associates firm wanted," he answered.

Shocked by this feeble explanation, I asked, "Well, just how much do they want?" McVeigh's attorney floored me: "$30,000," he said.

"and
we have no resources to pay it, because we are a court-appointed attorney and there are no funds for this purpose."
"For God's sake!" I screamed at him.

"I will raise the money!

I will pay the fee!

There's too much at stake for America.

"How," I demanded,
"can McVeigh go along with wanting that building destroyed, when that building is the one thing that can tell America the story of what really
happened?

I will get you the money, somehow, but don't refuse to keep the building up for that reason!"
My protests were futile.

Within hours of my call, by mutual agreement between McVeigh's attorneys and the government prosecutors, the
building was destroyed, and any evidence was destroyed with it.[1365]
Jones desputed this, stating in a letter to the author:
…if anyone took the trouble to check the public filings in the case of United States v.

McVeigh they will find that one of the very first Motions
that I filed was to stop the implosion of the Murrah Building until the Defense could go in and take films and moving video pictures.

The Court
sustained my Motion and we were able, together with an architect and an explosives expert, to tour the building.

Any claim that we made a
"deal" with the Federal authorities to permit the demolition of the Murrah Building before the Defense could inspect if is absurd and
contradicted by the public record.[1366]
A source within the defense team told me that Jones' team actually did go into the building to conduct forensic analysis.The Court
sustained my Motion and we were able, together with an architect and an explosives expert, to tour the building.

Any claim that we made a
"deal" with the Federal authorities to permit the demolition of the Murrah Building before the Defense could inspect if is absurd and
contradicted by the public record.[1366]
A source within the defense team told me that Jones' team actually did go into the building to conduct forensic analysis.

The group consisted
of a videographer, a still photographer, and one bomb expert, who were accompanied by several FBI and ATF agents.

The source said that
the bomb expert walked around with only a jeweler's loupe, no forensic kit, and did not take any samples for analysis.

The agents restricted
their passage through the building, and by the time they arrived, the crater had been filled.

Jones also made no mention of the amazing letter McVeigh sent to his sister, describing his recruitment into a secret government team
involved in illegal activities, which she had read before the Federal Grand Jury.

What he did do was show a film about Waco, further reinforcing the allegations of his client's guilt, including the absurd notion that McVeigh
murdered 25 innocent children in Oklahoma to avenge the murder of 25 innocent children at Waco.[1367]
Did Jones have a quid pro quo with the government not to reveal any evidence that his client was a government agent?

Did he purposely
throw the case?

His highly incriminating Writ of Mandamus and impressive opening statement tend to belie that theory.

As Jones said in his
opening statement:
"I know who bombed the Alfred P.

Murrah building.

It was NOT Tim McVeigh.

"Even more important, the government knows who bombed the Alfred P.

Murrah building.

The government knows it was NOT Tim McVeigh.

"The government also knows that its case against Tim McVeigh is corrupt.

At its core, it's rotten.

I will show you in what way, and why.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At its core, it's rotten. I will show you in what way, and why. "The most important difference between us, is that the government won't tell you who bombed the Alfred P. Murrah building. "I will."
Jones never got the chance. The exclusion of ATF informant Carol Howe sounded the death knell for other defense witnesses such as bomb
expert General Benton Partin, seismologist Dr. Ray Brown, and the many witnesses who saw additional suspects. While the prosecution
called 27 phone company employees to testify that McVeigh and Nichols used a pre-paid calling card to make chemical purchase inquiries,
they didn't call even one of the many witnesses who would have placed McVeigh downtown on the morning of the blast! While the government solicited the testimony of British explosives expert Linda Jones, McVeigh's attorney curiously did not call General
Partin, who could have blown the lid off the government's single bomb theory. "The judge would not permit… in his ruling he would not permit anything except one man, one bomb," said Partin. "…they structured the
whole case — the whole prosecution — completely eliminating the building and anything to do with it.… because they couldn't afford to get
into that."
Referring to Jones, Partin added, "I didn't expect to be called by these guys. I had absolutely no confidence in them. I didn't expect it — not
from Jones."[1368]
In response, Jones said, "I did not put Partin on the stand because my experts do not credit his theory.…"[1369]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Yet the question still remains: why didn't Jones take the issue of Judge Matsch's illegal decisions before the Appellate or Supreme Courts?

Jones replied by stating that the appellate court "refused to accept jurisdiction of the case and said [it] would review the issues on appeal, if
there was a conviction."[1370]
Some have speculated that the millions Jones stands to make in legal fees from the government played a part in his apparently poor
defense.

Those who expected a similarly poor defense from Michael Tigar were shocked to find him introducing evidence of other suspects, and
putting ATF informant Carol Howe on the witness stand.[1371]
No doubt Nichols' conviction of conspiracy and involuntary manslaughter stemmed from the critical opinions jurors had of the prosecution's
"limited hang-out."
"I do not believe that the government gave us the whole case," said Linda Morgan, one of the jurors who decided Nichols only had a minor
role in the bomb plot.

McVeigh, she said, "was seen with too many other people.

Who were these other people?"
"I think that the government perhaps really dropped the ball," said jury forewoman Niki Deutchman, who criticized the FBI for halting its
investigation after arresting Nichols and McVeigh.[1372]
"I think there are other people out there," she said, recalling defense witnesses who saw others with McVeigh before the bombing.

"I think
this was a horrible thing to have done… and I doubt two people were able to bring it off."[1373]
Deutchman also criticized the FBI for sloppy crime lab procedures, and claimed agents were "arrogant" for failing to tape-record Nichols'
initial 9-hour interrogation.

"It seems arrogant to me on the part of the FBI to say, you know, 'We have good recall and you can take what we
have said.'"[1374]
Nor could jurors agree on the scope of Nichols' involvement.

While most believed he played a major role, others questioned if he did much at
all or had backed out completely or been coerced."It seems arrogant to me on the part of the FBI to say, you know, 'We have good recall and you can take what we
have said.'"[1374]
Nor could jurors agree on the scope of Nichols' involvement.

While most believed he played a major role, others questioned if he did much at
all or had backed out completely or been coerced.

"Some people felt he wasn't involved at all in building the bomb," Deutchman said before echoing an oft-repeated mantra from the defense:
"I think he was building a life."
Juror Holly Hanlin, too, felt the government failed to fully prove its case.

"We couldn't find enough evidence to convince at least all of us that
he intended, that he was involved from the very beginning, that he built the bomb.

We felt that evidence was shaky at best…."[1375]
Others, like juror Keith Brookshier, said"[I] know that Terry Nichols was into it up to his eyeballs and that's the only thing I had to decide.…
We're not trying John Doe 2, or 3 or 4 or whatever." U.S.

Attorney Beth Wilkinson naturally added her voice to the ensemble, stating that
"sightings of John Doe 2 were about as common and about as credible as sightings of Elvis."[1376]
As the trial of Terry Nichols winds down, the public's attention will resolve itself to the latest scandal, reported in the same exposé-tabloid
fashion that riveted its attention on the O.J.

Simpson trial.

As in both cases, the relevant facts will remain obscured behind the colored
smoke and lights of what will certainly be more circus trials.

Attorney Larry Becraft told Media Bypass, "They got Oswald, they got James
Earl Ray, they got McVeigh and once they're finished with Nichols, they've offered the public a couple of sacrificial lambs, and they hope it
will all go away."
By the time this book is published, a few select facts may be brought to light.

They will first be revealed by a few victims' families, angrily
demanding justice; by the few public officials courageous enough to risk their careers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Attorney Larry Becraft told Media Bypass, "They got Oswald, they got James
Earl Ray, they got McVeigh and once they're finished with Nichols, they've offered the public a couple of sacrificial lambs, and they hope it
will all go away."
By the time this book is published, a few select facts may be brought to light. They will first be revealed by a few victims' families, angrily
demanding justice; by the few public officials courageous enough to risk their careers. And finally, they will be echoed in the courts by the
inevitable specter of civil litigation. Then, the powers that be will hasten to construct a new layer of damage control, and the cover-up will begin anew. Like the crime scene
quickly demolished, and the John Does that never existed, this new "limited-hangout," in the form of a few "startling revelations," will be used
as a dam, to hold back the onrushing tide of truth. Will Timothy McVeigh ever choose to reveal that truth — what he knows of it — or will it go with him to the grave, or die with him in a prison
"suicide?"
As Fletcher Prouty states: "The whole story of the power of the cover-up comes down to a few points. There has never been a grand jury
and trial in Texas (referring to Lee Harvey Oswald). Without a trial there can be nothing. Without a trial it does no good for researchers to dig
up data. It has no place to go and what the researchers reveal just helps make the cover-up tighter, or they eliminate that evidence and the
researcher."[1377]
The government illegally prevented a state trial in Dallas in 1963, as they tried to do in Oklahoma City in 1995. It came down to one

--- PAGE BREAK ---courageous District Attorney in New Orleans to open up that can of worms.

As this book went to press, a County Grand Jury, convened at the behest of two courageous men in Oklahoma, began hearing evidence.

Will these jurors will more objective and effective than the highly manipulated Federal Grand Jury?

One juror, Ben Baker, was quoted in The
Daily Oklahoman as saying: "Everyone I've talked to believes this is a waste of time and taxpayers' money.

I believe the same thing."
Another juror, Kenneth Rickenbrode, is a lieutenant with OCPD Internal Affairs, which should serve rather nicely to hamstring any serious
inquiry into the murder of OCPD Officer Terrance Yeakey.

Fortunately, Bob Macy's Chief Assistant DA, Pat Morgan and Assistant DA Suzanne Lister-Gump are on hand to "advise" the jurors and "pre-
screen" the evidence.

Charming.

Representative Key had little choice but to work with Macy's people, the alternative being a special prosecutor being appointed by political
hacks Attorney General Drew Edmondson or Governor Frank Keating.

Although Key could have objected to both Edmondson and Keating
based on their obvious prejudice, he felt the Supreme Court would have sat on the issue, perhaps not appointing a special prosecutor for
over a year.

After waiting two years, he was anxious to get the process started.

The choice was "deciding between bad, worse, and worse,"
said Key, who now believes that Macy is "on our side."[1378][1379]
Bob Macy — a man who "investigated" the case by thumbing through an old copy of The Turner Diaries — now insists he intends to uncover
the truth.

"I'm prepared to do what ever it takes to get to the truth!" Macy declared.

"My sole intent is in learning the truth." This Macy stated
to the author five months before he kowtowed to "Justice" Department wishes in opposing the grand jury.

Of course, Macy's most telling statement came when he was asked if he intended to pursue an investigation independent of the feds."My sole intent is in learning the truth." This Macy stated
to the author five months before he kowtowed to "Justice" Department wishes in opposing the grand jury.

Of course, Macy's most telling statement came when he was asked if he intended to pursue an investigation independent of the feds.

"Well… I don't want to be a party to anything that will interfere with the Feds' prosecution," said Macy.

"I don't want to open up a new can of
worms." [1380]
This is not surprising, coming from a man who refused to prosecute eight felony indictments against a sitting governor who was a campaign
manager for President Clinton.

Consequently, Key petitioned the Oklahoma Supreme Court to order Macy to do his job.

In reply, Macy stated, "I am going to do my job.

This
action by him won't have any effect one way or another.

I am still going to do it the way it is supposed to be done."
Former Congressman George Hansen (R-ID) thinks Macy, whom he says was "straddling the fence," has now turned around.

"Look, "he's
obligated to do the will of the establishment," said Hansen.

"He went along… with defending the establishment."
An old friend of Macy's from Washington, D.C., Hansen learned the hard way what it's like to suffer at the hands of a corrupt and vindictive
"Justice" Department.

Not one to easily trust the Federal Government, Hansen genuinely believes his old friend from the Department of
Agriculture is now honestly going to challenge that government.

"Give the guy a chance to turn around," said Hansen.

"He honestly wants
that grand jury to come out with as much of the truth as possible."[1381]
If true, perhaps Macy should imbue a sence of open-mindedness in his so-called investigators.

In an affidavit filed by Richard Sinnett, the
eyewitness claims that one of Macy's investigators made sarcastic comments to him about the grand jury investigation shortly before he was
subpoenaed.

Sinnett could not identify the person.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In an affidavit filed by Richard Sinnett, the
eyewitness claims that one of Macy's investigators made sarcastic comments to him about the grand jury investigation shortly before he was
subpoenaed. Sinnett could not identify the person. However, he said in the signed affidavit, the man who called him said "he did not know why he was
having to do this, that Charles Key was pushing this and that nothing would come of it and that is was a waste of time."
Naturally, Macy's office denied the charge. Perhaps the Supreme Court should order Judge Burkette, presiding over the County Grand Jury, to do his job. Burkett attempted to disallow
hearsay evidence to be presented to the grand jury — a clear violation of Oklahoma grand jury procedures.[1382]
"Do not accept hearsay," Burkett said in his opening instructions to the grand jurors. "Hear only those witnesses who would present facts,
which if true, would substantiate an indictable offense and not needlessly delay the courts in their other functions by listening to radical
persons or facts about which you could do nothing if it were true."[1383]
"…radical persons or facts about which you could do nothing if it were true"??? Judge Burkett's subtle signal is suspiciously reminiscent of
the 1976 House Select Committee on Assassinations investigation of the Kennedy assassination, which admitted that the evidence led to a
probable conspiracy. No indicments were ever handed down.

--- PAGE BREAK ---KFOR's Jayna Davis, who testified before the Grand Jury, didn't miss this subtle signal.

She told The Daily Oklahoman she expects
prosecutors "to express a legitimate interest" in pursuing indictments against the suspects her witnesses identified.[1384]
Even if Macy and Burkette are eventually forced to do their jobs, the FBI can undoubtedly be counted on to intimidate key witnesses, as they
did in the federal trial.

Kay H., who saw Hussain al-Hussaini speed away in the brown pick-up, reportedly is afraid to testify before the Grand
Jury, after publicly stating — twice — that Hussaini was the man she saw.

Gary Lewis, the Journal Record pressman who was almost run
over by McVeigh and John Doe 2, has now recanted his story.

After his testimony before the County Grand Jury, Professor Ray Brown of
the University of Oklahoma had a change of heart: "There's no evidence in the [seismographic] bomb signals for any additional charges,"
Brown told reporters.[1385]
The federal agents who might be subpoenaed will no doubt attempt to quash them on the grounds of "national security."
It is been rumored that no grand jury indictments will ever be returned.

Said Stephen Jones, "…a living nightmare for the Department of Justice is an Oklahoma state criminal trial, not only a nightmare for them,
but a nightmare for the intelligence community, for the ATF.

There isn't going to be any Oklahoma trial.…"
"If I thought the State of Oklahoma was really interested in the truth as opposed to just some political side show," added Jones, "I would
insist that Mr.

McVeigh have a state trial and demand that he be released to the state authorities.

But this is all politics."[1386]
"What [Joseph Hartzler] is trying to do is not have people learn," said McVeigh in an interview from his prison cell.

"He wants to have them
put their heads in the sand."
What McVeigh states may be an unfortunate axiom.

Many Americans aren't interested in knowing the truth."He wants to have them
put their heads in the sand."
What McVeigh states may be an unfortunate axiom.

Many Americans aren't interested in knowing the truth.

Like Becraft said, they want it to
go away.

They don't want to open up a new can of worms.

Many people, even those in Oklahoma, don't want to believe that the government,
or elements within that government, could or would, do, or cover-up, such an evil act.

However, "very few will cover up the violent deaths of their sons and daughters, or the children of a close family friend, no matter what the
price," argued a poster to an Internet newsgroup called OKBOMB.[1387]
Surprisingly, many of these people — including a significant number of bombing victims — are naive, intellectually lazy, and unreasonably
indignant.

Like this poster, these people haven't done their homework regarding the legion of evil and corruption in this country, so they don't
have any basis for understanding or challenging it.

Driven solely by instinct and emotion, and speaking from a place of ignorance, they react
angrily to those attempting to expose the truth, whatever that truth might be.

Simply stated, they are in denial.

Such denial absolves one of the responsibility of having to do something about the problem — to take a
stand — and, on an even deeper level, to challenge their comfortably held belief systems.

While the public servants who know the truth and
choose to remain silent are guilty accomplices after-the-fact, to deny that such a truth exists to begin with is intellectual cowardice.

Faced
with such a choice between examining their falsely cherished values and, consequently, themselves, most people opt for the safer approach.While the public servants who know the truth and
choose to remain silent are guilty accomplices after-the-fact, to deny that such a truth exists to begin with is intellectual cowardice.

Faced
with such a choice between examining their falsely cherished values and, consequently, themselves, most people opt for the safer approach.

As another OKBOMB poster observed, "They want their lives to go on as easily as possible, without being harassed by the government, but
without admitting to themselves that they sold their souls for a continued paycheck and a good credit rating."[1388]
The author has no respect or sympathy for such individuals, or for that matter, the majority of Americans who mindlessly subscribe to the
baleful fantasies perpetrated by government liars and mainstream media whores.

They can twist in the wind.

Two hundred years ago, Samuel Adams said: "If ye love wealth better than liberty, the tranquillity of servitude better than the animating
contest of freedom, go home from us in peace.

We ask not your counsels or arms.

Crouch down and lick the hands which feed you.…"
Fortunately, there are enough people who want to know the truth.

These are the people worth fighting for.

Approximately 500 bombing
victims and their relatives are beginning to seek answers.

They have brought two civil suits against the Federal Government.

The suits seek
to prove beyond a shadow of a doubt that the government had advance knowledge of the plot but failed to stop it, in what amounted, at least
on one level, to a sting operation gone wrong.[1389]
As Stephen Jones said in his opening statement, "Outrageously, the government shares part of the blame.

It's hands have blood on them as
surely as the hands of the man who lit the fuse.

Horrifically, the government knew what was coming, but failed to stop it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It's hands have blood on them as
surely as the hands of the man who lit the fuse. Horrifically, the government knew what was coming, but failed to stop it. Then it covered up
its role for fear of being held accountable for its inexcusable conduct."
The acquittal of ATF informant Carol Howe and the resulting publicity surrounding Elohim City will no doubt affect the balance of evidence. Yet given the fact that no Middle Eastern witnesses have been called (at least as of this writing), the revelations of Howe will only serve to
highlight the role that neo-Nazi elements played in the bombing — to the exclusion of the Arab faction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d (at least as of this writing), the revelations of Howe will only serve to
highlight the role that neo-Nazi elements played in the bombing — to the exclusion of the Arab faction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is nothing more than a "limited hang-out." Given the government/mass-media propaganda effort aimed at linking McVeigh and Nichols
to the Militia Movement, and the Militia Movement to the neo-Nazi community, the end result differs little from the government's original
premise — that the militias, being essentially neo-Nazis, are in effect, responsible for the bombing.
Should Howe's testimony reveal the government's prior knowledge, perhaps the ATF, FBI, and the "Justice" Department will eventually be
forced to admit a minor role in their "tragic blunder," and those starved for a little truth will be, at last, temporarily satisfied.
Then the hearings will begin. Like the Warren Commission, the Watergate hearings, or the Iran-Contra hearings, it will eventually be
revealed that a few bad apples, acting alone and outside the realm of official responsibility, were "negligent." Inevitable wrists will be slapped.
Then, as the hearings draw to a close, the deeper and more pressing questions will be swept under the rug, as the shock and tragedy of the
moment gradually fades in the wake of next year's TV sitcoms. Those who orchestrated the conspiracy will disappear into the invisable
cracks of time, protected by the same malignant forces that nurtured them into being.
One Congressman who allegedly displayed an interest in alternative bombing evidence was Senator Arlen Specter. As a young assistant
prosecutor on the Warren Commission, Specter propounded the "magic bullet" theory. Now, on the same day as the bombing, Specter's
foregone conclusions could be heard on McNeil-Lerher, propounding the "magic bomb" theory.
Soon after, Specter, who is head of the Senate Intelligence Committee, asked KFOR for all the evidence they'd collected on John Doe 2. No
doubt the good Senator's collecting this information for the next Warren Commission report.[1390]
One American's foregone conclusion of the Oklahoma City bombing may be more revealing however. It is from a letter sent to the
hospitalized survivors by a 3rd grade boy. It reads:
Hello, I hope you feel better from the explosion in Oklahoma. I wish it never happened. I felt sad when it happened. I felt bad for the people
who died and the people who got hurt. That's only the beginning of what's going to happen to America. Hope you feel better.
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.comn it happened. I felt bad for the people
who died and the people who got hurt. That's only the beginning of what's going to happen to America. Hope you feel better.
Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[This page is not identical to that of the printed version. It contains selected image files from it.]
G     Actual bomb crater
G     ATF director John McGaw
G     Athenian Restaurant
G     Baylee Almon
G     Bob Ricks
G     Bomb scare
G     Brescia photo
G     Clinton pointing
G     Edye Smith
G     Fake crater
G     False patriots
G     Federal building
G     Fortier
G     Gonzales
G     Hartzler
G     Hussain photo, front
G     JD2 sketch
G     JPFO
G     Keating
G     Kennedy
G     Khalil
G     Khobar Towers with crater
G     Linda Thompson
G     Larry Potts
G     Louis Freeh
G     McVeigh Double
G     McVeigh with baby
G     McVeigh at Noble Court House
G     Mementos on fence
G     Militia couple
G     Murrah demolition
G     Peter Ward
G     Reno pointing
G     Rep. Stockman
G     Young Tim and Jennifer McVeigh
G     Yeakey
G     Waco burning
G     Time cover
G     Strassmeir
G     ROTC Building in Madison
G     Snider drawing

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---rGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brought to you by SolarGeneral.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Evidence of libel of Mohammed Radi Abdullah by Ben Menashe