Spies
eye
SDS
Special to the Guardian
Washington, D.C.

The name has been changed to protect the guilty, said one
observer, but it’s still political burlesque.

The House Committee
on Internal Security, formerly known as HU AC, unveiled its 1969
version of the subversion follies with three days of public hearings
on SDS and other left groups.

There were few surprises.

Security was tight with eight armed guards in the hearing
room.

HISC chairman Richard I chord (D-Mo.) indulged in little
more than wishful thinking with the remark, “There are certain
groups who would seek to disrupt these hearings.” There were no
disruptions.

First on the witness stand was Bradshaw Mallard, a Gainsville,
Fla., policeman who posed as a student attending a rally on the
University of Florida campus.

One woman campus SDSer found
out he was a plainclothesman and apparently shook him to the
core with a well-placed obscenity.

Citing “overriding public interest,” Ichord subpenaed New
York Times reporter Anthony Ripley who covered last year’s
SDS convention in East Lansing, Mich.

If not unfriendly, Ripley
was reluctant.

He said that his appearance put the press in the
middle and made it more difficult to cover the movement and
gain the confidence of “disaffected youth.”
The entire committee went to town to try to find out just
what goes on at an SDS function.

Ripley hedged, finally stating
SDS has a kind of free-form policy.” When asked to summarize
some of the ideas presented at the SDS convention, he said he
was unable to do so because the rhetoric was so thick that his
mind was spinning in confusion most of the time.

Next was hired snooper Neil Wetterroan, a HISC investi^tor
who took in a rally at Kent State University in Ohio, two months
ago.

It was an SDS rally but since SDS wasn’t recognized on the
campus it was billed as a Yippie meeting.

Ichord leaned over his microphone with a most concerned
look.It was an SDS rally but since SDS wasn’t recognized on the
campus it was billed as a Yippie meeting. Ichord leaned over his microphone with a most concerned
look. “Are the Yippies recognized there?” he asked
incredulously. The audience laughed. Among the speakers at the rally, Wetterman reported, was
Bernardine Dohm, SDS interorganizational secretary. He testified
that Miss Dohm had a nice appearance, seemed like an
“intelligent girl” and expounded on her politics, which were
recounted for the committee. HISC spent laborious hours proving that the SDS national
officers had “admitted” they were “revolutionary communists.”
Small c, ’ not capital “C” Ichord kindly pointed out
The committee then reconstructed virtually minute by minute'
the events surrounding the disruption of San Francisco Mayor
Joseph Alioto’s speech in March at Georgetown University in
Washington, D.C. The speech, titled “Law and the Campus,” was
never completed as SDS converted the meeting into a melee. Following this, the committee was then entertained by a
Newsreel film about the Panthers-“Off the Pig”-which had been
»?t«?.e0r8Ct?Wn‘ mSC mcmbcrs wanted to know if the
words off and “pig” had to be interpreted to students by
movement activists. “It really didn’t have to be explained ”
dorlStoryStm8ht GU Student who *** sccn thc film in his
The hearings are likely to continue for another few weeks,
until the committee has thoroughly read into the official record
that SDS is a subversive organization. .• CT.VJr1??- ? •' «*?$ 7* .<