The Russian Question
Index
The Russian Question
(8 pages)
Dugin and Eurasianism
(7 pages)
The ‘Slav’
(4 pages)

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Russian Question
There exits claims of an apparent false association between pro-white activism (' the movement') and 
Russia geopolitically or perhaps it would be better said 'bio-politically'.

This apparent false association 
will be critically examined in the foregoing and a provisional stance on the issue propounded as to 
whether it is indeed false or no.

The basis of this association between pro-whites and Russia lies in the tangibly obvious connection 
between the ethno-centrism which naturally leads peoples to favor their own which exists in all 
people and the biological similarity between Russians who, though incorporative of asiatic elements 
to varying degrees, are conventionally referred to as 'white' and who presumably would look upon 
themselves as predominantly white though constituting a relatively distinct type to their 'Western', 
more pure Aryan counterpart, the Nordico-Germanic.

This biological basis for creating an association between whites in the 'Western' countries of 
continental Europe and its historical allies (the British and American Empire) and Russia thus would be
readily accepted by most as a viable basis for geopolitical affiliation.

The bio-political underpins the 
geopolitical in the minds of all if only at an ur-level of consciousness and this even in spite of the 
political correctness agenda of 'anti-racism'.

Perhaps this is the reason, this ur-recognition of biological reality (fact), that the jews and their lackeys
have vilified Russia as a 'Nazi regime' on innumerable occasions, projecting their own irrational anti-
racist biases upon Russia and this as a means of prejudicially condemning Russia and its politics.The bio-political underpins the 
geopolitical in the minds of all if only at an ur-level of consciousness and this even in spite of the 
political correctness agenda of 'anti-racism'.

Perhaps this is the reason, this ur-recognition of biological reality (fact), that the jews and their lackeys
have vilified Russia as a 'Nazi regime' on innumerable occasions, projecting their own irrational anti-
racist biases upon Russia and this as a means of prejudicially condemning Russia and its politics.

Hence at least an appearance of fear and trembling on the part of jewry is put forth in their media and
transmitted as an appearance of fear on the part of the 'good citizens', the jews pretend to be 
(concealing themselves behind the façade of 'liberals' or right wing or religious jewry to ingratiate 
themselves with the goyim and lead them to view others in a negative light).

This is the standard 
operating procedure of jewry in their vilification of others, inciting violence against them and using 
their pawns to do their dirty work, playing both ends against the middle, 'dividing and conquering the 
Egyptians' as their template for tyranny the Old Testament speaks of.

Hence an association with negativity is to all appearances created in the jewish media and Russia is 
painted with a black brush.

This could be intentionally undergone on the part of jewry as a means of 
setting up the stage for the world war three Apocalypse of biblical prophecy using Russia as its 
boogeyman playing the role of Gog or Magog and dialectically playing both China and Russia (Gog?

Magog?) Against N.A.T.O, the so-called 'Christians' against the 'Satanists' or 'anti-christs' according to 
various interpretations of their Bible blueprint.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This could be intentionally undergone on the part of jewry as a means of 
setting up the stage for the world war three Apocalypse of biblical prophecy using Russia as its 
boogeyman playing the role of Gog or Magog and dialectically playing both China and Russia (Gog? Magog?) Against N.A.T.O, the so-called 'Christians' against the 'Satanists' or 'anti-christs' according to 
various interpretations of their Bible blueprint. For the Russians themselves the jews who live there have their own brand of eschatological 
propaganda and this embodies itself in the Orthodox Church, the continuation of the Byzantine 
Empire which they had been attempting to re-create since its implosion in the cloaca gentium of what 
is now Turkey (Constantinople being its epicenter now intended to be moved to Moscow perhaps?). 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---The influence of jewry in all nations is a factor not to be denied or diminished as can be easily 
concluded from a basic scattershot statistical overview of who controls what and to what extent.

With 
respect to Russia the writer has heard that approximately eighty percent of the oligarchs are jewish.

However this does not mean, just as the case of England with its jewish banksters, that Russia or 
England are totally jew controlled and that there is no opposition when there most assuredly is.

This is the main question: "To what extent does Russia as a nation state and those in control of its 
apparatus of power have control in opposition to the zionist globalist agenda of mongrelization and 
the erasure of the organic differences of peoples and cultures?" This is not possible to definitively 
conclude and one can only look through a glass darkly.

However one can also gain greater insight 
looking through this glass with the torchlight shone upon it by some of the most significant racialist 
theorists on the Russian question known to the writer which will be discussed in the following.

The National Socialists had factions in Russia and perhaps faced the greatest opposition to the 
triumph of the swastika in that region of the earth.

Stalin also apparently had a party in Germany at 
some point and was in spite of any political rhetorical smokescreen to the contrary ethnically Russian 
at heart.

The claim that his name derived from 'son of a jew' in the Ossetian language of Georgia is apparently 
false and thus his racial bill of health can be cleared of the jewish tumor.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Stalin also apparently had a party in Germany at 
some point and was in spite of any political rhetorical smokescreen to the contrary ethnically Russian 
at heart. The claim that his name derived from 'son of a jew' in the Ossetian language of Georgia is apparently 
false and thus his racial bill of health can be cleared of the jewish tumor. Kerry Bolton, and alt-right 
spin doctor, for however legitimate his work and however much it amounts to distortion, had written 
a book on Stalin entitled "Stalin: the Enduring Legacy" in addition to another on the relationship 
between Stalin and Germany and Stalin's party there and this provides some insight into the 
ethnically-oriented nature of Stalin although it exists in cryptic form not so explicit as in the case of the
National Socialists. Hence Stalin, who was assassinated by a jewish doctor and who facilitated the disempowerment of 
jewry in the Soviet Union, having Trotsky assassinated in Mexico, was to all appearances motivated by 
his Russian soul to oppose the pestilential miasma from the East, the jew. This is not certain but the 
writer speculates that the Russian folk soul manifested itself through these circumstances surrounding
Stalin's regime and his political praxis. National Socialists were quite clearly anti-Russian in the main though certain elements wanted a pact 
with them. The official policy of the National Socialists with respect to Russia and the Soviet Union's 
population in large part was that they were 'untermenschen', laboring under the whip hand of the 
jew. They were indeed laboring under the whip hand although to stigmatize them as untermenschen is 
unfair and this was a flaw of National Socialist policy though Hitler undoubtedly had his reasons 
perhaps more opposing the ideology of Bolshevism and its jewish purveyors than Russian people as an
ethnic stock. Apparently National Socialists from Russia had gone to Germany when that was feasible 
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---before the beginning of the second world war forming some form of alliance with the National 
Socialists.

The Ukrainians under Stepan Bandera were affiliated with the National Socialists and thus, though 
ethnically 'Slavic' or Dinaric, were nonetheless viewed in a favorable light by Hitler and his affiliates at 
least to some extent.

That Alfred Rosenberg was from a country bordering Russia though of Baltic 
stock, further underscores that the National Socialists gave priority to a racial not a nationalistic 
worldview as borders could always be rearranged and inevitably and invariably are with the natural 
inclination of each people for expansion as an expression of their will to power.

The attempt on the 
part of Germany to retake Poland illustrates this point as does the previous de facto colonization of 
parts of Russia under Tsardom.

The antagonism between the Germans who colonized Russia and the Russian peasants is clearly seen 
in the rebellion of Pugachev as the archetypical representation of the Russian soul against the 
Germanizing influence.

The hostility toward the German and Polish nobility by the Russian peasants 
was largely a reaction to the disdainful treatment they received at the hands of their would-be 
masters and their would-be masters karma played itself out in the subsequent revolutions whose 
flames were fanned by the eternal jew and his usury and exploitation.

Hence the relations between Russians and Germans were always strained and this owing to the 
divergence of biology and culture, and this in spite of the similarities existent, the Russians being a 
somewhat hybridized stock, more German than asiatic but with varying degrees of asiatic admixture 
creating a somewhat tempestuous persona in the type.The hostility toward the German and Polish nobility by the Russian peasants 
was largely a reaction to the disdainful treatment they received at the hands of their would-be 
masters and their would-be masters karma played itself out in the subsequent revolutions whose 
flames were fanned by the eternal jew and his usury and exploitation.

Hence the relations between Russians and Germans were always strained and this owing to the 
divergence of biology and culture, and this in spite of the similarities existent, the Russians being a 
somewhat hybridized stock, more German than asiatic but with varying degrees of asiatic admixture 
creating a somewhat tempestuous persona in the type.

Regardless, the differences existent between the two served and still serves as a basis for camaraderie 
on an ethnic and thus on a political basis if and only if the political platform of the nation states is bio-
political which is indeed the question.

It is to all appearance not the case with the so-called judaized 
'Western' powers of Western Europe and their Anglo-American affiliates whose policies are obviously 
contrary to the survival of their founding ethnic stock.

The question remains: "Is Russia a nation state that has any racially-based policies buried under the 
rhetoric of politics it may clothe itself in?" The surfeit of jews surrounding its contemporary leadership
does not give a negative answer as this does not argue for total power concentrated in the hands of 
jewry, rather it simply demonstrates the influence of the jewish occupation government system (J.O.G)
and the necessity of its accommodation by the indigenous people in order to avoid being placed in the
crosshairs of the United Nations as a 'Nazi state', i.e.

one having an ethnic and organic basis.

Hence the rhetoric of political correctness which might be called 'raceless indifferentism', the 
necessity to adopt an attitude of 'anti-racism', i.e.--- PAGE BREAK ---

one having an ethnic and organic basis. Hence the rhetoric of political correctness which might be called 'raceless indifferentism', the 
necessity to adopt an attitude of 'anti-racism', i.e. denial of the existence and value of race, is an 
obligation imposed upon all nation states under the current crisis of the modern world of the J.O.G 
mongrelization agenda. 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---This 'raceless indifferentism' is reflected by the leading ideologues of Russia and the top man Putin 
with Putin making explicit reference to "caveman nationalism" and the ideologue Alexander Dugin 
condemning 'Atlanticism' and whites being affiliated with this as imperialists without making any 
mention of jewry.

Perhaps either or both are simply echoing the tune of the political pied piper's of Zion as a means of 
putting forth a general strategy of concealment, subtly forcing the issue of aggression against the 
'Western powers' and specifically the USA while assisting to undermine its Protestant Zionist culture 
with the degenerative culture of liberalism, funding subversive movements like BLM and others.

Perhaps this is simply a means of 'pulling off the Band-Aid' of Protestantism from the wound of 
Semitic gangrene which has and continues to eat away at the once robust flesh of the ethnic stock 
who created the west?

Who can say.

One can see that this agenda appears to facilitate the jews plans for white genocide however and that 
Putin's policy of enabling non-white foreigners to gain citizenship in Russia appears to suggest 
agreement with this plan.

However perhaps this is simply another strategy of accommodation which 
gets the jew off his back so he can make more significant moves later in the geopolitical chess game.

Various disinformation agents and Zionist apologists such as Brandon Martinez and Kyle Hunt of 
Renegade Broadcasting have vilified Putin in the recent years and Russia as a whole as an anti-white 
figure for acts such as enabling the murder of the National Socialist Tesak in jail, but these might also 
be political stunts for all we can see through 'Western eyes'.However perhaps this is simply another strategy of accommodation which 
gets the jew off his back so he can make more significant moves later in the geopolitical chess game.

Various disinformation agents and Zionist apologists such as Brandon Martinez and Kyle Hunt of 
Renegade Broadcasting have vilified Putin in the recent years and Russia as a whole as an anti-white 
figure for acts such as enabling the murder of the National Socialist Tesak in jail, but these might also 
be political stunts for all we can see through 'Western eyes'.

The stance of these dis-info agents 
however are countered by still other dis-info agents such as Nick Fuentes a 'Mexican American' crypto-
jew and E.Michael Jones a 'trad cat' sedevanticist Catholic who both simply wish to assimilate whites 
into their Christian-Catholic agenda and assimilate them into the cloaca gentium of the 
church-'Spiritual (miasmal) Israel'.

Hence either interpretation is untrustworthy and one can ultimately only makes sense of geopolitics 
through observation of actions not words and this leaves the question of Russia unanswered, as to 
whether it can in any way accommodate any ethnic orientation as a bastion of racial preservation of 
the ethnic Russian stock let alone that of 'the West', code speak in some mouths for Aryans.

Julius Evola, in his "Revolt Against The Modern World" had concluded his work addressing the issue of 
Russia as typifying the 'end of the cycle', of the manvantara, the depth of the Kali Yuga or age of lead 
and its 'mass man' of 'Homo Sovieticus'.

He affirms that this is the region wherein the fourth estate 
triumphed and that the mass man can be seen to manifest in all of his collectivistic tendencies and sub
personality within this Soviet crucible.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Julius Evola, in his "Revolt Against The Modern World" had concluded his work addressing the issue of 
Russia as typifying the 'end of the cycle', of the manvantara, the depth of the Kali Yuga or age of lead 
and its 'mass man' of 'Homo Sovieticus'. He affirms that this is the region wherein the fourth estate 
triumphed and that the mass man can be seen to manifest in all of his collectivistic tendencies and sub
personality within this Soviet crucible. This degeneracy is clearly the influence of Sovietism but Russia is not strictly correlated with Sovietism
as the case of Stalin illustrates with the cultural-organic foundation of Russia breaking through the iron
bonds of the jewish, mechanized state form and resurrecting itself as a hero (a Russian hero) if only 
within the confines of Sovietism, at that time not something that could have been thrown off owing to
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---the jewish influence and which was pragmatically useful in a Russian expansionism under the uniform 
of the proletarian 'worker'.

This might have been and to this day may still be a means of 'riding the tiger of modernity' within 
modernity in its lowest state, that of the 'fourth estate' or caste of the serfs.

Perhaps Stalin was the 
avatar of the Russian folk soul who initiated the transmutation of the Russian soul from the base 
metal of Sovietism to the philosophical gold of Empire?

This is a question which has no definitive 
answer to those not initiated into its secrets.

What can be inferred however is that Russia, being Aryan to a certain proportion, has always had an 
ethnic consciousness and that like any organism it simply had to adapt itself to the changing 
circumstances of the modern world and its disintegrative influence on the cultural organisms that bear
the name 'race' today.

James Larratt Battersby, and English National Socialist, wrote the book "The Holy Book of Adolf Hitler" 
(1952) in two parts and in this work he speaks of how the future world order will be an Aryan order 
with Japan holding down the fort in far east asia, Russia having hegemony over the eastern part of the
Empire and Germany over the West with the capital of both being located at the border presumably in
Danzig and the spiritual capital being located in India, the ancient Aryan homeland.

In the works' conclusion Battersby lists quotations of National Socialists who were martyred in 
Nuremberg which prognosticatively reveal the karmic consequences of the war of Allied aggression 
and the intended destruction of Aryan mankind on the part of jewry and the role of Russia in what 
Hans Fritzche in his last words called "the beginning of the Hitler legend" initiated with their sacrifice 
for the National Socialist idea.

Alfred Rosenberg's comment: "I don't blame the Russians at all for trying to break the stranglehold of 
this clerical monster.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the works' conclusion Battersby lists quotations of National Socialists who were martyred in 
Nuremberg which prognosticatively reveal the karmic consequences of the war of Allied aggression 
and the intended destruction of Aryan mankind on the part of jewry and the role of Russia in what 
Hans Fritzche in his last words called "the beginning of the Hitler legend" initiated with their sacrifice 
for the National Socialist idea. Alfred Rosenberg's comment: "I don't blame the Russians at all for trying to break the stranglehold of 
this clerical monster. I have always been anti-Catholic", illustrates the ideological sympathy between 
National Socialism and Russia at least in its anti-judeo Catholic form. Hermann Goering said during the Nuremberg trials: "Germany must rise either with the English or the 
Russians." Given that England had caused the decay and rot of its own Empire largely through the 
presence of jewry but not exclusively, in large part through adhering to its false Idea of egalitarianism 
and hypocritical passivism it had clung to, it was hence with Russia and looking toward the East that 
Germany would again arise. Rudolf Hess, quoted in the same work during the Nuremberg trials, prophesied the rise of Germany 
from the ashes: "when America and Russia have exhausted themselves in war." These prophetic words
are manifesting in the geopolitical crisis as of the time of this writing as Germany bides its time for 
heroic resurrection. Whether the Russia which remains will align with Germany according to "The Holy
Book of Adolf Hitler" of Battersby is a question. 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Many critical and downright cynical types have attempted to venture a prediction that the Kalergi plan
would be facilitated by Russia, and Europe, with the removal of N.A.T.O's ostensive protection would 
be at the mercy of the 'mad Ruskies' and Chinese hordes.

That it would be an effective means to 
decimate Europe, to orchestrate war between Russia and America and serve Europe up as a sacrifice 
in the process of acting out biblical prophecy with, as Albert Pike spoke of in his letter to Giuseppe 
Mazzini: "the victory going to the political Zionists."
Battersby, in his "The Holy Book of Adolf Hitler" speaks of a world plan for peace which would be a 
product of the reconciliation of Russia and Germany under a template of 'virile nationalism', rather 
than the decadent democracies which are currently rotting the healthy population from within.

They 
would form a world peace plan isolating America (North America) and creating regional blocks similar 
to the Kalergi plan and that of Alexander Dugin's "The Fourth Political Theory", only with the nation 
states not being comprised of rootless internationalist individuals as in the Kalergi plan but organic 
racial collectives in the traditionalists sense of blood and soil and kultur, kultur being a resultant 
product of the combination of the two presumably formed by and deriving from the higher planes.

Hence according to the prognostication of Battersby who was almost certainly an insider, the future 
world would be a "World Union of National Socialists" (W.U.N.S).

Whether this would entail the 
devastation of Russia played off against America in a third world war (orchestrated by Zionists as a 
gambit for power) is uncertain and whether the current leadership of Russia would be redeemable is 
also uncertain.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hence according to the prognostication of Battersby who was almost certainly an insider, the future 
world would be a "World Union of National Socialists" (W.U.N.S). Whether this would entail the 
devastation of Russia played off against America in a third world war (orchestrated by Zionists as a 
gambit for power) is uncertain and whether the current leadership of Russia would be redeemable is 
also uncertain. Francis Parker Yockey in his work "The Enemy of Europe" and to some extent in his magnum opus 
"Imperium" contends that the culture destroying influence of Americanism, that is to say Zionist-
liberal ideology and culture poses a greater threat to Europe than Russia and thus that Russia should 
be aligned with in destroying 'the Western democratic regimes'. He argues that the subtle 
disintegrative influence of the former far outstrips the latter, although he doesn't embrace either the 
capitalist or the communist ideology of New York or Moscow. Rather he contended that the then current communist regime prevailing in Russia could be 
transmuted into something more similar to National Socialism. This has been to all appearances borne
out in recent times since the rise of Stalin and the nationalization of Russia and its projection 
imperialistically over the globe. However a criticism of this might be that the spread of Sovietism globally was always undergone 
under the instrumentality of jewry and that jewry was always in control. This is uncertain and both 
points may be valid, the ethnic culture of Russia warring in an occult fashion with the architecture and 
ideological garb of Sovietism, of jewish design. A transmutation of this course, materialistic worldview however seems to have transpired since the 
end of the influence of Trotsky perhaps and increasingly so as the parasite of jewry was all but 
excreted from the Russian bowels up to the rule of Putin. Hence 'Yockey was right' as can be seen in 
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---the comparatively degenerate and debased condition of 'the West' and the ascension in the East of 
the cultural sun of Russia from the darkness of its communist past, the soul of the Russian having 
slumbered under the Iron Curtain, in hibernation to muster its strength in the nigredo phase of the 
manvantara and to come out of hibernation as the Arktos bear of first Hyperborea.

Yockey was apparently courting ties with muslims as well as communists (crypto-nationalists?) in Cuba
to strike against America perhaps before he was presumably assassinated after his apprehension.

Yockey's ties might raise eyebrows amongst the purists, especially the nordicists of our movement, but
the phrase "the enemy of my enemy is my friend" bears the ring of truth.

After all Hitler had many non-white allies not only India; Iraq; Iran; Columbia; Venezuela; Thailand; 
Tibet, etc., but many other nations throughout the globe.

The idea of National Socialism being 'racial 
nationalism', blood and soil, is not the property of blue-eyed, blonde-haired Nordics but need not 
exclude those closest to the Hyperborean Divyas either.

The Russian Federation of today accommodates and includes ethnic groups who Yockey had courted 
during his endeavors as well as to some extent Adolf Hitler.

Nonetheless it's anti-' Atlanticist' rhetoric 
emanating from the ideologue Dugin who according to rumor was and is under the influence of 
Evgeny Primakov aka.

Evgeny Finkelstein, a jewish ideologue, is either a smokescreen to conceal its 
actual ethnocentrism (in a good sense) or a genuine expression of its antipathy toward 'the West' 
along racialist lines (not necessarily racially but as an ideology perhaps).

That Yockey epitomized Atlanticism and that Atlanticism is castigated by modern Russia creates further
confusion as to whether Russia is in any way consistent with Aryan ethno-centrism.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Evgeny Finkelstein, a jewish ideologue, is either a smokescreen to conceal its 
actual ethnocentrism (in a good sense) or a genuine expression of its antipathy toward 'the West' 
along racialist lines (not necessarily racially but as an ideology perhaps). That Yockey epitomized Atlanticism and that Atlanticism is castigated by modern Russia creates further
confusion as to whether Russia is in any way consistent with Aryan ethno-centrism. The answer can 
only be said that the Russian soul is ethnocentrically Russian and that the state form of modern Russia
under Putin is most likely an attempt at a re-presentation or resurrection of the Byzantine multi-ethnic
empire under a certain label: the 'Russian Federation'. However perhaps greater transmutation of this 
intended state and ethnic form is underway and will reconcile its contradictions through the conflict to
come. According to the words of David Lane in his fictional work "K.D.Rebel", in the last chapter "From Russia
With Love" he plays out a fictional scenario of how pro-white forces in Ukraine and Russia will take 
down the leadership inside of both countries and transform them into pro-white or ethnically Aryan 
states through the dialectic of the third world war. This may be prognosticative assuming David Lane 
was who he is reputed to have been, an initiate, this may be a further development of a world plan by 
Aryan adepts. William L. Pierce, founder of the National Alliance and writer of "Hunter" and "The Turner Diaries" has
the latter work end on a similar note with America being struck with nukes by Russia assisting in the 
destruction of the system from within. Perhaps this is predictive programming on the part of the 
Aryan elite revealing what their intentions are? This is not entirely clear to the writer. William L. Pierce 
was affiliated with Russian women as far as the writer has heard so this might suggest another point in
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---tentions are? This is not entirely clear to the writer. William L. Pierce 
was affiliated with Russian women as far as the writer has heard so this might suggest another point in
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

favor of this thesis. Some of his "American Dissident Voices" broadcasts revealed the Jewish 
organizatsia or 'Russian mafia' in its true light as well as defending Russia and East European women 
who were and are being abducted by jewish and Israeli sex traffickers and being relocated to the 
prison state of Israel.
David Duke also has had connections with Russia. However the critical question a cynic would venture 
is whether this is simply designed to create the appearance of an affiliation between Russia and Pro-
whites in 'the West' or if it is an authentic connection. The writer speculates an organic connection 
exists but not necessarily the nation state or political regime itself. He can only view the world through
'western eyes' living in the matrix of Zion.
In the work "Gold in the Furnace", Savitri Devi asked a National Socialist insider in Germany whether 
Russians were on their side and she received an affirmative reply that they were and seemed 
convinced that was the case. Battersby's "The Holy Book of Adolf Hitler" is what Dugin would call an 
'Atlanticist' work hearkening to the mythos of the Atlantean origins of the Aryan race and its implied 
originary influence on subsequent regions of the earth and implied supremacy, the 'back to origins' 
position of such as H.S.Chamberlain.
However in that work Battersby defines Aryan as comprised of the stock of Nordic-Germanic-Celtic 
and 'Slavic' stock who would form the rulership of the new world order in a new golden age of the 
Satya Yuga. The slavic element of this conception is a sort of 'wild-card' in the minds of some, some 
taking the position that Russians are not entirely or adequately white-Aryan and others the converse. 
Dugin's conception of world history draws heavily upon the National Socialist Ahnenerbe member 
Hermann Wirth while simultaneously condemning National Socialism as 'Atlanticism'; "Caveman 
nationalism". This 'wild-card' of the Russian soul with its inner restlessness and Icarianism, it's lyrical 
soulfulness, is a question indeed that one must come to understand in order to decide "what must be 
done" in coming to an answer to the Russian question.
8restlessness and Icarianism, it's lyrical 
soulfulness, is a question indeed that one must come to understand in order to decide "what must be 
done" in coming to an answer to the Russian question.
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---Dugin and Eurasianism
The figure of Alexander Dugin the main proponent of contemporary Eurasianism as expressed in his 
work “The Fourth Political Theory” and other related works is another upon initial encounter 
ambiguous figure who has another unique philosophical offering for those seeking alternatives to the 
‘modern world’.

Dugin holds himself out as a so-called ‘Traditionalist" in the mode of an Evola or Guenon only qualified
to a great degree claiming in his critique of Guenon’s notion of ‘Tradition’ and the ‘counter-initiation’ 
(in which only major religions and freemasonry qualified as legitimate ‘traditions’ as they are based 
upon historical transmission of initiation which is his criterion of what constitutes a ‘tradition’ properly
so-called) that Guenon’s criteria is wrong and that Dugin's conception of 'Noomakhia ' is a valid 
‘traditionalist’ perspective.

Of course Dugin does not in any way approach the only valid tradition, that being the Hyperborean-
Aryan in doing so, as he attempts to politicize spirituality which is not initiatic and thus is not a 
manifestation or rediscovery of the ‘Tradition’ but is simply (from the point of view of the Sophia 
Perennis) a vulgarization or profanation of the mysteries.

Dugin goes further in his profanation by incorporating a heavy emphasis on chaos magick of a 
Crowleyan orientation having been (and being?) a devotee of Crowley and having been video recorded
involving himself in various strange ritualistic action and pageantry involving various Crowleyan 
tropes.

Hence the ‘magickal revival’ of Dugin is merely a lot of theatre and shock value derived from 
an invented pseudo-religion Crowley called ‘Thelema’, a syncretic Magian form of magickal praxis that 
is welded to Jewish plagiarized and hybridized Kabbalah.Dugin goes further in his profanation by incorporating a heavy emphasis on chaos magick of a 
Crowleyan orientation having been (and being?) a devotee of Crowley and having been video recorded
involving himself in various strange ritualistic action and pageantry involving various Crowleyan 
tropes.

Hence the ‘magickal revival’ of Dugin is merely a lot of theatre and shock value derived from 
an invented pseudo-religion Crowley called ‘Thelema’, a syncretic Magian form of magickal praxis that 
is welded to Jewish plagiarized and hybridized Kabbalah.

Whether any redeemable elements in this trundle sack of magick tricks exist is doubtful that they can 
properly resonate with the souls of various sub-types of ‘humanity’ and indeed that they are not 
inextricably bound up with the same demonic forms that Crowley was fated to become destroyed by.

Regardless, the chaos magick of Dugin is heavily Kabbalistic in the most Jewish sense of black magic 
and thus is perhaps only an instrument of change within the system of contemporary modernity (itself
a jewish black magic working, a world of chaos generated through their materialist idealism, 'diamat' 
in Soviet terms, for the destruction of the white society from within).

The fact of Dugin's chaos magick serves as a stereotypically ‘Satanic’ ‘Other’ that such as Christians 
can point their finger at and condemn and be worked up into a frenzy to attack, thus serving the Jews’ 
plans of orchestrating a third world war (three for Trinity; 33 for man perfected; three being one third 
of nine the number of completion in Kabbalah, being 33.3% of 100% of nine, manifesting the Messiah 
through the dialectic of the dark enlightenment).

The Russian/Chinese phalanx is served up as Gog/Magog on the silver platter of biblical prophecy as a 
Saturnian sacrifice of the new aeon of the age of Aquarius.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The fact of Dugin's chaos magick serves as a stereotypically ‘Satanic’ ‘Other’ that such as Christians 
can point their finger at and condemn and be worked up into a frenzy to attack, thus serving the Jews’ 
plans of orchestrating a third world war (three for Trinity; 33 for man perfected; three being one third 
of nine the number of completion in Kabbalah, being 33.3% of 100% of nine, manifesting the Messiah 
through the dialectic of the dark enlightenment). The Russian/Chinese phalanx is served up as Gog/Magog on the silver platter of biblical prophecy as a 
Saturnian sacrifice of the new aeon of the age of Aquarius. This ‘side’ plays luciferian role of ‘evil’, with
all manner of luciferian and Saturnian iconography, the ‘red, white and blue’, of America constituting 
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Ida (blue) and pingala (red) nadis and Shushumna (white) of the occult anatomy, symbolizing man 
perfected perhaps, a Trinitarian conception of the dialectical re-conciliation of opposites (conjunctiva 
oppositorum).

This is the immanentization of the eschaton with the legions of Lucifer (the Jewish kike-
o-demons) leading both sides against one another in a final conflagration tapping into the 
programming of the Abrahamic programs of Christianity (Jupiterian-black sun-Saturnian gnosis) and 
Islam (Luciferian Lunar-Venusian-Saturnian gnosis) and the Jews whose “monads derive from Saturn" 
according to Blavatsky "The Secret Doctrine" being the mastermind controlling the dialectic of the 
black cube matrix creating their idealized world order of the ages.

Dugin's philosophy purports to be and indeed may be what could be called an ‘organicist' one in which
different dasein(s) if that is the proper terminology (derived from Heidegger) or ‘Culture souls’ are 
allowed to develop themselves through themselves and to have their own territorial region of the 
earth to facilitate the organic development of the culture organisms and souls which constitute those 
particular Dasein(s) (Chinese; Russian; various tribes and groups scattered over the surface of the 
earth).

It is a synthesis of Spenglerian and Yockeyan organicism and Heidegger with elements of Crowleyan 
and other forms of chaos magick.

The difficulty in understanding the consequences of this 'diamat' or 
application of theory to practice is whether the ‘Eurasianism' of Dugin accommodates the 
preservation of racial groups or simply their being placed into those geopolitical topoi or crucibles and
melted down into alloys of various compatible or incompatible groups.It is a synthesis of Spenglerian and Yockeyan organicism and Heidegger with elements of Crowleyan 
and other forms of chaos magick.

The difficulty in understanding the consequences of this 'diamat' or 
application of theory to practice is whether the ‘Eurasianism' of Dugin accommodates the 
preservation of racial groups or simply their being placed into those geopolitical topoi or crucibles and
melted down into alloys of various compatible or incompatible groups.

That Dugin claims that race in the conventional sense is merely a lower aspect of beings and that he 
employs an Evolan conception of race (that being a tripartite conception-race of the body; race of the 
soul and race of the spirit) implies that there may and also may not be the accommodation of racial 
preservation in his ‘Noomakhia ' theory, the multi-polar conception of geopolitics in which the world is
divided into cultural regions reflective of the ancestral traditions of various groups.

If this is the 
consequence of such implementation, the writer sees no problem with the theory which is largely 
consistent with karmic law, that being a ‘live and let live’ policy to the extent deserved according to 
paleo and contemporary history, for each sub-group of what Dugin calls ‘humanity’ which, in spite of 
his conception being organicist entails a humanist (and hence universalistic abstract) conception and 
thus is paradoxical in this respect if the writer properly understands his meaning.

However the means of ‘equilibrizing’ the balance of the races as was Crowley's intent within the rubric
of a ‘solar phallic cult’ controlled by ‘initiatic Priest Kings’ (and priestesses?).--- PAGE BREAK ---

If this is the 
consequence of such implementation, the writer sees no problem with the theory which is largely 
consistent with karmic law, that being a ‘live and let live’ policy to the extent deserved according to 
paleo and contemporary history, for each sub-group of what Dugin calls ‘humanity’ which, in spite of 
his conception being organicist entails a humanist (and hence universalistic abstract) conception and 
thus is paradoxical in this respect if the writer properly understands his meaning. However the means of ‘equilibrizing’ the balance of the races as was Crowley's intent within the rubric
of a ‘solar phallic cult’ controlled by ‘initiatic Priest Kings’ (and priestesses?). Dugin seems to favor, a 
conception of luciferian androgyny perhaps not meant physically but alchemically though he has 
stated “gender is a social construct” and thus might be more willing to accommodate the gender 
bending Luciferian type regardless of the typically deleterious social and psychological consequences 
of such characteristically low minded behavior. Should this androgyny or ‘unity consciousness’ be 
meant in a higher sense, of the balancing of the modalities of consciousness, the sacred feminine 
(‘right brain’) and the divine masculine (‘left brain’) or the integration a la Miguel Serrano of the 
10
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---opposite gender of ones anatomical sex and a subordination and incorporation into the personality, 
this may be tolerable).

Hence Dugin's organicist conception (as espoused presumably-though the writer has not read it in his 
“Ethnos and Society” philosophical work) is one based upon karmic law and though the utopian would
misunderstand this as a ‘perpetual peace’, the latter may fail to understand that the law of life and the
phenomenal world orients around ‘will to power’ to a significant degree and a ‘war everlasting’ being 
the 'conditione humaine'.

Perhaps Dugin is being hubristic in attempting to create an equilibrious 
‘perpetual peace’?

The writer is not sufficiently informed of the end goal of this ‘geopolitical strategy’ 
of Dugin's and how the balance of power would be established save through the aforementioned 
initiated Priest Kings, the ‘Aryan race’ comprised of presumably a diversity of races or a hybrid stock?

Such is unclear to the writer but presumably they would, being a Brahmanical type, have the capacity 
to transcend their ego and work toward the ‘evolutionary development’ of 'all mankind' however 
utopian this conception may be.

This is critiqued in Mussolini and Gentile’s “The Doctrine of Fascism” in reference to the 
“selfdetermination of peoples” in a sarcastic tone by the ideologues of Italian Fascism which attempts 
to override this ‘live and let live’ principle (the copper rule of non-maleficence-’do no harm’) and 
claims “man can and must make his own world” especially with reference to Ethiopia and its conquest 
by the Italian fascists who bucked the Judeo-Christian ethos of “lions lying down with lambs’ and 
conquered the lion of Judah, of the Falasha Jews of Ethiopia with the roar of 'me ne frego!' (‘I don't 
give a damn’, the motto of the Italian Fascists) casting away their sheepskins (both freemasonic 
'humanitas' and the Judeo-Christian “cowardly supine pacifism", in Mussolini and Gentile’s words).Such is unclear to the writer but presumably they would, being a Brahmanical type, have the capacity 
to transcend their ego and work toward the ‘evolutionary development’ of 'all mankind' however 
utopian this conception may be.

This is critiqued in Mussolini and Gentile’s “The Doctrine of Fascism” in reference to the 
“selfdetermination of peoples” in a sarcastic tone by the ideologues of Italian Fascism which attempts 
to override this ‘live and let live’ principle (the copper rule of non-maleficence-’do no harm’) and 
claims “man can and must make his own world” especially with reference to Ethiopia and its conquest 
by the Italian fascists who bucked the Judeo-Christian ethos of “lions lying down with lambs’ and 
conquered the lion of Judah, of the Falasha Jews of Ethiopia with the roar of 'me ne frego!' (‘I don't 
give a damn’, the motto of the Italian Fascists) casting away their sheepskins (both freemasonic 
'humanitas' and the Judeo-Christian “cowardly supine pacifism", in Mussolini and Gentile’s words).

Dugin is critical of both competing ideologies of the so-called ‘extremes’ of the Overton window, the 
extreme left of Marxist communism and the extreme right of fascism and national Socialism and 
rejects both as well as the comfortable bourgeois center of ‘centrism’, a cowardly compromise with 
both based upon material advantages and economics (“The Reign of Quantity” as Guenon called it, 
the impossible stasis of an unsustainable world based upon a bourgeois ethos of domesticity and 
material comfort, what Nietzsche would call ‘pig philosophy’).

Rather Dugin posits his “The Fourth Political Theory” beyond the centrist positions of democracy (‘left’
and ‘right’ wing) and the third positionism of ‘right wing’ fascism and national Socialism and ‘left-
wing’ Marxist-communism (‘social democracy’).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dugin is critical of both competing ideologies of the so-called ‘extremes’ of the Overton window, the 
extreme left of Marxist communism and the extreme right of fascism and national Socialism and 
rejects both as well as the comfortable bourgeois center of ‘centrism’, a cowardly compromise with 
both based upon material advantages and economics (“The Reign of Quantity” as Guenon called it, 
the impossible stasis of an unsustainable world based upon a bourgeois ethos of domesticity and 
material comfort, what Nietzsche would call ‘pig philosophy’). Rather Dugin posits his “The Fourth Political Theory” beyond the centrist positions of democracy (‘left’
and ‘right’ wing) and the third positionism of ‘right wing’ fascism and national Socialism and ‘left-
wing’ Marxist-communism (‘social democracy’). This is a synthesis of elements of all of its forebears 
into a new mode or state in the dialectic and manifests itself in the ‘multi-polar theory’ that all 
cultures have their own Dasein and thus must self-determined in accordance with the laws of karma 
and evolution (meant in an esoteric sense). What he neglects (perhaps deliberately as he may be an operative of the cabal of Judeo-masonry 
which will be discussed further on) to mention is that the karma of the currently existing races has not
being addressed by his ‘live and let live’ philosophy, that each organism in its current form would 
qualify in the terminology of Jewish Kabbalah as ‘qlippoth’ save for the pure white races (the 
11
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---Hyperborean archetype, the original race on the earth) as all current sub-types of what Dugin calls 
‘humanity’ are hybrids (‘soul shells’, qlippoth), they in their culture (in both the Spenglerian and 
conventional sense) amounts to a product of the murder of white men and the rape of white women 
(involuntary mixture) or the voluntary fornication with non-white anthropoids and whites paleo-
historically, their genetico-spiritual product amounting to a hybrid which is the ‘race’ of today in all 
cases save the purest white races on this earth (blue-eyed, blonde haired Nordic Germanic 
Hyperborean archetype).

Each and all have their karma in most cases save exceptions to the rule and thus are subject to karmic 
cycles as it relates to their culture organism in the Spenglerian sense (‘what goes around comes 
around’ according to the law of attraction).

As an example Blavatsky refers to how the Redskins' 
extinction is a ‘karmic necessity’ owing to their genocidal destruction of the whites in the Americas 
from Atlantis who preceded the Redskins’ presence in the Americas by over 7,500 years (having 
arrived 12,500 years ago creating Tiahuanaco; Machu Picchu; Easter Island and various other 
pyramidal sites over the Americas and indeed the world).

Hence the future of a ‘whiter, brighter world’ is the ‘promise’ of Providence according to the laws of 
karma if and only if whites take their “lucky chance full of meaning” (Nietzsche).

This does not mean 
that all of the current stocks would be eliminated even in the case of the hegemony of the white race 
but would instead entail an upliftment perhaps of those favorably disposed in thought and deed 
toward the white race.Hence the future of a ‘whiter, brighter world’ is the ‘promise’ of Providence according to the laws of 
karma if and only if whites take their “lucky chance full of meaning” (Nietzsche).

This does not mean 
that all of the current stocks would be eliminated even in the case of the hegemony of the white race 
but would instead entail an upliftment perhaps of those favorably disposed in thought and deed 
toward the white race.

Dugin of course would see it otherwise (although this is not certain) in his 
‘multi-polar theory’, who apparently supportive of ‘Otherness’ would simultaneously entail the 
possibility of Ben Klassen's (the founder of the creativity movements’) conception of letting the muds 
“wither on the vine”, allowing them to go to their ‘proper destiny’ (again the copper rule of non-
maleficence or ‘do no harm’ applies thereby discharging any karma).

Once the non-whites attack the 
whites they incur their karma, through their own greed and self-seeking and receive their ‘equal and 
opposite’ reaction.

Thus Dugin's work may be a truly Brahmanical source of wisdom but that is 
difficult to definitively conclude or understand owing to the writer's poor acquaintance with his work 
(hence he can only ‘look through a glass darkly’).

On the contrary where the evidence related to Dugin's personal biography is consulted there is much 
that reveals the true sinister strategy of his “The Fourth Political Theory”, being little more than a 
contemporized version of the Kalergi plan for the formation of the ‘Eurasian Negro’ as outlined 
decades before in Richard Coudenhove von Kalergi's “Practical Idealism" notorious 'Kalergi plan'.

The connections Dugin has are equally notorious in the worst sense of the word spanning the gamut 
of Jewish elites, working with rabbis, involving himself in Kabbalistic rituals and having affiliations with 
other Jews and other affiliates of Jews who are put forward by the cabal as disinformation agents.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On the contrary where the evidence related to Dugin's personal biography is consulted there is much 
that reveals the true sinister strategy of his “The Fourth Political Theory”, being little more than a 
contemporized version of the Kalergi plan for the formation of the ‘Eurasian Negro’ as outlined 
decades before in Richard Coudenhove von Kalergi's “Practical Idealism" notorious 'Kalergi plan'. The connections Dugin has are equally notorious in the worst sense of the word spanning the gamut 
of Jewish elites, working with rabbis, involving himself in Kabbalistic rituals and having affiliations with 
other Jews and other affiliates of Jews who are put forward by the cabal as disinformation agents. Hence (given his connections and his ideological orientation) Dugin's suspicious character is blackened
yet further. 12
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---Indeed the more one delves into Dugin the more he comes to understand this certainty of the role of 
propagandist and ideologue for the cabal to undermine the pro-white movement and subvert it by:
1) associating naïeve and gullible pro-white activists (led by disinformation agents who claim to be 
proponents, however critical, of Dugin and his Eurasianist orientation) with Russia and Eurasianist 
policy as a means of
2) setting them up through guilt by association as an enemy of the state (of whatever N.A.T.O country 
they are dwelling in, those which are traditionally white created and occupied and thus eliminating 
any dissidents) be they ‘law-abiding’ or no-anyone critical of Jews; anyone pro-white, be they 
oblivious to Jews or no and indeed anyone historically or contemporaneously having been disliked by 
Jews or representing a power source for whites enabling them to consolidate power and strengthen 
themselves).

“The Fourth Political Theory” of Dugin and other similar works are the philosophical marketing 
gimmicks employed to sell Eurasianism which softens up the white intelligentsia for receptivity to the 
expansion of the Russian Empire which is Eurasian not white, the Russians having been (at least since 
the time of the Bolshevik revolution but probably before) predominantly Eurasian, a hybrid stock and 
thus for the white Europeans filled with jealous hatred of their Hyperborean superiors.

Dugin's plans are revealed in the book he had released over a decade prior to this point which was 
designed for only Russian consumption called “The Foundations of Geopolitics” which vilifies whites 
and claims Russians are Finno-Tatar stock and not white.

The plans of Dugin are for a Eurasian empire 
which would engulf Europe and destroy the ethnic stock therein through what Hitler called ‘blood 
poisoning’ enabling the mass immigration of Muslims and Orientals into Europe to mix the population 
out of existence.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dugin's plans are revealed in the book he had released over a decade prior to this point which was 
designed for only Russian consumption called “The Foundations of Geopolitics” which vilifies whites 
and claims Russians are Finno-Tatar stock and not white. The plans of Dugin are for a Eurasian empire 
which would engulf Europe and destroy the ethnic stock therein through what Hitler called ‘blood 
poisoning’ enabling the mass immigration of Muslims and Orientals into Europe to mix the population 
out of existence. In concept, as spoken of in the (made for Anglo and European audiences text) “Fourth Political 
Theory”, the multi polar conception outlined in his voluminous ‘Noomakhia ' series, the idea of 
organicism where all regions will be respected and autonymous serves simply as a dupe of the white 
mind, a cleverly orchestrated deception that is intended to engineer the above results: the elimination
of pro-white dissidents and easier takeover by Jewry as the hidden hand of the cabal. As such Dugin is the glove puppet and front man of the cabal in the particular region and serves the 
cabal as one of the horns of its devilish dilemma it imposed upon the world, both of which are “The 
Enemies of Europe” as Yockey spoke of in his book of the same name, playing both faction 
(Russia/China versus N.A.T.O) against the ethnic population of the European Union, the white 
European Aryans which is intended to be the reification of the Kalergi plan and the consummation of 
the genocide of the white race. All salesmen disinformation agents who advertise the Duginist 
Eurasian agenda are working toward the Kalergi plans’ realization and serving the Jew. As such they 
should be exposed and attacked. 13
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---Further as it concerns Dugin's philosophy he puts forth a ‘mother goddess’ orientation which is 
completely opposed to the historically Aryan conception of the Solar-Uranian worldview.

Perhaps, as Dugin himself acknowledges with respect to the ‘Demetrian’ soul of the Russian (in Evola’s
terms) this might apply to a greater extent to his Finno-Tatar stock but has no place in the true 
Hyperborean Tradition which was always ‘Solar-Uranian’ and hence a Father-God (All-father; Tengri; 
Tor, etc.

not a mother Goddess).

This mother Goddess religion is and has always being Jewish, having its ‘origins’ (if such it could be 
called or perhaps it has origins of an extraterrestrial region in the Pelasgian-Semitic stocks which 
inhabited the near East and Mediterranean) Paleo-historically and which has carried itself forward in 
the Dionysian rites and conceptions of Jewish kabbalah of which Dugin is a great fan.

The mother 
goddess is the ‘astral light’ (in the terms of Eliphaz Levi) and more or less accommodates the 
relationship between her consort and himself, between the initiate and ‘the One’ (Mother Mary) in 
the most dark occult sense of luciferian atrocities perpetrated against others, transforming oneself 
into a being ‘beyond good and evil’, in Dionysiac ecstasis.

Hence Dugin is way off the mark as to the Hyperborean Tradition.

The oft-cited counter-example of 
the Druids committing sacrifice in mass atrocities in the region Dugin justly speaks of as Hyperborea is 
not a legitimate example of Aryan stock but was a case of Jewish infiltration into the priest caste and 
had imposed their typical sinister behavior on the population, a behavior bound up with their savage 
biology of Neanderthal-reptilian blood which represents the origin of the mother Goddess religion on 
this earth and which is the ‘Ain Soph Aur’ of the Jewish Kabbalah (‘the boundless light of nothingness’,
the ‘astral light’ in the terms of Eliphaz Levi).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hence Dugin is way off the mark as to the Hyperborean Tradition. The oft-cited counter-example of 
the Druids committing sacrifice in mass atrocities in the region Dugin justly speaks of as Hyperborea is 
not a legitimate example of Aryan stock but was a case of Jewish infiltration into the priest caste and 
had imposed their typical sinister behavior on the population, a behavior bound up with their savage 
biology of Neanderthal-reptilian blood which represents the origin of the mother Goddess religion on 
this earth and which is the ‘Ain Soph Aur’ of the Jewish Kabbalah (‘the boundless light of nothingness’,
the ‘astral light’ in the terms of Eliphaz Levi). Thus can be seen the distortion in Dugin's philosophy which is completely Luciferian as is his political 
praxis which is a direct result of this and which is represented as influencing Putin’s the political 
figurehead of the cabals ‘left-wing’-left-hand path (China; Muslim countries; Russia; non-white 
countries predominantly) to be played off against the ‘right wing’-right-hand path (North America 
possibly excluding Mexico; Europe; Australia; New Zealand, i.e. the white countries). Hence the ideological war is simultaneously a spiritual, a racial and in mundane political war with the 
earth being the Coliseum of this perspective gladiatorial contest between rival factions whose organic 
differences are amplified by the Jews through their ideological-spiritual mind programs of religion: 
Christianity; Hinduism; Buddhism, i.e. right-hand path pacifistic reactionary programs; is land; quotes 
Satanism quotes; Taoism, i.e. left-hand path aggressive action oriented mind programs and their 
subordinate secular forms of right-wing (Capitalism; ‘conservatardism’, etc.) and ‘left-wing’ 
(Communism; Democracy, etc.). The war to end all wars plays into the religious quotes and times quotes eschatology in all regions 
reflective of the Divine Will and the cycles of time in the Kali Yuga. Dugin and his cabal are 
14
14e war to end all wars plays into the religious quotes and times quotes eschatology in all regions 
reflective of the Divine Will and the cycles of time in the Kali Yuga. Dugin and his cabal are 
14
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

undoubtedly attempting to co-opt or rather spin this Aeon exchange in their favor as a final act of 
black magic in their gambit to have hegemony over the world.
15
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---The 'Slav'
Within the pro-white movement and historically in race relations amongst peoples, those who have 
come to be referred to as 'slavs' have been a question mark in the minds of others not 'slavic'.

Specifically as it concerns the Nordic, more Aryan elements, the slavic type has been forever a 
question.

Are they, the question is so often phrased, 'white' or 'Aryan', or are they instead rather un-
Aryan and not white at all?

Are they not instead 'eurasian', these far East Europeans, and if so is it 
merely a question of degree of proportionality to justify qualifying them as 'white' or 'not white'?

The 
'slav' remains a tertiam quid, a question mark in the mind of the racial scientist or philosopher, the 
'racialist', and it is the writer's intention here to amplify the meaning of the 'East European' and to 
make lucid the opaque glass through which this figure is typically perceived.

The East European is a variable figure and this variability is what makes of him an enigma in terms of 
racial classification.

Eastern Europe is a geographical region comprised of many nation states which 
themselves are not wholly bound up with a particular 'nation' in the proper sense of the word 
('ethnos' from the greek) but are an as it were tumultuous concatenation of nations which have been 
confined within the ever changing borders of nation states over millenia, sometimes expanding and at 
others contracting while having their ethnicity also undergo protean change owing to the invasion of 
other ethnicities.

Thus it can be properly spoken of can Eastern Europe and East Europeans by extension (conventionally
and falsely called 'slavs') as a protean organism admitting of change and yet paradoxically 'remaining 
the same'.

Indeed this is the enigma, the paradox of the East European in a nutshell.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thus it can be properly spoken of can Eastern Europe and East Europeans by extension (conventionally
and falsely called 'slavs') as a protean organism admitting of change and yet paradoxically 'remaining 
the same'. Indeed this is the enigma, the paradox of the East European in a nutshell. Zooming out to a God's eye perspective taking into the mind the sense data of history and the entire 
geographical region in question we may acknowledge that those areas of Eastern Europe furthest 
from the asiatic countries are, all things being equal, the least asian/mongoloid and most 
European/Aryan/White and vice versa, and that those areas of this region closest to others are again, 
ceteris paribus (all things being equal) most like those other regions be they Austria; Italy; Czech 
Republic (Bohemia); Germany; etc. Hence as an example we can observe the Hungarian being more 
akin to the Austrian but only relatively, eg. to the Ukrainian and yet, owing to the influx of gypsy stock 
containing an admixture thereof and thus perhaps less Aryan than the Ukrainian in spite of Hungary's 
closer proximity to the West. The tumultuous history of Eastern Europe results in a tumult of peoples who are strengthened 
through the conflicts of the ages while simultaneously undergoing modification through these 
oppositional forces, through assimilation of other elements in eg. defeats in battles spanning millenia 
and/or the voluntary assimilation of those foreign elements leading to greater decay of the nation. The more inhospitable regions, owing to barrenness and remote inaccessibility of climate, led to a 
greater segregation from mixture and especially in those of closest proximity to Central Europe. Hence
places such as Latvia; Estonia and the East Baltic region are more Aryan and pure adjusted for mixture 
16
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---with the Finno-Ugric stock; the Russian with the Mongol stock and the pressure of greater forced 
mixing through the forced migrations of the 'slavs' under the Soviet Union especially within Russia 
itself, and the genocidal decimation of the Germanic stock in the tens of millions by the jewish 
Bolsheviks.

Thus the 'slav' (as a concept or idea made flesh) is borne and was conceived in the mind of
jewry as early as the Byzantine Empire which latter degenerated into modern Turkey, the menace 
which sits on the doorstep of Europe.

The 'slav' or better stated East European is thus a being which admits of much variation and 
incorporates elements that give impetus to forms of behavior and cognition that are quite divergent 
from that of the more pure Aryan stock, however they lend a more lyrical and perhaps even soulful 
character, soulful in the sense of Evola's classification from his work "Synthesis of Racial Doctrine" as a 
Demetrian character or soul type.

The lyricism of their traditional music and dance is reflected in the poetry and literature as well as in 
the mythos of the traditional folkways which have managed, in spite of the imposition of the 
Abrahamic mind virus by the sword, to remain Aryan in the Indo-European sense and hence still "East 
European", becoming differentiated via the particular racial soul of the subtypes of this more abstract 
geographical label, those types who dwell within these regions and who have formed a distinct culture
as a result of their lived experiences in these regions.

Indeed Latvia was one of the last regions of Europe to be yolked to the semitic torture machine of the 
Catholic church and the people have not had their consciousness as deeply imprisoned in the matrix 
of Abraham as have those areas closer to Rome.The lyricism of their traditional music and dance is reflected in the poetry and literature as well as in 
the mythos of the traditional folkways which have managed, in spite of the imposition of the 
Abrahamic mind virus by the sword, to remain Aryan in the Indo-European sense and hence still "East 
European", becoming differentiated via the particular racial soul of the subtypes of this more abstract 
geographical label, those types who dwell within these regions and who have formed a distinct culture
as a result of their lived experiences in these regions.

Indeed Latvia was one of the last regions of Europe to be yolked to the semitic torture machine of the 
Catholic church and the people have not had their consciousness as deeply imprisoned in the matrix 
of Abraham as have those areas closer to Rome.

Those areas within reach of jewish controlled Rome 
have served as a base of operations by the inventors of the Abrahamic creed, such as England; 
Holland; France and Germany to a lesser extent, the latter being the perpetual bone of contention 
which has assisted in repelling the influence of catholicism but in the process spreading the virus of 
protestantism via Luther, et.al.

Paradoxically this has led to the disintegration of Catholicism.

Eastern Europe perhaps owing to the tenacity of foreign elements introduced within its blood has 
acquired a perhaps greater capacity of resistance to the semitic innoculation of the virus of 
Abrahamism and, perhaps owing to that same admixture now inextricably welded to the type and 
formative in part of that type, it has enabled a retention of the healthier instincts which, especially in 
the case of Britain and its imperial colonies has been to a great extent weakened through the millenia 
of spiritual infection.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Paradoxically this has led to the disintegration of Catholicism. Eastern Europe perhaps owing to the tenacity of foreign elements introduced within its blood has 
acquired a perhaps greater capacity of resistance to the semitic innoculation of the virus of 
Abrahamism and, perhaps owing to that same admixture now inextricably welded to the type and 
formative in part of that type, it has enabled a retention of the healthier instincts which, especially in 
the case of Britain and its imperial colonies has been to a great extent weakened through the millenia 
of spiritual infection. An example of this Western Spiritual Siphilis can be seen in the "moralizing 
fetishism" of 'Western society', its bad conscience; guilt; shame and other signs of a sick mind, 
behavior largely absent in the East European. The remote North of Scandinavia also bears witness to the preservation of Tradition over and against 
Abrahamism, however the relative purity of the stock perhaps makes it less resistive and more 
delicate in suceptibility of such infection. As Nietzsche said the noblest and purest animals are often 
the most susceptible to extinction. The strengthening influence of the presumed asiatic or oriental 
blood infusion from asia and the mediterranean into the East European stock has had a degenerative 
17
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---influence in many cases and also as a saving grace from the perspective of rassen hygiene (racial 
hygiene) a strengthening influence perhaps kindling in the mind the fire of the blood memory of the 
ancient Hyperborean stock.

Those purest are often least conscious of their purity, taking it for granted and thereby failing to 
safeguard it from contamination.

Those less pure, though still white, still predominantly Aryan in 
terms of the proportion of their Aryan blood, are more vigorous in fighting to retain that Aryan blood 
they have and indeed to purify it yet further through sound eugenics either within their own kind or 
through crossing with those of purer kind such as in the case of East Europeans with those of Central; 
Western or North Europeans.

The apathy of the 'West' is largely attributable to the mind virus of christianity.

The comparative 
healthy mindedness of the East European may be considered to derive from the following causes:
1) a lack of christianity (where present); 2) the constant threat of assault from the asiatic East and 
arabic South; 3) the slight admixture of blood from the foreign stocks who presumably either have 
ceased to exist, being mixed together or who have been beaten and defeated or at least beaten back 
leaving whatever remnant now exists in those regions.

The 'slav' has his quixotic nature as can be seen
in the work of Dostoevsky and Gogol amongst others, his chaotic character and the sardonic wit that 
forever plays about his features, a survival mechanism.

This may be attributed to a life of struggle 
against foreign invasion and the necessity of perpetual war, his temperment being one of 
perseverence in adversity and strength through joy and joy through strength.

The East European has 
served as the vanguard against incursion into Europe and, in spite of his perhaps 'fatal flaws' he 
deserves to be dignified with the title 'Aryan'.

'Slav'-life, Trad-life?--- PAGE BREAK ---

The East European has 
served as the vanguard against incursion into Europe and, in spite of his perhaps 'fatal flaws' he 
deserves to be dignified with the title 'Aryan'. 'Slav'-life, Trad-life? The perpetual discussion in the alt-kike/altright regarding 'slavs' and their 'tradition' typically in the 
form of Russia and its orthodox christianity may be reasonably assumed to be designed to achieve the 
following purposes:
1) to create a false association between pro-whites and Russia as a nation state such that pro-whites 
in non-russian countries can be associated with a soon to be enemy nation and to be declared 'enemy 
combatants'. They would then be subjected to Guantanamo-bay-style torture and/or elimination by 
the police state of the J.O.G (jewish occupation government) such that the state can justify the 
acceleration of its 4th generational warfare program against their own slave populations leading to 
their end game of white genocide and global despotism. 2) The psyop of the 'trad slav' is deployed to mind control and neutralize pro-whites by attempting to 
subject them to the mind control of christian dogma which is a black magic formula for mental slavery 
and subordination to jewry. This is achieved through the presentation (a simulacrum or fake) of the 
'slav' and 'slavic culture' as 'Traditional' when, as Julius Evola stated in several of his works, christianity 
is not an authentic Tradition but a form of garbled syncretism of lunar-semitic near eastern 
18
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---Traditional' when, as Julius Evola stated in several of his works, christianity 
is not an authentic Tradition but a form of garbled syncretism of lunar-semitic near eastern 
18
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---

'spirituality' that was combined with the solar-uranian authentic spiritual tradition of the Aryan and 
formed a pragmatic amalgam that was used by jewry to weld together the disparate populations of 
Rome and to create a mongrelized product of the original Roman stock and near-eastern and 
mediterranean traders servile to the jewish oligarchy.
Hence 'the orthodox tradition' is an oxymoron and an absurdity which was imposed in 
characteristically jewish fashion on the Russian empire in the same way catholicism was imposed upon
Rome. The Tsars were typically bound up with jews and this via miscegenation or affiliation in the 
conventional forms of usury and finance and tied together through occult and religious bonds. Those 
who have fallen for the lie of the 'trad slav' have merely embraced a syncretic construct, a 'simulacral 
idea' and have assisted in bringing it into being through lending it support. 
The True Tradition of East Europeans is as foreign from that psyop as the Western; Northern and 
Central Europeans are from Catholicism and protestantism. Christianity is the spiritual siphillis which 
has rotted out the body of the white man and which, rather than serving as a life preserver is in fact a 
life destroyer, a leaden anchor which seeks to submerge him within the corrosive waters of the illusory
world, the matricized fake world of jewry. To discover the actual Tradition of the East European one 
must look before christianity cursed the earth with its presence and consult the myths which predated
it and understand the relationship between East and North; Central and Western Europeans. Such a 
task is no easy one but still lives in the region in the form of authentic culture which has had to be 
concealed from the sight of the perpetually 'witch hunting' christian censor and their jewish mind 
manipulators to avoid being destroyed by the cabal of evil which still shrouds the world in darkness. 
Tradition can be discovered in the cultures which have put up the greatest resistance to the jewish 
hegemony and that lies in the West-but in the East of the West and not in the false cultural constructs 
which jewry has installed in these regions as trojan horses to tear apart these nations via 
miscegenation and destroy their authentic traditions.
The soul of the East European, erroneously named 'slav' lives on in spite of the relentless assault by 
the 'robots of the demiurge', jewry and their fellow black magician christian priest underlings. Should 
the prognostication of James Battersby in his "The Holy Book of Adolf Hitler" fructify we will see arise 
under the aegis of the folk soul of Aryan mankind a union formed of the Nordic-Germanic; Celtic and 
East European subtypes of the descendants of the Hyperborean Aryans.
19
19