12/3/63
：
TO:'
SAC
Denver
62-b04060-1388
.
From:
Director,FBI
LER HARYEY
OSVALD
IS-R
RB:
OTHER BVIDKNCE
Reurundatod airtel in above-captioned matter forwarding
undeveloped 35 mm filn relating to the above matter as obtained
fron Robert Barl Croft, 7o9 Clarkson Street, Denver,Colorado
on 11/23/63.
This film was developed by the Kodak Process Laboratory
in Fashington, D. C., Bhortiy arter its reccipt. Trenty-tro
frames vere developed and only three franes,numbers 16,17,and
18 may have sone future pertinence to this case.
Frane number
Thile there are only 22 franes,the slido number8 go to 23. This
vould account for the skipped nunber,bowever, this early Boquence
no doubt relates to personal shots taken by Mr.Croft at an eariier
time and he should be in a position to verify the seguence vhen the
film is returned to Denver.
Frane number 19 is a complete blank
and night possibly have been occasioned by a malfunction of Croft's
Beairtel epocifies that photographs of possible eviien-
tiary ralue may be retnined until completion of prosecution,at.
vhich tine they must be returned to Croft without any duplicates
or'copies having been made.
As you are vell avare, prosecution 
against Osvald is inpossible and while there is no foreseeable
need for the above-Bpecified franes,it ls possible that subsequent
dovelopmonts in this hlghly involved case zight require reviei at
presentation of these pbotographs before a congresfional committee
Telocn
Belmou
or Presidontial commisgion; therefore, you are requested to contact
Molu
Croft and endeavor tg/obtgin his permission tor the Bureau to
Cellobn
theabovethree
frases for our use
Dalias
Caa
Smith
(Laboratory Unit)
1
Salln
Tore!
Trotier
LEC-31963
Tele.
加R：飞
SEE NOTE PAGE TTO
COMM-FBI

--- PAGE BREAK ---n his permission tor the Bureau to
Cellobn
theabovethree
frases for our use
Dalias
Caa
Smith
(Laboratory Unit)
1
Salln
Tore!
Trotier
LEC-31963
Tele.
加R：飞
SEE NOTE PAGE TTO
COMM-FBI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Airtel to sAC,De_rer:
RE:.LKE IARYEY OSHALD
".
cover tne eventualities nentioned above. You can asgurei
Kr.Croft this Bureau does not intend to make use of these
photos commerically or to infringe upon his rights of ownership
Pripr to any use of these photographs other than the possibilities
mentionod above, appropriate release would be sought from hin.r
Mr.Croft a release to use these photos in any manner this Bureau
deens necessary with the exception that we viil not release them 
commorcially or to the press as such 
is his prerogative.
.
For your information and guidance, frame number 16
depicts the Presidential motorcade approaching the Main and s
Houston Streets intorsectionj frame number 17 ehows the::.
Prosidential car just as it turns on to Houston Strcet from
Hain Street; and frane number l8 appears to show the .
Presidentiai car on Eln Street south of Houston Street just
aoments bofore the Presidont vas shot.In the latter two fraaes
the President and Mrs.Kennedy are cleariy visible.
In view of the above, you are instructed to pronptiy
contact Hr.Croft in an efiort to obtain his cooperation in
this matter and advise the Bureau ir he vill accede to our
request. Upon receipt of your answer,all developed franes
viil be pronptly sent to Denver for appropriate return to
Mr.Croft.
NOTE:
Croft, a Kormon Missionary, was in Dallas, Texas, on 
I172z/63,awaiting a train for Denver and allegedly took four photo-
graphs oi the Presidential motorcade. He voluntarily appeared at
our Denver Office on 1l/23/63, was interviewed and furnished
undeveloped 35mm film which he had taken on 1l/22/63.Croft believed
the last picture taken by him was taken bimiltaneously with the shot
Vhich kilied the President. This no doubt refers to frane nuaber 
.19 which is a complete blank which probably vas occasioned by some
malfunction of Mr. Croft's camera or sone other fault. While Croft
requested that no copies be made,it would be our best interest to
pxve copies of the pertinent frames made for possible future use
even though they appear to have no evidentiary pertinence at
this time.