DL 89-43
HAILVHLSINIIV
On Novonber 22,1963, U.8. Attorney H.BAREro0T BANDER8,
Northern District of Texas, Dallas, Toxas,and his Btaff did con-
Biderable reBearch 1n an effort to locato a Fedoral Btatuto that
Vould cover the aasasBinntion of Presidont JOHN P.KKNNkDY ith
nogative roaults.Contacts by ropresentatives of the PBI in this
connoction Vere confirmod by lotter to U. 8. Attorney BANDERs on
Novenbor 26, 1963.
No local dissemination of this roport ls being mado to U.8.
Attorney or to tho local U.8.Secrot Bervice 1n Dallas.
Ixtra coples
or this report have boon made for the Dallas Offico in the ovent the
Bureau directs that acopy of thie roport should be disaeminated to
both the local Secret Service and the U.8.Attorney'gOffice at
Dallas.It is felt that diesomination at a national lovel might be
more appropriate.
By teletypo dated Novomber 23,1963,the Buroau 1nstructed
all officos to furniah all information of intorest to tho U.8.
Secret Service to the Bureau and follow With a lettorhead memorandum
fordissominatlon.
Throughout tho 1nitial Btages of this lnvestigation,
poople who in the past have made romarks constituting threats against
the late Prosident KENNEDY'. Investigation in connection with Buch
remarks.has boen conducted and the results will be Bet forth 1n a
Bubsoquont roport which 1t 1s folt Bhould be dissominated to the U.8.
Socrot Sorvice,but letterhoad memoranda were not prepared in each.
Buch instance.
Whore information was received indicating alleged threats
against Proaidont LYNDoN B. JOHNSoN, Buch·infornation has been
1mmodiately furnished local U.8. Socret Sorvico and lottorhead
momoranda submitted to the Bureau.
Results of nogative contacts ith all informants,security,
raoial and criminal,as well as other Bources,for 1nformation bearing
on tho asgassination oi Prosident KENNkDY are being rotained in tho
Dallas file.
Tho contonte of communications from other offices reflocting
thoir 1nvestigation 1n oatablishing the whereabouts of bombing sus-
pects,known Klan and hate group members,are not being Bet forth
horoin but are boing rotained in. the Dullas file.
C
COVER PAGE
Sefen/Lecl.
15f255ation 1n oatablishing the whereabouts of bombing sus-
pects,known Klan and hate group members,are not being Bet forth
horoin but are boing rotained in. the Dullas file.
C
COVER PAGE
Sefen/Lecl.
15f255

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DL 89-43
In Bome instances there are contained 1n this roport PD-3o2s
reflocting intorviow with cortain individuals by different agents on
difforont days.It 1s pointed out that many people ho appearod to
ponsss information of valuo wore inastate of mind when intorviewed
and thoy vere rointorvieved a day or so lator during the investigation.
In connoction ith tho intorview of Mrs.Lois Brrz at Fort Wooth,
Texas,on Novonber
22, 1963,an unknovn ubjoct -Inporsonation.case
haBbeon oponodin
thoDallasOffico.
of
A separate cape Was oponed in connection With the shooting
"JACKL.
RUBY,aka. Jack Rubonstein,
LBE HARVEY OSWALD captionod
OSWALD，aka.-VICTIM.
CR"
Dallas file 44-l639,and the rosults of such 1nveBtigation will be
contained in a Boparate roport in thst case.
D
COVER PAGE

--- PAGE BREAK ---ein,
LBE HARVEY OSWALD captionod
OSWALD，aka.-VICTIM.
CR"
Dallas file 44-l639,and the rosults of such 1nveBtigation will be
contained in a Boparate roport in thst case.
D
COVER PAGE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DL89-43
It ia to be noted that this report contains information
1n the details which ordinarily would be reported in the administrative
aection and the ldentity of the Bource of the information not
revealed. Due to'the fact that the FBI Laboratory reports set
forth in the details of this report containcertain information
baged on Buch confidential records,and further because of the
gravity.of this matter and the fact that Preaident LYNDoN B.
JOHNSON had requegted the FBI conduct invegtigation, it was
felt beat to reflect the ource of Buch information..It hould
benoted further that in connection with information from the
Selective Service Becords there is a false Selective Sorvice Card
1n which 1nstance it would not be necessary to conceal the
ldentity oi the source of informntion from such records:
The information from the records of the U.S.Pogt
Office,Dallas,Texas,Wag made available on 11/23/63 by Mr.
HARRy HoLRS, U.S.Postal Inspector,Terminal Annex,Dallas,Texas.
The 1nformation fromthe records of theSouthwestern
Bell Telephone Company,Ft.Worth, Texas,on ll/23/63,as made
ayailable to SA B.TOM CARTER by JOHN B.MOORE,District Manager,
Southwestern Bell Telophone Company,Ft.Worth, Texas.
The information from the records of the Southwestern
Bell Telephone Compnny,Dallas, Texas, was mnde available on
ANTONPAVRLKA,JR.
The 1nformation obtained from the records of the
Southwestern States Telephone Company, Irving,Texas,Was made
available on 1l/26/63 by W.P.ESSLINGER,Division Manager:
The lnformation from the records of the Irving Bank &
Trust Company, Irving, Texns, Was made avnilable on 1l/26/63 by
GENE GLAZIER,.Cashier.
COVERPAGE