CIA Assassination Plots: The Church Committee Report 50 Years Later

Published: Nov 20, 2025 | Briefing Book # 909 | Edited by Peter Kornbluh

Senate Report on CIA Efforts to Assassinate Foreign Leaders Caused Major Scandal; Prompted New Legal Restraints on Targeted U.S. Murders
Assassinations Report Remains Relevant as U.S. Targets Venezuelan Leader

[As the Church Committee begins its investigation into controversial CIA operations such as assassination plots, Secretary of State/National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger, CIA director William Colby and other national security officials meet to discuss whether to cooperate with the Senate inquiry. In this memorandum of conversion, Kissinger presents an argument to essentially undermine the investigation by restricting the Committee ’ s access to secret documents. “The fact of these investigations could be as damaging to the intelligence community as McCarthy was to the Foreign Service,” Kissinger notes in his opening remarks. “We have to be clear on what we want them [the Committee] to stay out of.” CIA Director Colby suggests forcing Senator Church to sign a secrecy agreement. Eventually, the CIA agrees to provide access to its Top Secret files in return for prior review of the draft Senate report.]

U.S. Senator Frank Church, Democrat from Idaho, led the Senate committee that investigated CIA assassination plots.

Cuban leader Fidel Castro was one of the key targets of U.S. assassination plots.

Rafael Trujillo, leader of the Dominican Republic, was killed in an assassination plot linked to the CIA.

Congo Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba was the target of an assassination plot described in the Church Committee report.

Gen. Rene Schneider of Chile was murdered in a CIA-linked plot described in the Church Committee report.

Washington D.C., November 20, 2025 - Fifty years ago today, a special Senate Committee led by Idaho Senator Frank Church lifted the veil of secrecy on the clandestine efforts of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to target specific foreign leaders for assassination. The Church Committee overcame intense pressure from the Gerald Ford White House to withhold publication of the report, which exposed CIA operations to “neutralize” leaders such as Fidel Castro in Cuba, Patrice Lumumba in Congo, and General Rene Schneider in Chile, and generated a major scandal over the ethics of U.S. foreign policy and the compatibility of unaccountable covert operations with a democratic society.

“The evidence establishes that the United States was implicated in several assassination plots,” states the introduction of the 285-page report, officially titled Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders. “The Committee believes that, short of war, assassination is incompatible with American principles, international order, and morality. It should be rejected as a tool of foreign policy.”

The 50th anniversary of the release of the assassinations report comes as the Trump administration is openly threatening to kill Venezuelan president Nicolas Maduro. According to media reports, the White House Office of Legal Counsel is developing a legal argument alleging that Maduro is a “Narco terrorist” because he is associated with a vague criminal network called the Cartel de los Soles and is therefore a legitimate target for elimination. The State Department announced that on November 25 it will officially designate the Cartel as a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO), giving the U.S.According to media reports, the White House Office of Legal Counsel is developing a legal argument alleging that Maduro is a “Narco terrorist” because he is associated with a vague criminal network called the Cartel de los Soles and is therefore a legitimate target for elimination. The State Department announced that on November 25 it will officially designate the Cartel as a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO), giving the U.S. legal latitude to strike down alleged members of the group.

The Trump administration and the Pentagon have used similar designations to justify the series of deadly attacks on “unlawful combatants” aboard small boats in the Caribbean that were allegedly carrying drugs. Over the last two months, the U.S. military has targeted and killed more than 80 crew members aboard the vessels using drones and Hellfire missiles.

To commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Church Committee report, the National Security Archive is posting a small selection of documents on efforts by the Ford Administration to keep the report secret and Senator Church’s commitment to ensuring that the American public would learn what the CIA was doing in their name but without their knowledge. These include records about CIA director William Colby’s pressure on President Ford to block publication of the report and the failed White House effort to persuade Church not to do so.military has targeted and killed more than 80 crew members aboard the vessels using drones and Hellfire missiles.

To commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Church Committee report, the National Security Archive is posting a small selection of documents on efforts by the Ford Administration to keep the report secret and Senator Church’s commitment to ensuring that the American public would learn what the CIA was doing in their name but without their knowledge. These include records about CIA director William Colby’s pressure on President Ford to block publication of the report and the failed White House effort to persuade Church not to do so. The records are drawn from a comprehensive Digital National Security Archive collection on the CIA scandals in 1975 compiled and edited by John Prados and Arturo Jimenez-Bacardi.

The report detailed an array of covert efforts to assassinate foreign leaders, including plots to kill Fidel Castro with toxic cigars, exploding seashells, and hypodermic needles disguised as ballpoint pens, and the ensuing scandal was one of several the CIA faced for its misconduct in the mid-1970s. Officially called the Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, the Church Committee issued additional reports on the CIA’s covert efforts to destabilize the democratically elected government of Salvador Allende and a set of volumes detailing the hidden history of the intelligence community, including the CIA, the National Security Agency (NSA), and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).

The impact of the Alleged Assassination Plots report was immediate and consequential. Public outrage forced the CIA and the White House to retreat on the use of assassination as a tool of covert operations. Officially called the Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, the Church Committee issued additional reports on the CIA’s covert efforts to destabilize the democratically elected government of Salvador Allende and a set of volumes detailing the hidden history of the intelligence community, including the CIA, the National Security Agency (NSA), and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).

The impact of the Alleged Assassination Plots report was immediate and consequential. Public outrage forced the CIA and the White House to retreat on the use of assassination as a tool of covert operations. In response to the report, on February 18, 1976, President Ford signed Executive Order 11905, which stated: “No employee of the United States Government shall engage in, or conspire to engage in, political assassination.” Successive presidents have issued similar executive orders.

In a short epilogue to the report, the Church Committee determined that the targeted assassination of foreign leaders contradicted the principles of the United States as a nation. “The Committee does not believe that the acts which it has examined represent the real American character,” the report concluded. “We regard the assassination plots as aberrations.”

“Despite our distaste for what we have seen, we have great faith in this country. The story is sad, but this country has the strength to hear the story and to learn from it. We must remain a people who confront our mistakes and resolve not to repeat them.”

“Senator Church’s insistence on publishing the assassinations report effectively ended officially sanctioned murder of foreign leaders as a policy tool for nearly half a century,” said National Security Archive senior analyst Peter Kornbluh. “Now, the Trump administration seems ready to return to the dark days of CIA assassination plots and extrajudicial executions.”

In a plea to Senator Church, President Ford summarizes his cooperation with the Committee’s investigation while advancing his arguments against publishing the report. The President concedes that the CIA’s assassination plots were “abhorrent” but argues the report must remain secret. “Public release of these official materials and information will do grievous damage to our country. It would likely be exploited by foreign nations and groups hostile to the United States in a manner designed to do maximum damage to the reputation and foreign policy of the United States. It would seriously impair our ability to exercise a positive leading role in world affairs.”

Documents

Kissinger Opposition to Supporting Committee Inquiry Memorandum of Conversation, “Investigation of Allegations of CIA Domestic Activities,” February 20, 1975, 9 pp.
Feb 20, 1975 | Source Gerald Ford Presidential Library

Top Secret Draft of Church Committee Report, October 16, 1975, 366 pp.
Oct 16, 1975 | Source Digital National Security Archive
After an intense eight-month investigation, the Church Committee provides a pre-publication draft of their revealing report to the CIA. Only a few persons in the executive branch are cleared to read the draft, which totals well over 300 pages and contains multiple and shocking revelations of CIA efforts to assassinate Fidel Castro in Cuba—among the plots are the use of exploding sea shells, toxic cigars, poison pens, contaminated scuba diving suits and collaboration with the mafia to murder Cuba’s revolutionary leader. The report also reveals assassination plots against Chilean General Rene Schneider, Prime Minister Patricie Lumumba in Congo, and Ngo Dinh Diem in Vietnam.

DCI William Colby letter to President Ford in response to draft report on assassinations, Secret/Sensitive, October 20, 1975, 12 pp. (includes memo from S. D. Breckinridge, “SSC Draft Report on Assassinations,” October 20, 1975)
Oct 20, 1975 | Source Digital National Security Archive
After a top aide to CIA Director William Colby reviews the draft report, Colby sends a memorandum to President Ford forcefully arguing that he has to protect the Agency by blocking publication of the report. “I believe that any exposure of events of the past on this subject could only do grievous damage to our country,” Colby writes. He recommends “most strongly” that the President convince Senator Church “to forgo this action [of publishing the report] so destructive to our country.”

William G. Hyland, Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, Memorandum for the Record on Assassinations Report, Secret/Sensitive, October 20, 1975, 3 pp.
The director of the State Department’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research, William Hyland, also reviews the Senate draft report. In his memo to President Ford, Hyland argues that portions of the report should be restricted from publication on national security grounds.

Counselor to the President Jack Marsh, Options Memo to Ford Regarding “Assassination Report,” Secret/Sensitive, October 29, 1975, 7 pp. (includes cover memo to Richard Cheney)
Oct 29, 1975 | Source Digital National Security Archive
President Ford received this options memo on how to respond to the pending publication of the report. A top White House aide, Jack Marsh, presents the argument of Kissinger, the CIA and other national security officials that “official acknowledgement of assassination plotting by successive Administrations of the United States Government would have an appalling and shattering impact in the international community. Without question, it would do grave damage to our ability to play a positive role of leadership in world affairs. It would provide profoundly harmful leverage to our adversaries and the resultant humiliation we would suffer would deal a serious blow to our foreign policy from which we could recover only with difficulty.” The options Ford is given include cooperating with the publication of the report, attempting to restrict the publication and distribution of the report, and fully opposing any publication of the report in its present form. The President checks the final option “that no report be published.”

President Ford letter to Sen. Frank Church asking him “not to make public the report on the subject of assassinations,” October 31, 1975, 3 pp
Oct 31, 1975 | Source Gerald Ford Presidential L ibrary

Sen. Frank Church letter to President Ford rejecting his request to suppress the assassinations report, November 4, 1975, 3 pp.
Nov 4, 1975 | Source Digital National Security Archive
In his November 4, 1975, response to President Ford, Senator Church rejects the White House effort to suppress the findings of the Committee on assassination plots. “In my view,” Church writes, “the national interest is better served by letting the American people know the true and complete story. A basic tenet of our democracy is that the people must be told of the mistakes of their government so that they may have the opportunity to correct them.” After redacting some names of CIA officers named in the report, the Committee eventually votes to release its comprehensive exposé on Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders on November 20, 1975.
