I saw The President Assinated
The morning of November 22, 1963 started out to be
cold e.nd raining a dark day.I made detail at.6:45 along
with many other officers."I had escorted President Kennedy
in l9el when he came to Dallas to visit with Mr. Sam Rayburn
who wa.s. in Baylor Hospital in Serious condition. That day
when we got back to Love field Mr. Kennedy shook my hand and
thanked me for the escort.This time I was hoping that I
could escort the President again But I thought I would
probably have to work a corner instead.. In Detail I was
rear cf.the Presidental Limosine.The original Plan was
to have two officers ride on the left of the car and two on
the right of the car..These officers were to ride one behind
the other to keep any one from getting to near the President
but he did not want this so we were changed so as to ride
side by side at the rear bumper of the car which was only
slightly behind the President.
We rode our Motorcycles out of the Garage that
morning in the rain.We were required to be on our assignments
at Ten that morning.The Planes were due to land at about
Eleven Thirty.I got to Love Field at a little after Nine and
it had about quit raining.By Ten it was beganing to clear off..
The planes Landed at about Eleven Thirty'Five. There
were three of them the first.two carried the Staff, white
House press and other dignitaries.
The third planewas air Force
one which carried the President.
We lined up our motorcycle escort preparing for the
departure.The motorcade was to be led by Chief Lumpkin who
was to be about six blocks ahead followed by Sgt. Bellah with
Two Motor Jockey who were to be about three blocks ahead then
Sgt.Ellis with four Jockeys one block ahead,'then Chief
Curry only a few feet ahead of the President's car I was riding
beside Jim Chaney on the right side of the President's Limosine.
B.J. Martin and Bobby Hargis were riding on the left side of
the car.Sgt. Smart and Four other Jockey's were bringing up
the rear behind the Secret Service car.right side of the President's Limosine.
B.J. Martin and Bobby Hargis were riding on the left side of
the car.Sgt. Smart and Four other Jockey's were bringing up
the rear behind the Secret Service car.

--- PAGE BREAK ---esident's Limosine.
B.J. Martin and Bobby Hargis were riding on the left side of
the car.Sgt. Smart and Four other Jockey's were bringing up
the rear behind the Secret Service car.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There was Hundreds of people standing on the curbs
as we came out of Love Field it was to be this way all the way
to the Market Hall.These people would walk out into the
street as the first motorcycles went by so Chief Curry told them
over the radio to fall back to about 50 feet ahead of his car.
On Leinon Ave.49o0 block near Loma Alto some people on the
stop and shake our hands".Mr. Kennedy had his driver stop and
he to.ld these people to come on and they walked up to his car and
did shake his hand. I saw people start to run toward the
stopped car from as far as a block ahead of us.Jim Chaney
callei by radio to Chief Curry and he started backing up toward
the Prresidental car Sgt. Ellis and the four Jockeys turned
around and started toward us the secret Service men dismounted
and ran to the car and started moving the people away then we
started moving again.Chief Lumpkin called Chief Curry and told
him the crowd was extra heavy at Turtle Creek and Lemon and he
replied "Thats all right we'il take care of it we have a good
motorcycle escort." Sgt.Ellis and his Four got the crowd pushed
back and we proceeded with out tocmuch interference.
Thecloser
we got: to downtown the heaveir the crowd got and the more they
wouid walk out toward the President. If one of them got pretty
close a secret service man would leave his car and get on Back
of the: Presidental car so he could be close enough to Mr.Kennedy
toprotecthim。
We.traveled West on Cedar Springs to Harwood then South
on harwood to Main Street without to much trouble with the crowd
but as: we traveled West on Main the crowd was heavest of all and
they wouldn't back up.Several times my right handle bar and
right hand hit people in the stomach because they weren't
watching me they were only looking at the president.Along about
Akard Street the crowd was so heavy and they would not back up
so rat:her than bump them I slacked back and was riding directly
behinc. Jim Chaney. A young man ran out of the crowd from behind
Presicental Limosine As he ran by me I saw that he was carrying..k up
so rat:her than bump them I slacked back and was riding directly
behinc. Jim Chaney. A young man ran out of the crowd from behind
Presicental Limosine As he ran by me I saw that he was carrying..

take the close up picture of the President because one of the
Secret. service men caught him just in front of my motor and
bodily threw him between me and Jim Chaney into the crowd.. The
About this time I saw ahead of me standing in the street a lady
holaing an umbrella,the type that had a long metal piece on the

--- PAGE BREAK ---w him between me and Jim Chaney into the crowd.. The
About this time I saw ahead of me standing in the street a lady
holaing an umbrella,the type that had a long metal piece on the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

but this lady aidn't right then.An Agent left his car and
got on. the rear of the Presidental car.I rode closer and
closer to her forcing her back into the crowd.After we
passec. her the Agent went back to his car。
We traveled West on Main the turned North on Houston
Street.without too much trouble with the crowd then we turned
West cnto Elm St.Drove only a short way traveling very slowly.
About that time I heard what I thought was a car back fire and
I looked around and then to the President's car in time for the
next explosion and saw Mr. Connaly Jerk back to his right and
it seemedl that he look right at me I could see a shocked
expression on his face and I thought"Someone is shooting at
them" I'began stopping my motor and looking I looked straight
ahead first at the Railroad overpass saw only one Policeman
standing on the track directly over the StreetI looked then
back to my right and behind me then looked back toward Mr.
Kennedy and saw him hit in the head he appeared to have been
hit just above the right ear.The top of his head flew off
away from me.Mrs. Kennedy pulled him toward him; Mrs.Connaly
pulled Mr..Connaly down and she slid down in the seat.I knew
back that way but I never did look up.Looking back to the
front again I saw the Secret Service Agent lying down across
the car over Mr。and Mrs. Kennedy the Presidental·limosine was
past the presidental car drawing there guns as they ran.I
pulled.past the Presidents car and up toward Chief Curry's car.
Chief Curry came on the radio and notified the Dispatcher that
a shocting had accured that we were in route to Parkland Code
North on Stemmons Freeway Agent Hill raised up looked over
toward me and shook his head from side to side and held up his
hand thumb down.He knew at that time as I did that the
President: of the UnitedStates was dead or dying.
We were driving at a high rate of speed the people
along to shoulder of the freeway not knowing what had taken
place.were trying to get a closer look at the President and
would run into the street in front of us.A very dangerous
thing to do.After we passed Market hall we had no trouble with
pedestrian traffic but the automobile traffic was heavy. Itt the President and
would run into the street in front of us.A very dangerous
thing to do.After we passed Market hall we had no trouble with
pedestrian traffic but the automobile traffic was heavy. It

--- PAGE BREAK ---would run into the street in front of us.A very dangerous
thing to do.After we passed Market hall we had no trouble with
pedestrian traffic but the automobile traffic was heavy. It

--- PAGE BREAK ---

seemecl like an eternity but we finally got to Parkland
Hospit:al.
I got off my motor stepped over to.the Presidental
Limosine.An Agent opened the car door and started to get
Mr. Kennedy out but Mrs. Kennedy said no.Its no need she
said and raised up.from over Mr. Kennedy.I could see the
top of his head was gone, his left eye was bulged out of
socket.. The agent said "oh no" and started crying pulled
his ccat off.and placed it over Mr.Kennedy's he head.I saw
out then"; thinking that Mr. Connaly was Mr. Johnson; reached
in the:car and got ahold of him under his arms some other
officers.got a hold of Mr..Connaly and we laid him on.the
stretcher and he was taken inside.I looked back to Mr.
Kennedy as Mrs.Kennedy said "All right but I'm going with
him.".I reached in and got ahold of him at his shoulders
and helped lay him on a stretcher.I stepped.back and some
agents started pushing Mr. Kennedy into the Hospital Mrs.
Kennedy walked beside the.stretcher.As we got to the Door
to the emergency room an agent told me to take up a post
here and not to let anybody but'Doctors and nurses in.
Some woman and a small boy walked up and asked
"Is it true that the President was shot" and I said yes.
"How bad is he hurt" she said and I said "I don't know Mam
and If I aid I could not tell you."
' Mr. Pokey Wright a retired Deputy Chief of Police
walked up and told me to clear the Hallway and I along with
some Secret Serviceagents askedeverybodyto leave the
hallway and aid get it cleared out.
This was the first chance I had to relax a little
bit and as I lit a cigerate.I::noticed I had blood on my hands
looked and I had blood on my left sleeve, down the left side
of my riaing breeches and on the outside of my left boot.I
supposed I got this on me as I helped get Mr.Kennedy out
oftheca.r。
A man walked up and wanted to go into the Emergency
room.I asked him who he was and he said he was Justice of
thePeace
Itold himhecould not goinot this on me as I helped get Mr.Kennedy out
oftheca.r。
A man walked up and wanted to go into the Emergency
room.I asked him who he was and he said he was Justice of
thePeace
Itold himhecould not goin

--- PAGE BREAK ---elped get Mr.Kennedy out
oftheca.r。
A man walked up and wanted to go into the Emergency
room.I asked him who he was and he said he was Justice of
thePeace
Itold himhecould not goin

--- PAGE BREAK ---

because there was probably nothing he could do. He said
okthenhewenton.
Later the Hospital Administrator came
out looking for this J.P.,I tola him I turned him back and
he saia "Turned him backman he own's.the body" and I
you see him again we need him to authorize the removal of
theBody"。
This was the first official word I had that the
President was dead。Officer L.C. Gray walked up and asked
me if I had heard about.Officer Tippett I said no and he
told me that officer Tippett had stopped a suspect and was
killed and that they were looking for this suspect in Oak ciiff.
Mrs. Cabell walked up and asked if Mr. Cabell was in
to come.in.I went inside to ask him and before I could say
   5 1 o  .  
said come on any we went to my motorcycle as we passed his
wife in the hallway he told her thathe would be right back.
them to get a Justice of the Peace'to the hospital in a hurry.
I did and we went back inside he went back into the Emergency
information that the airplane had been moved wanted me to find
out where it was and arrange for an escort back to Love Field.
I liked to never found a phone in that hospital that wasn't
busy.One line had already been hooked up direct to Washington.
I'finally got a line and called the dispatcher's office.I
told him who I was.and that I understood the air planes had been
moved Instructed him to contact the love field officer and
Instruct him to pick up theescort at the entrace to love field
and lead it to the president's plane.He asked if I was going
toescort the presidents body back to love field and I told him
that I did not know.I then looked for the agent to tell him
back to the door to the Emergancy Room.
Shortly some officer walked up and told me they are
taking the president out the other door come on he said.I
walked outside Just as they were putting the casket into the
Hearse.Someone said "Jackson a secret service agent is looking
for.you" Sgt.Steve Ellis asked me if I was going to escort
the Body to love field I said I don't know about that time the
agent walked up and asked if I had arranged for the escort and.ent is looking
for.you" Sgt.Steve Ellis asked me if I was going to escort
the Body to love field I said I don't know about that time the
agent walked up and asked if I had arranged for the escort and.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I said "yes Im ready to go when you are." Officer James Taylor
asked me if I wanted him to go with me.and I said yes and
turned to Sgt. Ellis and told him that Taylor and I were going
to make Escort to love field with that we left.As chief's
car pulled out in front of us until we got onto Hines Blvd.
then he motioned for us to take the lead.We did and made
a usual funeral escort, using only red lights and whistle
toclear traffic to love field.
Where the president was placed back on air force one.
D.L.Jackson1410
DallasPolice Dept。