Dear Harold, 
I'm so sorry to have let you down on the question of Finck's recollection of the autopsy photos.

I miss things sometimes in my chaotic life.

Hal Verb gave me a deserved slapping around about 
it.

It was not that Finck saw images that later were not in the inventory, 4- Finck unequivocally 
and repeatedly stated, even under oath, he'd directed the autopsy photographer, who he did not 
name, to take images that he later never saw.

The impl&tion was that the inventory was 
incomplete.

(I am sympathetic that there may also have been tampering, but I cannot prove it, 
nor will I publicly insist that there definitely was tampering with the images we have.) 
I wrote up the question of the problem with the photos in relation to the JAMA JFK articles.

It 
is way too brief to be comprehensive, of course, but to show JAMA's shoddiness, I hoped it 
would do.

My comments follow this and please feel free to use them any way you wish.

PROSECTORS DISPELL MYTH THAT NO PHOTOS WERE ALLOWED 
Breo claimed that Humes dispelled the myth that no photos were allowed during the autopsy.

(Breo DL.

JAMA.

267:2797) Here Breo revealed an unexpected ignorance of the subject, and 
he incontestably proved his peer reviewers’ unfamiliarity with the evidence.

Anyone even 
vaguely familiar with the assassination literature knows photographs were taken of the autopsy.

Copies of the autopsy photographs are available to anyone entering a decent sized bookstore, 
for several books explore the autopsy photographic record as a major thesis, including two 
written by author Harrison Livingstone.

(Livingstone, ironically, was the only critic of the 
Warren Commission invited to the the AMA’s May 19,1992 news conference on JFK.) The 
issue is not whether photographs were taken but whether the currently available images are the 
original, untampered and complete photographic record.Copies of the autopsy photographs are available to anyone entering a decent sized bookstore, 
for several books explore the autopsy photographic record as a major thesis, including two 
written by author Harrison Livingstone. (Livingstone, ironically, was the only critic of the 
Warren Commission invited to the the AMA’s May 19,1992 news conference on JFK.) The 
issue is not whether photographs were taken but whether the currently available images are the 
original, untampered and complete photographic record. As eyewitness, Fuad Bashour, MD, 
Parkland cardiologist exclaimed when shown a photograph of the rear of JFK's skull showing 
intact scalp behind the right ear (F-3), "Why do they cover it up?...This is not the way it was!" 
(Groden R, Livingston, H. High Treason. 1989 New York, Berkeley Books, p.45) Humes 
himself, as readers of the last chapter realize, strongly disputed the HSCA's photographic 
interpretation that there was an entrance wound high in the rear of JFK's skull, which the HSCA 
believed was visible on the same image Bashour rejected. When told by the HSCA that the image of the rear of the skull revealed a bullet entrance wound 
near the top of the skull, Humes countered, "...I can assure you that as we reflected the scalp to 
get to this point (the HSCA-determined entrance wound near the top of the skull) there was no 
defect corresponding to this in the skull at any point. I don't know what that is. It could be to 
me clotted blood. I don’t, I just don't know what it is, but it certainly was not any wound of 
entrance." (HSCA~V7:254) Continuing his disavowal of the image, Humes later told the 
forensic panel, "Because I submit to you that, despite the fact that this upper point (the higher 
wound in the photograph of the back of the skull) that has been the source of some discussion 
here this afternoon is excessively obvious in the color photograph, I almost defy you to find it in

--- PAGE BREAK ---that magnification in the black and white...." (HSCA--V7:260-261) Independently, Finck 
emphatically agreed on this very point in a separate only recently released HSCA interview.

Purdy asked Finck, "Do you remember anything that would correspond to that red spot (the 
same high 'wound' in the color photograph of the rear of JFK's head that Humes believed not to 
be a wound at all)?" Finck answered, "No.

No, there was only one wound of entry in the back 
of the head (which was low in JFK's skull)." (Finck's HSCA interview, p.

94.) 
While Humes praised the senior autopsy photographer (of two), John Stringer, as "one of the 
best medical photographers in the world" (Breo DL.

JAMA 267:2797), not a single acceptable 
image of the President's fatal wound, the skull wound, is to be found.

An image of a skull 
wound is among the collection, but it is taken so close to the skull as to make the image virtually 
impossible to incontestably orient to JFK's body or head.

While an image was taken of the left, 
uninjured side of JFK's head from a distance that allows the head and shoulders to be captured, 
peculiarly no comparable image is available of the right side~a view that might have shown 
JFK's skull wound well if the HSCA's interpretation is correct of a right antero-lateral exit 
wound.

It seems unlikely that the autopsy photographer would have neglected to take at least a 
single, adequate image of the wound, if not many more than the one inadequate image we have.

(There apparently were two black and white and two color images taken of the skull wound, but 
all four images contain virtually the identical perspective, and thus all suffer from the problem 
of being such 'close ups' of the wound as to be difficult to orient properly.) 
The HSCA's Baden seemed to share the author's view that JFK's photographic autopsy record is 
poor.It seems unlikely that the autopsy photographer would have neglected to take at least a 
single, adequate image of the wound, if not many more than the one inadequate image we have.

(There apparently were two black and white and two color images taken of the skull wound, but 
all four images contain virtually the identical perspective, and thus all suffer from the problem 
of being such 'close ups' of the wound as to be difficult to orient properly.) 
The HSCA's Baden seemed to share the author's view that JFK's photographic autopsy record is 
poor.

He said, "Proper photographs were not taken." (539), and, "...certain things didn't 
happen...(such as) the kinds of documentation, pictures, measurements, that the forensic 
pathologist does automatically..." (HSCA-1:310-311) (emphasis added) It seems extraordinary 
that the United States apparently did no better for its slain President than what would have 
failed to pass muster for a common murder autopsy in a county hospital.

The problems with the 
photographs do not end there however.

Finck recalled, in a 2/1/65 letter to his superior.

General Joe Blumberg, that he "help(ed) the 
Navy photographer to take photographs of he occipital wound (external and internal aspects)..." 
(From Personal notes used for test sent with letter of February 1, 1965 to Brig.

Gen.

Blumberg 
by Finck.

HSCA rec # 180-10081-10347, agency file # 006165, p.

8.

See also the final 
Blumberg memo which states the same.) Oddly, the extant collection reveals no image that 
clearly fits Finck's description.

Some Warren loyalists, however, have argued that the extant 
images do include those Finck recalled having taken: a photograph of the rear of JFK's head 
showing only scalp and no bone, the so called "F-3" image, is, thus, allegedly Finck's 'external 
aspect' image of the occipital wound.

The image of the interior of the skull, the so called "F-8" 
photograph is, correspondingly, the 'internal aspect' of the occipital bone wound.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some Warren loyalists, however, have argued that the extant 
images do include those Finck recalled having taken: a photograph of the rear of JFK's head 
showing only scalp and no bone, the so called "F-3" image, is, thus, allegedly Finck's 'external 
aspect' image of the occipital wound. The image of the interior of the skull, the so called "F-8" 
photograph is, correspondingly, the 'internal aspect' of the occipital bone wound. The F-8 image 
depicts a large skull defect in the foreground, and, seemingly incidentally, some uncertain 
object in the backround which, only if the image was taken from the front aiming the camera 
backward into empty skull, might depict the occipital wound's internal aspect.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Author (Aguilar), who has seen the original images in the National Archives, is unpersuaded F- 
3 and F-8 are the images Finck recalled having taken.

Finck himself did not believe F-3 and F-8 
were the images in question.

After he saw all the photographs, including F-3 and F-8, with 
Humes and Boswell on 1-20-67, Finck wrote, "I saw no photos of bone of entry; I thought we 
had photographed the outside and inside of entry wound in skull." On the same page Finck 
catalogued some of the images he saw as, "Entry, back", "Entry, back of head (scalp)" (sic), 
"Exit, head (scalp)" (sic), and "Exit, head (bone)" (sic).

Finck was clearly describing images F- 
3 and F-8 while also claiming that he did not see the images of the occipital wound whose 
photography he had supervised.

(This memo referred to a visit to the "Archives of the US" with 
Humes and Boswell on January 20, 1967.

The memo was typed in Brussels on Sunday, 
February 26, 1978 "from hand-written notes of 1967.) (HSCA document.

RG #233, 2nd page.) 
Finck's belief that the images he took of the occipital wound, internal and external aspects, were 
absent when he later examined the photographs was also made clear in his HSCA testimony, 
which was released in 1993.

Finck claimed, "I remember positively that a Navy photographer 
took pictures and I wanted pictures of the crater in particular because this is a positive finding 
for a wound of entry in the back of the head.

So I wanted a picture showing no crater from the 
outside and a clearcut crater from the inside, but I don't know..."(Finck’s HSCA testimony, p.

85.) To clarify the point, HSCA counsel, Andy Purdy said, "...We have here a black and white 
blowup of that same spot.So I wanted a picture showing no crater from the 
outside and a clearcut crater from the inside, but I don't know..."(Finck’s HSCA testimony, p.

85.) To clarify the point, HSCA counsel, Andy Purdy said, "...We have here a black and white 
blowup of that same spot.

You previously mentioned that your attempt here was to photograph 
the crater, I think was the word that you used." Finck answered, "In the bone, not in the scalp, 
because to determine the direction of the projectile the bone is a very good source of 
information so I emphasize the photographs of the crater seen from inside the skull.

What you 
are showing me is soft tissue wound in the scalp." (Finck's HSCA testimony, p 88.) 
To further clarify that by "occipital wound" Finck meant an image of skull bone.

Dr.

Charles 
Petty asked, "If I understand you correctly.

Dr.

Finck, you wanted particularly to have a 
photograph made of the external aspect of the skull from the back to show that there was no 
cratering to the outside of the skull." Finck answered, "Absolutely." Petty followed with, "Did 
you ever see such a photograph?" Finck, "I don't think so and I brought with me memorandum 
referring to the examination of photographs in 1967 when I was recalled from Vietnam.

I was 
asked to look at photographs and as I recall there were two blank 4 by 5 transparencies; in other 
words, two photographs that had been exposed but with no image and as I can recall I never saw 
pictures of the outer aspect of the wound of entry in the back of the head and inner aspect in the 
skull in order to show a crater although I was there asking for these photographs.

I don’t 
remember seeing those photographs." (HSCA p.90) Thus Finck himself did not believe the F-3 
photograph of the rear of the head showed the bone wound entrance he recalled having 
photographed—it failed to show any bone at all.

The F-8 image also was not the image Finck 
believed he had taken showing beveling of the internal aspect of the skull bone.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I don’t 
remember seeing those photographs." (HSCA p.90) Thus Finck himself did not believe the F-3 
photograph of the rear of the head showed the bone wound entrance he recalled having 
photographed—it failed to show any bone at all. The F-8 image also was not the image Finck 
believed he had taken showing beveling of the internal aspect of the skull bone. In fact, none of 
the pathologists believed the extant images clearly showed the entrance wound they had found 
After reviewing the photographs on 1/20/67, Humes, Boswell and Finck signed an affadavit on 
1/26/67 in which they noted that the extant photographs did not clearly reveal the skull wound 
they had seen at autopsy. Their report states, "From the photographs (of the back of JFK's head)

--- PAGE BREAK ---this (an object in JFK's skull) is not recognizable as a penetrating wound because of the slanting 
direction of entry.

However, as we pointed out in the autopsy report, there was in the underlying 
bone a corresponding wound through the skull which exhibited beveling of the margins of the 
bone when viewed from the inner aspect of the skull.

This is characteristic of a wound of entry 
in the skull." (Get ref.

from Weisberg.) Under oath, Finck insisted, as had Humes, that when he 
examined the actual skull he did not notice anything that corresponded to the higher "red spot", 
the 'cowlick wound', which the HSCA believed to be the true entrance wound in JFK's skull.

(Finck's HSCA testimony, p.94.) Besides the 'occipital wound' image that appears to be missing, 
there is evidence that there are other images missing.

John Stringer, the chief autopsy photographer, was interviewed for the HSCA by Andy Purdy.

Purdy claimed that in the interview, "STRINGER (sic) said it was his recollection that all the 
photographs he had taken were not present in 1966 (when he first saw the photographs).

He 
noted that the receipt he had said some of the film holders (sic) had no film in one side of the 
cassettes.

He said the receipt said this happened in two or three of the film holders where one 
side only was allegedly loaded.

He said he could understand it if the film holders were reported 
to have poorly exposed or defective film but could not believe that there were any sides on the 
film holders which were not loaded with film...

STRINGER (sic) also said that he thought he 
had taken some interior photographs of the Presidents's chest ("I believe so") (sic).

He said he 
was present in the room where the autopsy was conducted between approximately 6:00 and 
6:30 P.

M on the night of the 22nd and 3:00 to 3:30 A.M.

on the morning of the 
23rd....STRINGER remembers taking 'at least two exposures of the body cavity'" (HSCA rec # 
180-10093-10429.

Agency file # 002070, p.--- PAGE BREAK ---

on the morning of the 
23rd....STRINGER remembers taking 'at least two exposures of the body cavity'" (HSCA rec # 
180-10093-10429. Agency file # 002070, p. 11.) 
Stringer was not alone in recalling that photographs were taken of the interior of the chest. A 
document first released in 1993 revealed Humes told the HSCA that he "specifically recalled 
photographs)...were taken of the President's chest, one of which showed a relatively significant 
part of the tract of the first missile...(diese photographs ) do not exist." (HSCA record # 180- 
10093-10429), Agency file # 002070, p. 17.) In a recently released 8/17/77 interview with 
Boswell, HSCA's Purdy noted "...he (Boswell) thought they photographed '...the exposed 
thoracic cavity and lung...' but doesn’t remember ever seeing those photographs." (HSCA rec# 
180-10093-10430. Agency file # 002071, p. 6) Finally, Floyd Reibe, Stringer's assistant told 
author David Lifton that "he thought he took about six pictures--! thing it was three film packs’- 
-of internal portions of the body." (Lifton, D. p.638) While Reibe does not specifically state that 
the photographs were taken of the interior of the chest, as that was the area of interest in the 
'internal portion' of JFK's body, it is reasonable to assume that these mutually recalled, though 
absent images are those Reibe described. Nevertheless, there are no images of any 'internal 
portions of JFK's body', whether of the chest or any other area 
In a recently released HSCA interview with autopsy witness, Robert F. Kamai, MD, Jim Kelly 
and Andy Purdy reported, "He (Kamai) recalls them putting the probe in and taking pictures 
(the body was on the side at the time) (sic)." (HSCA, JFK Collection. RG #233, file #002198, 
p.5.) There is no photograph of JFK's body on its side and there is no photograph with a probe 
in the body. Kamai's description, however, suggests positioning to capture the absent image

--- PAGE BREAK ---Humes, Boswell, Stringer and Reibe also recalled having taken of the interior of the chest.

Thus, both autopsy photographers.

Stringer and Reibe, all of JFK's pathologists and Robert F.

Kamai, MD recalled the taking of photographs that do not now exist.

What should one trust—the 
photographs we have, or the mutually corroborating recollections of the prosectors, another 
physician-witness and the photographers - that the photographic record is at least incomplete, if 
not also altered?

In summary, the photographs of the inside and outside of the skull bone showing the 
characteristics of an entrance wound, which Finck claimed in JAMA and elsewhere to have 
personally supervised, are nowhere to be found.

The images taken of the interior of JFK's body, 
whose taking was recalled by Humes, Boswell, Kamai, Stringer and Reibe apparently do not 
now exist.

The defect in the right rear of the skull agreed upon by 44 of 46 witnesses at 
Parkland and Bethesda, including autopsy photographer.

Stringer, and mortician, Robinson, (see 
last chapter) is simply absent in the image we have of the rear of the head.

In fact, the image of 
the right-rear aspect of the head reveals no defect behind the right ear at all, except for the 
controversial red spot at the top-rear of the skull which Humes, Boswell and Finck denied 
before the HSCA was any wound at all.

The apparent defect that is visible seems to start at a 
position parallel with the right ear and extend foreward.

It is the myriad photographic failings and inconsistencies, and many others, that persuade some 
that the photograph record has been tampered with, as has other evidence been tampered with in 
the JFK case.

One cannot blithely dismiss the forceful opinion of autopsy photographer, Floyd 
Reibe, who believes JFK's autopsy photographs have been forged.

Of the extant images that 
show JFK's rear skull and scalp to be intact, Reibe said, "They're wrong.

I don't know what this 
is, but that ain't the way it was.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Of the extant images that 
show JFK's rear skull and scalp to be intact, Reibe said, "They're wrong. I don't know what this 
is, but that ain't the way it was. He didn't have a back of the head." (Livingstone, Harrison. Killing the Truth. New York, Carroll and Graf, 1993, p. 169) The argument that the photographs 
have been "authenticated", as claimed by the HSCA's forensic panel, is unpersuasive. The 
absence of facial features precludes a photograph of the rear of 'JFK's' head being authenticated. And even if some of the extant images are 'authentically' of JFK, if Humes, Boswell, Finck, 
Kamai, Stringer and Reibe are to be trusted, it appears some images that were taken on the night 
of the autopsy are now absent. If, however, the available photographic autopsy data is complete and reliable, an ironic 
consistency to the Bethesda proceedings seems inescapable: those nationally-respected, 
medical and photographic authorities selected by the American government to complete the 
most important autopsy in the nation's history all proved to be woefully inadequate to the task, 
and to have embarrassingly poor memories. Breo is certainly right that critics have taken aim at the photographic record of JFK's autopsy, 
but not because critics claim it does not exist, but because of the peculiarly inadequate record 
that does. On this issue Breo seems to have missed yet another opportunity to offer a real 
contribution - by not knowing what important questions to ask JFK's pathologists and by 
worthlessly demolishing a straw man myth - that autopsy photographs do not exist.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Best personal wishes, 
Gary J 
PS What is in your next book? I understand that Norman Mailer is coming out with an 'Oswald 
did it' book. But John Newman and David Lifton are coming out with 'we know Oswald better 
than Mailer, and Oswald didn't do it, and besides Oswald was definitely intelligence-connected 
even if he did' books. Will be interesting.