FBI - INTERROGATIONS OF OSWALD 
Statements of Witnesses - Manning C. CLEMENTS 
Deposition - April 8, 1964', 7 H 318-22 
Clements Is a 23-year veteran of the FBI who had been assigned in 
Dallas for over 11 years. 
He describes his function beginning with the time of the assassi- 
nation as liaison. After the first interview of Dallas police and other 
law enforcement officers with Oswald, Clements thought it would be a 
good idea to get a complete biographical statement. The others were 
in accord and Clements had this interview: 
"Mr. Clements. I introduced myself to the officers Whose names I 
do not believe that I got, and also Introduced myself to Oswald. Ex- 
hibited my credentials and told him that I would like to obtain from him 
some physical description, background, biographical data. He was agree- 
able, and I began ray interview with him. 
Mr. Stem. Can you approximate the time of day that this ooourred - 
roughly? 
Mr. Clements. I would say the interview began roughly at 10 p.m." 
(p.320) 
Here you have anything but the description given by Bookhout of 
Oswald's attitude toward being questioned. 
And Clements* version of Oswald's attitude when questions were 
asked that he declined to answer (and specifically about the same Alek 
James Hidell oard): 
"Mr. Stern. What did he say about that card? 
Mr. Clements. He declined to answer any questions as to the reason 
of his possession of it. 
Mr. Stem. Were there any other questions you put to him that he 
refused to answer? 
Mr. Clements. Toward the conclusion of the interview and after

--- PAGE BREAK ---eason 
of his possession of it. 
Mr. Stem. Were there any other questions you put to him that he 
refused to answer? 
Mr. Clements. Toward the conclusion of the interview and after

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 - Clements 
he had been absent and returned I continued with the questions of past 
residence and past occupations. He responded to my questions. At a 
time when I asked him as to his present occupation he hesitated and 
told me that he thought the obtaining of his description and background 
information had become somewhat prolonged.,(p.321) 
Perhaps a glimpse of Oswald*s experience in the Soviet Unionis 
reflected by the conclusion ofiothis paragraph: "(Mr. Clements) ... He 
stated there was a counterpart or a similar agency in Russia, Jf)# that 
S’ was using the soft touch, where the approach of a Russian agency 
would be different, but the tactics would be the same.” 
Nonetheless, Oswald continued to answer Clements* questions. 
Again on Oswald’s attitude: 
"Mr. Stern. Did he seem hostile or resentful or irritated by the 
fact that you were an FBI agent? 
Mr. Clements. He did not state that, if that were the case. He 
was courteous, responsive as to any question. Volunteered little in- 
formation." (p.321)