I


The Cuban government has publicly dis-
played six captured Invaders from Florida,
all of whom said they were CIA agents, and
of whom said they had orders to assas-
sinate Fidel Castro. Their contentions could
easily he dismissed as preposterous except for
two things.

One is that the leader of tiie Cuban rdugee
^tary group, sitting safely in Miami, said
four of tte men were menubers of his force
and, did have orders to kill Castro. Mai.
^mandO 'Cleites made no reference to the'
Central Intelligence Agency, but his an-
nouncement confirms a good part of the
stories of the prisoners in Havana.

^ The second puzzling factor is that such fili-
bust^ng expeditions can still be operated
out of Florida despite proclaimed Government
pohcy against them. The prisoners in Havana
told 'Iwig stories of CIA recruitment and
training in "security houses” in Miami Even
allowing a generous discount for the fact that
many Castro prisoners claim to have been
CIA agents, the questions remam;

Is it possible for these dangerous adven-
tures to be Rtoned in Florida without the
CIA knowing a^ut them? If the CIA does
not know about them, what is wrong with its
basic intelUgence function? If it does know
about them, why does it not attempt to stop
them in accordance with the stated Govern-
ment policy? And if it does not attempt to
stop them, does it then encourage acts of
terrorism and sabotage against Cuba?

Castro Cuba obviously jntends to dramatize '
the arrests and statements to try to combat '
Venezuelan charges that Cuba landed guer-
i^s near Caracas. The Castroite Organiza-
tion^of ^tin American Solidarity^ now meet-

I? ^ expected to condemn

the United States, in advance of new condem-
nation of Cuba by the Organization of Amer-
ican States.

TMs political maneuvering may mean little,
refugee militarists
tased in Mianu continue to give Castro choice

^ « appealing for sympathy in the
hemisphere. It is a cheaper source of such
propaganda than the CIA's Bay of Pigs dis-
aster, wta^ It recalls. The Florida filibuster-
ers^are doing United States foreign policy no
semce and the CIA ought to be ^ng ite

j whatever it is that

the CIA is doing now.
