F302(0v.4-15-64)
FEDERALBUREAUOFINVESTIGATION
4/29/68
At the outSet of the interview，JERRY WILLIAM
RAY was advisedoftheprovisions of Section 1ool,Title18,
Unitcd States Code。Hewas adviscdthat he didnothave
totalk to the interviewing Agents but that they wished
to stress tohim theimportance of his cooperation and
truthfulneSsinthematterof themurderofMARTIN LUTHER
KING,Jr.
ItwaSpointedouttoJERRYthathehadlied
to
theAgents in the previous intervievs in that the.FBI
had locatcd his brother,JOHN,andthat it would have been
impossible for JERRY not to have known his whercabouts.
Hethenstated thathehadlied but onlyin an effort to
protect his brother JoHN's，investment in a bar in St.
Louis.
JOHNhadputupS250otopurchasethebarandJERRY
was of the opinion that if FBI Agents haraSsed JOHN,he would
lock up the bar,take a loss and leave.The bar,known as
"The Grapevine",is located in St.Louis,Missouri，and
is licensedin the name of CAROL PEPPER，their sister.
He
saidthathehasnoinformationnordoeshebelievethat
JAMES RAY has been in contact with JOHN sincehis cScape
from prison in April,1967.JERRY went on to'say that
hedoubted verymuch thatJAlES RAYwasawareof thepresent
whereaboutsofJOHNsinceJOHNwaSclaSSifiedaSa"drifter"
Itwaspointedoutto JERRYthatJOHNhadbecn ayisitorto
theMissouri PrisononthedaybeforeJAMESRAY'seScape.
In answer to a direct question,JERRY then admitted that
itwouldbepossibleforJAyESRAytoknowthelocationof
his brother's tavern.He said that he doubted if JAlrS RAY
knew his,JEaRy's，present empioyment at the Sportsman's
Club.Northbrook,Illinois.but that he might be aware of
it sincc hc had written a letter to the Parolc Board inwhich
he might have mentioned his present employment Saying that
he possibly could obtain employment for his brother,JAMES
RAY,either at the country club or in the immediate neighbor-
hood.He denied'that he had ever furnished JAMES RAYwith
his present employment.He said that to his positive
knowledge，the only way that JAMEScould get in touch vith
4/24/68
Caicago,Illinois
File#.
CG44-1114-
On
.ot.
rf
SAS JOSEPH
M.
BURKE and
by.
RENE.J
DMAINE:QaS
DolediclotedA/26/68
Ihis docununtconlains nuithur tecom
hundolions nor conclusions of the FBl. is the properly of theFBlond 1s loonod lo your ogoncy;
AoonqoosoOSEPH
M.
BURKE and
by.
RENE.J
DMAINE:QaS
DolediclotedA/26/68
Ihis docununtconlains nuithur tecom
hundolions nor conclusions of the FBl. is the properly of theFBlond 1s loonod lo your ogoncy;
Aoonqooso

--- PAGE BREAK ---y.
RENE.J
DMAINE:QaS
DolediclotedA/26/68
Ihis docununtconlains nuithur tecom
hundolions nor conclusions of the FBl. is the properly of theFBlond 1s loonod lo your ogoncy;
Aoonqooso

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
CG44-1114
him was through P.O.Box 22,Wheeling, Illinois.since
he,JERRY，had obtained this box for the specific use of
hisbrother sincehe didnotwantmailfromthepenitentiary
coning to thc countryclub.
JERRY relatedthatJOHNcametothis area sometime
around 1964 and stayed for about 2 years.Tothe best of
JERRy's recollection,JOHN first worked at Murphy's
Steakhouse,then went to the Rolling Graen Country Club
andfromtheretotheWhitePines CountryClubwherehe
was enployed as a pot washer.JonN then went to bartending
SchoolinChicago and went to workfor theIndianHills
Country Club in Itasca,Illinois.JERRY is of the opinion
that his brother，JOHN,uSes the nane RYAN.
JERRY said that on Apri1 20 or 21，1968,he
telephonically contacted his sister,CAROL PEPPER,and
explainedthattheuncooperativeattitudeofbothCAioLand
JOHNarosefrontheharassnentofthenewspaperreporters
intheneighborhoodandthatbothwereafraidofunfavoreble
publicitywhich wouldadverselyeffect the tavern business
causingthemtoSelloutandnove.
HeSaidthathis
Sister,CAROL,has told him that she feels that she now has
tomovefromtheparticularneighborhoodwheresheresides
in St.Louis.Missouri.CAROL haS commented to him that
thepicture in thc newspaper of JAMES RAY does look Something
likehim.
JERRY said thathe agreeswith this but that felt
itcouldnotbehisbrotherbecausehd readinthenewspapers
that the person sought by the FBi for tie KiNG murdier had
attended dancing School in kew Orleans,Louisiana，in 1964
and 1965,butsincehis brothcr was imprisoned during these
years，heknewit could not behim.
Concerning his trip to St.Louis,Missouri，in
February.1968,JERRY advised that he stayed at the MacArthur
Hotelforonenight;hebelievcsthe datetobe February2,
1968，-and that his brother，jOHN.either stayed in an
apartment over the tavern or nearby,but not at the hotel
as hc previously implied.He said that about every Six or
seven weeks he drives to St.Louis,Missouri，to visit withther，jOHN.either stayed in an
apartment over the tavern or nearby,but not at the hotel
as hc previously implied.He said that about every Six or
seven weeks he drives to St.Louis,Missouri，to visit with

--- PAGE BREAK ---yed in an
apartment over the tavern or nearby,but not at the hotel
as hc previously implied.He said that about every Six or
seven weeks he drives to St.Louis,Missouri，to visit with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3
CG 44-1114
CAROLandsometimesJOHNBincetheyarethe onlyfamily
he has.He denied that his brother,JAMES RAY,had been
atthis family reunionatthislastoranyother time.
JERRY advisedthathe owns twoautomobiles,one
a 1960 1ight green four-door De Soto whichpresently is
parked in front of the cottage at the Sportsman's Country
Club.The other,a 1961 two door white over red Plymouth。
Both of these cars were purchased from a stepfather,JERRY
RAYNES,who resides on a farm in Center，Missouri.He
exhibited a receipt from the Dunhurst Currcncy Exchange
showing that Missouri driver's 1icense k250-6227-822-98-473MO,
plus titleand registration for 1960 De Sotohadbeenturned
in.The receipt was in the name of JERRY WILLIAM RYAN,
2897 Techny Road。JERRY said that he had turned over
these items April 24,1968,and expected to obtain his
Illinoisdriver's licenseand licensetagswithin the next
several days.
JERRYfurtherrelatedthathepaidS2oofor
the
The
196l Plymouthandhas owned it forabout six months.
caris presentlyathis stepfather'sfarmandis not
registcred.The reason it is not registered is that the
title to this car was filed by his stepfather in St.Louis,
Missouri，but was not returned.
Bothheandhisstepfather
made inquiry concerning the title,but it was evidently
lost.JEnRy saidthat he has (iriven tho carto Chicago and
inthis area on one occasion utilizing licenseplates from
ajunk car.CARoL PEppER has also driven the car on several
occasions with the sameplates,However，the plates have
sincebecnremoved from thecaranddestroyed.
In responsetoquestionsconcerningPostOffice
Box 22,Wheeling, 1llinois,JERRY rcitcrated that the only
person whohas cver written to him was his brother JAMES RAY
withthe rareexceptionthathemightrcceivesome
Hepersisted
advertisingliteratureofnoconsequence.
in stating that that he had received no comnunications at this
Post Office boxwithin recent weeks.After further questioning，
JERRYadmitted that onApri1 23，1968,he rcceivcd a telegram
addressed to him at P.o.Box 22.He then made available..
acopyof this telegramwhichread as follows:hin recent weeks.After further questioning，
JERRYadmitted that onApri1 23，1968,he rcceivcd a telegram
addressed to him at P.o.Box 22.He then made available..
acopyof this telegramwhichread as follows:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4.
CG44-1114
"JERRYRAY
"POBOX22WHEELINGILL
"(RTE WATS CHGO)
"PLEASE CONTACT ME AS SOON AS POSSIBLE,COLLECT AT 217-224-1710
ROOM 230,ORMYSELF OR GERALD MOORE 312-467-9700.
IHAVEA
METTER
OFIMPORTANCETODISCUSSANDSOMEMONEYFORYOU
"DICKWOODBURYLIFEMAGAZINE"
He
then related that on Apri1 23，1968，he went
to"Life"magazineofficcswhcrehewasinterviewed
concerning his brother，other family members and family
residences and background.He stated that it appeared to him
that whatLife'magazinc was interested in was the family
history.He also adviscd that his picture was taken and
thatforhisserviceshewaspaidSl50.
AccordingtoJERRy,
his sister,CAROL PEPPER，refused to talk with the"Time"
and "Life"reporters but that his uncle,WILLIAM MAHER,
cooperatedfreely.MAHERalso toldthe reporters that SUE
(SUSAN DONIAN)had a family album in which there were
pictures ofJAMES RAY,including a picture inuniform.
Concerning SUE,JERRY related that hedoes notknow SUE's
presentwhereabouts andis certainthatJAMES alsoisnot
avareofherprescntaddress.He requcstedtobeinforned
ofherwhergaboutswhichwasdenied.
He related that his usual day off is Tuesday,
andthatonocc:ion，hewill gotoNorthbrook，1llinois,
wherehe.gets
raintotheUnionStationandspendssome
time in Chicag.
1llinois.The evening of April 23，1968,he
Spent at the ViioriaHotel,Clarkand Van Buren Streets.

--- PAGE BREAK ---oNorthbrook，1llinois,
wherehe.gets
raintotheUnionStationandspendssome
time in Chicag.
1llinois.The evening of April 23，1968,he
Spent at the ViioriaHotel,Clarkand Van Buren Streets.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
CG44-1114
JERRY advised that sometime around September，1960,
shortly after his release from prison,he was unemployed
in St。Louis and he was contacted by his brother，JOHN,
whotold him to ccme to the Chicago arca whichJERRYdid。
He commenced cmployment at the Rolling Greens Country Club,
Arlington Heights,I1linois,from September，1960，until
January,1962.He then returned to St.Louis,Missouri,
and returned sometime in April，1962,where he obta.ined
enployment at the North Shore Country Club,Glonviev,Illinois.
He alsoworkedforthe Olympia FicldsCountryClubfor 13
daysand then wentto workfor theMedinah CountryClub
unti1 sometime in December，1963，when he was hit by a car
as he was walking along a highway. JERRY spent some time in
thehospitalasaresultofthescinjuriesandthenwentback
to St.Louis,Missouri,with JOiN.He again returned to this
areaandwas employedattherlossmoorCountryClub,from
April until Scptember，l964.At that time,he connenced
hispresentenploymentatSpctsnanCountryClub.
JERRYsaidthathehadresidedattheSportsman
CountryClub exceptfor a short period of time fronMarch to
September，1967，whenhe re3idedat 2897Techny Road,
Northbrook,Illinois,with his wife GJERDiS STREET who presently
HeSaid
residcs on Wisconsin Avenue,Lake Forcst，Illinois。
that while they were married,she had a child,hovever,this
child was by her previous husband.He wcnt on to Say that he
and hiswifeseparated in Augustorlse7and the divorce
was finalized on January 25,1967. Later in the interview,
JERRY adviscd that he was married in August，1966,and
that the divorce was final January 25,1968.
Whenquestionedastowhetherornothehadbeen
married previously，JERRy replied that he hadn't，but that
he hadlived conmon-lawwithCAROL SARTAINwhois presently
residing in Morristown,Tennessee.He did know that
CAROL is presently married but he did not know CAROL's
married name。CAROL and JERRY had one child, MICHAEL,age
6,vho is presently living with CAROL's parents,Mr.and
MrE. WILLARD SARTAIN,Route #2,Whitesburg,TenneSsce。ly married but he did not know CAROL's
married name。CAROL and JERRY had one child, MICHAEL,age
6,vho is presently living with CAROL's parents,Mr.and
MrE. WILLARD SARTAIN,Route #2,Whitesburg,TenneSsce。

--- PAGE BREAK ---d not know CAROL's
married name。CAROL and JERRY had one child, MICHAEL,age
6,vho is presently living with CAROL's parents,Mr.and
MrE. WILLARD SARTAIN,Route #2,Whitesburg,TenneSsce。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
CG44-1114
This town is 1ocated 24miles outside of Knoxville,but
JERRY does not know exactly where the SARTAINs live。He
Saidthathedoubtedthatthesubjectwouldbeawareofthe.
SARTAINsidentity since JAMESwas inprisonbefore JERRY
mcthisex-wife。
JEkRYrelated that his take-home pay is
approximately$1l3perweek and.thathealsorcccivcs room
andboard。
Hesaidthat hchas nomoneyto Speakof，
at the present time,since all of his savings hid been
expended in his ill-fated marriage.He Said that he Sends
money to his Sister，CARoL,which she deposits in her account
tokeep for him..He estimated that he hasapproximatelyS200
in that account.He denicd that any of his noney had been
utilizedbyhisbrotherJoHNinthepurcahscofthetavernin
St.Louis.
JERRY sendsmoneytothe SARTAINs SpaSrodically,
about $50 at a time and estimates that since December,1967,
he has sent them approximately $150。He also Sends clothing
and other itens for MICHAEL's use.He also advised that he
expends a greatdealofmoney_onautomobilesandsincehehas
bcen in this area has had at least l2cars but never Seems
tobeable to purchase a newer model than a 1962。He informed
that his marriage"cost him a fortune"indicating that in the
first two months he was married,hiswife ran up S3oo in phone
bills.He also paid $135 to send her to driving school after
whichsnehadthreeautomobii.
'ccidentsandin one conpletely
dehiolishcdonecarsothathe:
：itobuy anothcr。Hisex-wife
wasalsocxtravagantandspcn:.oneyfreelythroughcharge
a.ccounts.
JERnyrelatedthathehas never hcard ofanyone
named JAMES DAVID DAILEY，THOMAS BEECHUM CREWS Or JUNIOR
RAY CONWAY。
JERRYadvisedthat he was notaware thatJOHN
registered at tho Mac Arthur Hotel,St.Louis,Missouri,
ding the time that he,JERRy,was there.He said that
.:idknowthatJOHNusedtheMacArthurHotelwhenever
bwas able to"pick up a woman".He Said that.JOHN has
nevermarriedand hasnoknowledgethatJoHNis presently
going with or residingwith anyparticularwonan。
~-t
.:idknowthatJOHNusedtheMacArthurHotelwhenever
bwas able to"pick up a woman".He Said that.JOHN has
nevermarriedand hasnoknowledgethatJoHNis presently
going with or residingwith anyparticularwonan。
~-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7
CG44-1114
Herelatedthathehasnoidea as to thepresent
whereabouts of his brother,JAMES,and believes that he is
either dead or outof the country.He could offer no reason
for JAMES alleged murder of MARTIN LUTHER KING,Jr., but
didsaythatJAMESwouldhavetohavebeenpaidfor this
murderinviewofthepurchaseofthecarandthedance
school paymentswhich JAMESmade which information heobtained
fron reading the newspapers.JEany did spcculate that ifi
anyone did pay JAMES for this murder,itwould have to be
someonehemctafterhisescapebecausehedoubtedthat
anyone in prison or anyone that heknewih JAMEs'life
priortobeing inprisonwouldhavethemoneyorthedesireto
kill KING.JERRY said that all of the other crimes-conmitted
byJAMES were Small scores and that he knew he never realized
muchmoneyfromthem。
JERnY furtherrelated that it is hisopinion
thatJAMES wouldnevergetintouch withanyoneinthe
family no..matter how bad he nceded help.
JOHNSON and ASAC KYLE G.CLARK in an effort to obtain his
complete cooperation in this matter。After discussion,JERRy
gavehis wordthathewould notlieinthefutureandthatif
his brothcr did contact him,he would contact the FBl。He
reiteratedthathehadnoreasontobelievethatJAiiES
wouldcontacthim。
JERRY advisedthat he Sends his noney tohis
sistcr,
CAkOl,becausehe would spend itifitwasavailable
tohin
Hesometines sends her his whole paychecktoput
in the account.
Hewantsthemoneytosavetoput asa
downpaymentonopeningabar。
Concerning his automobile accident,JERRY advised
thathe was walking along the highway when he was struck
Illinois,where he was Semi-conscious for three.daysHe

--- PAGE BREAK ---paymentonopeningabar。
Concerning his automobile accident,JERRY advised
thathe was walking along the highway when he was struck
Illinois,where he was Semi-conscious for three.daysHe

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
CG44-1114
s
bone had been broken。He enteredinto alawsuit in an
effort to recover damages,however,he was only paid $l,00
andbelievesheowesthehospitalaround$4oo。
Heagainstatedthathehad absolutelynoidea
astohisbrother'swhcrcaboutsandthenadviscd
Ithatif
there was anyonc else involved in the cxime with JAMES,it
person's'identity.
He Said that at the'tine his brother
reccived the 20 years'sentence,from which he escaped,
hehadbeenofferedcightyearstoturnstate'sevidence
turn state's evidence and received a sixyear sentence.
JERRY opined that even if JAMES was offered a sentence,of
fiveyears against death in the electric chair,he would not
implicatea.partner if in fact he had one.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d a sixyear sentence.
JERRY opined that even if JAMES was offered a sentence,of
fiveyears against death in the electric chair,he would not
implicatea.partner if in fact he had one.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
CG44-1114
Thefollowing descriptionofJERRYWILLIAMRAYwas
obtained through interviewand observation:
Race
White
Sex
Male
Date of Birth
July 16,1935
Placeof Birth
Quincy, 1llinois
(No birth certificate,
doctordiedtwodaysafter
birth)
Height
5'9"tall
Weight
178pounds
Build
Medium,stocky
Hair
Brown,receding
Eycs
Brown
Scars and larks
Circle scar 4" dianeter
above left eyebrow;
Tattoos
"J.R." Jcft forearm outer;
"JR。"inScrollrightforearm
outer
Other employments
Knodel Bakery Company
St。Louis,Missouri,
oven worker, one day, 1953-64;
Sunsct Sunitarium,
St。Louis,Missouri
12 dayS,1963-64;
Keeshen`s,cannotrecall working
there
Marital. Status
Diyorced
JERRYthenadvisedthatheuscd'theBellFmployment
Service,Chicago,since his brother JoHN had used it because
thefee wasonly$15or$30tolocateajob。
Hethenrelated
thathe cameto Sportsman's CountryClub fromrlossnoor
Country Club whcre he had bcena bar waiter。He said he
startedoutatSportsman'sasadishwasherandthenwentto
workfortheMarxMaintenance Companyas amaintenanceman in
the country club.Somctime thereafter，the country club dropped
the maintenance service and hiredJERRY。
Healsoadviscdthat
his brother JoHN was cmploycd at the Indian Hills Country Club,
Elnhurst,Illinois,not at Indian Lake。
Hethenrccalledthat
hisbrotherwasalsoemployedatGreenAcresCountryClub,
about 22 miles from Sportsman's in Northbrook,Illinois。

--- PAGE BREAK ---lls Country Club,
Elnhurst,Illinois,not at Indian Lake。
Hethenrccalledthat
hisbrotherwasalsoemployedatGreenAcresCountryClub,
about 22 miles from Sportsman's in Northbrook,Illinois。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FO.307 (Rev. 4-15.64)
FEDERALBUREAU OFINVESTIGAYION
5/7/68
Date,
JERRY WILLIAM RAY advised that he left Chicago,
I1linois，at about 1:00 PM,Apri1 29,1968,driving his 1960
light grcen Desoto.He became sleepy while driving and stopped
at a motel in Braidwood,Illinois,where hc slept and stayed
unti1 about 4:00 AM,Apri1 30,1968。He arrived in St.Louis
at9:OoAMthatday andwentinmediatelytohisbrotherJOHN's
apartment on Lenp Street, where he stayed until noon.
Then JOHN snd he went to his Sistcr CAROL PEDPER's
t"ohours.
residence,whcre they stayed for approximately
JERRYandJOHNthenreturnedtoJOHN's'tavernandJERRYsaid
he drank toomuch bcer,became slecpy and feel aslcep that
evening。He said that he couldmtrecallverymuch about
Stayed with JoHN at the apartment until leaving St.Lcuis,
Missouri，about 1l:00 AM，May l，1968.
JERRY advised that hc,his brothcr JOHN，and CAROL
haveread almost everyarticle inthe newspapers concerning
theirbrother.
Hecommentedthiat whilehe was in St。Louis
this last time,most of the conversation ccntered around'the
article in"Life"magazine and that there was noindication
inthe convcrsationwithJOHNor CAROLthattheywereawareof
thesubject's whereabouts or his whereabouts since his escape
unti1 September 1，1967。JERRY waS advised that the FBI was
verymuch intercsted inattempting to determine hisbrother's
whereaboutsfrom theporiodoftimefronhisescapeuntilhe
first appearcd in Birmingham,Aiabama,cbout Septomber 1，1967。
JERRyadvised thathe had no information as tohisbrother's
whereabouts either during theabove time or his present whereabouts.
JERRY explained that JOhN,CAnOL'sand his owninfornation
concerningthe whereabouts ofthe subject came fron their
aforcmentioned following of the KixGmurdcrin thcnewspapers
and that he noted in one article that his brother obviously,
using the name ERic SrARvo GALT,first appeared in a rooming
house in Birmingham,Alabana,around September l,1967.
CG44-1114-/0
5/1/68
Northbrook,Illinois
Fllo#
uo
at.
SAS JOSEPHM./BURKE
5/3/68
and RENE JDUMAINE/laj
Dalodictated.
by.
Ths dorument contoins nuithet recommendotlons nor conclusions of the FBl.l ls lleproperly of theFBlond ls loonad loyour ogency:
ondscontenlsaronot tobe dlstribuledoutsideyour agoncy.Dalodictated.
by.
Ths dorument contoins nuithet recommendotlons nor conclusions of the FBl.l ls lleproperly of theFBlond ls loonad loyour ogency:
ondscontenlsaronot tobe dlstribuledoutsideyour agoncy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
CG44-1114
JERRY denied having anyinformation which wouldinthe
slightest way indicate that hisbrothcr or his sister
aided the subjectin his escape and have had anyidea of
the subject's whereabouts since hisescape.
JERRY'then statedthathisbrotherJOHNhadtold
himthat theFBIhad combed atwo-block arealooking fora
JACKGAwRoN，sinceit hadbeen developcdthatGAwRONhad
been acquaintcd with JAMES.JERRY Said that JOHN knows that
indicatetoJEiiYthatGAWioNhadeverstatedwhathehad
told thc FBI.
JERRY Said that in the past，he had driven GAWRON
GAWRON would pay the.expenSes.To JERRY's knowledge,GAWRON
never committed anyburglaryin any of the places in which
they had "cased"and in JERRY's opinion,GAWRON is"living on
pastglories."
JERrYthcnstatedthatGAwRoNwasananethat
hcprobably shouldhavcgiven to the Agents before sincehe,
JERRy,was aware that GAWRoN had servcd tine with his brother
JAMES.
JEnRY cxprcssed the opinion that JAMES would not contact
GAwRoNbutbelieves that JAMES docsknowGAwRoNwcll，considering
ornotGAWRoNand JAMESparticipatedinburglariestogether
andmadenocommentastotheclosenessofassociationbetween
them。
JErRYadvised thatWAiTER RIrEwas JAME'srap partner
in Leavenworth and that he,JERRY,has served timc with both
LONNIEandWALTER RIFE in Mcnard.
JERRYadvisedthathehas givcnthematter ofwhat
hewould doifhis brother contacted himconsiderablethought。
Hcisnowoftheverystrongopinionthathewouldassistthe
FBI if it couldbehandled in such a manner soas not to compromise
himandalsoifhecouldbcassuredthateverycffortwouldbe
nadeto apprehendhisbrother without hurting him.