Co--rifesion iio.
UNITED STATES DEPARTMIENT OF JUSTICE
FEDERAL LUREAU OF'INYESTIGATION
IA Reply, Please Refer to
Miani, Florida
Filevo.
May 8,1964
RE:
LEE HARVEY CSWALD
INTERNAL SECURITY
.CUBA
Reference is made to the report of Special Agent
JAMmS J. 0'conOn, dated April 4, 1964, at Miami, Florica..
in the.above caption, wherein JO V. MARTINO, Miani Beach,
Florida, attributed various inforaation regaraing the
ectivities of osuAiD in Miani end in Mexico to a Cuban
sourco,. whose"tdertity he would not reveal. Information
:attziouted by VARriNo to this source included an allogation
that CSWAlD had made a telephone call to the Cuban
Inteliigence Service in Cuba from a private resldence
in Miani, cnd that OsUALD had pemphlets ofa pro-FiDEL CASrRO
chareeter pzinted in Miani, Florica, paying the printer by
cheel dravn on the Feir Plcy Zor Cuba Cormittee. MARriNO,
cueing
the period varch 21 to 31, 1964, was contacted.on
sevocl
ccecoions in cn effort to elieit the idontity of his
Cysan source.
Ho seid he intencsd to solieit hks souree
to ccnssntto inteiview by the Federel Buresu of Investigction
(23r). . Ha said he had been unable, however, to locate tho
souzce duxing that'period.
.A characterication of the Faix Play'for Cuba
Comaittee (Fpcc) can be found in the Appendix, of
this nezozancum.
On Apzil 18, 1964, Yr. MARrINO vas agein contacted.
He claiued his source wes then in California, end that he
hed sont cn cireail letter to his source on April 17,
1ss4, telling hin to telephone on receipt of the letter
soiacive to corsent to F3l interview.
Cn Apri1 22, 1964, Ms.MaR2iNO ws reccntaeted
and advised hio.source vas then en route to Mieaf by car,
cnd-was.expacted to arrive on Apzi1 24,1964.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ive to corsent to F3l interview.
Cn Apri1 22, 1964, Ms.MaR2iNO ws reccntaeted
and advised hio.source vas then en route to Mieaf by car,
cnd-was.expacted to arrive on Apzi1 24,1964.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LEE HARVEY C3HALD
MAnTiNo. indicated hts. source had.left California.
prior to'celivary of the letter, and that the party in :
Califoraia at whose hone' the source had stayed. telephoned
Mr. lARriro, advising hin of the departure of the source.
On Apzi1 27,1964, Mr.MARTINO stated he sti11
had rot hecrd frod his source, but had been taiking to a
Cuban friend at Miani, who informod him that the source
end friends of the Source, all of whom were traveling.
together from·Celifornia, were coming to Miami for the
purpose of joining.the forces of the Movimiento de
Pecupereeion Revolucion
(MRR)y. an anti-CASTRO
nieation at Miaal
It was explained to Mr. MARriNo that ·inaomueh
as it wes essential chat the clegations regarding OsuaiD's
cecivities be resolved, it might be Coened necessary that
Maarino) be cailed to cppear before the President's
Corsission on the csscssination of President KeNNeDY.
Mr. MARriNo said he'could not be forced to revecl the
identity.of his source.
He said he would be leaving on
April 27, 1964, for Several days, to fulfilllacture engagemants
in Boston, Minneopolis gnd Charleston, South Carolina, but
that if his source contccted his houe, his vife in turn
wcula.instruet his source to contaet the FBl Office in
Cnay
1，1954,
ALFRELO BORGZS
Executive'Officor
ofmat
Florica,ecvised no one arriving
from
Calitoraia hcd rseently
cypaczod at the offices of the
theuselvos vith the
siection, cnd he hed ro kncvlecge that iadividuels were
beirg
expeeted frcn Califsznia to join the forces of the
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---a hcd rseently
cypaczod at the offices of the
theuselvos vith the
siection, cnd he hed ro kncvlecge that iadividuels were
beirg
expeeted frcn Califsznia to join the forces of the
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CSALD
On May 6, 1964, Mx. JON V. MARTJNO, who continues
to zeotdo ct 232s Alton .Rosd,
,Msami Beach, Flortda,:advised
that he hcd received no. word froa his source, cnd he belfeved
his couree had probably not yat arrived in Miani. He said
he would continue his effozts to locate the source, and in
the cvenc he was tneuccossful, ha would pzobcbly furnioh tho
raro os hio couree to tho rBl in.the mnttor of a weok oz so.