APPLICATION FOR UNITED STATES PATENT
Oath cnd Petirion
residing at
Eeing dualy swom, I, PHTLOMENA_.E.OPEELMAN.
-; that I have
depose and ssy that I am a citizen o. _United States.of. America.
Maxtford...onn.
read the foregoing specifcation and claims and I verily believe I am the original, frst, azd sole
TWIMBLE.
inventcr of the invention or discovery in
ceseribec and claimed therein; that I do not know and do not believe that this invention was ever
t this application,npulic useorn salein theUnited Statesformore than oneyear prior to
this spyication; that this invention or discovery has not been patented in any country foreign-to
the United States on an application filed by me or my legal representatives or essigns more than
tive months before this application; and that no application for patent on this invention or dis-
covery has been filed by me or my representatives or assigns in any country foreign to the United
States,except as follows:
NONE
Wherefore I pray that Letters Patent be granted to me for the invention or discovery described
enC claimed in the foregoing specifcation and claims, and I hereby subscribe my name to the fore-
going speciications and claims, oath,and this petition, this
19.
7
dayof.
e2
！
C
Last name
INVENTOR
Inventor.
KOPPELMAN
SIGN
First nozoe.
E.
HERE
PHILOMENA
1212Broad
St
Conn.
90190
Post Omce Address
Hartford,
State of.
Conr.
SS
County
Before me perscnally appeared....Rhilomena.....Koppelmen.
to me known to be the person described in the above application for patent, who signed the fore-
goinginstrument in my presence,ard made cath beforeme to the allegations set jorth therein as
being urder oath,on the day andyear aforesaid.
Notary Pubiie
[SEAL]
My Comiassn apies Aarl 1, xy
My commission expires:.
NOTARY
IPRESS
This form may be executed only when sttached to z complete applieation as the last page thereof
SEAL
Sele Invester
HERE

--- PAGE BREAK ---iassn apies Aarl 1, xy
My commission expires:.
NOTARY
IPRESS
This form may be executed only when sttached to z complete applieation as the last page thereof
SEAL
Sele Invester
HERE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PHILOMENA E..KOPPEIMAN
(one sheet of drawing)
THIMBLE
ABSTRACT OF THE DISCLOSURE
A thimble made of a flexible and resilient material
siapted tc readily fit any size finger has a shield made of a
rigid materiel fixed thereto,whereby
the shield is adapted to
be engaged by the end of a needle as the latter is pushed through
an article being sewn.
SPECIFICATION
This invention relates to the art of sewing and uore
rit any size finger. Known thimbles are clumsy and ilz-ritting
ard there exists the prcblem of trying to find the size and shape
of a thimble tnat will suitably fit the finger.For example,in
order to retain 2 conventional,rigid thimbie which is made of
1
and second joint and cannot keep thatfinger close to the materia
at least not as close as the rest of the fingers.Further,the
hand is not as free to handle the material.
Acccrdingly,an object of the present invention is to
provide athimble which will readily fit any size finger.
Another object isto prcviaea thimble thatismade ofa
resilient and flexible material so that it wiil snugiy fit on
any finger and wiil be retained on such finger withcut having to
hold it on.
A further cbject is to provide a thimble made of a fiexi-
ble and resilient material which has affixed theretoc shield o
cnd protect the user's finger.
Yet a further object is to provide a thimble made of a

--- PAGE BREAK ---vide a thimble made of a fiexi-
ble and resilient material which has affixed theretoc shield o
cnd protect the user's finger.
Yet a further object is to provide a thimble made of a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

non-risid material and having affixed thereto e shiela of rigid
material located to be positioned over the ball of the finger
when the thimble is worn by the user.
Its still afurtherobject of the invention toprovide
a.thimble which will conform closely to the configuration of the
extremity or the finger.
following desoription taken in conjunetion with the accompanying
drawings wherein:
fitted thereon.
Figure 2 is an elevational view of the thimble on a larger
scale.
Figure 3 is a·sectional view of tne thimble showing the
shield which is secured to the thimble.
Referring to the draving, the illustrated eubodiment shows
a tnimble lo adapted to fit on the end of a person's finger.
The thimble lO may be made of various flexible and resiiient
materials so that it will fit any size finger.For example,it
may be made of an elastic material such as rubber or the like.
may be of sheet material.he thimble may aiso be made of plastic
or nylon and may have a weave which makes it stretchable.How-
ever the material or the weave used should be such thatthe
thimble can be stretcned to place it on the finger wnereby once
it is placed on the finger,. the resiliency thereof will cause
the thimble to hug the person's finger so that it will not fall
cff.
The aforesaid resilientmaterials are generaiiy not com-
patible with the requirements needed In a thimble for pushing
the end of the needle through material.Accordingiy,the thimble

--- PAGE BREAK ---The aforesaid resilientmaterials are generaiiy not com-
patible with the requirements needed In a thimble for pushing
the end of the needle through material.Accordingiy,the thimble

--- PAGE BREAK ---

be suitabiy secured to the thimble by adhesive or the like. The
shield 12may be made of metal,plastic or other suitable mater-
The shield12 islocated on the tnimble so that it is
disposed at the ball of the finger. Accordingly, when using the
thiable, the user can have the end of the needle engage the
shieldto push theneedievthrough while the rigid shield protects
the user's finger.
From the above description it will be seen that,the
thimble.of the present invention wiil fit snugiy on various size
rirzers so'that the hand is completely free while at the same
time,the thimble has a.rigid shield to provide the necessary
support for pushing the needle.
The shield 12 may have various configurations. Fon
ezaxple,it may be circuiar cr it may be oval. Aiso,the shield
may be fiat or t may have a slight curvature to more closely
The thimble may have a iongitudinal length to extend
cver the first joint or to extend further to the second joint.
As may be desired, an intermediate material (e.g. felt) may be
disposed between the thiuble and the shield 12.
The shield may be provided witn dimples or other irregu-
larities 16 to facilitate engagement with the needie. As may be
desired,the open end of the thimble may be reinforced as indi-
cated at 14.
It is understood that minor variations from the form
or the invention disclosed herein may be made without departure
from the spirit and scope of the invention, and that the specifi
cations and drawins are to be considered as merely illustrative
revher than limiting.

--- PAGE BREAK ---may be made without departure
from the spirit and scope of the invention, and that the specifi
cations and drawins are to be considered as merely illustrative
revher than limiting.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Wnat is claimed is:
1.A thinble adapted to be fitted on the extremity of
the finger comprising an elongated cup-like element open at one
end and adapted to receive a person's finger, said element being
onto the person's finger,and a shield made of a rigid material
sffixed to said element and adapted to engage the end of 2 needle
to push the latter.
2. A thimble according to claim l, wherein said cup-iike
element is an elastic material.
3. A thimble according to claim l, wherein said cup-like
elementis made of a woven material.
4.A thimble according to olaim 1, wherein said cup-like
element is made of a thin walied sheet material.
5. A tnimble according to claim 1, wherein said shield
is secured to said cup-like element by an aahesive.
6. A thimble according to claim l, wherein said shield
is made of metal.
7.:A thimble according to claim l,wherein said shield
is maae of plastic.
8. A thimble according to claim l, wherein said sheild
has an arcuate configuration adapted.to conform to the curvature
ofthe ball of a person's finger.
9.A thimbie according to claim l,wherein said shield
has a conriguration adapted to cover the bsil of a person's
finger.