1
<r-
C'
1 - Belmont
1 -’Sullivan
1 - W. L. Smith
1 - Branig an
1 - Lenihan
1 - Loo
February 7, 1964
ROBERT EDWARD WEBSTER
Robert Webster' lived in Russia from August, 1959,
until Kay, 1902, when he returned to the United States. Be
has boon interviewed by this Bureau and the following is a
Summary of the Information be furnished.
Wobster was born October 23, 1928, at Tiffin, Ohio.
Ho served in the United States Havy from August, 1947, until
Buy, 1950. In November, 1957, he began employment with the
Rand Development Company, Cleveland, Ohio.
In 1959 Webster made throe trips to Russia to
represent his employor at the American National Exhibition
in Moscow. In March, 1959, he was in Moscow for one week,
in Mny, 1959, and June, 1959, he was there for eeven weeks
and hia third visit bogan In July, 1959. At this time he
was married and the fatbor of two children. During his third
trip to Russia, he requested permission to remain there.
The thought of remaining in Russia came to Webster
during his second trip in 1959; however, at that time he made
no effort to remain there. Shortly after his arrival in Moscow
in July, 1959, ho discussed this with Alexander Shiskin, an
English-speaking Russian official at the exhibition, and
Shiskin arrangod for an Interview with one Popof. At this
meeting Vobator filled out a questionnaire furnishing his
background and expressing his wish to remain in Russia to
hotter hinaolf in the plastics Industry. Popof did not
. accept this renson and Webster then changed it to state that
lfc"* wnnted^to stay in Russia since all business in the
IJ.iltod States was controlled by the Government. ~ XRRCflf-
Tolsoa _
Pftimoal .
Uohi
Ceiper M
Callahan ,
-Cam**-
OeLooch ,
' tvans
Cole _....
Rom
V Webster was interviewed on'four occasions by ^ ^
Popof and other poreons. The Interviews wore aimed at
otermlnlng if Webster was cortaln that he wanted to stay la
it*n4 K ..4 AM 4   .j_- * _ « > > > . . .*
—Jtuasia and to determine his tochnical qualifications and
—experience. Throe days before he was scheduled to loava
Russia, he recoivod permission to remain thore. In company
,Sulltvoa .
Tovel
Tioil#* __
-—JPL: pa
Holme* -
Geady _
“with a male Intourist guide, he traveled to Leningfortd, Russia
"’’4 AF A 1 AA F . . ^ / V
K
H05-81285
ORIG AND ONE FURNISHED COMMISSION
oX ,
tfir)
(ID
1 =
bJ-IrrtSiO' /'d-Fq
U.-LViURSl
:4ff
sa male Intourist guide, he traveled to Leningfortd, Russia
"’’4 AF A 1 AA F . . ^ / V
K
H05-81285
ORIG AND ONE FURNISHED COMMISSION
oX ,
tfir)
(ID
1 =
bJ-IrrtSiO' /'d-Fq
U.-LViURSl
:4ff
s

--- PAGE BREAK ---de, he traveled to Leningfortd, Russia
"’’4 AF A 1 AA F . . ^ / V
K
H05-81285
ORIG AND ONE FURNISHED COMMISSION
oX ,
tfir)
(ID
1 =
bJ-IrrtSiO' /'d-Fq
U.-LViURSl
:4ff
s

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fobort Edward Webster •
>• .v !. • ' :
. • •• * . W • •«* *
V- ' r • Wobater has stated that his decision to remain
In Russia was bn6od on several things. First, ho dedred
to escape his family responsibilities in the United States.
Secondly, his wife had objected to the travel necessitated
by his job and, finally, he was seriously in debt.
•"vIn addition to the above reasons, when Webster
was in Moscow on his second trip, he had set one Vera Platonova,
who was eoparated from her husband. Their friendship was
surreptitious, as Soviet nationals were not supposed to i&lngls
with foreigners. After Wobater had roceived permission to
remain in Bussia and had been in Leningrad for two weeks, he
was permitted to telephone Platonova and she was permitted to
visit him in Leningrad. Webster then traveled to Moscow where
ho officially renounced his American citlzonship to American
officials and then went on a one-month vacation with Platonova.
After this vacation Wobater and Platonova returned
to Leningrad and be bocomo employed at tho Plastics Institute,
with Platonova as hie interpreter. His Job was to establish
a Fiberglas Department since there was none in the Institute.
During this time ho and Platonova resided in a common-law
relationship which resulted in a daughter being bom on
-> ,r August 18, 19C0. Ho aluo attempted to design a Fiberglas .v
rosin depositor, but due ,to the lack of parts and equipment,
t the machine did not work. y. . ' '• • ....
• About Docembor of 1959 Webstor received a letter fro*
his father informing him that his mother had suffered a mental
breakdown‘and that bo was needed at homo. This letter disturbed
^ob3tor and in May, 19C0, ho travolod to Moscow accompanied
)j,j Platonova on official business. While in Moscow he contacted
t|;ue Amorlc.an Embassy to determine tho necessary procedure to
li stum to tho United Statos. When he returned to Leningrad,
• l'} began steps to obtain tho required Soviet documents and in
/ igust, 1U60, made his first application for a 8oviot exit visa.
/' x>ut two months Inter ho was told the roquost had been denied
e id that ho would have to wait one year bofore reapplying. On*
year later ho again mado an application and the exit visa was
granted lit Fobruary, 1962. On March 12, 19C2, tho American Embassy
adviced him that his Soviet exit visa was approved and ho was
givon instructions regarding tho obtaining of an American visa.
- 2 -
y ~iV. Vr
. ^*r'r ^rrr
- "T "rch 12, 19C2, tho American Embassy
adviced him that his Soviet exit visa was approved and ho was
givon instructions regarding tho obtaining of an American visa.
- 2 -
y ~iV. Vr
. ^*r'r ^rrr
- "T "

--- PAGE BREAK ---

*n
Robert Edward lobster
-v.
Regarding his efforts to leave Russia, lobster ,
stated that Vera Platonova made no effort to porsuade him
to remain in the Soviet Union, but she assisted him In
preparing forms and obtaining various documents which h*
needed. When it bocone known that Webster wanted to leave ^
Russia, two men from Moscow interviewed him for about <l£teen
minutes and askod him to reconsider his decision, he told,-
tbeso men he wanted to return to his wife and children and - >.
to aee hie sick mother. Ho pressure was exerted on him and
no political matters wore discussed.
Webster has stated that he was not aware of any
participation of Soviet intelligence personnel in his interviews
or othorwiee either before or after his defection. He
aware if Yora Platonova was over contacted by Soviet intelligence.
Further, to the best of his knowledge Boviet intelligence ..
' exhibited no interest in him before bis departure to the. .
United States. Ho requests were made of him and no agreements
wore made in return for his exit visa. The only question
concerning American defense matters occurred when some engineers
from Moscow askod him what Government work was handled in the
Rand Company and Webster denied any knowledge of this, which
ho said was true. ' •'* ;* ‘ ;..-
Webster arrived back in the United States on :.,r
May 20, 1962, as an alien admitted under the Russian quota. ; ^
ij.
f.y. ' )
..... k'- >
- 3 -
S