Spy vs. Spy: Scenes from the Cold War in Colombia, 1963-72

Published: Sep 3, 2025 | Briefing Book # 902 | Edited by Michael Evans

1968 CIA Op Netted Intel on “Entire Clandestine Leadership” of Communist Party and FARC
CIA “Prop Play” Planted Info on Soviet Agent in Colombian Press
High-Level Cuban Defector, Bay of Pigs Veteran, Operated CIA Listening Post in Bogotá
CIA Secretly Funded Civilian Anti-Communist Group in Colombia
New Revelations from the JFK Assassination Records

[A “fairly reliable” intelligence source for the West German government has said that Cuban intelligence (G-2) official Maximo Gruber “has been appointed technical leader of the Communist guerrillas in Sumapaz, Colombia,” according to this CIA Information Report. Gruber is “a Polish Jew” who “carries a Bolivian diplomatic passport identifying him as ‘traveling inspector of the Bolivian Foreign Ministry.’” In Colombia, Gruber is working with insurgent leader Jaime Guerra, also known as “Captain Veneno” and he is linked to the Colombian Communist Party through “Blanca Diaz y Collazo, a lawyer and former member of the Cuban Embassy in Bogota, trained in Prague in 1952.”]

Colombian President Alberto Lleras Camargo speaks to the media after the arrival of President John F. Kennedy and First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy at El Dorado Airport in Bogotá, December 17, 1961. (Source: JFK Library )

Soviet envoy Nikolay Leonov (center, facing camera) with Fidel Castro during the Cuban leader's first visit to the Soviet Union, May 1, 1963. (Source: TASS)

Manuel Villafana Martinez ("Errol R. Lythgoe") is pictured at far right in this photo posted on a website dedicated to veterans of Brigade 2506 , one of the CIA-backed paramilitary groups involved in the failed April 1961 invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs.

Image and caption from a declassified CIA Resarch Paper, "Cuba: Training Third World Guerrillas," December 1986, depicts Cuban intelligence chief Manuel Pineiro alongside Rosemberg Pabon ("Comandante Uno"), leader of Colombia's M-19 guerrilla group after the resolution of the Dominican Embassy seizure in April 1980. (Rosemberg is misspelled in the CIA caption.)

Spanish actor Damián Alcázar portrayed Feliciano Pachón in the 2015 film La Sargento Matacho.

Washington, D.C., September 3, 2025 - Covert CIA surveillance of a Soviet agent under diplomatic cover in Mexico City in 1968 led to the acquisition of intelligence on the “entire clandestine leadership” of the Colombian Communist Party and the nascent FARC insurgent group, according to declassified records from the John F. Kennedy assassination papers released earlier this year. Colombian government operations based on that intelligence led to the “roll up” of the Communist Party’s “clandestine printing press,” which was used to forge passports and other documents, according to a selection of CIA cables from the JFK documents published here today by the National Security Archive. (Documents 5-13)

Another group of records tells the story of a high-level defector from Castro’s Cuba who for several years ran a covert CIA listening post in Bogotá targeting the office of Novosti, the Soviet news agency that was closely associated with the KGB. The eavesdropping operation was led by former Cuban military official Manuel Villafana Martínez, who years earlier had been among the Cuban exiles involved in the failed April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion. Villafana worked with another Cuban expatriate, Manuel Machado Llosa, the former treasurer of Castro’s revolutionary 26th of July Movement who ran a print shop in Colombia that provided cover for Villafana’s intelligence operation against Novosti. (Documents 14-20)

Document 14: A 1970 cable from the CIA station in Bogotá sheds light on Agency targeting of Soviet communications in Colombia.

The thousands of JFK records released earlier this year, including almost all the documents that remained classified in whole or in part, have not produced any bombshell revelations about the assassination of President Kennedy or changed the general consensus that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in killing JFK. Instead, the most interesting documents by far are the thousands of CIA cables, memos, case files and other records describing heretofore undisclosed covert operations and undercover intelligence agents that were believed to have some possible connection—however tangential—to the Kennedy assassination. Among these are scores of fascinating new documents about CIA operations in Colombia and the rest of Latin America that were intended to both monitor and counter Soviet and Cuban intelligence operations and support for leftist groups.

While the Colombian news media has reported on some of the newly released assassination papers—and some downright bizarre documents found in the CIA’s CREST database—this Electronic Briefing Book highlights some intriguing new declassified details from the JFK collection on Cold War spy operations in Colombia during the 1960s and 70s that other news organizations may have missed.

Document 9: In a memo to Ambassador Charles Freeman, the CIA’s Mexico City station chief provides some details on how its surveillance of Soviet official Nikolay Leonov in Mexico City led to a big intelligence haul against the clandestine leadership of the FARC and the Colombian Communist Party.

One group of records details U.S. efforts to track Cuban “subversion” in Colombia during 1963, less than a year after the Cuban Missile Crisis of October 1962. By early February 1963, for example, the CIA had a report from a “fairly reliable” German official source that a top Cuban military intelligence official named Maximo Gruber had “been appointed technical leader of the Communist guerrillas in Sumapaz, Colombia,” a key early stronghold of the FARC guerrillas. (Document 1) An October 1963 FBI memo found in the collection describes how CIA interception of mail and radio communications in Colombia led one CIA analyst to determine that legendary Cuban intelligence chief Manuel Pinerio was in contact with an undercover agent known as “Roberto” who was living in Colombia near the Venezuelan border. (Document 4)

The CIA continually monitored the travel of Colombian (and other Latin American) nationals to and from Cuba during this period, tracked Soviet and Cuban funding of Colombian leftist groups, collected what scant evidence there was linking Cuba to Colombian insurgent groups, and secretly worked with civilian anti-communist groups. A 1963 report prepared for the Joint Chiefs of Staff from the “Sub-Committee on Cuban Subversion” said that leads developed by one “returnee” from Cuba had led the Bogotá station to investigate “members of both the Colombian Congress and the Bogota municipal government.” In another operation, the CIA had “subsidized and directed” the activities of a “Colombian Civic Action Group, composed of influential local businessmen,” that had “established an anti-Castro propaganda unit” and that was “actively collecting evidence of Cuban subversion in Colombia to support its propaganda campaign.” (Document 3)

Other records show that the CIA also fought the Cold War in the Colombian news media through covert propaganda operations to secretly plant information in the press. One CIA “prop play” described in the JFK papers was aimed at exposing secret Soviet efforts to support communist parties and revolutionary groups in Latin America at precisely the moment that Colombia was reestablishing relations with the Soviets after 20 years with no formal diplomatic representation.

Document 13: In a 1969 cable, the CIA station in Colombia reports that it has "placed articles in 'La Republica' and 'El Siglo'" identifying the Soviet official behind the financing of communist and insurgent groups in Colombia.

The operation began to take shape in April 1968 after the CIA’s Mexico City station observed legendary KGB Latin America hand Nikolay Leonov passing money to Colombian revolutionary figure Feliciano Pachón and an associate. The Agency surveillance of Leonov led to the immediate arrests of the two couriers upon their return to Bogotá, seizure of $100,000 cash, and a treasure trove of intelligence about the clandestine leadership of the FARC and the Colombian Communist Party.

The next month, a cable from the Bogotá station described the CIA effort to secretly influence Colombian news reports to link the arrests and the subsequent “roll up” of the Communist Party leadership to a larger Soviet effort to support communist revolutionaries in Latin America. The initial series of “distorted, fuzzy conflicting” articles had included the “insertion” of information on “the uncovering of a vast subversive net” across the region supported by the Soviets. A new article published that day in El Tiempo and excerpted in the cable included important new details, based on “sources worthy of all credit,” indicating that Pachón had received the money “in Mexico from the hands of a functionary of the Soviet Embassy in Cuba,” a fact that was probably not widely known outside of a relatively small group of officials at the CIA. El Tiempo also reported that the money had been destined for Pachón’s brother, alias “Rapidol,” commander of a FARC front in Caquetá.A new article published that day in El Tiempo and excerpted in the cable included important new details, based on “sources worthy of all credit,” indicating that Pachón had received the money “in Mexico from the hands of a functionary of the Soviet Embassy in Cuba,” a fact that was probably not widely known outside of a relatively small group of officials at the CIA. El Tiempo also reported that the money had been destined for Pachón’s brother, alias “Rapidol,” commander of a FARC front in Caquetá. In a message bearing the cryptonym “MHSPAWN” for covert propaganda, the Bogotá station said that it had “more than enough ammunition to keep prop play boiling along lines this case dramatic proof Soviets have not only not changed their ways but have no intention of doing so.” (Document 7)

But the Bogotá station also recognized that the propaganda operation created a potentially embarrassing situation for the Colombian government under President Carlos Lleras Restrepo, who had recently reestablished relations with Moscow. El Tiempo also reported that the money had been destined for Pachón’s brother, alias “Rapidol,” commander of a FARC front in Caquetá. In a message bearing the cryptonym “MHSPAWN” for covert propaganda, the Bogotá station said that it had “more than enough ammunition to keep prop play boiling along lines this case dramatic proof Soviets have not only not changed their ways but have no intention of doing so.” (Document 7)

But the Bogotá station also recognized that the propaganda operation created a potentially embarrassing situation for the Colombian government under President Carlos Lleras Restrepo, who had recently reestablished relations with Moscow. The cable cautioned “against attacking or accusing President Lleras personally” and requested “that Colombian personalities be kept out of any prop play since current situation inevitably will present Lleras with extremely difficult and embarrassing political pill to swallow.” (Agency sensitivity about President Lleras is of particular interest since the publication of reports earlier this year, also based on recently declassified JFK assassination records , indicating that his cousin, the former president Alberto Lleras Camargo, had been authorized for “Operational Approval” by the CIA on February 24, 1958, although there had reportedly “been no operational interest in him” since his election as president in May 1958.)

The Mexico City CIA station’s reply to the report about the ongoing “prop play” in Colombia “strongly” recommended that the Bogotá station work with press contacts to “surface” information identifying Leonov “as the Soviet diplomat … who gave Pachon money in Mexico,” characterizing the undercover KGB agent as “the mastermind for Soviet clandestine support, direction and financing of [communist parties] in Latin America.” (Document 8) The clandestine propaganda effort continued into the next year as the Bogotá station reported in May 1969 that it had “placed articles ‘La Republica’ and ‘El Siglo’ 17 May which identify Nikolay Leonov as diplomat who passed one hundred thousand plus US dollars to Colombian Feliciano Pachon in Mexico City in April 1968.” (Document 13)

Documentation about the Novosti eavesdropping operation—known as GICITRON inside the CIA—picks up in early 1970 with a cable from the Bogotá station indicating that a vacancy had opened up in a “GICITRON target building which should improve reception and therefore take considerably.” The listening post was to be run by Villafana, a former Cuban military attaché who defected in the early years of the revolution and had previously worked for the CIA’s Mexico City station (where he was known by the Agency cryptonym “LITAINT-1”).In a message bearing the cryptonym “MHSPAWN” for covert propaganda, the Bogotá station said that it had “more than enough ammunition to keep prop play boiling along lines this case dramatic proof Soviets have not only not changed their ways but have no intention of doing so.” (Document 7)

Documentation about the Novosti eavesdropping operation—known as GICITRON inside the CIA—picks up in early 1970 with a cable from the Bogotá station indicating that a vacancy had opened up in a “GICITRON target building which should improve reception and therefore take considerably.” The listening post was to be run by Villafana, a former Cuban military attaché who defected in the early years of the revolution and had previously worked for the CIA’s Mexico City station (where he was known by the Agency cryptonym “LITAINT-1”). In Colombia, Villafana used the pseudonym “Errol Lythgoe,” and cover for GICITRON was provided by another well-connected Cuban defector, Manuel Machado Llosa, the former treasurer of Castro’s revolutionary 26th of July Movement.The cable cautioned “against attacking or accusing President Lleras personally” and requested “that Colombian personalities be kept out of any prop play since current situation inevitably will present Lleras with extremely difficult and embarrassing political pill to swallow.” (Agency sensitivity about President Lleras is of particular interest since the publication of reports earlier this year, also based on recently declassified JFK assassination records , indicating that his cousin, the former president Alberto Lleras Camargo, had been authorized for “Operational Approval” by the CIA on February 24, 1958, although there had reportedly “been no operational interest in him” since his election as president in May 1958.)

Documentation about the Novosti eavesdropping operation—known as GICITRON inside the CIA—picks up in early 1970 with a cable from the Bogotá station indicating that a vacancy had opened up in a “GICITRON target building which should improve reception and therefore take considerably.” The listening post was to be run by Villafana, a former Cuban military attaché who defected in the early years of the revolution and had previously worked for the CIA’s Mexico City station (where he was known by the Agency cryptonym “LITAINT-1”). In Colombia, Villafana used the pseudonym “Errol Lythgoe,” and cover for GICITRON was provided by another well-connected Cuban defector, Manuel Machado Llosa, the former treasurer of Castro’s revolutionary 26th of July Movement. As “GICITRON-4,” Machado managed the Colombian affiliate of a Mexican printing company that was used as a front for CIA operations.

By the 1970s, with more and more countries having recognized Cuba and invited Cuban diplomats to their capital cities, the CIA had grown wary of relying on Cuban exiles for intelligence operations in Latin America.

By the 1970s, with more and more countries having recognized Cuba and invited Cuban diplomats to their capital cities, the CIA had grown wary of relying on Cuban exiles for intelligence operations in Latin America. “[W]e would do well to begin a gradual cut-back in our use of Cubans given the targetting [sic] that we presume will be made on them as the Cuban CI [counterintelligence] effort begins in the various countries,” reported CIA headquarters in a draft memo found among the JFK papers. The scaling back of the use of Cuban agents should be “keyed initially to where the official Cuban presence is,” the cable reads, and should therefore start with Peru, although Cuban agents working in Colombia, including “GICITRON-4” and “LITHGOE” are also mentioned in the document. (Document 20)

The previous month, CIA headquarters had cabled the Bogotá station to inquire about the status of CIA-managed Cuban agents in Colombia and to “assess threat growing PBRUMEN diplomatic presence in hemisphere creates for BKTRUST employed PBRUMEN assets,” using established Agency cryptonyms for Cuba (“PBRUMEN”) and CIA (“BKTRUST”). The message specifically asked about the status of four known Cuban CIA assets in Colombia: “Errol A. Lythgoe, Reginald M. Daciek, GICITRON-4 and GICITRON-5 in Bogota” and asks the station to indicate if it has “additional PBRUMEN assets we unaware of, or others whose files should be reviewed.” (Document 18)

Document 22: A 1972 cable from CIA headquarters asks for a report on the status of "Cuban exile assets" being run by the Bogota station.

Questions remain about the true identities of the individuals and organizations behind some of the Agency cyptonyms that appear in these records. While “GICITRON-4” is known to be Manuel Machado Llosa, there is no further information about the identify of “GICITRON-5.” While “Errol Lythgoe” is the known pseudonym used by Manuel Villafana Martinez, it’s not clear whether or not “Reginald M. Daciek” is also a false name.

Another continuing mystery is the identity behind the cryptonym “GISOY-92,” who, from context, appears to have been a highly-placed intelligence source inside the Colombian government. Records to and from the Bogotá station suggest that there was concern that station operations could jeopardize Agency relations with GISOY-92.

In the case of the the late-1960s “prop play,” the Bogotá station worried that allowing information about Leonov’s connections to Colombian revolutionary groups to “break in all its glory” could lead to the “dismissal” of “GISOY-92.” CIA officials in Colombia had “urged GISOY-92 to release as factual a presentation as possible,” according to one cable, and “station could well be made scapegoat by [President] Lleras and GISOY-92.” (Document 7)

In the case of CIA’s spying on the Novosti office (GICITRON), CIA headquarters asked to what extent GISOY-92 would be informed of the bugging operation. “Thought occurs to HQS that GISOY-92, being aware GICITRON operation, would probably suspect proposed Lythgoe cover office in GICITRON building is new LP [listening post].” Did the Bogotá station “plan to make GISOY-92 witting of Lythgoe role?” If they chose not to do so, “would he be piqued if he later learned of it?” Finally, “What repercussions could this have on Station/GISOY relations?” (Document 15)

Check out the Documents list below for more details on the CIA’s role in Colombia during this critical period of the Cold War in Latin America.

Documents

CIA Information Report, “Cuban Support of Guerrillas in Colombia,” Secret/Noforn, 1 p.
Feb 4, 1963 | Source JFK Assassination papers, file no. 198-10005-10018

CIA Memorandum, “Cuban Training of Latin American Subversives,” Secret, 45 pp. (includes annex on Colombia)
Mar 27, 1963 | Source JFK Assassination papers, file no. 177-10001-10305
This finished intelligence report is the CIA’s effort to summarize what it has learned on Cuba’s efforts to train and equip “subversives” in Latin America just a little more than five months since the resolution of the Cuban Missile Crisis of October 1962 (and nearly two years since the disastrous CIA-led invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs). A special section on Colombia presents the results of CIA efforts to track the travel of Colombian citizens to Cuba. Of 400 Colombians who went to Cuba in the past year, “37 are reported to have received training in guerrilla warfare, one in counterintelligence,” and another that “attended a staff or cadre school,” according to the CIA report. Most were members of the FUAR or MOEC groups, characterized in the report as “revolutionaries, dissident Communists, and recruits from the ranks of labor, students, and the unemployed lower classes.” The groups are said to be receiving “Cuban financial support” and are “attempting—without appreciable success to date—to coordinate operations with the bandit gangs terrorizing the violence areas of Colombia.”

U.S. Army General Counsel Joseph Califano, Jr., to Joint Chiefs of Staff (Earle Wheeler, enclosing report: “Report of Sub-Committee on Cuban Subversion on Progress Made During April-June Period in Curbing Cuban Subversion in Latin America,” Secret, 18 pp., (includes cover memoranda)
Jul 18, 1963 | Source JFK Assassination papers, file no. 198-10007-10022
A U.S. Army report on U.S. government efforts against “Cuban subversion” for spring 1963 includes a short section that describes a range of CIA activities in Colombia. Colombia’s customs chief believed that his agency had “identified a courier operating between Colombia and Cuba” and had “mounted an operation to uncover his Colombian contacts.” The CIA Station in Colombia had one “asset”—a controlled, undercover agent—“in Cuba attending guerrilla warfare training.” Another CIA “asset” was “being debriefed after his recent return from Cuba,” while a third would “depart soon for two months training in Cuba.” Leads developed by agents sent to Cuba led the CIA station to open investigations on Colombian Congress members and officials from the Bogota city government. Meanwhile, the CIA office in Colombia was funding and directing the activities of a “Colombian Civic Action Group, composed of influential local businessmen,” that had “established an anti-Castro propaganda unit” and that was “actively collecting evidence of Cuban subversion in Colombia to support its propaganda campaign.”

FBI memo, S.J. Papich to D.J. Brennan, Jr., “Subject: Manuel Pineiro, IS-Cuba,” Secret , 2 pp. (includes cover memo)
Oct 10, 1963 | Source JFK Assassination papers, file no. 198-10007-10022
CIA interception of Cuban message traffic in and out of Colombia and elsewhere helped the Agency identify the sender of some of the messages as Manuel Pineiro, a high-ranking Cuban intelligence official whose duties included aiding revolutionary movements in other parts of Latin America. The cable describes how one CIA analyst, identified as “Mrs. Anita Potocki,” had determined that an individual that had been sending messages to Cuban agent in Panama as “Patronio” was actually Pineiro. One of the recipients of the messages was an apparent Cuban agent living in Colombia near the border with Venezeula. An intercepted letter from that agent combined with Cuba’s radioed response (to reprimand the agent for including too much information in the letter) was also intercepted help to identify Pineiro as origin of the messages from Cuba.

CIA memorandum, “Nikolay Sergeyevich Leonov, KGB Officer Possibly Linked to PACHON Case in Colombia,” Secret, 2 pp.
May 5, 1968 | Source JFK Assassination papers, file no. 104-10218-10007
James B. Noland, who would the next year become the CIA’s Mexico City station chief, describes how information collected by the Mexico CIty station led to the late-April arrests of senior FARC official Feliciano Pachon and one of his associates after returning to Colombia by air from Mexico City. Noland writes that the tipoff that led to the arrests came from Adelmo Urrea Garcia, a Colombian Communist Party member “whose motives are as yet unclear.” Noland says that “cryptic notes” were found in Pachon’s suitcase, including the address of Soviet Press Attache Nikolay Leonov, who was “[known] to be a KGB officer, known to have handled CP [probably Communist Party] operations in the past.”

FBI liaison officer Sam Papich to D. J. Brennan, Jr., “Communist Party of Colombia; Internal Security Colombia,” Classification unknown, 1 p.
May 23, 1968 | Source CIA CREST database
In a memo to a senior FBI official, Sam Papich reports that the CIA’s deputy director of plans has turned over a list of serial numbers from the U.S. currency found in the possession “two individuals in Colombia who clandestinely brought into the country a large sum of U.S. currency slated to be delivered to the Communist Party of Colombia.” Papich indicates that the “Soviet Section” would check to see if the money had gone “through Soviet intelligence channels” and notes that the list had been made available to the Central Investigative Division in case they wanted to see whether it matched “any identified currency utilized by James Earl Ray,” the suspected shooter in the April 4, 1968, assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr.

CIA Station Bogota cable, [Articles on Pachon Case], Secret, 12 pp. (includes cover memo and attachments)
May 24, 1968 | Source JFK Assassination papers, file no. 104-10218-10007
This fascinating cable from the CIA’s Bogota Station (marked “MHSPAWN,” a cryptonym used for covert propaganda) describes status of a CIA “prop play” (propaganda operation) in Bogota. The purpose of the operation was to secretly influence Colombian and other news organizations to report information identifying Nikolay Leonov, a longtime Soviet intelligence agent operating under diplomatic cover in Mexico, as a key figure behind efforts to fund Communists and revolutionary groups in Colombia. This fascinating cable from the CIA’s Bogota Station (marked “MHSPAWN,” a cryptonym used for covert propaganda) describes status of a CIA “prop play” (propaganda operation) in Bogota. The purpose of the operation was to secretly influence Colombian and other news organizations to report information identifying Nikolay Leonov, a longtime Soviet intelligence agent operating under diplomatic cover in Mexico, as a key figure behind efforts to fund Communists and revolutionary groups in Colombia. Here, the Bogota station calls attention to a May 24, 1968, article that appeared in El Tiempo , Colombia’s leading newspaper, that followed “two days of distorted, fuzzy, conflicting articles appearing in all Bogota dailies” about the April arrest of Feliciano Pachon Chaconta and an associate at El Dorado Airport in Bogota. Previous articles in the Colombian media had linked the arrests to the subsequent “roll up” of the Colombian Communist Party leadership, and, the cable notes, included the “insertion” (presumably by the CIA) of information about “the uncovering of vast Latin American subversive net involving Colombia, Bolivia, Mexico [and] Venezuela.” The new article in El Tiempo , apparently based on information planted by CIA, further reported that Pachon had “confessed” to having received the $101,000 (USD) that was seized from him at the Bogota airport from “a functionary of the Soviet Embassy in Cuba” whose mission was to see that the money reached the emerging FARC revolutionary forces in southern Colombia, according to portions of the article quoted (in Spanish) in the CIA cable. The Bogota station adds that it “has more than enough ammunition to keep prop play boiling along lines this case dramatic proof Soviets have not only not changed their ways but have no intention of doing so.” Colombia and the USSR had renewed their official ties in January 1968 after a 20-year break in diplomatic relations, and “timing most propitious,” according to the CIA station, since the article linked the Soviets to Communist revolutionaries in Colombia on the same day that the new Soviet ambassador, Nicolas Belous, was due to arrive in Bogota, “oozing sweetness and good fellowship” and vowing that the Soviet Union “would never interfere in internal Colombian affairs.” Colombians would the same day learn that the same Soviet government “was secretly pumping in funds, material support, and propaganda materials for subversive use in undermining Colombian government,” according to the cable. Recognizing the obvious political sensitivities for the Colombian government, which had only recently reestablished relations with Moscow, the Bogota station “cautions against attacking or accusing President Lleras personally … since he reacts unpredictably and sometimes rashly to personal criticism” and further requests “that Colombian personalities be kept out of any prop play since current situation inevitably will present Lleras with extremely difficult and embarrassing political pill to swallow.” The Bogota station is also concerned that allowing the story to “break in all its glory” without concern for Lleras or other top government figures could lead to the “dismissal” of a CIA-associated entity identified in the message as “GISOY-92.” “Station urged GISOY-92 to release as factual a presentation as possible,” according to the cable, and depending on “whether or not station recommendations had any weight in producing wide-scale publicity, station could well be made scapegoat by Lleras and GISOY-92.” The station says that it is keeping the U.S. Source JFK Assassination papers, file no. 104-10218-10007 The purpose of the operation was to secretly influence Colombian and other news organizations to report information identifying Nikolay Leonov, a longtime Soviet intelligence agent operating under diplomatic cover in Mexico, as a key figure behind efforts to fund Communists and revolutionary groups in Colombia. Here, the Bogota station calls attention to a May 24, 1968, article that appeared in El Tiempo , Colombia’s leading newspaper, that followed “two days of distorted, fuzzy, conflicting articles appearing in all Bogota dailies” about the April arrest of Feliciano Pachon Chaconta and an associate at El Dorado Airport in Bogota. Previous articles in the Colombian media had linked the arrests to the subsequent “roll up” of the Colombian Communist Party leadership, and, the cable notes, included the “insertion” (presumably by the CIA) of information about “the uncovering of vast Latin American subversive net involving Colombia, Bolivia, Mexico [and] Venezuela.” The new article in El Tiempo , apparently based on information planted by CIA, further reported that Pachon had “confessed” to having received the $101,000 (USD) that was seized from him at the Bogota airport from “a functionary of the Soviet Embassy in Cuba” whose mission was to see that the money reached the emerging FARC revolutionary forces in southern Colombia, according to portions of the article quoted (in Spanish) in the CIA cable. The Bogota station adds that it “has more than enough ammunition to keep prop play boiling along lines this case dramatic proof Soviets have not only not changed their ways but have no intention of doing so.” Colombia and the USSR had renewed their official ties in January 1968 after a 20-year break in diplomatic relations, and “timing most propitious,” according to the CIA station, since the article linked the Soviets to Communist revolutionaries in Colombia on the same day that the new Soviet ambassador, Nicolas Belous, was due to arrive in Bogota, “oozing sweetness and good fellowship” and vowing that the Soviet Union “would never interfere in internal Colombian affairs.” Colombians would the same day learn that the same Soviet government “was secretly pumping in funds, material support, and propaganda materials for subversive use in undermining Colombian government,” according to the cable. Recognizing the obvious political sensitivities for the Colombian government, which had only recently reestablished relations with Moscow, the Bogota station “cautions against attacking or accusing President Lleras personally … since he reacts unpredictably and sometimes rashly to personal criticism” and further requests “that Colombian personalities be kept out of any prop play since current situation inevitably will present Lleras with extremely difficult and embarrassing political pill to swallow.” The Bogota station is also concerned that allowing the story to “break in all its glory” without concern for Lleras or other top government figures could lead to the “dismissal” of a CIA-associated entity identified in the message as “GISOY-92.” “Station urged GISOY-92 to release as factual a presentation as possible,” according to the cable, and depending on “whether or not station recommendations had any weight in producing wide-scale publicity, station could well be made scapegoat by Lleras and GISOY-92.” The station says that it is keeping the U.S. Embassy Bogota (“LNPURE”) “closely informed” on the case and that it has “alerted REELFOOT and other station sources with access to the Palace to keep us informed on Lleras’ reactions.” bassy Bogota (“LNPURE”) “closely informed” on the case and that it has “alerted REELFOOT and other station sources with access to the Palace to keep us informed on Lleras’ reactions.”

CIA Station Mexico City, [Recommends Identification of Leonov in Press], Secret, 2 pp.
May 29, 1968 | Source JFK Assassination papers, file no. 104-10218-10007
Regarding the covert propaganda operation referred to in the previous document, the CIA’s Mexico City Station advises that Leonov be identified as the Soviet diplomat who gave the money Feliciano Pachon and whose address was found in his possession when he was arrested upon his April return to Bogota. The Mexico station recommends that the Bogota station “tell press contacts address belongs to Leonov,” who is “a KGB officer who uses the cover of second secretary and press attache of the [Soviet Embassy] in Mexico” and “the mastermind for Soviet clandestine support, direction and financing” of communist revolutionaries in Latin America.

CIA Station Chief, Mexico, Winston M. Scott, memorandum for Ambassador Fulton Freeman, “Soviet Participation in Colombian Subversive Activities,” Secret, 4 pp. (includes cover memo)
Jun 17, 1968 | Source JFK Assassination papers, file no. 104-10218-10007
In a memo to Ambassador Charles Freeman, the CIA’s Mexico City station chief provides some details on how its surveillance of Soviet official Nikolay Leonov in Mexico City led to a big intelligence haul against the clandestine leadership of the FARC and the Colombian Communist Party. Surveillance of Leonov conducted by the station “determined that he had a clandestine meeting with a Latin American male” and that Leonov had “passed a bundle to this individual.” After following the individual to his hotel, agents discovered he was registered under the name Feliciano Pachon Chaconta and that a woman named Librada Moreno Leal was registered to the same room. Both were later determined to be members of the Colombian Communist Party and were arrested upon return to Bogota on April 20, 1968, carrying a total of $100,000 (USD). Pachon and Moreno are said to have “broke and provided considerable information,” including the identities of “the entire clandestine leadership of the PCC and FARC,” FARC “personnel and plans,” information about previous financial support from the Soviets, including a $200,000 (USD) payment in June 1967, and the “address and identification of the PCC clandestine printing press,” which was used to forge “false documents and passports,” according to the person who ran the installation. The captured couriers said that all of the clandestine Soviet support received by the FARC and PCC came through the Soviet Embassy in Mexico and that Leonov was the “regular contact” on such matters.

CIA cable to Bogota Station, [Inadvisable to Surface Leonov Connection to Pachon Case Without Mazatlan Address; Concerns About Lleras], Secret, 2pp.
Jun 18, 1968 | Source JFK Assassination papers, file no. 104-10218-10007
The cable from CIA headquarters deals with several aspects of the coordinated “prop play” among various CIA stations to undermine Soviet diplomatic efforts and specifically to plant damaging information about the activities of Nikolay Leonov, a KGB agent under diplomatic cover in Mexico City. Regarding Leonov, stations are advised that any information tying him to the Pachon case should be pegged to the discovery of Leonov’s address in Pachon’s suitcase. Additionally, stations are advised of the importance of “keeping Pres. Lleras’ name out of it.” Attached comments indicated that the Bogota station “will continue to attempt placement of Leonov’s connection in the case in Bogota press.”

CIA Bogota Station cable, [Travel of Nikolai Leonov to Colombia], Secret, 2 pp.
Apr 22, 1969 | Source JFK Assassination paper, file no. 104-10218-10007
A CIA-associated individual or entity known by the cryptonym “GIWREN” has reported to the Agency’s Bogota station that Jose Arizala Posso, chief of the Novosti office in Bogota, has asked the presidential press secretary whether Soviet official Nikolay Leonov can travel to Bogota on way to Lima. The cable notes that Leonov was “once stationed Mexico City as Soviet Embassy press attache and known RIS [Russian Intelligence Service].”

CIA cable, [Order to Name Leonov in “Station-Inspired Articles”], Secret, 2 pp.
May 5, 1969 | Source JFK Assassination papers, file no. 104-10218-10007
This cable from CIA headquarters suggests that the Lima Station plant stories in the local press connecting Soviet official Nikolay Leonov to Peruvian guerrillas as was done previously in Colombia after the arrest of Feliciano Pachon in April 1968. The cable refers to three previous cables, one of which (Bogota 2114) “outlines prop play being conducted by Station Bogota in connection with recent discovery of an ELN cache.” Another reported the “[a]rrival of Leonov in Lima,” describing him as “a Soviet RIS [Russian Intelligence Service] officer who is under cover of Second Secretary of Soviet Embassy in Mexico City.” A third reported on the “connection between Leonov and Pachon.”

CIA Station Bogota, [Station Placed Articles on Leonov in Local Media], Secret, 2 pp.
May 24, 1969 | Source JFK Assassination papers, file no. 104-10218-10007
The CIA Station Bogota reports that it “placed articles ‘La Republica’ and ‘El Siglo’ 17 May which identify Nikolay Leonov as diplomat who passed one hundred thousand plus US dollars to Colombian Feliciano Pachon in Mexico City in April 1968.” The articles “tie Leonov to Pachon by revealing that scrap of paper in possession Pachon when captured had notation of ‘Avenida Mazatlan,’” which was Leonov’s address as Soviet press attaché in Mexico City. The cable adds that Leonov transited through Bogota airport April 23 where he met with “several members of clandestine apparat.”

CIA Station Bogota, “GICITRON Techs,” Secret, 3 pp. (includes forwarding cable from CIA Station Mexico)
Jan 20, 1970 | Source JFK Assassination papers, file no.104-10219-10066
A cable from the CIA station in Bogota sheds considerable light on the Agency’s targeting of Soviet communications in Colombia. Here the station reports that it “has learned of space becoming available” in a “GICITRON target building,” using the Agency cryptonym associated with the Colombia-based communications interception operation. Shifting operations to the new building “should improve reception and therefore take considerably,” according to the station. The station recommends that the new space should be rented and set up by “Errol R. Lythgoe,” the cover name used by Manuel Villafana Martinez, a former Cuban military attaché who defected to the U.S. in 1960 and participated in the Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961. The cable notes that “Lythgoe” (Villafana) was previously known by the Cryptonym “LITAINT-1” when he was handled by the Mexico City station. “Lythgoe” told the station that “he had already formed” a front company that could provide cover for the operation “in conjunction with Manuel Machado Llosa,” the “Cuban manager for Colombia of Galas y Cia.,” a printing company based in Mexico. Machado is a “long-time friend of Lythgoe who performed ops tasks for RVROCK [CIA] in Mexico and is aware of Lythgoe’s operational history.” The station requests that “headquarters obtain clearance [on] priority basis” for Machado “to provide cover for Lythgoe’s business and funds.” Machado would “not to be involved directly in operating,” but “it must be expected that, Cubans being Cuans, he will be more than generally aware of what is going on.” Machado would later be assigned the cryptonym “GICITRON-4.”

CIA cable to Bogota station, “GICITRON Techs,” Secret, 2 pp.
Jan 31, 1970 | Source JFK Assassination papers, file no. 104-10219-10066
Referring to the January 20 cable of the same subject (Bogota 3483) which asked the Agency to clear Manuel Machado Llosa for use by the CIA station in Bogota, CIA assigns him the cryptonym “GICITRON-4” and file no. 201-267298. The cable says Machado “was original member of 26th of July Movement,” in Cuba, “but became disillusioned with administrative incompetence of Castro regime” and the “Sovietization of Cuba.” He worked with Cuban counter-revolutionary groups (including on the CIA’s AMWAIL operation), “had excellent contacts in Cuban diplomatic circles and with Cuban United Nations and Mexican police officials,” and “was rated a reliable source by Station Mexico City,” although he had not been a useful contact for Mexico City since 1963. Regarding the CIA listening post in Bogota, headquarters agrees “that improvement GICITRON reception could improve product and, hence, worth pursuing,” but there were also some concerns about operational security vis a vis an unknown individual assigned the Agency cryptonym GISOY-92. “Thought occurs to HQS that GISOY-92, being aware GICITRON operation, would probably suspect proposed Lythgoe cover office in GICITRON building in new LP [listening post].” Headquarters asks whether the Bogota station planned “make GISOY-92 witting of Lythgoe role?” If not, “would he be piqued if he later learned of it?” “What repercussions could this have on Station/GISOY relations?”

Chief, Western Hemisphere Division to Chief of Station Bogota, “Subject: GICITRON-4,” Secret, 1 p.
Mar 16, 1970 | Source JFK Assassination papers, file no. 104-10219-10066
This short cable indicates that on March 6 “a POA [Provisional Operational Approval] was granted GICITRON-4 (Manuel Machado Llosa) to permit him to form a corporation to provide funding cover for Errol R. Lythgoe.”

Chief, Western Hemisphere Division to CIA Chief of Station, Bogota, “GICITON-4 (201-267298) [Operational Approval Granted], Secret, 2pp.
Feb 11, 1971 | Source JFK Assassination Papers, file no. 104-10219-10066
Operational approval is granted to CIA Station Bogota for use of “GICITRON-4” in Colombia by CIA headquarters.

CIA HQS to Bogota Station, [Growing Threat to CIA-Employed Cuban Assets in Latin America], Secret, 1 p.
Aug 7, 1972 | Source JFK Assassination Papers, file no. 104-10219-10066
In a cable to the CIA station in Bogota, CIA headquarters says it is trying to assess the threat for Cubans employed by the CIA created by the “growing PBRUMEN [Cuban] diplomatic presence in hemisphere.” Agency records list “Errol A. Lythgoe, Reginald M. Daciek, GICITRON-4 and GICITRON-5 in Bogota,” according to the cable. “Pls indicate if station has additional PBRUMEN assets we unaware of, or others whose files should be reviewed.”

CIA memorandum for WH/FI, “Subject: GICITRON-4,” Secret, 1 p.
Aug 15, 1972 | Source JFK Assassination Papers, file no. 104-10219-10066
In apparent reply to the CIA headquarters cable of August 7 on the recommended reduction in reliance on Cuban agents, this memo describes how the individual known as GICITRON-4, Manuel Machado Llosa, is used by the Bogota Station. Machado provides “cover, status and funds for an operation handled by Errol R. Lithgoe,” the pseudonym of Manuel Villafana, “also a Cuban, who is nominally Subject’s partner in the business enterprise.” Although “he was involved in several clandestine Cuban activities while treasurer of the 26th of July Movement during 1957-58,” the CIA says that Machado “has received no training in clandestine operations” from the CIA. In any case, since Machado “provides cover for LITHGOE, he is not required to utilize any tradecraft,” adding that, “Having his own company provides for adequate cover.”

CIA memo draft, “Results of Our Survey of Cuban Assets,” Secret, 1 p.
Sep 13, 1972 | Source JFK Assassination Papers, file no. 104-10219-10066
This strange document — marked both as a “memo draft” and as an “extract” and containing what appear to be pasted-together, non-contiguous sections — notes concerns raised by the Lima chief of station about the security of Agency operations that rely on Cuban assets in countries where Cuba has recently established diplomatic relations. In response, the undisclosed author of the memo asserts that: “[W]e would do well to begin a gradual cut-back in our use of Cubans, given the targetting [sic] that we presume will be made on them as the Cuban CI [counter-intelligence] effort begins in the various countries,” but the reduction in the use of Cuban agents should be “keyed initially to where the official Cuban presence is” and should therefore start with Peru. A seemingly disconnected section indicates that, “GICITRON-4, who has been Treasurer of the 26th July movement in the period 1957-58 provides cover for LITHGOE.”
