-77? ^ -jA/TroVuc^/on 
■fl-A/D -bitIt 
rljy 
f

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“We the People" 
Represent the Spirit of John F. Kennedy 
Vs. 
s 
The United States Government 
Case# 112263-2000 
By 
William P. Miller

--- PAGE BREAK ---fl-A/D -bitIt 
rljy 
f

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“We the People" 
Represent the Spirit of John F. Kennedy 
Vs. 
s 
The United States Government 
Case# 112263-2000 
By 
William P. Miller

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“To sin by silence when we should protest 
makes cowards out of men. ” 
- Ella Wheeler Wilcox 
Introduction 
On November 22, 1963, America’s thirty-fifth president of the United States 
(John Fitzgerald Kennedy) was murdered as he rode in an open car through 
the streets of Dallas, Texas. In the hours, days, months and even years that 
followed the assassination there grew one of the most notorious mysteries of 
the 20th century. For every question that was answered there were at least a 
dozen more new questions left unanswered. It seemed that all at once, every 
level of both the local and federal law enforcement agencies involved in the 
investigation that was to follow, had now become delinquent in their duties 
to pursue the available facts and evidence in the case. Witnesses that had 
tried to come forward with what they had seen or heard were intimidated 
into keeping quiet or ignored altogether. Testimonies that lead to other 
participants in the assassination were pither altered or had never found their 
way into the records at all. Evidence that was present in and around the 
murder scene was either collected and never to resurface again or was able 
to somehow magically change form and become something else entirely. 
Normal investigative procedures by the local police and the various federal 
government agencies were not being followed both before and after the 
murder of President Kennedy. Medical records were destroyed and common 
everyday autopsy protocols were either forgotten or disregarded. For not 
even in death was our murdered President to be given his right to a thorough 
and professional handling of his wounds as to make known what actually 
happened to him during his last few seconds of life. Even before the shots 
rang out in Dallas, the setting of the stage for President Kennedy’s murder 
1of his wounds as to make known what actually 
happened to him during his last few seconds of life. Even before the shots 
rang out in Dallas, the setting of the stage for President Kennedy’s murder 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---make known what actually 
happened to him during his last few seconds of life. Even before the shots 
rang out in Dallas, the setting of the stage for President Kennedy’s murder 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was already talcing place. An unnecessary motorcade route had been planned 
allowing the President’s car to be slowed down to a near standstill in an area 
where assassins were later able to ambush him. The president’s protection 
had been stripped away and even when a warning was dispatched throughout 
the FBI that an impending attack was indeed going to take place during the 
President’s trip through Dallas, the warning was ignored and not passed 
along through the proper channels. 
Any one of the many things that faltered both before, during and after the 
President’s murder could be looked upon as mere coincidence or possibly 
excused as just gross human error when singled out by themselves, but when 
all these things are examined as a whole there as never been so much 
evidence that pointed to a conspiracy than in the case of the assassination of 
President John F. Kennedy. But yet those individuals who were appointed by 
the newly sworn President of the United States through his establishing a 
Commission to investigate the assassination, had almost immediately laid 
claim to the notion that there wasn’t any evidence to support a conspiracy 
and that the assassination had been the work of only one man. For the United 
States Government in all it’s capabilities to have conducted such a poor and 
biased inquiry into the facts of this one single murder case is highly suspect 
to nearly eveiy American who has gained even the slightest knowledge of 
the events surrounding the assassination. If not for the work and dedication 
of a handful of investigators to seek out the truth about what really happened 
to President John F. Kennedy as he rode through Dealy Plaza, turning down 
Elm Street towards the Triple Underpass on that warm sunny November day 
in 1963, most Americans would still be oblivious to the true facts of the 
case. It’s unimaginable for me to think that those dedicated investigative 
researchers I speak of, despite the many walls and obstacles that they’ve had 
to overcome, have been able to do wtyat our government has been incapable 
or unwilling to do for nearly four decades. And to do so with not the help of 
the government’s vast resources and cooperation, but to have done so with 
their own limited time and resources. For in nearly every incident our 
government has blocked the efforts of those who have tried to expose the 
truth about the assassination of President Kennedy. It boggles the human 
mind to think that our government’s law enforcement agencies can take on 
such an undaunted task as searching the ocean floor for a downed jet liner 
only to find it and bring it up piece by piece until they not only have enough 
information to tell why it went down, if there was an explosion, where on 
the plane it exploded, whether an explosive device was used, how it got on 
board, where the material was purchased to make the device, how it was 
2it went down, if there was an explosion, where on 
the plane it exploded, whether an explosive device was used, how it got on 
board, where the material was purchased to make the device, how it was 
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---re was an explosion, where on 
the plane it exploded, whether an explosive device was used, how it got on 
board, where the material was purchased to make the device, how it was 
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

built and most of all by whom. And let the record show that no expense has 
ever been spared to seek out those individuals believed to be involved in any 
way of their suspected crimes. But in the case concerning the murder of 
President John Fitzgerald Kennedy, you will find that not one fraction of this 
same type of determination and effort was ever made to sincerely bring 
about any kind of real justice sought for this magnitude of crime not only 
against our murdered president, but also against the people of this nation 
who he represented. When viewing the facts of this case, one has to wonder 
how it was that a crime that should have demanded the all out efforts of this 
nations law enforcement agencies to leave no stoned unturned wound up 
being nothing more than an obvious attempt to conceal the true facts of the 
case and to protect those who were involved in this cold blooded crime of 
the century. 
And let us say shame on those who have taken the easy way out by 
admitting that they had withheld what they knew in order to spare the 
Kennedy family of any more pain than what they have already endured. 
What greater pain or injustice could one inflict on someone else than to 
allow the murderers of his or her family member to go unchallenged and 
unpunished. Who of us has honestly ever really heard of a murder victim s 
loved ones saying that they didn’t want their slain family member’s killer(s) 
held accountable for their terrible deed and brought to justice because it 
would be to painful of a process for the remaining family to go through? 
What are we to think when those who were supposed to be closest to the 
President will make such admissions that he or she told the FBI what they 
wanted to hear and that the family had suffered enough? To take such a 
position is not only an injustice to the memory of President John F. 
Kennedy, but it’s also a disgrace for what he stood for and was in the end 
willing to die for. t 
One of the tragedy’s after nearly four decades is that most Americans are 
unaware of the quality of the evidence that has been uncovered by the 
various researchers to date and that most likely if presented all together in a 
court of law that the spirit of John Fitzgerald Kennedy would emerge 
victorious over the very government he presided over at the time of his 
death. Moreover, I believe it can be shown that in accordance with our own 
current standards of law that in response to the overwhelming evidence, a 
guilty verdict could be obtained against the United States Government for 
it’s involvement (through it's own agencies) for the planning and execution 
3t in response to the overwhelming evidence, a 
guilty verdict could be obtained against the United States Government for 
it’s involvement (through it's own agencies) for the planning and execution 
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---overwhelming evidence, a 
guilty verdict could be obtained against the United States Government for 
it’s involvement (through it's own agencies) for the planning and execution 
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of President John F. Kennedy, along with the mass cover-up that has 
followed. The issue here is accountability! 
This book is dedicated to all those who have added to the endless efforts to 
expose what really happened to President Kennedy on November 22, 1963. 
It may be to late to seek out all those who participated in the planning and 
execution of the murder of President Kennedy, but I believe that it’s not to 
late to hold the one major culprit accountable for it’s institutions that were 
responsible for not only causing and /or allowing the murder to take place, 
but also for purposely covering up the facts and distorting the evidence as to 
allow those individuals involved to remain free to this day. It will be this 
author’s intention to present the available evidence as the many researchers, 
including myself, have provided it as of the time of this writing in order to 
allow the American Public to stand in judgment of their government’s 
involvement in the murder of the thirty-fifth President of the United States. 
It’s the hopes of this author to allow the spirit of John F. Kennedy a voice to 
be heard with and to be given his day in the courts of the American public’s 
opinion. To make those individuals aware that their deeds did not go 
unnoticed and that those responsible for protecting them can be held 
accountable from the evidence in accordance with our current standards of 
law. Not to overwhelm the reader with a mountain of evidence, but to point 
out enough of the facts to show that something far more sinister than a lone 
gunman fable was at work in the elimination of our 35th President of the 
United States. To let the record not only speak for itself by letting the chips 
fall where they may, but to also show the reader that the constant denials of 
wrong doings by our government through it’s agencies despite the 
undeniable facts that tend to consistently show otherwise, compounded by 
the inexcusable lack of interest to correct the official record and to seek out 
those who were guilty that are still at large, can be as telling in itself as the 
ultimate signed confession of guilt. 
4