I* 
winthrop college 
rock hill, south Carolina 29733 
AO3-323-2240 
1 
October 19, 1977 
Mr. Michael Marsh 
Mutual Association for 
Professional Services 
4801 Suite 1101 
East Independence Boulevard 
Charlotte, NC 28212 
Dear Mr. Marsh: 
Thank you so much for the lecture you gave at Winthrop College 
on October 13, 1977. It was appreciated not only by myself but 
by all the students who attended. I found your lecture to be 
very informative, awakening and fascinating. Thank you for your 
concern of this subject matter. I am sure that if more Americans 
were as honest and concerned as you, that the government would 
not have a chance to be corrupt! May God be with you in your 
investigations and lectures. 
I am sorry that I had to leave early and could not stay to say 
goodbye. I had a big test the next morning so I had to get in 
some last minute cramming^- vI hope you will forgive me. 
Once again, I truly enjoyed the lecture. I was awakened to a 
lot of facts. Perhaps America will never know what has been 
happening concerning the deaths of our leaders, but thank you 
for digging up so many facts and sharing them with Winthrop 
College. 
Sincerely, 
Deborah Ann Bright 
Special Events Chairperson 
DAB/pns 
cc: File

--- PAGE BREAK ---of our leaders, but thank you 
for digging up so many facts and sharing them with Winthrop 
College. 
Sincerely, 
Deborah Ann Bright 
Special Events Chairperson 
DAB/pns 
cc: File

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MUTUAL ASSOCIATION FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES 
PO. BOX 25248, CHARLOTTE. NC 28212 
*» The most fascinating speaker you will ever hear.” fftuderrt Government 
Winston Salem State University 
11 We gave him a standing ovation." Student Government A&T 
" Mr. Marsh, our students want you back.” ^Student Government, Savann^i 
vState College^ 
it At our school Mr. Marsh spoke on the Assassinations of President John 
F. Kennedy and the Son of Morehouse college, Dr. Martin L. King Jr. 
With a full house, he was fasination and honest with us. _^e received 
a standing ovation." (Student‘Government, 
11 We wish you well in your work and thank you again for a very fine ^ 
presentation on the Assassination of President Kennedy.” _Jeff W^te, 
•PH.D. Students Affairs Cdorinator/ (University^of ^outh Carolina. 
” I have had the privilege of seeing one of Mr. Marsh1s Lectures. He 
has a dynamic presentation full of evidence.” _ ^ 
(Lee Garnett 
{Reporter VAME News 
” Thank you for your recent lecture in our auditorium. Please continue 
to present the facts to the American people." 
(Patrice Carter 
/Charlotte Observer 
 , . ^ —w 
" Mr. Marsh's visit to Fiedmont High School will be remembered as one 
of the best things that happened during our school year. Our students 
loved him.” _ _  _    ^ 
(Denise Broome £ tfack Bruschi/(Social Studies Dept. 
ii You are doing a great service tcf the American people. V.
Te enjoyed 
your lecture l" _ 
(Beverly Lev^ .Public Service Director/jWwlTjV. 
ti Being in his present, one get the feeling that he is a statute of 
what mankind should be about." 
Attorney Joseph L. Smalls Jr. 
" Thank you for your imformative and challenging program. Our members 
are still talking about you. We hope you can come back." 
(Bob' Gudger 
(Seneca Rotary Club. 
" Michael Karsh,will present some insight into history, as he speakes 
about President Kennedy*s Assassination." 
$Jack Eulitt C.L.U. 
(Southern Lions Club.