‘•laiviattjis ana OrcaaisatlOii-

~ . Ar.VOlvOa Cf ittuCJ'Viev.'od

rww (R»». U1.-S0J . FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION f v . i ' / . •

, D af0 Novei-bor ”9, IS 63

G20 SQ3 SAUDI K«S, JE., 2455 Kelson Way, Sparks,- Nevada,
advised as follows:

He recalls that the organisation in Los Angeles^, Calif orni
with which he was associated was named the First Church ox Caras w
• Christian or Church of C&riarc Christian. Ee first becace
interested in the organisation through his cousin EL-u'.i.*
v/ho operates the Far ly American Chair Company, Los Angeles,
California.

Ke docs rot recall the names of all the individuals no
met in this organisation but at tne tine he furnished all 01 t~*~
names in his possession to Special Agents of uhe i‘ 31 in Lcx»

Angeles, California. Ee recalls that the head of the organisation
was Doctor Y/E3LLY SYfXFT. The second in command was a Colonel wILLa—
GALS, an attorney, who was supposed to have been the youngest
intelligence officer under General LiAC ARi^JR*

This organisation in California intended to. assassinate
three hundred public officials in high positions of the government
and industry. Eight men were to be assigned to each of the three
hundred victims and not one of the eight would know the other
seven, and the mass assassination would take place as simultaneously

as possible.

He never did formally join this organization but was given
to understand he was "in". He jwas also told by JAHES SHGUP tha^ ho
might be tapped for one of the eight men. They led him to believe
they were serious and that anything he did was at the risk of his
neck and if he did any talking it would mean he would be taken care
of and his children by a previous marriage would be harmed.

Ee had made up his mind to leave Los Angeles, .California,
and after talking to the FBI in Los Angeles he did not attend any
more meetings and attended one private meeting at v/hich time he
informed the members of the organization he had a job and would ■
have to leave Los Angeles. He did not tell anyone where he was.
going and the only person who has his address is his cousin
HARRY WILSON. •

He came to Reno, Nevada, and obtained a .job as a milkman
for liodei Dairy. He begins work each day at 4:00 A. 21.


fit-Tii. '3£_


On 1 1/2 S/53 nt Sparks, Nevada

SA 703.2 2. ECIA123 and

SA ALP ?. STOUSLAND/jp


Filo #_LV_iOS z iS5


Doto dictet.d


12/1/53


TtU. document contain, n.l.hor roeommondollono n« conelu.lon. ol th. FBI. It U th. pcoporly ol th. FBI and f loaned to
you? oguncy; it and Uu content* ar« not to be dUtrlbulod outaido your agency.

- 3 -
