III. THE SECURITY INVESTIGATION 
A. FBI Surveillance And Harassment Of Dr. King 
1. Initiation of Technical Surveillance and 
Type Activities 
In order to reconstruct the actions taken by 
members of the FBI toward Dr. King, the task force 
scrutinized the basis for the initiation by the Bureau 
of any action with respect to Dr. King. During the review 
it was revealed that on Hay 22, 1961, Mr. Alex Rosen, then 
Assistant Director of the General Investigative Division 
(Division 6), advised Director Hoover in an information 
memorandum, per his request on Dr. King and four other 
individuals in connection with the "Freedom Riders," 
that "King has not been investigated by the FBI" (Memo 
from Scatterday to Rosen, May 22, 1961, App. A, Ex. 7). 
The memorandum contained few references on Dr. King. The 
Director cemented, with regard to the omission of a subject 
matter investigation on Dr. King: "Why not?" The substance 
of the report was forwarded to Attorney General Kennedy, and 
the FBI did not pursue the King matter at this time. Thus, 
FBI personnel did not have ncrdid they assure a personal 
interest in the activities of Dr. King through May, 1961. 
Furthermore, in 1961, information in the Bureau files on 
-113-

--- PAGE BREAK ---FBI personnel did not have ncrdid they assure a personal 
interest in the activities of Dr. King through May, 1961. 
Furthermore, in 1961, information in the Bureau files on 
-113-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dr. King had only been gleaned from sporadic reports, 
and this particular report to the Director was provided 
by Division 6 which had responsibility for civil rights 
matters. 
In the beginning of 1962, the FBI started and 
rapidly continued to gravitate toward Dr. King. The 
sequence of events has already been reported in some 
detail by the Senate Select Committee as well as in the 
Robert ttirphy Report which you received in March, 1976. 
The task force in its review of pertinent documents con- 
firms these reports. 
In essence, the Director comamicated to Attorney 
General Kennedy during 1962 and 1963 a host of memoranda 
/ 
concerning the interest of the Connunist' Party in the 
civil rights movement, and, in particular. Dr. King's 
relationship with two frequently consulted advisors whom 
the FBI had tabbed as members of the Comnunist Party. As 
a result of the deep interest in civil rignts affairs by the 
Attorney General and by the Kennedy Administration, these FBI 
reports had the effect of alarming Robert Kennedy and affecting 
his decisions on the national level. 
The net effect of the Bureau nemoranda nearly 
culminated in the sunnier of 1963 when Attorney General 
-114- 
-3

--- PAGE BREAK ---obert Kennedy and affecting 
his decisions on the national level. 
The net effect of the Bureau nemoranda nearly 
culminated in the sunnier of 1963 when Attorney General 
-114- 
-3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kennedy suggested consideration of technical surveillance 
on King and the SCLG (HQ 100-106670-3631). Previously, 
the bulk of FBI intelligence on Dr. King was secured by 
technical surveillance of one of his advisors and from 
informants close to his associates. However, when Attorney 
General Kennedy was confronted shortly thereafter with the 
Director's request for such surveillances, he reconsidered 
his suggestion and denied the request (HQ 100-106670-165, 
171). Attorney General Kennedy as well as several other 
Department officials were sincerely concerned with King's 
association with alleged communist members since proposed 
civil rights legislation was then very vulnerable to the 
attack that communists were influencing the direction of the 
civil rights movement. Yet, an affirmative program to 
gather intelligence with King as the subject was still 
considered ill-advised. However, a significant turn of 
events within the circles of the FBI hierarchy would soon 
reverse the Attorney General's decision, and without his 
knowledge the FBI would also launch an illegal counter- 
intelligence program directed to discredit and neutralize 
the civil rights leader. 
Director Hoover's demeanor toward Dr. King has been 
well publicized and is svmnarized below. Certainly, as 
the task force determined, this played a vital role in 
-115- 
h 
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---r. 
Director Hoover's demeanor toward Dr. King has been 
well publicized and is svmnarized below. Certainly, as 
the task force determined, this played a vital role in 
-115- 
h 
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FBI affairs, as did the Director's attitude toward the 
Cotmunist Party. On August 23, 1963, then Assistant 
>* 
. Director of the Domestic Intelligence Division, William 
C. Sullivan, pursuant to the Director's request, presented 
a seventy-page analysis of exploitation and influence by 
the Connunist Party on the American Negro population since 
1919 (HQ 100-3-116-253X). This report and Mr. Sullivan's 
synopsis shewed a failure of the Connunist Party in achieving 
any significant inroads into the Negro population and the 
civil rights movement. Director Hoover responded: 
"This memo reminds me vividly 
of those I received vfoen Castro 
took over Cuba. You contended 
then that Castro and his cohorts 
were not Cormunists and not 
influenced by Conmunists. Time 
alone proved you wrong. I for 
one can't ignore the memos 
as having only an infinitesimal 
effect on the efforts to exploit the 
American Negro by Cormunists" (HQ 100- 
3-116-253X). 
The Director's comment had a resounding effect 
on Mr. Sullivan. Seven days later, he replied: 
"The Director is correct. We 
were completely wrong about 
believing the evidence was not 
sufficient to determine some 
years ago that Fidel Castro was 
not a communist or under connunist 
influence. In investigating and 
-116-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ong about 
believing the evidence was not 
sufficient to determine some 
years ago that Fidel Castro was 
not a communist or under connunist 
influence. In investigating and 
-116-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

writing about conmmism and the 
American Negro, we had better 
remember this and profit by the 
' ■' lesson it should teach us." (Memo 
from Sullivan to Belmont, August 
30, 1963, App. A, Ex. 8). 
Even more inportantly, Mr. Sullivan also said 
in response to the action that he now believed was 
necessitated in determining cotmunist influence in the 
civil rights movement: 
"Therefore, it may be unrealistic 
to limit ourselves as we have been 
doing to legalistic proof or definite- 
ly conclusive evidence that would 
stand up in testimony in court or 
before Congressional committees that 
the Communist Party, USA, does wield 
substantial influence over Negroes 
which one day could become decisive." 
(idan.) 
The FBI hierarchy had no written canments on this memo- 
randum either supporting or negating the Assistant Director's 
proposed line of action. 
Then, in September, 1963, Mr. Sullivan recanrended 
"increased coverage of comnunist influence on the Negro" 
(Memo from Baumgardner to Sullivan, September 16, 1963, 
App. A, Ex. 9). The Director refused and connented: 
"No I can't understand how you 
can so agilely switch your think- 
ing and evaluation. Just a few 
weeks ago you contended that the 
Canmunist influence in the racial 
movement was ineffective and infin- 
itesimal. This - notwithstanding 
-117- 
i-twnifij

--- PAGE BREAK ---evaluation. Just a few 
weeks ago you contended that the 
Canmunist influence in the racial 
movement was ineffective and infin- 
itesimal. This - notwithstanding 
-117- 
i-twnifij

--- PAGE BREAK ---

iatoittgite - - - ^ 
BBny mams of specific instances 
of infiltration, New you want 
to load the field down with more 
coverage in spite of your recent 
mam depreciating CP influence 
•in racial movement. 1 don't intend 
to waste time and money until you 
can make up your minds what the 
situation really is" (idan.) 
In commenting on a cover mam to the above Sullivan 
request. Director Hoover also stated, "I have certainly 
been misled by previous mams which clearly showed 
canonist penetration of the racial movement. The 
attached is contradictory of all that. We are wasting 
manpower and money investigating CP effect in racial 
movement if the attached is correct" (Memo for the Director 
from Tolscn, September 18, 1963, App. A, Ex. 10). 
By now the Domestic Intelligence Division was 
feeling the full weight of the Director's dissatisfaction 
with their work product. Mr. Sullivan again replied on 
September 25, 1963, in a humble manner that Division 5 
had failed in its interpretation of ccnmunist infiltration 
in the Negro movement (Mam frem Sullivan to Belmont, 
Septenber 25, 1963, App. A, Ex. 11). The Assistant Director 
asked the Director's forgiveness and requested the oppor- 
tunity to approach this grave matter in the light of the 
Director's interpretation. Director Hoover sanctioned 
this request but again reprimanded Mr. Sullivan for stating 
-118- 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---nity to approach this grave matter in the light of the 
Director's interpretation. Director Hoover sanctioned 
this request but again reprimanded Mr. Sullivan for stating 
-118- 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that communist infiltration "has not reached the point 
of control or domination." The Director curtly commented 
that "Certainly this is not true with respect to the 
King connection" (idem). One could now foresee that 
Dr. King vrould be closely watched by FBI personnel. 
In October, 1963, the Director forwarded a request 
to the Attorney General for technical surveillance of 
Dr. King's residence and the SCLC office in New York City. 
This time the FBI received authorization for technical 
surveillance and it was instituted almost immediately. 
In addition, the FBI had prepared a new analysis on 
communist involvement in the Negro movement (Communism 
and the Negro Movement, October 16, 1963, App. A, Ex. 12). 
A cover memorandum of this analysis written by Assistant 
to the Director A.H. Belmont to Associate Director Clyde 
A. Tolscn reads: 
"The attached analysis of Communism 
and the Negro Movement is highly 
explosive. It can be regarded as a 
personal attack on Martin Luther 
King. There is no doubt it will 
have a heavy impact on the Attorney 
General and anyone else to whom we 
disseminate it ... This memorandum 
may startle the Attorney General, 
particularly in view of his past 
association with King, and the fact 
that we are disseminating this out- 
side the Department" (Memo from 
Belmont to Tolson, October 17, 1963 
App. A, Ex. 13). 
-119- 
WWIJI

--- PAGE BREAK ---past 
association with King, and the fact 
that we are disseminating this out- 
side the Department" (Memo from 
Belmont to Tolson, October 17, 1963 
App. A, Ex. 13). 
-119- 
WWIJI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

' . 2. Predicate for the Security Investigation 
The security investigation of Dr. Martin Luther King, 
Jr., and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) 
was predicated on the belief that they were under the 
influence of the Communist Party, United States of Anerica 
(CPUSA). The basis for this belief was that Dr. King relied 
upon one particular advisor who was tabbed by the FBI as a 
ranking Conmunist Party member (HQ 100-392452-133). 
This characterization of the advisor was provided by 
sources the Bureau considered reliable. The task force was 
privy to this characterization through both our file review 
and our September 2, 1976, conference with representatives 
of the Bureau's Intelligence Division. For security 
purposes the sources were not fully identified to the 
task force. Therefore, the veracity of the sources and the 
characterization are remaining questions. 
The advisor's relationship to King and the SCLC 
is arrply evidenced in the files and the task force 
concludes that he was a most trusted advisor. The files 
are replete with instances of his counseling King and 
his organization on matters pertaining to organization, 
-121- 
■■w ,n» rgTT’TW''1 i w i’-u;" *

--- PAGE BREAK ---t trusted advisor. The files 
are replete with instances of his counseling King and 
his organization on matters pertaining to organization, 
-121- 
■■w ,n» rgTT’TW''1 i w i’-u;" *

--- PAGE BREAK ---

finance, political strategy and speech writing. Some 
examples follow: 
The advisor organized, in King's name, a fund 
raising society (HQ 100-106670-47, 48). This organization 
and the SCLC were in large measure financed by concerts 
arranged by this person (HQ 100-106670-30). He also 
lent counsel to King and the SCLC on the tax consequences 
of charitable gifts. 
On political strategy, he suggested King make a 
public statement calling for the appointment of a black 
to the Supreme Court (HQ 100-106670-32, 33). This person 
advised against accepting a movie offer from a movie 
director and against approaching Attorney General Kennedy 
on behalf of a labor leader (HQ 100-106670-24). In each 
instance his advice was accepted. 
King's speech before the AFL-CIO National Convention 
in December, 1961 was written by this advisor (HQ 100-392452- 
131). He also prepared King’s May 1962 speech before the 
United Packing House Workers Convention (HQ 100-106670-119). 
In 1965 he prepared responses to press questions directed 
to Dr. King frcm a Los Angeles radio station regarding 
the Los Angeles racial riots and from the "New York Times" 
regarding the Vietnam War. 
-122-

--- PAGE BREAK ---s to press questions directed 
to Dr. King frcm a Los Angeles radio station regarding 
the Los Angeles racial riots and from the "New York Times" 
regarding the Vietnam War. 
-122-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The relationship between King and his advisor, 
as indicated, is clear to the task force. What is not 
clear is whether this relationship ought to have been 
considered either a possible national security threat or 
CPUSA directed. We conclude that justification may have 
existed for the opening of King's security investigation 
but its protracted continuation was unwarranted. 
Our conclusion that the investigation's opening 
may have been justified is primarily based on irerroranda, 
summarized below, written during the first six months of 
1962. It is pointed out that in October, 1962 the Bureau 
ordered the CCMINFIL SCLC investigation (HQ 100-438794-9). 
In January the Director wrote the Attorney General 
and told him that one of King's advisors was a communist. 
At this time he also pointed out that the advisor wrote 
King's December, 1961 AFL-CIO speech and assisted King in 
SCLC matters (HQ 100-392452-131). 
In March the Attorney General was advised that a 
March 3, 1962 issue of "The Nation" magazine carried an 
-123-

--- PAGE BREAK ---CIO speech and assisted King in 
SCLC matters (HQ 100-392452-131). 
In March the Attorney General was advised that a 
March 3, 1962 issue of "The Nation" magazine carried an 
-123-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

article critical of the administration's handling of 
civil rights. The article was ostensibly written by 
Martin Luther King but in fact the true author was 
. another advisor characterized by the FBI as a ranking 
member of the Communist Party (HQ 100-106670-30, 31). 
In May the Attorney General learned that the CPUSA 
considered King and the SCLC its most important work because 
the Kennedy Administration was politically dependent upon 
King (HQ 100-106670-58). 
Lastly, in June, 1962 the Attorney General became 
aware that King's alleged Communist advisor had recommended 
the second ranking Communist to be one of King's principal 
assistants (HQ 100-106670-79, 80). Later King accepted 
the recommendation. 
The conclusion that the investigation's continuance 
was unwarranted is based on the following task force finding: 
The Bureau to date has no evidence whatsoever that 
Dr. King was ever a communist or affiliated with the CPUSA. 
This was so stated to us by representatives of the Bureau's 
Intelligence Division during our September 2, 1976 conference. 
This admission is supported by our perusal of files, which 
included informants' memoranda and physical, microphone and 
telephone surveillance memoranda, in which we found no such 
indication concerning Dr. King. 
-124- 
1 
A 
v»■ '"UJU 1!H.■ y.aiU.IJ ' m.n.i«. ■.!u 
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---and physical, microphone and 
telephone surveillance memoranda, in which we found no such 
indication concerning Dr. King. 
-124- 
1 
A 
v»■ '"UJU 1!H.■ y.aiU.IJ ' m.n.i«. ■.!u 
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Bureau provided us with no documentation 
that the SCLC under Dr. King was anything other than a 
legitimate organization devoted to the civil rights ncve- 
ment. 
The Bureau files that we examined lacked any infor- 
mation that the alleged Conmunists' advice was dictated by 
the CPUSA or inimical to the interests of the United States. 
Indeed, in early 1963 the Bureau learned through reliable 
sources the principal advisor had disassociated himself 
fran the CPUSA. His reason was the CPUSA was not suffi- 
ciently involving itself in race relations and the civil 
rights movement (HQ 100-392452-195). 
3. King-Hoover Dispute 
The flames of Director Hoover's antipathy for 
Dr. King were fanned into open hostility in late 1962 when 
Dr. King criticized the Bureau's performance during an 
investigation of a racial disturbance in Albany, Georgia. 
Efforts to interview King by the Bureau were not successful 
(IK) 157-6-2-965) and the matter lay dormant for a tine. 
The controversy was publicly rekindled in early 1964 
vhen the Director testified before a House appropriations 
subcannittee that he believed ccmnjnist influence existed 
-125- 
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---The controversy was publicly rekindled in early 1964 
vhen the Director testified before a House appropriations 
subcannittee that he believed ccmnjnist influence existed 
-125- 
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in the Negro novanent. King countered by accusing the 
Director of abetting racists and right wingers (HQ 100-3 
116-1291). • During November of 1964, the Director told 
a group of Washington women reporters that King was "the 
most notorious liar in the country." A week later. Director 
Hoover referred to "sexual degenerates in pressure groups" 
in a speech at Loyola University (HQ 162-7827-16). 
Dr. King and his inmediate staff requested a meeting 
with Director Hoover to clear up the misunderstanding. The 
meeting was held on December 1, 1964. Hoover claimed that 
"he had taken the ball away from King at the beginning," 
explaining the Bureau's function and doing most of the 
talking. On the other hand, King apologized for remarks 
attributed to him and praised the work of the Bureau. Thus, 
an uneasy truce was momentarily reached. (HQ 100-106670-563, 
607.) 
However, the controversy flared again when a letter 
was circulated by the Southern Christian Educational Fund 
(SCEF) which referred to the criticism of Dr. King by the 
Director and urged the recipients of the letter to write 
or wire the President to remove Hoover fran office. In a 
meno from Sullivan to Belmont on December 14, 1964, Sullivan 
stated: 
-126-

--- PAGE BREAK ---urged the recipients of the letter to write 
or wire the President to remove Hoover fran office. In a 
meno from Sullivan to Belmont on December 14, 1964, Sullivan 
stated: 
-126-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"In yiew of this situation, realign 
makes it mandatory that we take every 
prudent step that we can take to merge 
completely victoriously in this conflict. 
We should not take any ineffective or 
half-way measures, nor blind ourselves 
to the realities of the situation," 
(HQ 100-106670-627.) 
We believe the persistent controversy between Dr. 
King and Director Hoover was a major factor in the Bureau's 
determination to discredit Dr. King and ultimately destroy 
. his leadership role in the civil rights movement. 
4. Technical Surveillance 
Our review of FBI files and interviews with Bureau 
personnel substantially confirms with a few additions the 
findings which have already been reported by Hr. Murphy 
and the Senate Select Cannittee on Intelligence with respect 
to the electronic surveillance of Dr. King and his associates. 
We found that some microphone surveillances were 
installed in New York City against Dr. King and his associates 
vhich have not thus far been reported. These installations 
were as follows: 
Americana Hotel (HQ 100-106670-2224, 4048) 
4/2-3/65 ( symbol) 
6/3-3/65 ( symbol) 
1/21-24/66 (no symbol) 
Sheraton Atlantic (NY 100-136585 Sub-Files 7-8) 
12/10-11/65 (symbol) 
New York Hilton (NY 100-136585 Sub Files 11-12) 
10/25-27/65 (symbol) 
-127- 
“-
1.  UJJ": 
1 
I 
I 
i 
» 
i 
i 
*

--- PAGE BREAK ---ton Atlantic (NY 100-136585 Sub-Files 7-8) 
12/10-11/65 (symbol) 
New York Hilton (NY 100-136585 Sub Files 11-12) 
10/25-27/65 (symbol) 
-127- 
“-
1.  UJJ": 
1 
I 
I 
i 
» 
i 
i 
*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

All of these installations with the exception of 
the placement at the Americana Hotel in January, 1966 
appear to have been -unproductive either because Dr. King 
did not reside at the hotel as planned or the recordings 
made did not pick up any significant information. 
The installation by the New York Field Office at 
the Americana Hotel on January 21, to 24, 1966, caused 
sane consternation within the FBI hierarchy and is 
illustrative of hew the Bureau apparatus could, on rare 
occasion, continue to function even contrary to the wishes 
of the Director. The installation was made at the Anericana 
on January 21, 1966, pursuant to the request of SAC Rooney 
in No? York. Assistant Director William Sullivan authorized 
the coverage. Bureau files indicate that Associate 
Director Clyde Tolson, upon being informed of the coverage, 
wrote back on the same day in a rather perturbed fashion to 
have the microphone removed "at once." Tolson advised the 
Director that "no one here" approved the coverage and that 
he had again instructed Sullivan to have no microphone 
installations without the Director's approval. Hoover 
confirmed Tolson's directive. (HQ 100-106670-2224X). 
No syrrbol nunber was ever attached to this coverage 
as was the standard practice. This was apparently due to 
the strong disapproval voiced by Headquarters. Yet, despite 
-128- 
■i’JWMI-V.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nunber was ever attached to this coverage 
as was the standard practice. This was apparently due to 
the strong disapproval voiced by Headquarters. Yet, despite 
-128- 
■i’JWMI-V.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hoover's orders, the coverage was maintained and a good 
deal of intelligence on King’s personal activities was 
obtained and transcribed., These activities are reflected 
in a six page memorandum. (HQ 100-106670-4048.) 
Irrespective of the level of Bureau approval 
vMch was required for electronic surveillance installa- 
. tions during the King years, our review reinforced the 
conclusions of the Senate Select Committee that the purposes 
behind this intelligence gathering became twisted. 'Several 
instances of Bureau correspondence are instructive. Section 
Chief Baumgardner in reccranending coverage of King in 
Honolulu urged an exposure of King's "moral weakness" 
so that he could be "for the security of the nation, com- 
pletely discredited" (HQ 100-106670 June File, Metro Bautigardner 
to Sullivan, January 28, 1964). In a similar mono from 
Sullivan to Belmont reconnanding coverage in Milwaukee at 
the Schroeder Hotel, the expressed purpose was to gather 
information on "entertainment" in which King might be engaging 
similar to that "uncovered at the Willard Hotel" (HQ 100- 
106670 June File, Memo Sullivan to Belmont, January 17, 1964). 
Director Hoover, upon being informed of the results 
of the surveillance, ordered that they all be inmediately 
transcribed despite DeLoach’s recarmerdation that the tran- 
scribing be done later (HQ 100-106670-1024). As each of the 
-129-

--- PAGE BREAK ---surveillance, ordered that they all be inmediately 
transcribed despite DeLoach’s recarmerdation that the tran- 
scribing be done later (HQ 100-106670-1024). As each of the 
-129-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

file reviews has shown, portions of summaries of the 
transcripts were widely disseminated among governmental 
officials. -These disseminations included a rather 
comprehensive six volume transmittal by the Bureau in 
June, 1968. This was at the apparent request of the 
President through Special Counsel Larry Tenple for all 
information concerning Dr. King, including the Instructions 
and approval of former Attorney General Kennedy regarding 
the electronic surveillance of King (Memo R. W. Smith to 
William Sullivan, June 2, 1968, referring to memo DeLoach 
to Tolson, May 24, 1968, setting forth the President's 
request). Included with the transcripts were several 
sunmaries, previously disseminated, and several hundred 
pages of Bureau comnunications to the White House from 
1962 to 1968 regarding King and his associates. The 
purpose of the White House request was not stated, but it 
was the irost complete accumulation of transmitted informa- 
tion on the electronic surveillance of King which we 
encountered during our review of Bureau files. The task 
force noted the timing of the alleged White House request 
and subsequent transmittal particularly in light of 
-130- 
.... MNU-WW...', •mm, "W'.-UL. 
IM

--- PAGE BREAK ---of Bureau files. The task 
force noted the timing of the alleged White House request 
and subsequent transmittal particularly in light of 
-130- 
.... MNU-WW...', •mm, "W'.-UL. 
IM

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Director Hoover's communication to the White House on 
March 26, 1968 (included in the transmittal) which 
advised that Robert Kennedy had attempted to contact 
Dr. King before announcing his candidacy for the 
Presidency (HQ 100-106670-3262). 
Ihe task force reviewed selected portions of all 
of the transcripts in the King file as well as selected 
portions of several tapes from which the transcriptsv 
were obtained. An inventory of the tapes reviewed is 
set forth below: 
1) Washington, D.C., 1/5-6/64 (Willard Hotel 
15 reels) - Reel Nos. 1-6, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 14 
2) Atlanta Tape (symbol) (one reel) 
3) Composite Tape 12/15/64 
Track No. 1 - Washington, D.C. recordings 
(edited version of 15 reels) 
Essentially, we reviewed the tapes by listening to the 
beginning, middle, and end of each tape and compared it to 
the corresponding transcript. They were basically accurate 
transcriptions in the sense that what was in the transcripts 
was also on the tapes. However, some material on the tapes 
was not put on the transcripts apparently because either 
that portion of the recording was garbled or unclear or 
it was considered uninportant. 
-131- 
;yn»U UUM1J MM.IVMV yj 
umnyiLM iji.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t on the transcripts apparently because either 
that portion of the recording was garbled or unclear or 
it was considered uninportant. 
-131- 
;yn»U UUM1J MM.IVMV yj 
umnyiLM iji.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Our review of the composite tape, the Atlanta 
tape and the agents handwritten notes included in the 
box with the recordings from the Hillard Hotel gave an 
additional indication of where the Bureau’s interest 
lay with respect to Dr. King. The composite tape contained 
"highlights" of the fifteen reels of tape from the Willard 
Hotel and appeared to consist of little more than episodes 
of private conversations and activities which the Bureau 
chose to extract from the original recordings. The 
Atlanta tape was obtained from the telephone tap on the 
King residence and consisted of several of Dr. King's 
conversations. These included conversations of Dr. King 
with his wife regarding his personal life and had nothing 
to do with his political or civil rights activities. The 
handwritten notes from the original Willard tapes contained 
notations as to what point in the tape a particular personal 
activity or conversation took place. 
5. CDINTtiPRO Type and Other Illegal Activities 
The task force has documented an extensive program 
within the FBI during the years 1964 to 1968 to discredit 
Dr. King. Pursuant to a Bureau meeting on Decenter 23, 1963 
to plan a King strategy and the Sullivan proposal in January, 
1964 to promote a new black leader, the FBI accelerated its 
-132-

--- PAGE BREAK ---Pursuant to a Bureau meeting on Decenter 23, 1963 
to plan a King strategy and the Sullivan proposal in January, 
1964 to promote a new black leader, the FBI accelerated its 
-132-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

program of disseminating derogatory information, which 
was heavily fraught with the Bureau's own characteriza- 
tions of King, to various individuals and organizations 
who were in critical positions vis-a-vis the civil rights 
leader. Our review has essentially confirned those already 
performed by the Civil Pdghts Division and the Senate Select 
Cocmittee and we, therefore, do not dwell on those areas 
which they have already covered. We did find, however, 
additional proposed activities against Dr. King, some of 
which were approved by the Director. They are instructive 
not only in revealing the extent to which the Bureau was 
willing to carry its efforts but also in showing the 
atmosphere among some of the rank and file which this 
program against King created. 
In November, 1964, the Bureau discovered that 
Dr. King was desirous of meeting with high British officials 
while in England during King's planned trip to Europe. 
Section Chief Baumgardner recorrmended a briefing for the 
purpose of informing British officials concerning King’s 
purported ccnmunist affiliations and private life 
(HQ 100-106670-522, 523). Within three days the briefings 
had been completed (HQ 100-106670-525, 534, 535). 
-133- 
,u„., 
u ******

--- PAGE BREAK ---ported ccnmunist affiliations and private life 
(HQ 100-106670-522, 523). Within three days the briefings 
had been completed (HQ 100-106670-525, 534, 535). 
-133- 
,u„., 
u ******

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ftie particular dissemination, the contents of which 
was not revealed in the files, was apparently initiated 
and carried out personally by the Director. On January 22, 
1965, the SAC in Atlanta advised Mr. Sullivan that, 
pursuant to their electronic surveillance, the Bureau 
learned that King had plioned Ralph Abernathy and caiplained 
that Hoover had had a meeting with a particular Atlanta 
official while in Washington attending the Inauguration. 
According to King, when this official returned to 
Atlanta he contacted Dr. King senior and passed on a 
"good deal" of information. According to Sullivan's 
memo to Belmont, Dr. King, Jr. was very upset (HQ 100- 
106670-768). The files did not reveal any formal proposal 
for this briefing but Section Chief Baumgardner later speculated 
that the Atlanta official was Chief of Police Jenkins 
8ince the Director had met with him on January 18, 1965 
(HQ 100-106670-780). The files do not indicate whether 
the Director suggested that the information be passed on 
to Dr. King's father. 
-134-

--- PAGE BREAK ---had met with him on January 18, 1965 
(HQ 100-106670-780). The files do not indicate whether 
the Director suggested that the information be passed on 
to Dr. King's father. 
-134-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In connection with the post-assassination 
efforts to declare a national holiday in memory of 
Dr. King the Senate Select Committee has outlined 
in its report the attempts by the Bureau to prevent 
such a declaration by briefing various members of 
Congress on King’s background (HQ 100-106670-3586). ^ 
We discovered that the Bureau also sent a monograph 
on King to the President and the Attorney General 
in 1969 for this same purpose (HQ 100-106670-3559). 
The Bureau's efforts to discredit Dr. King's 
trcvenent also included attempts to damage the 
reputation of King's family and friends. The Bureau 
looked very closely at Coretta King although a 
security investigation was never opened. This 
included scrutinizing her travels in an attempt 
to uncover possible facts embarrassing to her. 
These attenpts also included a plan, proposed 
-135-

--- PAGE BREAK ---gation was never opened. This 
included scrutinizing her travels in an attempt 
to uncover possible facts embarrassing to her. 
These attenpts also included a plan, proposed 
-135-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

by Assistant to the Director DeLoach and approved 
by Hoover to leak information to the press that Coretta 
King and Ralph Abernathy, were deliberately plotting to 
keep the assassination in the news by claiming a conspiracy 
existed in order'to keep monetary contributions flowing 
for their benefit (HQ 44-38861-5654). 
Ralph Abernathy and Andrew Young also became Bureau 
targets. Shortly after the assassination the field was 
instructed to report any information on possible "inmoral 
activities” of King's two associates (IK) 62-108052-Unrecorded 
serial, Atlanta to Director, April 29, 1968). Presumably 
there were OOINIELPRD type purposes behind this request. 
The Atlanta Field Office in attaipting to demonstrate 
the initiative and imagination demanded by Headquarters 
proposed additional measures against Ralph Abernathy. The 
Bureau learned that after Dr. King's death, Rev. Abernathy 
may have voiced some concern over possible assassination 
attempts on his cwn life. The Atlanta office proposed that 
the Bureau begin notifying Abernathy directly (instead of 
only informing the police) of all threats against him in 
order to confuse and worry him (HQ 62-108052-Unrecorded 
serial, Atlanta to Director, March 28, 1969). This activity 
was not approved by Headquarters. 
-136-.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eats against him in 
order to confuse and worry him (HQ 62-108052-Unrecorded 
serial, Atlanta to Director, March 28, 1969). This activity 
was not approved by Headquarters. 
-136-.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bureau files indicate that the FBI may have also 
attempted to help the executive branch in its efforts 
to deal with Abernathy after King's death. In a meno 
to Associate Director Tolson, Director Hoover related 
a telephone conversation with former Vice President 
Agnew in which Mr. Agnew expressed concern over the 
"inflammatory" statements which Abernathy had made. ‘ 
The Vice President was seeking information from Hoover 
which could be useful in destroying the credibility of 
Rev. Abernathy. Hoover agreed to the request (HQ 100- 
106670-Unrecorded serial, Hoover to Tolson, May 18, 1970). 
We did not find what information, if any, was forwarded 
to the Vice President. 
Finally, we discovered that a series of illegal 
surreptitious entries was conducted by the FBI. Some 
of these entries had as one purpose, among others, the 
obtaining of information about Dr. King. The FBI in 
the review of its indices was unable to locate records 
of any entries onto the premises of Dr. King or the SCLC.

--- PAGE BREAK ---others, the 
obtaining of information about Dr. King. The FBI in 
the review of its indices was unable to locate records 
of any entries onto the premises of Dr. King or the SCLC.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

■■■.■■<■. 
The agents began to retrieve information about 
Dr. King during these entries through the use of photo- 
graphs. In one instance a supervisor in the appropriate 
field office requested authority to conduct an entry 
for the express purpose of obtaining information about 
Dr. King. The proposed entry was approved at Head- 
quarters pursuant to a telephone call by an Inspector 
and was later conducted. 
Ch four subsequent occasions the Bureau again 
conducted entries and obtained information concerning 
King and the SCLC. fti one such occasion a specimen of 
King s handwriting was obtained. The purpose of 
gathering this piece of intelligence was not revealed. 
Bureau policy at the time of these entries 
required the approval of such field requests by 
Director Hoover or Associate Director Tolson (Meno 
Director, FBI, to Attorney General, September 23, 1975). 
We assume that such approval was granted. Handwritten

--- PAGE BREAK ---eld requests by 
Director Hoover or Associate Director Tolson (Meno 
Director, FBI, to Attorney General, September 23, 1975). 
We assume that such approval was granted. Handwritten

--- PAGE BREAK ---

notations on -the field office memos indicate that 
the Bureau was advised of the entries in each case. 
We also raise the issue of these illegal entries 
because aside from being violative of Fourth AnendriEnt 
rights the entries ran the risk of invading a privileged 
relationship. 
We note in passing that the FBI continued to 
employ an informant in the SCLC despite the fact that 
the informant conceded to agents that the informant had 
embezzled some SCLC funds. The Bureau voiced strong 
disapproval of these activities. Yet, no legal or 
disciplinary action was ever taken with respect to 
the informant (HQ 134-11126-56, 57). 
B. Critical Evaluation of the Security Investigation 
In the area of domestic intelligence the mandate 
of the FBI has been both broadly and vaguely defined. 
It is stated in the Code of Federal Regulations as follows: 
-139- 
.IMP.I

--- PAGE BREAK ---In the area of domestic intelligence the mandate 
of the FBI has been both broadly and vaguely defined. 
It is stated in the Code of Federal Regulations as follows: 
-139- 
.IMP.I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(The FBI shall:) carry out the Presidential 
directive of September 6, 1939, as reaffirmed 
by Presidential directives of January 8, 1943, 
July 24, 1950 and December 15, 1953, designating 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation to take 
* . charge of investigative work in matters relating 
to espionage, sabotage, subversive activities, 
and related matters (28 CFR 0-85 (d)). 
Given this charter and the history of the scrretimes 
overpowering influence of the views of the late Director 
J. Edgar Hoover on his subordinates and on succesive 
Attorneys General, it was understandable that a security 
investigation should be initiated into the possible 
V 
influence of the Ccmnunist Party, U.S.A., on Dr. Martin 
Luther King, Jr. TWo of King's close advisors, at the 
outset of the security matter, were reported to be 
Communist Party members by sources relied upon by the 
Bureau. 
The security investigation continued for almost 
six years until Dr. King’s death. It verified, in our 
view, that one alleged Communist was a very influential 
advisor to Dr. King (and hence the Southern Christian 
leadership Conference) on the strategy and tactics of 
King's leadership of the black civil rights movement of 
the early and mid-sixties. Another had no such weight 
although he seemed to be of use to King. But this 
very lengthy investigative concentration an King and on 
-140- 
I 
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---t of 
the early and mid-sixties. Another had no such weight 
although he seemed to be of use to King. But this 
very lengthy investigative concentration an King and on 
-140- 
I 
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the principal advisor established, in our opinion, 
that he did not sell" Dr. King any course of conduct 
or of advocady which can be identified as oomnunist or 
"Party line". King, himself never varied publicly or 
privately from his ccnrnitment to non-violence and did 
not advocate the overthrow of the govemn^nt of the 
United States by violence or subversion. To the contrary, 
he advocated an end to the discrimination and disenfran- 
chisanent of minority groups which the Constitution and 
the courts denounced in terras as strong as his. We 
concluded that Dr. King was no threat to domestic security. 
And the Bureau's continued intense surveillance 
and investigation of the advisor clearly developed that 
he had disassociated himself from the Conmunist Party 
in 1963 because he felt it failed adequately to serve 
the civil rights movement. Thus the linch-pin of the 
security investigation of Dr. King had pulled himself 
out. 
We think the security investigation which included 
both physical and technical surveillance, should have been 
terminated on the basis of what was learned in 1963. 
lhat it was intensified and augmented by a COINTELPRO type 
campaign against Dr. King was unwarranted; the COINTELPRO 
type campaign, moreover, was ultra vires and very probably 
in violation of 18 U.S.C. 241 (and 242), i.e. felonious. 
-141- 
i 
J ' .wunnu.m W- H'. JmUM I'iu J i. m I". i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The continuing security investigation reflects also 
that the Attorney General and the Division charged with 
responsibility for internal security natters failed badly 
in what should have been firm supervision of the FBI's 
internal security' activities. 
-142-