THE JEWSAT K'AE-FUNG-FOO:
BEING
A NARRATIVE OF
AMISSIONOFINQUIRY,
TOTHE
JEWISHSYNAGOGUEATK'AE-FUNG-FOO,
ON BEHALF OFTHE
LONDOXSOCIETYFORPROMIOTINGCHRISTIANITY
AMONGTHEJEIWS:
WITH AN INTRODUCTION,
BY THE
RIGHT REVD.GEORGE SMITH,D.D.
LORDBISHOPOFVICTORIA.
SHANGHAE:
PRINTED AT THE LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY'S PRESS.
1851.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

STADr-BIP!:THEK
FRANKFRI..N

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INTRODUCTION.
The subject ofthe“JewsinChina”is one calculat-
edto awakenpeculiar interest inthemindof the
Biblical critic,as well as the student of general litera-
ture.The smallamount of certain knowledge respect-
ing them in past times,and the long period which
has elapsed without any addition being made toformer
accounts,have tended to excite in many adesire that
some more definite and detailed information should be
procured respecting this long-isolated and alinost un-
known remnant of theJewishrace.
For the little previous knowledge which we possess
respecting the “Jews in China,”we are almost exclu-
sively indebted to the researches of theRoman Catho-
lic Missionaries in a former age.The work published
by James Finn,Esqr.in 1843,contains the principal
previously-existing materials, which have been present-
edinasuccinct and interesting formtoEuropean
readers.It was at the commencement of the 17th
century, that the Jesuit Missionary Ricci, and his
learned associates at Peking,were suddenly made ac-
quainted with the existence of a Jewish colony at
K'hae-fung-foo,the capitai of Ho-nan province.A
Jewish scholar and expectant of civilpromotion,a na-
tive of that city,temporarily resident at Peking,intro-
duced himself to‘the Missionaries,and announced him-
self of the same religion as the foreigners.Being led
byRicci to view theinterior of the chapel,and the

--- PAGE BREAK ---sident at Peking,intro-
duced himself to‘the Missionaries,and announced him-
self of the same religion as the foreigners.Being led
byRicci to view theinterior of the chapel,and the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

iv
paintings above the altar and around the sides of the
building.he proceeded to bow before the various pic-
tures, professing,however, to perform this unusual act,
only in imitation of his guide and conductor, and as a
homage to the great ancestors of his race.It was only
by means of a subsequent explanation, that the misun-
derstanding was removed, and the fact of the mutual
distinctness of the two religions became clear to the
mindofeach.
Theinteresting information obtainedfrom this
Jewish visitor,led Ricci three years afterwards,to des-
patch a Chinese Christian toK'hae-fung-foo, to test the
accuracy ofhis statements.A copy of portions of the
Pentateuch in Hebrew were brought back by the mes-
senger.Other Israelites arrived in Peking, and in-
terestingcommunications tookplace
The poorIsraelites,even then fewin number,reduced
in circumstances,and exposed to many trials,appeared
ready to renounce their ancestralreligion,and to trans-
fer the control of their synagogue to the Jesuits.
Others of theRoman Catholic Missionaries subsequent-
lyvisited thelocality,and sketched thegeneral plan
and appearance of the synagogue.
Although at the commencement of the 18th century,
a fuller account of the Jews atK'hae-fung-foo was re-
ceived from Father Gozani, then resident on the spot,
yet down to the present time,but little additional light
hasbeenthrownonthesubjectof theTeaou-kin
keaou,“the sect who pluck the sinew.”The late Dr.
Morrisonmakesindeedabriefallusiontoarumour
respecting them,in his journal more than thirty years
ago;andaHebrew letter was actually written and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ct who pluck the sinew.”The late Dr.
Morrisonmakesindeedabriefallusiontoarumour
respecting them,in his journal more than thirty years
ago;andaHebrew letter was actually written and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

despatched in theyear 1815,by someJews in London,
to the Jewish community atK'hae-fung-foo.Whether
itwas ever received by them,there are nomeans of
certainlyknowing.
Since the British treaty of Nanking in 1842, many
Christians inEuropehave directed theirattentionto-
wards the Jews in China;and anticipations in some
instances may have been cherished respecting their
present condition and future destiuies,such as the
incidents of the subjoined narrative will faii togratify
or confirm.A benevolent lady lately deceased,and
well known for her deeds of pious munificecce in the
support of Christian Missions, placed the necessary
funds for carrying out such an inquiry,at the disposal of
the“London Society for promoting Christianity among
the Jews.”It was at their request, that the writer of
theseIntroductory
Remarksundertookto direct the
general plan and management ofthe undertaking.The
subject is thus noticed in the Society's Aunual Report
for1849.
“Your Committee have gladlly availed themselves
of the opportunity,offered by the establishment of the
Bishopric of Victoria,Hongkong,to make further in-
quiries respecting the Jews in China,and the practi-
cability of establishing aMission inthatcountry.
There appear tobe peculiar difficultiesinthewayof
the immediate realization of their wishes in this res-
pect, and their present efforts must be limited to a
Mission of Inquiry,in which the Bishop has kindly
promised his assistance.That munificent friend of
Israel,Miss Cook has placed in the hands of your
Treasnrer,a sum sufficient to cover the aniount of

--- PAGE BREAK ---in which the Bishop has kindly
promised his assistance.That munificent friend of
Israel,Miss Cook has placed in the hands of your
Treasnrer,a sum sufficient to cover the aniount of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

vi
the expenses occasioned by the establishment of the
Mission."
The writer on his arrival in China,entered into
correspondence with various foreign residents,both
Missionaries and civilians,settled in the five consular
citiesof China,whowerelikely tofeel aninterest in
the object,and abie to furnish information towards its
successful prosecution.A number of questions had
been prepared and printed in England,principally by
the Revd.Dr.Macaul, and these were sent round to
the different consular ports,in order to direct atten-
tion to certain specific points of inquiry.No intelli-
gence whatever could be procured respecting even the
existenceofanynativeJewsinChinaatthepresent
time.So far as we know,not a single native Jew has
ever been met with by any Protestant Missionaries,or
othe1 foreigners now resident in China.The Revd.
Dr.Medhurst,of theLondon Missionary Society，was
the first to give a practical turn to these inquirics.
He
revolved in his mind a plan for.despatching some
trustworthy native messengers into those parts of the
interior, where Jews were formerly known to be.He
laid his scheme before the writer,during his subsequent
visit to Shanghae in October,1850.The services of
two Chinese Christiansin the employment of the Lon-
donMissionary Society,who appeared suitable and trust-
worthy agents,were made available for the mission.
One of them,K'hew T'heen-sang、whose journal is
placed first and was written in English,was educated
by Dr.Medhurst,in his Mission school at Batavia, and
is now engaged as a printer in the Mission at Shang-
hae.The other,Tseang Yung-che, a somewhat older

--- PAGE BREAK ---en in English,was educated
by Dr.Medhurst,in his Mission school at Batavia, and
is now engaged as a printer in the Mission at Shang-
hae.The other,Tseang Yung-che, a somewhat older

--- PAGE BREAK ---

vii
man, and a literary graduate of the fourth or lowest
degree,had been for some years a teacher of Chinese
toone of theMissionaries atShanghae.
Hisjournal
was composed in Chinese, and has been translated into
English by the Revd.J.Edkins.
Three Jewish merchants also, from Bagdad,resi-
dent at Shanghae,and connected with the opulent
Jewish firm of Sassoon &Co.atCanton,contributed
valuaLlehelp;one ofthem having written aletter in
Hebrew to thtir Jewish co-religionists atK'hae-fung-
foo,for the purpose of indroducing the two Chinese
messengers,and inviting the Jews to visit Shanghae.
After receiving various cautionary suggestions and
instructions as to their mode of proceeding,our two
Chinese friends left Shanghae on November15th,1850
They followed the routewhichhadbeen previously
laid down for them,by way of Soo-chow, and thence to
Chin-keang-foo, where they crossed the river Yang-
tsze-keang.They pursued their course thence in boats
as before,along the grand canal,to the point of its
junction with the YellowRiver.Here,after a slight
detention,they renewed their journey in arude cart or
barrow, drawn by mules,along the southern bank of the
YellowRiver, arriving at K'hae-fung-foo on Deceraber
9th,having travelled a distance of about 700 miles in
a north-westdirectionfromShanghae.
The journals of our travellers will best convey,in
their own simple truthful language, anidea of the state
of the country and population through which they pass-
ed.The generally perceptible poverty and distress of
the people in the vicinity of theYellow River,the fre-
quent signs of dilapidated dwellings,villages in ruins,

--- PAGE BREAK ---which they pass-
ed.The generally perceptible poverty and distress of
the people in the vicinity of theYellow River,the fre-
quent signs of dilapidated dwellings,villages in ruins,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

viii
and partial neglect of cultivation,may be taken as
proofs of the devastating effects from time to time, pro-
duced by the overflowing of this vast centralstream,
and of the occasional desolation spreadon either side
ofits embankments.Butwe must be cautious inad-
mitting a too lhasty conclusion,that these appearances
militate against the popular accounts of thehigher de-
gree of prosperity and civilization,generally prevailing
in other parts of the Chinese empire.
The diaries of our Chinese visitors will acquaint the
reader with the general condition of the Jewish com-
munity atK'hae-fung-foo.After atediousjourneyof
twentyfive days,they at length entered the east gate
of the city;and pursuing their course along the Great
East-gate Street,in accordance with the information
which theyhad lately acquiredon the journey，they
soon turned to the northwards,and at no great distance,
arrived at the site of the Jewish synagogue,facing to
the eastward.Here, in the midst of a surrounding
population, two thirds of whom were professors of Ma-
hommedanism,and close adjoining toaheathen temple
dedicated to the“god offire，”a few Jewish families,
sunk in thelowest poverty and destitution,their re-
ligion scarcely more thana name,andyet sufficient to
separate them from the multitude around,exposed to
trial,reproach,and the pain of long-deferred hope,
remainedthe unconscious depositariesof theoracles of
God,and survived as the solitary witnesses of departed
glory.Nota single individualcould read theHebrew
books;they had been without a Rabbi for 50 years.
The expectation ofa Messiah seems to have been en-
tirely lost.The rite of circumcision,which appears to

--- PAGE BREAK ---idualcould read theHebrew
books;they had been without a Rabbi for 50 years.
The expectation ofa Messiah seems to have been en-
tirely lost.The rite of circumcision,which appears to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ix
have been observed at the period of their discovery by
the Jesuits two centuries ago, had been totally dis-
continued.The worshippers within the synagogue
faced towardsthewest;butwhetherinthedirection
ofJerusalemortowardsthesuspendedtabletsofthe
emperors,no clear information was obtained.The
synagogue itself was tottering in ruins;some of the
ground had been alienated to pagan rites,and a portion
of thefallen materials sold to the neighbouringheathen.
Some'timepreviously,theyhadpetitioned theChinese
emperor to havepity on their poverty,and torebuild
their temple.Noreply had been received from Pe-
king,but to this feeble hope they still clung.
Out
of seventy family names or clans,only seven now re-
mained,numbering about 200 individuals in all,dis-
persedovertheneighbourhood.Afewofthemwere
shopkeepers in the city;others were agriculturists at
some little distance from the suburbs;while afew
families also lived in the temple precincts, almost des-
titute ofraiment andshelter.According topresent
appearances, in the judgment of our native messengers,
after afewyears,all traces of Judaismwillprobably
have disappeared,and this Jewish remnant have been
amalgamated with and absorbed into surrounding Mo-
hammedanism.
Although themessengers were afterwards suddenly
interrupted in their researches within the synagogue,
and theirdeparture fromthecityitself was subse-
quently hastened by fear,they remained for a period
suficienttoenablethem toaccomplish themainobject
of their visit.They copied many interesting inscrip-
tions in Chinese,and a few in Hebrew,which are

--- PAGE BREAK ---fear,they remained for a period
suficienttoenablethem toaccomplish themainobject
of their visit.They copied many interesting inscrip-
tions in Chinese,and a few in Hebrew,which are

--- PAGE BREAK ---

X
appended to theirjournals.They broughtback also
eight M.S. S.of apparently considerable antiquity,
containingportions of the Old Testament Scriptures,of
which fac-similes are subjoined.These eight M.S.S.
are written on thick paper, bound in silk, and bear in-
ternal marks of foreign,probably Persian origin.The
writing·appears to have been executed by means of a
style,and to be in an antique Hebrew form,with vowe!
points.The cursory examination which we have been
already enabled tobestow on them,leads to the belief
that they will be found by western biblical scholars，to
beremarkable for their generally exact agreement with
thereceivedtextof theHebrewOld Testament.
Though in themselves interesting and valuable, they
are probably much inferior in interest and value, to the
twelve rolls ofvellum containing.theLaw,each 30 feet
in length by 2or 3inbreadth,which our messengers
examined in the holiest of holies.Measures are al-
ready in progress for procuring these latter M.S. S.,
which would beaworthyadditiontosomeone of
our national Institutions,and for bringing down to
Shianghae,anyIsraelites who might be induced to
visit that city.The portions of the Old Testament
Scriptures already received,are the following :
Exodus, chapters I. to VI.:Exodus,XXXVIll. to
XL.:Leviticus,XIX.and XX.:Numbers,X1II. to
XV.:Deuteronomy,XI. to XVI.:and Deuteronomy,
XXXIl.:various portions of the Pentateuch,Psalms
and Hagiographa, which appear to be parts of an an-
cient Hebrew Liturgy, are contained in two of the·
MI.S. S.alrcady received.
The temple or synagogue at K'hae-fung-foo is said

--- PAGE BREAK ---s
and Hagiographa, which appear to be parts of an an-
cient Hebrew Liturgy, are contained in two of the·
MI.S. S.alrcady received.
The temple or synagogue at K'hae-fung-foo is said

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1X
to have:been bnilt about A.D.1ll90;but the Jews
themselves assert that their race entered China as ear-
ly as the period of the Han dynasty,which would cor-
respond’with some time about the Christian era.
Afriendly feeling wasgenerally evincedby them
towards our visitors;which is in no small measure
attributable to theHebrewletter ofintroductionfrom
Shanghae;of which although the Jews understood not
the purport,they readily perceived its identity with
their own sacred writings.Without such an introduc-
tion,they would probably have been received with
suspicion and distrusted as spies.
Our visitorslearnt
that during the year 1849,the whole of the little
Jewish community at K'hae-fung-foo,were thrown into
great alarm and exposed to danger of persecution, on
account of suspectcd connexion with foreigners,by a
letter written in Chinese,and despatched some time
before,by the late TempleLayton,Esqr.H. B.M. Con-
sul at Amoy,for the purpose of procuring some Hebrew
M.S.S.
It remains for the writer of this preface,in conclu-
sion,to express how great are the obligations under
which,not only he himself,but also theLondon Society
for promoting Christianity among the Jews,must feel
themselveslaidby the valuable labour andresearch of
Revd.Dr.Medhurst,and the well-performed services
of thetwonativeChristianAgentsoftheLondon
Missionary Society.To thembelongs the entire merit
offurnishing thecontentsof the little volumewhich is
now presented to the Christian public.
Our best thanks are also due to the Revd.John
Hobson,British Chaplain at Shanghae, and the Revd.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hing thecontentsof the little volumewhich is
now presented to the Christian public.
Our best thanks are also due to the Revd.John
Hobson,British Chaplain at Shanghae, and the Revd.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

xii
W.Muirhead,of the London Missionary Society，for
their kind services and assistance in comparing the co-
pying,and work of the Chinese block-cutters with the
original Hebrew M. S. S., during its progress through
thepress.
Hongkong,May,1851.

--- PAGE BREAK ---services and assistance in comparing the co-
pying,and work of the Chinese block-cutters with the
original Hebrew M. S. S., during its progress through
thepress.
Hongkong,May,1851.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SINce the preceding pages were written,the two Chinese trnvellers have been
despatehed a second time to Kae-fung-foo.They returned to Shanghae in July,
having met with complete success in their mission.Six of the twelve rolls of
the Law, which they saw during their previous visit, each containing a complete
copy of the wholePentateuch, were purchased for 400 taels of silver(about
i30) from the Jews duly assembled to the number of 300 persons; and the
MSS. were conveyed in open day from the synagogue to the lodgings of our
travellers.They are each written in a fine legible hand on thick sheep-skins
sewed together, and are without points, or any of the modern divisions into
seetions or even books. They nre in excellent preservation, except one, which
was injured by a flood during the Ming Dynasty, but is considered critically of
the grentest value.During the first visit our travellers, by mistaking family-
names for individuals, greatly underrated the number of the Jewish community.
Cireumcision also appears to be praetised, though the tradition respecting its
MSS. were also brouglht away, wlhich, on farther examination, may possibly
throw light on their early history and migration.
Two Chinese Jews also aecomnpanied our travellers on their return, and are
now residing under the roof of Dr Medhurst nt Shanghae, in order to study
Hebrew, the knowledge of whieh has been entirely lost among them. They
appear tohave a great desire toreestablish the Hebrew servicesin their syna-
instruction；and the Bishop of Victoria indulges the hope that lhe may possibly
obtain hereafter two Jewish students for the Mlissionary college of StPaul’s at
Hongkong,nownearly completedndinstitutedforthebjctof trniningnative
Missionaries for Chinn.A portion of the MSS.are sent to the London
Society for Promoting Christianity among the Jews,” Chatham Place, Blackfriars,
by the present monthly steamer.
HoxGKoxG,September 1851.sionaries for Chinn.A portion of the MSS.are sent to the London
Society for Promoting Christianity among the Jews,” Chatham Place, Blackfriars,
by the present monthly steamer.
HoxGKoxG,September 1851.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---.are sent to the London
Society for Promoting Christianity among the Jews,” Chatham Place, Blackfriars,
by the present monthly steamer.
HoxGKoxG,September 1851.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JOURNALOFK'HEWTHEEN-SANG
TO
K'HAE-FUNG-FOO.
A.D.1850.Nov.15.Friday.In the commencement of
our journey from the city of Shanghae,at about half
post7 A.s., the tide was so strong against us, that it was not
till half past 8,we passed the 老間Laou-cha，and at half
past 9,the新Sin-cha；leaving this,we arrived at the
ferry of趙家渡Chaou-kea.to6.Betwcen the Soo-chow
bridge and the Chaou-kea ferry, we had very stroug winds
against us just by the point, so that the boatinen could
a qronopddosoa puemou upaonsnou
river side ; afler breakfast, about 10 a. M. we started again,
and at half past lo, we passed'the Chaou-kea ferry; at
about quarter to ll，we paased the 王Ke-wang-
mcaou (temple of Ke-wang),and about a quarter to 12
(noon),野鸡墩Yay-ke-tun+was in sight of us,which
we passed at 12; all the way from Chaou-kea-to6 to Yay-
ke-tun, the fields were well cultivated with wheat, barley,
vegetables,cotton and turnips ；about a quarter past 2 p.M,
the mouth of the馮家滨Hung-kea-pang was in sight of
us；after passingwhichcanal,at about5o'cloc,we arrived
at the high bridge of黄渡Hwang-too：where we stopped
for the night; as soon as we arrived, Tseang and I went out
immediately from the boat, taking with us a few tracts; we
saw that the people of Hwang-toowished more for books
The Sin-cha is by the foreign residents in Shanghae denomina-
ted the Soo-chow bridge,because it spans the creek which leads to
Soo-chow.It is about a mile and a haif from the British consulate.
Ya-ke-tun,literally the Pheasant Mound, is an artificial mound,
tbrown up for the purpose of affording a viewof the surrounding fat
country,and of giving warning of approaching danger,in case of
invasion.There are several such on the way to the city of Kea-
ting； this mound is situated on the point where the creek divides,
oLe branch leading to Soo-chow and the other to Kea-ting.
Ain case of
invasion.There are several such on the way to the city of Kea-
ting； this mound is situated on the point where the creek divides,
oLe branch leading to Soo-chow and the other to Kea-ting.
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---There are several such on the way to the city of Kea-
ting； this mound is situated on the point where the creek divides,
oLe branch leading to Soo-chow and the other to Kea-ting.
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
than the inhabitants of Shanghae, in that they asked us with
engerness ; both old and young did the same.
Nov.16.Saturday.Early in the morning about 4 A.
M.we started again;and about 9o'clock we arrived at
家浜Lah-kea-pang，a thinly-inhabited village；op-
posite to it there were two or three walled houses ; we saw
too that they had built a new straw-roofed house, on the
top of which there was a chimney to be seen, which we
thought very dangerous indeed among the straw.All the
way from Hwang-too to Luh-kea-pang, the fields were
covered with green things, such as .turnips, wheat,barley and
cotton, whilst some were uncultivated; from Hwang-too to
Lih-kea-pang, we had very strong head winds, so that the
boatmen were obliged to scull the boat up to the point. After
leaving Lih-kea-pang,at a quarter to 9, we saw the pa-
goda of千墩Tsheen-tun；in the way to it, we observed
many straw-roofed houses, and the fields were planted most-
ly with turnips, but a few with barley; from Lih-kea-
pang,in our way to L[山I Kwan-san we had a little fair
wind, and about a quarter past 10, we saw from the distance
of about 40 le the pagoda on the hill of Kwan-san; at about
30le distance fromit,we saw the東洋翟橘Tung-yang-le-
keaou,(bridge of the eastern ocean),by the canal side; and
at about half past 12, we entered Kwan-san.*The first
bridge thatwe Eaw was.the文星橘Wan-sing-keaou
(bridgeofvaiegated stars)andafterhavinggonea litleway,
we eapieda temple entitled飛仙伯府Fei-seen-pih-foo
(palace of the fying angel) ;about half past I p. M., we stop-
ped our boat near the 馬四馬Sze-ma-kwan,(four-horse
pass),and while the boatmen went to buy sormething,Tseang
and I took the opportunity to distribute sorme tracts.About2,
we started again for P唯亭Wei-ting,intending to pass the
*Kiwan-san is a district in the prefecture of Soo-chow,(Lat.31.
28.North,Long.120.48.East.The walls include two district
cities,viz.Kwan-san and Sin-yang; they therefore embrace alarge
space of ground.Within tle walls is a hill of a romantic appearane,
with a pagoda on the top ofit.This hns frequently been visited by
foreigners ; and on one occasion by two Euglish ladies.ace alarge
space of ground.Within tle walls is a hill of a romantic appearane,
with a pagoda on the top ofit.This hns frequently been visited by
foreigners ; and on one occasion by two Euglish ladies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ground.Within tle walls is a hill of a romantic appearane,
with a pagoda on the top ofit.This hns frequently been visited by
foreigners ; and on one occasion by two Euglish ladies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3
night there;on the way to it, about 3,we passed the village of
Tsee-e, at the mouth of which there was a high stone bridge
with a temple near the foot of it ; at a quarter past 4, we pas-
sed大唯亭Ta-wei.ting,and ina quarter of an hour more
小唯亭Seaou-wei-ting；about quarter to5，we passed the
large sheet of water called 沙塘 Sha-tang (sandy pool).
We did not stop our boat, as we intended, to pass the right at
Wei-ting,but on account of the fair wind we had all the way
fromKwan-gan,we sailed straight on to州Soo-chow.*
In the way toit,about quarter to 5,we passed外跨塘Waé-
khwa-taug；andat a quarter past6,wecame to州安門
and about half past7，arrived at明Clhang-mau, or
Soo-chow.
Nov.17. Sunday.Early in the norning about 6 o'clock,
before any body was up,Tseang and I went out of the boat
to distribute some tracts,by putting at various shop doors
one or two complete sets of trncts, that when the people awoke
and opened their doors，they might find some new and true
books,which their forefatbers had not known,neither were
they handed down up to the present period; after that, we
went down to our boat.About 9,we started again,and in
half an hour we pased 邱Hoo.k'hew,a hillfull of
temples and shops ; along the way to Hco-k'hew, we saw
by the wall of a temple on the left side,a few.characters
writen“百善孝盒先萬恶淫篇首pthshén
heaou wel seen, wan go yin wei show, of all the virtues filial
piety is the greatest, and of all the vices carnal lusts are the
chief;a few houses further on there was written again
“诸恶莫作泉善奉行choogomotso,chung shén
fung bing, do not commit wickedness of any kiud,but reve-
Soo-chow isaprefecture，and the chief city of the south-eastern
part of the province of Keang-nan.A lieutenant-governor resides
here,with a large number of officials.It s a place of considerable
political importance,and the seat ofa large commerce.Itspopulation
is supposed to amount to a million;itis situated in Lat.31.23.25.
North, Long. 120.28.55.East, distant from the capital 824 miles.le
political importance,and the seat ofa large commerce.Itspopulation
is supposed to amount to a million;itis situated in Lat.31.23.25.
North, Long. 120.28.55.East, distant from the capital 824 miles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nce,and the seat ofa large commerce.Itspopulation
is supposed to amount to a million;itis situated in Lat.31.23.25.
North, Long. 120.28.55.East, distant from the capital 824 miles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4
rently practice every sort of virtue.”Atabout quarter past
11,we pnssed the custom.house(墨Heu-shoo-kwan),
and ag soon as we passed it we saw many mulberry-trees;
from the custom-houee to the borders of Woo-seth, there
were scarcely to be seen in the fields any such thing as
wheat,barley,cotton,&c.,but grass all the way.About 2 p.
M.we paased the village of the southern Wang-ting（南
Nan Wang-ting),and about 3, the village of the northern
Wang-ting（北望亭Pih Wang-ting)；the day wasvery
dull, but the wind was still favourable.About 4 o'clock,
we passed Shin-tih, and at 6 the village of Sin-gnan ; at
half past 6, in our way to Woo-seih, we saw a row of t rees
by the river side, and after having passed these, about S at
night, we arrived at 無锡Woo-eeih,* theevening being
very dull and rainy.
Nov.18.Monday.Early in the morning, about 6o'clock,
or the shops were opened, to distribute a few sets of tracts,
by placing them at their various doora, or putting them in the
crevices of the doors, that when the people awoke and opened
their doors, they might find some new doctrine, which nei-
ther the Buddhists nor Taouists could supply them with,
received from an unknown friend.After breakfust (at 9),we
started again, but the wind was so strong against us, that
the boatmen could not succeed in rowing; so we stopped our
boat near the 小金[Seaou-kin-san,a temple in the
middle of the river, where we saw attached to the 音閣
Kwan-yin-ko, a scroll, on the right of which there was written
“我费一片婆心因汝善良抱個孩兒送汝
I have carried to the utmost my maternal feelinga, and on ac-
count ofyour good actions,here present you with a little
boyandonthelef“你做百般好事要他福
壽积些陰與他You shouldnowpracticeevery
Woo-seih is a district city in the prefecture of Chang-chow-fou,
Lat.31.38.North, Long.120.8.East.good actions,here present you with a little
boyandonthelef“你做百般好事要他福
壽积些陰與他You shouldnowpracticeevery
Woo-seih is a district city in the prefecture of Chang-chow-fou,
Lat.31.38.North, Long.120.8.East.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
sort of virtuous action,and if you desire his long life and
After we hadvisited this temple, we went also to the 惠
Hwuy-san-she,(monastery of the favourable hill), where
passing the bridge, we saw at the end of the canal what was
called a dragon fountain（能泉lang tseuen)，which sent
the end of the canal by the way side.Having noticed these
things,we went to see the famous temple and mountain just
mentioned，where on enteringwe sawwritten“江南第—
[Keang-nan te yih san(the very finest hill in Keang-nan);"
passing this, we crossed a small stone bridge,and reached
the天王Teen-wang-teen,(hall of the celestial king)；
this we entered, and passing a small bridge saw a 'marble
tablet on a pedestal,containing the following inscription:
寄暢圜中眺翠螺，入雲橱濕多羅、
了知到處佛無任，信是名山价占多、
暗宝明亭相掩映，天花潤草自婆娑，
梨公案休窟、十六春秋一刹那。
Wandering for pleasure round this place,I look at yonder
spiral mountain ; entering the cloud, I brush against the trees
and become wet with dew; I know full well that everywhere
there are numberless Buddhas,and truly on every celebrated
mountain priests are sure to find a fortunate residence.
Where this dark dell and that gay looking summer-house
partly shade and partly reveal each other,heavenly fowers
and grass of the mountain ravine unite to please the beholder ;
that table of the priests take care not to overset;when the
seasons were revolving for the sixteenth time during my
reign I first entered this temple."
This was preceded by thedate oferection,“乾隆辛未
春惠山作Keon-lang sin we ch'hun hwuy san tso,com-
posed at Hwuy-san,in the spring of the 16th year of the
reign of Keen-láng”（A.D.1751).Underneath was sub-
scribed 御yu peih，the imperial signature.On our re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---h'hun hwuy san tso,com-
posed at Hwuy-san,in the spring of the 16th year of the
reign of Keen-láng”（A.D.1751).Underneath was sub-
scribed 御yu peih，the imperial signature.On our re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
turning to the boat,just by the Hwuy-san-she,:we saw.a
stone,like a candlestick,about 7 feet in height;and leaving
the temple，observed over a gateway“勝地名泉shing
teming tseuen,a surpassingly fine region and a famous
fountain."
Nov. 19. Tuesday. About 2 in the morning, we started
from Hwuiy-san, and about 6 passed a village called Shih-
tang; at the front of the temple gate we saw two stone lions
on pedestals,and a little further on a grave-yard,fenced with
a wall, which the people said, was for those who had no
fields, nor friends and relations; even beggars when they
died might be buried there.At a quarter past 6, we.passed a
village called Yaou-t'how-pang; and in a quarter of an hour
more，we passed the village of 洛社镇Lo-shay-chin,a
well-inhabited place.About half past 7, we passed 五牧
Woo-muh,a thinly-inhabited village, famous for producing
garlick ; within this villnge there were temples and a row of
mulberry-trees,all the felds being well cultivated and appa-
rently fruitful.About half past S,we passed 横林Hwang-
lin, a village with unceiled houses, and where the fields were
badly cultivated；having passed this village,we came to成
堰Tserh-shoo-yen, a place well inhabited, but badily cul-
tivated,being surrounded with graves and wild plants,such as
half past 9,亭堰Ting-yen was in sight of us，which was
also very thinly inhabited; after having passed this,we espied
the pagoda of 常州 Ch'hang-chow,and at half past 10,
arrived at the enstern gate of the same, where we observed
that the waters were rather yellow；at 11 o'clock,we
arrived at the south gate,where I had fornerly been,passing
which we reached the west gate; leaving this we saw a
number of tablets erected in honour of filialand chaste per-
Ch'hang-chow is the chief city of a prefecture;it is situated in
Lat.31.50.36.North,Long. 119.52.47.East. Distant from Nan-
king 82 miles, 85 miles from Soo-chow, and 768 from the capital.chaste per-
Ch'hang-chow is the chief city of a prefecture;it is situated in
Lat.31.50.36.North,Long. 119.52.47.East. Distant from Nan-
king 82 miles, 85 miles from Soo-chow, and 768 from the capital.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

meaou,（the temple of virtuous women);then a teinple
dedicated to the queen of heaven（天后行宫Theen how
hing kung); and at a quarter past 1 p.M. we passed the
villnge of新胃Sin-cha，the newfood-gate.Abcut quarter
to 2,we passed the bridge of 速江橘1een-keang-keaou,
which spans tle river at the junction of two streams; at 3,
we passed the village of奔牛镇Pan-new-chin,（literally,
the run-away cow).where we saw a cow-market;and after
thata temple called香林寺Heang-lin-she,（the forest
of incense sticks).About 4，we passed the 九里铺
Kew-le-p'hoo, a villnge where there was nothing to be seen,
but fields and a few vegetables upon them; after passing
which，we observed that there was a play (hé) being
acted in the fields with music and lights, and many peo-
ple came as spectators; pursuing our journey,about half past
5.we arrived at 吕城Leu-tsing,and passed the oiglit
thicre.
Nov.20.Wednesday.About 4 o'clock in the morning,
we started for Tan-yang;in the way to it,about 6
A. M., we passed the village of Ling-k'how; at 7, we
pussed青杨铺Tsing-yang-phoo，anda quarter pust 8,
of尹公橘Yin-kung-keaou，oppositewhichwesaw
the pagodaor寶塔湾Paou-t"ha-wan,andatemplenear
it calied三羲閣San-é-k；arrived at the north gate of
the city，we stopped our boat near the新梧Sin-keaou,(new
bridge); and after having paid a visit to Tseang’s family, we
went through the city to look at it.After walking through the
crowded stroets,we returned to the boat,and about half past
2 started again; the city walls of Tan-yang, were all broken
down and left unrepaired,the river banks were all high
ground up to镇江府Chin-keang-foo；on our arival at
Tan-yang, the day was very dull and rainy,about half past
Tan-yang isa district city belonging to the prefecture of Chin-
keang-foo, situated in Lat.32. 4.North,Long.119. 32.East.foo；on our arival at
Tan-yang, the day was very dull and rainy,about half past
Tan-yang isa district city belonging to the prefecture of Chin-
keang-foo, situated in Lat.32. 4.North,Long.119. 32.East.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Tan-yang, the day was very dull and rainy,about half past
Tan-yang isa district city belonging to the prefecture of Chin-
keang-foo, situated in Lat.32. 4.North,Long.119. 32.East.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
4,we arrived at張官渡Chang-kwan-too,and passed the
nightthere.
Nov. 21. Thursday.About half past 4, we started again,
but the wind was still against us,and the weather very in-
clement；at6,we passed黄泥珊Hwang-ne-pa；and ar-
breakfast,we started again, and a quarter past 9, arrived at
大王廊Ta-wang-meaou,（the temple of the great king),
and 庄T'aou-chang,(the peach village).Athalf past 10,
we passed月可Yue-ho（the rmoonriver),on thebank of
which we saw a temple called古镇海庵Koo-chin-hae-
gan,(the marine monastery of the old town)and near to it金
龍四大王廓Kin-lung-sze-ta-wang-meaou,（the temple
of the four great golden dragonkings).A quarter to 12
we reached the village of 丹徒镇Tan-to chin，and ai 2,
the pagoda of Chin-keang wns in sight of us;-at a quarter
past 2.we pnssed the都天扇Too-t'heen-meaou,oppomite
which there was a dockyard,where they built and repaired
the imperial grain-junks; we observed that they put all the
old wood inside, and the new and clean pieces outside, in or-
der to cheat the Emperor, so that in a few years, they might
have to repair them again; thus they defrauded the govern-
ment by their craftiness.At half past 2, we pased 镇江
南聞Chin-keang-nan-man-cha，(the south gate of the
city); here we saw that the wall of Chin-keang was firmly
built,and beautiful to the sight; at 4o'clock,we stopped
for the night at镇江Chin-keang.
Nov. 22.Friday. Early in the morning about 2 A. M.,We
started again,intending to cross the 洋子江Yang-tsze-
keang at 6.but could not,because there were so many
large and small boats before us, which had to cross also, and
the canal being so narrow, we had to stop our boat at 羲渡
Chin-keangis the chief city ofa prefecture,lying on the banks
of the Yang-tsze-keang;Lat.32.14.23.North,Long.119.24.10.
East, it is distant from Nan-king 54 miles,from Soo-chow 112 miles,
and 707 from the capital.This city was taken by the English dur-
ing the war.the Yang-tsze-keang;Lat.32.14.23.North,Long.119.24.10.
East, it is distant from Nan-king 54 miles,from Soo-chow 112 miles,
and 707 from the capital.This city was taken by the English dur-
ing the war.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Lat.32.14.23.North,Long.119.24.10.
East, it is distant from Nan-king 54 miles,from Soo-chow 112 miles,
and 707 from the capital.This city was taken by the English dur-
ing the war.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
E-t'hoo，till those in front of us were gone; opposite this
plnce,there was a temple called古遍通庵Koo-peen
t'hung-gan; after having rested awhile, at halt past 7,we
crossed the 洋子江Yang-tsxe-keang,when it was ra-
ther calm, with a little wind against. us.
In theYang-tsze-
keang we observed various hills,such as 金[Kin-shan
(the golden hi）,銀山Yin-shan（the silver hill）.蒜山
Swan-shan（he garlick hill）. Seang-ran(the elephant
bill)and焦[ Teeaou-shan (the banana hill）.Tie Kin-
shan had a pagoda with temples on it, but all the rest had
no pagodas and only a few temples.On the opposite side
of theYang-tszi-keang there were many洲1oo-chow
(reed islands).We heard that this river is always decreasing
in size; formerly it was large and wide,and now it is becom-
jng uarrow,the breadth of the river now being about a mile
across; it took ns, however,half an hour to cross to the reed
island.Tie Kin-shan hill looked from afar very beautiful
tothe sight,with painted temples,surrounded with green
trees;about a quarter past S,we saw the wall of 瓜
Kwa-chow, all broken down; instead of repairing which,
with bricks and stones,they had piled up a heap of mud for a
wall.About n quarter to 9.we entered the Kwa-chow larger
river,and at 9,noticed a trinplecalled古總持寺Koo-
thang,with arched front door：next to that the大悲禅院
Ta-pei-shen-yuen,and the拔孤壇Pa-koo-than；about
half past 9,we arrived at the瓜州由Kwa-chow-yew-
kwan (custom-house); where,after having been submited
to a minute inspection, we gave the man who examined us 14
cash(or one half-penny) for his trouble,besides which the boat-
men give him 1,400 cash for the boat and boat-ticket. About
J0,we started again straight for杨州Yang-chow，and in
the way to it,at 1l,sawa temple called泰山行宫T"ae-
*Yang-chow is the chief city of a prefecture,Lat.32.26 32.
North,Long.119 14. 13.East ;according to the map of Klaproth
the longitude is 119. 15. East.
Bhe way to it,at 1l,sawa temple called泰山行宫T"ae-
*Yang-chow is the chief city of a prefecture,Lat.32.26 32.
North,Long.119 14. 13.East ;according to the map of Klaproth
the longitude is 119. 15. East.
B

--- PAGE BREAK ---awa temple called泰山行宫T"ae-
*Yang-chow is the chief city of a prefecture,Lat.32.26 32.
North,Long.119 14. 13.East ;according to the map of Klaproth
the longitude is 119. 15. East.
B

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
shan-lhing-kung;opposite which were temples on the
other side of the river, all broken down, with neither images
nor inscriptions, but a bell hung in a broken frame-work.
At 5 minutes past 11,we past八里铺 Pa-le-p'hoo，a
village with few people; at half past 12 (noon), we passed the
famous temple called高县寺Kaou-min-3ze,which looked
very beautiful from afar, with pagoda and painted houses,
（thepointed top of the pagoda haviug been conisumed by fire
on a stormy day, as many people reported to us on enquiry),
and many temples which lhad been newly repaired and rebuilt ;
from Kwa-chow to Kaou-min-sze, all the houses were built
of rice straw merely,but the fields wers full of vegeta-
bles.About l，we passed 杨子橘Yang-tsze-keaou；at
2, the pagoda of Yang-chow was in sight of us ; at a quarter
pnst 2,we passed 九能Kew-lang-keaou（uine diagon
bridge),a village of straw-roofed houses ;and at 3.we
arrived at 杨州Yaug-chow；abouta quarter past 3，we
pased the pagoda of Yang-chow(寶塔湾Paou-rha-
wan)，at the entrance ofa tenple calledthe文峰寺
Wan-fung-sze; the top of the pagoda was fallen down
by the sides of it were weeds growing， and the birds of the
air had taken up their stntions there.
Abontaquarlerto
4,we sawthe teinpleof longevity（萬壽宫Wan-
show-kung). with benutiful steps at the front door by the
river side;and next to it one dedicated to the queen of
heaven,（天后宫T"heen-how-kung)，witharchedfrout
door; about half past 4, we arrived at the custom-house ;
when we arrived there,the office was shut up, so that we
passed the night near the custom-house.We saw by the
front of the custoin-house a bridgc of boats;these bridges
are formed by joining a number of boats together，sufficient
to stretch across the river,so that they may intercept all
traffic,and prevent other boats passing while the custom-
house is shut; the people nt the same tine taking advantage
of this arrangenent to cross the river.Tlie current here
flowed so rapidly,that our boat required 2 or 3ropcsmadepassing while the custom-
house is shut; the people nt the same tine taking advantage
of this arrangenent to cross the river.Tlie current here
flowed so rapidly,that our boat required 2 or 3ropcsmade

--- PAGE BREAK ---ustom-
house is shut; the people nt the same tine taking advantage
of this arrangenent to cross the river.Tlie current here
flowed so rapidly,that our boat required 2 or 3ropcsmade

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
fast to the shore, to hold it';so that even if we had had a
fair wind,it would have been hard to get through against
the rapid strean.
Nov. 23. Saturday.After we had taken our rest, at 6 A. M,
our boat was examined； while the examination was taking
placewe went a litle way into the city of杨州府Yang-
chow-foo, to buy something; after we liad seen the city, we
went to our boat again,and at 1l, we started for Shaou-pih ;
in the city ofYang-chow there were many profssors of the
religion of Mohammed;we ohserved that at the professor's
shops they put up the title of 教Keacu-man,or religion:
we asked some of them, if thcy were Mohamrnedans ? they
said,yes；after that we asked again,where docs your 师
Mih-sze.or teacher live? they said,our teacher lives at a
short distance from this place.The city wall of Yang-chow
is not like that at Kwa-chow ; the strects are narrow anid
mity in rainy weather, and at the gate where we stopped our
boat,the 徐算門Tseu-ming-man，very low and damp.
About a quarter past 1l,we passed the temple of everlasting
life（長生耀寺Clhang-sang-shen-gze)；at 12(noon),we
pnssed the dock-yard of Yang-chow; and half an hour after,
a temple called 響阜寺Heang-fow-she;there waga
garden near it,full of fowers and trees.About 1 p.M.,
Wan-t'how was in sight ofus;andat the end of the
village we sawa temple called萬壽庵Wan-show-gan
(the monastery of a myrind ages); a few le further on, we
observed lamps bytheroad side for travellers andvoyagers,
and many stone pillars to assist navigators in the time of high
winds and rapid currents；about 2,the高Kaou-ineaou
(high teinple) was in sight of us ; near it we saw furuaces,
where they made bricks ; the soil here was rather sandy and
yellow.At half past 2，we passed the 准子河Hwae-
tsze-ho.a river of tliree branches, with an island in the mid-
dle；andalittlefurther onthe新何橘Sin-ho-keaou
(newriverbridg-），and凰橘Fung-hwang-keaou（the
phenix bridge);#at a quarter past 3,we saw a village
These two bridges exist in name, but there are none in reality.