The United States and Greenland: Episodes in Nuclear History, 1957-1968 Part II: The B-52 Crash and Its Impact

Published: Oct 15, 2025 | Briefing Book # 906 | Edited by William Burr

Secret Agreement Reaffirmed Nuclear Weapons-Free Greenland “in Peacetime” But Allowed Introduction in Defense Emergency
U.S. Pledged to Clean Up and Store Plutonium Contamination in “Gentleman’s Agreement” with Denmark
Danish Official: “Don’t dump your garbage in someone else’s doorway and walk away if you get caught”
AEC Reports Detail Underwater Search for Missing Nuclear Weapon Component

[The JCS Chairman’s 1955 proposal for the purchase of Greenland may have never received a formal Department of State response, but a new JCS proposition in 1956 to either purchase or lease it for 99 years encountered a formal and highly negative State Department response. According to the critique by Ambassador to Denmark Robert Coe and Assistant Secretary of State C. Burke Elbrick, a U.S. proposal to purchase Greenland “could well be regarded as an insult by the Danes and could be seriously damaging to U.S.-Danish relations.” That line of argument flowed from Elbrick and Coe’s understanding of the history of Denmark’s economic interests in Greenland, its territorial policy and its “paternalistic—‘white man’s burden’”—approach to the Inuit, the nature of the 1951 U.S.-Denmark defense agreement, and U.S. security interests. The Elbrick/Coe presentation tracks with William Kerrigan’s critical analysis of JCS proposals in Part I of this posting but with more detail. The JCS’s proposal did not show up in the file that included the State Department’s critique and it has not yet been found at the National Archives.]

Organization of the Documents

I. Deep Background on Proposals to Lease/Purchase Greenland

II. Early Reports to the White House of the Crash

III. Operation Crested Ice

IV. The Missing “Spark Plug”

V. Diplomacy and Denmark’s No-Nuclear Objectives

“Crested Ice” excerpt from: Strategic Air Command Semi-Annual Film Report February to July 1968, n.d. , FR 818

Probably seeing the B-52 crash as an embarrassment, Air Force film producers gave perfunctory treatment to "Crested Ice" with no discussion of weapons recovery efforts or why the aircraft had been flying above Thule Air Base.

Full report includes: SAC Automated Command and Control System SACSS, Giant Plow [Minuteman reliability test]; Crested Ice; Grissom AFB Indiana [renaming of Bunker Hill AFB]; Mackay Trophy; B-52s in SEA [Southeast Asia]; and Change of Command [General Bruce K. Holloway became the new CINCSAC].

Source: National Archives, Motion Pictures Division, Record Group 342

Early map showing B-52 crash site on sea ice off Saunders Island, near Thule Air Base. [Excerpt from Document 2]

President Johnson greets Ambassador Torben Rønne, 13 April 1965. (Photo from Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library)

John M. Leddy, Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, conducted negotiations concerning Denmark after the Thule accident. (Photo from National Archives Still Pictures Division, RG 59)

Air Force Major General Richard Hunziker directed the cleanup of weapons parts and contaminated material after the B-52 crash. (Photo from National Archives Still Pictures Division, RG 342)

Shown in a 2011 photograph, the U.S. early warning system at Thule Air Base (since renamed Pituffik Space Base), Greenland. The successor to the Ballistic Missile Early Warning System (BMEWS), the facility (Thule Site J) has operated as a Solid State Phased Array Radar System (SSPARS ) since 1987. That the U.S. government assigned a high priority to maintaining the BMEWS site in Greenland gave the Government of Denmark a strong hand in negotiating a no-nuclear agreement during the spring of 1968. (Photo from Hanscom Air Force base website ).

Unloading of the Star III submersible from a C-130 aircraft at Thule Air Base. The mission of the submersible was to help locate a missing part of an H-bomb secondary that had broken apart during the 21 January 1968 B-53 accident on Greenland. (Photo from National Archives, Still Pictures Unit, RG 342-B)

The preliminary check of the Star III submersible prior to its underwater dives to locate a missing nuclear weapon part in North Star Bay, Greenland. (Photo from National Archives, Still Pictures Unit, RG 342-B)

Washington, D.C., October 15, 2025 - The 1968 crash of a nuclear-armed B-52 bomber near the U.S. Air Force Base in Thule, Greenland, that scattered radioactive plutonium across miles of icefields created an environmental catastrophe that demanded a quick response and a political crisis for the Danish government that exposed contradictions in its no-nuclear policy. Declassified documents published today in the second part of the National Security Archive's publication on the Thule episode describe the frantic effort to clean up and contain the dangerous debris and the negotiation of a secret agreement between the two countries that confirmed Denmark’s no-nuclear approach but preserved the U.S. ability to resume nuclear-armed overflights in a national security emergency.

A State Department telegram from the aftermath of the crash published here today for the first time is evidence of the leverage that Denmark had in negotiations because Washington did not want to risk the 1951 Defense Agreement that had enabled it to deploy the strategically valuable Ballistic Missile Early Warning System (BMEWS) site at Thule Air Base. Concerning an inquiry from Secretary of State Dean Rusk as to whether Denmark had any issue with the “continued U.S.ability to resume nuclear-armed overflights in a national security emergency.

A State Department telegram from the aftermath of the crash published here today for the first time is evidence of the leverage that Denmark had in negotiations because Washington did not want to risk the 1951 Defense Agreement that had enabled it to deploy the strategically valuable Ballistic Missile Early Warning System (BMEWS) site at Thule Air Base. Concerning an inquiry from Secretary of State Dean Rusk as to whether Denmark had any issue with the “continued U.S. presence” at Thule or the possible need to introduce nuclear weapons into Greenland during “NATO alert situations,” Danish Ambassador Torben Rønne suggested that a deal was possible: the “continuation of Greenland defense agreement [was] not involved,” and Denmark’s no-nuclear policy would apply to Greenland “in peacetime.” [See Document 32]

Today’s publication focuses on the effects and implications of the nuclear-armed B-52 crash on Greenland on 22 January 1968, including the Air Force’s cleanup of contaminated snow and ice as part of a “gentleman’s agreement” agreement with the Danish government and the underwater search for a missing nuclear weapon component. Other documents included in this collection detail the negotiation of a supplement to the 1951 Defense Agreement to confirm Greenland’s non-nuclear status.

Most of the documents in today’s posting are published here for the first time. Among them is a little-known State Department document from 1957 assessing a Joint Chiefs of Staff proposal to either purchase or lease Greenland from Denmark. According to the top secret critique, “a proposal by the U.S.Among them is a little-known State Department document from 1957 assessing a Joint Chiefs of Staff proposal to either purchase or lease Greenland from Denmark. According to the top secret critique, “a proposal by the U.S. … to purchase Greenland could well be regarded as an insult by the Danes and could be seriously damaging to U.S.-Danish relations.” [Document 1]

Part I of this publication documented U.S. security interests in Greenland during the early years of the Cold War and the 1951 U.S.-Denmark negotiations for a defense agreement that demarcated areas of the island where the U.S. could establish and operate military bases and facilities. According to declassified documents, by 1957 the Pentagon wanted to deploy nuclear weapons to Thule Air Base for strategic bombing missions but also for air defense purposes. Those plans involved secret U.S.-Danish negotiations that ended with the U.S. receiving a tacit green light for nuclear deployments.

While Denmark had adopted a “no nuclear weapons” approach, U.S. nuclear deployments in Greenland revealed the inconsistencies in its policy. Strategic Air Command (SAC) operations further exposed these contradictions: The U.S. began flying daily nuclear armed airborne alert missions over the BMEWS site at Thule to confirm its security. SAC’s “Thule monitor” mission eventually resulted in a serious B-52 accident in January 1968 that lay the basis for a major readjustment in U.S.-Denmark nuclear relations.

Crested Ice

Before the U.S. and Denmark reached an agreement on Greenland’s nuclear status, Washington had to address the problem of the plutonium scattered by the B-52 crash. Both U.S. and Danish officials and scientists pondered the risks of contamination. While agreeing that the dangers were low, they did not want to take any chances.and Danish officials and scientists pondered the risks of contamination. While agreeing that the dangers were low, they did not want to take any chances. The Danish scientists wanted to avoid any scenario where the contaminated ice melted into the area around North Star Bay, where 200 Inuit families hunted for birds, seals, and walruses. (Some of them had been relocated from the site of Thule Air Force Base when construction began in 1953.) According to a U.S. Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) official involved in the talks, “The Danish Government has a very paternalistic policy toward the Greenlanders and appears determined to look out for their interests as much or more than they would for themselves.” [See Document 4]

U.S. nuclear experts recognized that “time was of the essence” because the contaminated ice would melt in North Star Bay, adding that “a vigorous attempt to remove this main contamination would be well received by the Danes.” Moreover, the “Panel [was] not wholly charmed by calculations which might suggest permissible contamination of the sea water,” which would be the case if plutonium-polluted ice melted into the bay. [See Document 7]

Late in January, Danish scientists had called for “zero contamination.” What concerned the scientists was that the spilled jet fuel would form a plutonium contaminated slick that could accumulate on Saunders Island, where, during the summer, birds, seals, and walruses would be found.nuclear experts recognized that “time was of the essence” because the contaminated ice would melt in North Star Bay, adding that “a vigorous attempt to remove this main contamination would be well received by the Danes.” Moreover, the “Panel [was] not wholly charmed by calculations which might suggest permissible contamination of the sea water,” which would be the case if plutonium-polluted ice melted into the bay. [See Document 7]

Late in January, Danish scientists had called for “zero contamination.” What concerned the scientists was that the spilled jet fuel would form a plutonium contaminated slick that could accumulate on Saunders Island, where, during the summer, birds, seals, and walruses would be found. Seeking to protect Inuit hunting grounds, the Danes saw the oil slick as a “major problem” because its movement was “unpredictable.” The implication was that there should be no fuel “to form a slick.” According to AEC official Harry Bruner, that was “another way of saying: We want you to scrape up all the contaminated ice and do something with it.” [See Documents 6 and 8]

The person in charge of the “Crested Ice” cleanup operation, Air Force General Richard Hunziker, preferred to bury the 25,000-gallon tanks of irradiated material in the permafrost, which he saw as “cheap, simple, and safe.” Yet, he recognized the alternative of shipping the contaminants to the U.S., and that became a necessity. The understanding that the U.S. would remove the contaminated ice was a key point in the “gentleman’s agreement” that U.S. and Danish officials reached in February 1968 when they met in Copenhagen. Understood as a “good housekeeping measure” that was also necessary to shield Denmark from Soviet bloc propaganda, the agreement involved several points, but one was crucial: The U.S.and Danish officials reached in February 1968 when they met in Copenhagen. Understood as a “good housekeeping measure” that was also necessary to shield Denmark from Soviet bloc propaganda, the agreement involved several points, but one was crucial: The U.S. would remove the contaminated aircraft debris and snow and ice—an estimated 10,000 cubic meters, which comprised some 90 to 95 percent of the total contamination—for storage in sealed containers and removal to the United States.

The cleanup of the contaminated, blackened crash area began officially on 3 March 1968, but preparatory work had already begun with the assembly of equipment, including storage tanks, and tests to determine the best way to remove the top two inches of contaminated snow and ice. The Air Force began using 25,000-gallon tanks to pump the over 10,000 tons of contaminated snow and ice but also acquired many smaller tanks—modified R-4360 engine containers—that could hold 1,800 gallons. By the late summer of 1968, the Air Force had shipped thousands of tons of radiated waste to AEC facilities in Savannah River, South Carolina.

The Missing “Spark Plug”

The most secret aspect of the effort to collect and remove bomb parts and fragments and the scattered plutonium in the ice and snow—and one that is not yet fully documented—was the search for a significant weapon component. It was part of a thermonuclear weapon’s second (fusion) stage or “secondary”: the U-235 fissile core, or “spark plug,” which resembled a marshal’s baton. The Air Force could not find it. Thinking that the piece of the secondary might be underwater in North Star Bay and worried that hostile powers might try to seize it, the Air Force contracted the deployment of a submersible to try to locate it.The Air Force could not find it. Thinking that the piece of the secondary might be underwater in North Star Bay and worried that hostile powers might try to seize it, the Air Force contracted the deployment of a submersible to try to locate it. Under the cover story of a search for radioactive material, during July and August 1968, the Star III made dives, but its crew failed to find the missing part. Years later, the BBC reported that the underwater search was for a missing fourth bomb, but the documents and a thorough investigation by a Danish researcher demonstrated otherwise. [1]

Negotiations: Squaring “Neither Confirm nor Deny” with a Non-Nuclear Status for Greenland

While the removal of radioactive debris was underway, the U.S. and Denmark cleaned up the diplomatic mess caused by the B-52 crash. Copenhagen had kept secret for years its tangled nuclear history with Washington, but the crash exposed the hollowness of the no-nukes policy that Denmark first declared in 1957. It also created an opportunity for Denmark to manage the crisis by establishing a consistent policy, which it initiated by publicly stating that the U.S. had no nuclear weapons stored in Greenland. Moreover, U.S. authorities were “aware of Denmark’s nuclear policy,” according to the statement from Denmark, “and we assume that there are no American flights over Greenland by aircraft carrying nuclear weapons.”

The statement surprised the State Department, perhaps because Denmark had not consulted with the U.S. in advance. The State Department rejected a Danish proposal for a joint declaration to the same effect because the U.S. refused to confirm or deny the presence of nuclear weapons.The State Department rejected a Danish proposal for a joint declaration to the same effect because the U.S. refused to confirm or deny the presence of nuclear weapons. Instead, Secretary of State Rusk suggested a unilateral statement by Denmark that there “are no nuclear weapons stored in Greenland and no overflights of Greenland with nuclear weapons,” which Copenhagen accepted. [2]

The election of a new government in Denmark solidified a high-level consensus on the need for U.S. assurances on Greenland’s non-nuclear status. [3] A key factor in prompting Copenhagen to negotiate a more permanent understanding was a Danish parliament resolution in February 1968 requiring the government to seek “absolute [U.S.] guarantees that no nuclear weapons are stored in Greenland, and that Greenland airspace remains a nuclear weapon-free zone, that Danish nuclear policy is upheld in all parts of the kingdom and Danish sovereignty respected.”

To formalize an understanding, the Danish government requested negotiations to modify the 1951 defense agreement. Copenhagen had leverage in the talks because the U.S. had a vital asset in Greenland, the BMEWS, whose status it did not want to jeopardize. Nor did the U.S. want to endanger the 1951 Agreement. According to a State Department official, Washington could not take a “stance so rigid as to cause the Danes to question the desirability of retaining the 1951 Agreement on the Defense of Greenland” [See Document 31]. Thus, a forthcoming U.S. attitude would serve as “damage control” to preserve the U.S. position on Greenland. [4]

By May 1968, the two governments had reached a secret agreement confirming Danish nuclear policy, although it was less “absolute” than what the Parliament sought. The two nations agreed to language that the U.S.position on Greenland. [4]

By May 1968, the two governments had reached a secret agreement confirming Danish nuclear policy, although it was less “absolute” than what the Parliament sought. The two nations agreed to language that the U.S. would not “store nuclear weapons in Greenland or overfly Greenland” with nuclear-armed aircraft. But U.S. negotiator Assistant Secretary of State John M. Leddy wanted Denmark to recognize that “in circumstances of extreme emergency” advance consultation could be difficult but that the U.S. would “make every effort” to do so. When the Danish Ambassador Torben Rønne commented that the caveat would make the agreement “less than binding,” Leddy replied that the “written agreement would be [the] governing instrument” and that, as with any U.S. government agreement, “we would abide by it to full extent of our ability to do so.” When Rønne asked why the agreement had to be secret, Leddy replied that it “embodied a specific limitation on [the] deployment and movement of nuclear weapons.” In other words, publication of the agreement would be inconsistent with the U.S. “neither confirm nor deny” policy.

The Danish Foreign Ministry could not publish the agreement, but it could confirm that it had brought consistency to Denmark’s nuclear policy. According to the Ministry’s public statement, “The result of the discussions in Washington creates harmony between the Defense Agreement of 1951 and Danish atomic policy and therewith assurance under international law, that this policy is respected in Greenland.”

Much remains secret about the Thule accident and its consequences. The U.S. Embassy files, including top secret records, remain classified, along with numerous documents in the State Department’s central files and the office files on Denmark and Greenland. In addition, significant records held by the Department of Energy on the accident are still classified. Embassy files, including top secret records, remain classified, along with numerous documents in the State Department’s central files and the office files on Denmark and Greenland. In addition, significant records held by the Department of Energy on the accident are still classified. Pending Archive requests for additional declassifications may someday disclose more of the backstory of U.S. policy toward Greenland and U.S.-Danish relations.

RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1967-1969, box 1678

Ambassador White agreed that with the Department that the U.S. could treat the Star III survey as a program of continuation of the “arrangements and obligations of B-52 crash program.” White recommended that the U.S. begin exploratory talks with Hans Koch of the Danish AEC because his suggestions in “dealing with Danish press and other Danish repercussion of B-52 .... proved sound.” Koch is a “close friend who has proved discreet.” He “assisted in keeping publicity about clean-up operations well channeled, reasonable, and even helpful to U.S. efforts.” State Department messages endorsed the Ambassador’s recommendations and authorized follow-up action.

[1] . Svend Aage Christensen, The Marshal’s Baton: There is No Bomb, There Was No Bomb, They Were Not Looking for a Bom b (Copenhagen: Danish Institute for International Studies, 2009). DIIS Report Vol. 2009 No. 18.

[2] . For a detailed account of these developments and the negotiations, see Thorsten Borring Olesen’s “Tango for Thule: The Dilemmas and Limits of the ‘Neither Confirm nor Deny’ Doctrine in Danish-American Relations, 1957–1968,” Journal of Cold War Studies 13 (2011): 116-147. See also Danish Institute of International Affairs [DUPI], Greenland During the Cold War: Danish and American Security Policy, 1945-1968 (Copenhagen: Danish Institute of International Affairs, 1997 ), 31-36. The editor is grateful to Professor Olesen for the interpretive guidance provided by his first-rate article.

[3] . DUPI, Greenland During the Cold War, 34 .

[4] . For Danish leverage and U.S. “damage control,” see Olesen, “Tango for Thule,” 137-138 and 143.

[5] . Some of aspects of the relationship necessitated a recent high-level apology: “Danish Prime Minister Apologizes to Greenland Women Subjected to Forced Contraception,” Le Monde , 2 October 2025.

[6] . Christensen, The Marshal’s Baton .

[7] . DUPI, Greenland During the Cold War, 33.

[8] . Olesen, “Tango for Thule,” 137-138.

[9] . DUPI, Greenland During the Cold War , 35.

Documents

Memorandum for the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “99 Year Lease of Northern Greenland,” from Mansfield Sprague, 30 September 1957, enclosing Information Control Sheet, 19 September 1957, with letter to Sprague from Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs C. Burke Elbrick and views of “Ambassador Coe on Joint Chief of Statt Memorandum,” Top Secret
Sep 30, 1957 | Source National Archives, Record Group 330, Records of Secretary of Defense, Office of Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1956-1960, box 21, 092.2 Greenland

Raymond [Notway?] Situation Room, memorandum to the President, Sunday, 21 January 1968, 5:15 p.m., with undated cover memorandum and National Military Command Center memoranda attached, Top Secret, excised copy
Jan 21, 1968 | Source LBJ Library, National Security File, Country File, Denmark, Vol. 1.
A day before Robert McNamara called him about the B-52 crash, President Johnson learned about it through a memo from the Situation Room staff. According to the memo, preparations were in the works to send an “ordnance disposal team to the crash site to handle the nuclear weapons.” The undated memorandum included information indicating that the B-52 was on a “normal airborne alert mission” before it declared an emergency because of a fire on board, although with no specific reference to the BMEWS monitoring task.

Message 4683ABGP from Thule Air Base to Air Force Chief of Staff et al., “Supplemental Report No. 1 of Nuclear Accident (Broken Arrow),” 22 January 1968, Secret, Excised Copy
Jan 22, 1968 | Source LBJ Library, National Security File, Country File, Denmark, Vol. 1.
This message was written in response to standard questions, found in 4 AFR [Air Force Regulation] 127-4, about incidents involving aircraft. A copy of the Air Force regulation is not available, but this report includes an early account of what caused the crash and the condition of each of the crew members, who had all been found, including the one fatality. According to the report, the B-52 was in “Thule orbit at 33,000 feet.” That indicated why the plane crashed near the air base, although whether White House officials shared the information with President Johnson is not known.

H.D. Bruner report to John Trotter, Director [Division of Biology and Medicine], “Trip to Thule, Greenland, January 23 to February 3, 1968, in Connection with the B-52 Crash, January 20 [sic] 1968,” 18 March 1968, Official Use Only
Mar 18, 1968 | Source RG 59, Records Relating to Denmark, 1959-1974, Box 5, Thule Crash Clean-Up Operations
Although dated 18 March 1968, Bruner’s report described his experience in Greenland soon after the crash. He and Los Alamos plutonium expert Wright Langham hurriedly traveled to Thule Air Force Base to inspect the crash site. This is Bruner’s account of the trip, what he learned about the crash and efforts to determine the area of contamination, and the interactions with Danish scientists and naturalists. While waiting for the flight, Bruner and Langham ran into Thule Air Base Commander, Col. C.S. Dresser who briefed them on Thule and Greenland, including the phenomenon of “phases,” the local name for ice storms that create dangerous and deadly “white outs.” Bruner learned on the spot that after the crash, a series of phases had enlarged the contaminated area. Bruner provided granular detail on the tremendously difficult conditions—total darkness and lethal cold—that U.S. Air force officers and troops endured while conducting the search for bomb debris. From speaking with the naturalists, characterized here as “old Greenland hands,” Bruner developed a “composite-summary of information about the bio-ecology” of the area, with considerable detail on the way of life of the Inuit people, their hunting patterns, and their diet. According to Bruner, “These ecological considerations dictated that the contaminated metal and black streak would have to be removed and buried, probably in the U.S.” He took note of what he saw as sincere concerns on the part of the Danes “about the possibility of Pu [plutonium] getting into the food chains on which the Greenlanders depend.” In memoranda on possible biological surveillance programs [See Annexes IV and V], Bruner observed that, “The Danish Government has a very paternalistic policy toward the Greenlanders and appears determined to look out for their interests as much or more than they would for themselves.” [5]

Excerpt from AEC Chair Glenn Seaborg diary, 30 January 1968
Jan 30, 1968 | Source Library of Congress, Glenn Seaborg papers, box 734, Denmark
Seaborg called Hans C. Koch, the chief of Denmark’s Atomic Energy Commission, telling him that “we … saw no reason for alarm.” The U.S. AEC would take a “detailed, scientific” approach to environmental and other matters and would “be in touch to exchange views” with the Danes. “Koch said they are not really alarmed but are doing everything to keep things quiet.” According to Dr. Harry Bruner, that conversation was important for helping create a “cooperative, genial attitude of the Danes… They appreciated his sincerity and responded in kind.” [See Document 8].

Message from Chief of Staff Air Force to Joint Chiefs, National Military Command Center, “Supplemental Report Number 7 of Nuclear Accident,” 31 January 1968, Secret
Jan 31, 1968 | Source National Security Archive, DOE Releases on Thule Crash
When Danish scientists met with U.S. officials in Greenland, their chief concern was “possible contamination of the natural food supply” for some 200 Inuit families living near North Star Bay. While acknowledging that under international standards that the distribution of the weapons plutonium into a cubic kilometer of the bay’s water would be safe, the Danes wanted “zero contamination.” Taking a “fairly hard line,” they favored “scraping up the contaminated layers of ice and snow and doing something with it.”

“The Chairman’s Account of the Preliminary View of the Safety Evaluation Panel for Thule Incident Following DoD-AEC Briefing, February 5, 1968,” with list of members of Panel, chaired by Herbert M. Parker, Battelle Memorial Institute, 5 February 1968, Secret
Feb 5, 1968 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net
This not a record of the DoD-AEC briefing, except on one significant point: the scope of plutonium contamination: “38 % of the total plutonium burden has been located on the snow and ice around the site of the crash; 36% is within the [unclear words] corresponding to 100,000 counts per minutes as measured on the available instrumentation.” The area of black ice, some 20 acres, was the location of 95 percent of the plutonium contamination. Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Atomic Energy Carl Walske wanted the panel to consider areas where “action might be taken fairly promptly,” relating to three issues: the radiological situation, the cleanup, and the definition of an environmental monitoring program. A key consideration was that the area of black ice “will be completely gone by July and will begin to break up in April.” If a decision to remove the ice, snow, and debris was to be made, it would be necessary to so by 1 April: “time is of the essence.” In the discussion of the radiological situation, the panelists, who included Wright Langham, believed it “very probably quite safe to allow the whole residual contamination on the ice to drop into the water and be dispersed as the ice melts.” Yet, in the discussion of cleanup issues, the panelists assumed that “a vigorous attempt to remove this main contamination would be well received by the Danes.” Moreover, the “Panel is not wholly charmed by calculations which might suggest permissible contamination of the sea water,” which would be the case if the plutonium-polluted ice melted into the bay. As for biological-environmental monitoring, the Panelists agreed that before plutonium passed to larger animals and humans, it would be first observable in “detritus, algae, plankton, or a few specific animals such as the mussel.” The Panel suggested monitoring “emphasize these aspects rather than the extensive collection and examination of larger animals.”

Memorandum from H[arry] D. Bruner, Assistant Director for Medical and Health Research, Atomic Energy Commission, to John R. Trotter, Director for Biology and Medicine, “Conferences at København, Denmark, February 14-16, 1968, with Danish Officials on Plans for Dealing with the Contamination Problem at Thule, Greenland,” 19 February 1968, Secret, with attachments [Not all available in source]
Feb 19, 1968 | Source National Security Archive, DOE Releases on Thule Crash
In his account of meetings held in Copenhagen, Bruner reported on the internal U.S. discussions held before the talks with Danish scientists. A key item was determining the extent of contamination of the scar area where the plane crashed. Wright Langham had studied the black crust of the scar area and had determined that it was a “combination of JP [jet propellant]-4 kerosene fuel, carbon, very fine debris, and organic matter in which is entrapped about 80% of the PU [plutonium] of the total sample.” During this discussion, Bruner reported that the Danes favored an “extensive biosurveillance program to assure that the Greenlander [Inuit] would not be contaminated by PU.” At the end of the meeting, the participants decided to “urge the Danes first to state what they thought should be done.” During the talks with Danish officials, Langham suggested that “biological hazards would be minimal due to the dilution of the PU” and that there “should be no harm to anything if the PU were kept out of the systematic circulation of animals.” What concerned the Danes was that the JP-4 would form a slick, because an “oil slick will move at 5% of the wind velocity, the film would pile up on the shore of Saunders Island, where there are birds, walrus and seals in the summer.” The Danes saw that as a “major problem” because the movement of the slick was “unpredictable.” The implication was that there should be no fuel “to form a slick.” According to Bruner, that was “another way of saying: We want you to scrape up all the contaminated ice and do something with it.” According to Bruner’s 19 April report and the SAC “Crested Ice” history, the U.S. and the Danes then reached a “gentleman’s agreement” based on that point: the U.S. would remove the contaminated aircraft debris and snow and ice, an estimated 10,000 cubic meters, in the range of 90 to 95 percent of the total contamination, for storage in sealed containers for eventual removal.

Brig. General Edward B. Giller, Assistant General Manager for Military Application, to Atomic Energy Commission Members, “B-52 Crash at Thule Air Base, Greenland,” 23 February 1968, Secret, Excised Copy, with Joint U.S.-Denmark Statement, 16 February 1968 attached
Feb 23, 1968 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net
Giller kept the AEC up to date on the collection of aircraft and weapons debris and the efforts to remove contaminated ice and snow. According to Giller’s report, the “last piece of positively identified weapons debris was found on February 14.” A postmortem on the weapons debris had to determine what pieces belong to which weapons “in order to ascertain what happened to the fourth weapon secondary , from which no parts have been positively identified.” Giller also reviewed the plans to scrap the top five inches of ice and snow from the impact area, which would comprise 100,000 cubic feet, noting that Oak Ridge was “prepared to dispose of this material, possibly in 25,000 gallon tanks.” During the recent talks in Copenhagen, the Danes proposed “to conduct all monitoring and surveillance studies of the biota of the area using the logistic support of Thule Air Base and leaving to the Air Force the task of removing the debris and scraping up snow and ice in the contaminated areas.” That was the essence of the “gentleman’s agreement.”

John T. Conway, Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, to Carl Walske, 28 March 1968, enclosing rough transcript of JCAE Executive Session on Thule disaster, 20 March 1968, Secret, Excised Copy
Mar 20, 1968 | Source FOIA Release to National Security Archive
This Executive Session included Committee members and representatives from the Air Force, the Department of Defense, and the AEC. The briefings, led by Walske, General Hunziker, and Langham, covered the accident itself, the search for aircraft and weapons debris and the cleanup efforts, and the plans to remove the barrels of contaminated debris and ice. Langham emphasized that “as far as I am concerned out on this big cake of ice which is going to break up and melt into the bay … before long there is absolutely no risk whatsoever, particularly now that we have cleaned up 93 percent of it.” For Walske, the cleanup effort was in the “nature of precautionary, super-precautionary … work” that “brought us a lot of good will from the Danes.” While the briefers downplayed the risk of plutonium contamination, Walske acknowledged “that the U.S. could not say “unequivocally to the Danes that the engine oil when it melted in the summertime wouldn’t go over the shore and carry plutonium there.” Langham minimized the actual hazard but quoted one of the Danes, who “aptly put it, ‘Don’t dump your garbage in someone else’s doorway and walk away if you get caught.’” As Langham put it “there is no “way that you can hide the fact that you had an incident involving nuclear weapons.” The JCAE members were sympathetic. Senator Burke Hickenlooper (R-IA) “realize[d] the benefits of bending over backwards to assure our hosts that we are not going to contaminate their population nor their food supply... I think it is worth the extra expense.” But he was surprised to learn from a statement made by General Ottto Glasser that the Danes were concerned about the “propaganda activities” of other countries, presumably the Soviet Union and its allies, and that they wanted to “bend over backwards to do a good job [to] blunt” propaganda.

Memorandum from H.D. Bruner, Assistant Director for Medical and Health Research, Atomic Energy Commission, to John R. Trotter, Director for Biology and Medicine, “Conference with Danish Representatives in Pentagon, March 18-19 to Follow Up on Broken Arrow Crested Ice Project, Thule Base Greenland (January 21, 1968),” 19 April 1968, with attachments, including “Gentleman’s Agreement,” Classification Markings Deleted
Apr 19, 1968 | Source National Security Archive, DOE Releases on Thule Crash
Bruner’s detailed report on a “cordial” meeting at the Pentagon with Danish representatives included General Hunziker’s briefing on the cleanup. So far, about 230,000 cubic of blackened ice had been transported to the shore and stored in 65 steel tanks. As of 1 March, about 83 percent of the total Pu on the ice had been removed but “if only the black streak area and the cracked ice are considered then about 93% has been removed.” Hunziker further reported that the “blackened area is no longer discernible” but that up to 100 gallons of JP fuel and 350 grams of Pu were still in the ice, but that patrolling the shore for pieces of airplane, oil, and contamination would catch some of the contamination. The cleanup work that Hunziker was describing was Phase II of Operation Crested Ice, which officially began on 3 March (see Crested Ice history, Document 13). Also discussed during the meeting was Langham’s reconstruction of the B-52 crash and the possibility of further surveillance of the areas that had been contaminated. The Danes wanted to handle it themselves in a “low-key” way because if foreigners were involved it would undermine statements to the Greenlanders that the bay was “suitable for hunting and travel.”

Information Meeting Item, Atomic Energy Commission Secretariat, AEC 907/36, “Disposal of the Contaminated Residue from the Thule Accident, Report to the General Manager by the Assistant General Manager for Military Applications,” with Note by AEC Secretary, W.B. McCool, 4 July 1968, Official Use Only
Jul 4, 1968 | Source National Security Archive, DOE Releases on Thule Crash
The Air Force had before it the problem of disposing of 10,500 “measurement tons” of melted ice and snow sealed in 232 1,800-gallon tanks and a “wide variety of sealed containers of contaminated solid residue, primarily aircraft parts.” The goal was to remove the material from Greenland as soon as possible. After the staff of the Division of Military Applications reviewed possible sites for storing the material, including AEC facilities at Savannah River, Oak Ridge, Richland, and the Nevada Test Site, and looked closely at pros and cons and the expenses involved, it concluded that “from an overall standpoint, the best solution is to dispose of all the residue at the Savannah River Plant.” Curtailing overland transport of the material was an important consideration. Moreover, to minimize any danger of a criticality incident, the Savannah River operation had a “capability to effect positive containment of the plutonium in the liquid residue.” The estimated total cost, including transportation and disposal, was over $1.2 million (1968 dollars).

U.S. Strategic Air Command, History and Research Division, “Project Crested Ice: The Thule Nuclear Accident,” Volume I, Historical Study # 113, 23 April 1969, Secret, Excised copy, best copy available
Apr 23, 1969 | Source Air Force FOIA Release
This is a detailed account of SAC’s role in the cleanup after the Thule accident from January to early April 1968. It includes a description of the accident on 22 January, the assembly of the disaster control team at Thule Air Bases, and the two main phases of “Crested Ice.” Information concerning Phase I, on the recovery of bomb and aircraft debris, is wholly excised from this version. Nevertheless, this account provides useful coverage of Phase II, from late January through early April, including the negotiations with Danish scientists and officials toward the “gentleman’s agreement” and the cleanup and removal of contaminated material. Unfortunately, in response to an Archive request for a new declassification review of this history, the Air Force has been unable to find the original classified version.

USAF Nuclear Safety , Jan.-Feb.-Mar 1970, No. 1, Volume 65 Part II (Special Edition), “Project Crested Ice,” unclassified
Jan 1, 1970 | Source National Security Archive, DOE Releases on Thule Crash
This special edition of USAF Nuclear Safety provided detailed, if carefully vetted, coverage of the Thule accident. It covered the cleanup work, the ecological considerations, the role of public affairs, and the removal of the contaminated debris. It also provided considerable information on the role of Danish scientists and U.S. interactions with them. But it also provided a cover story—for example, treating the underwater investigation as a search for radioactivity instead of missing bomb parts. Also elided was why an airborne alert B-52 happened to be flying near Thule. That remained a secret for years.

Brig. General Edward B. Giller, Assistant General Manager for Military Application, to Atomic Energy Commission, “Underwater Search for Weapon Debris at Thule, Greenland,” 18 April 1968, with cover memorandum by AEC Secretary W. B. McCool, AEC 907/33, 22 April 1968, Secret, Excised Copy
Apr 22, 1968 | Source National Security Archive, DOE Releases on Thule Crash
As Giller mentioned in his 23 February report, the weapons recovery efforts had not found the “secondary” for the fourth bomb. Apparently one of the missing pieces was a compact uranium rod, the cylinder-shaped fissile core of the weapons’ thermonuclear secondary (fusion) stage—its “spark plug.” A major study by Svend Aage Kristensen reviewed the search for weapons parts and carefully assessed the claims, repeated over the years, that there was a missing bomb. Kristensen found that the declassified evidence did not indicate any concern about a missing bomb, but pinpointed a lost uranium fissile core, resembling a “marshal’s baton,” that was a crucial element of the weapon’s secondary stage. [6] Giller informed the Commission members that the Defense Department sought the AEC’s “consensus” on the suitability and the possible extent of an underwater search for missing bomb parts. As he mentioned, the “gentleman’s agreement” covered the possibility of a sea-bottom search of which the U.S. would inform the Danes of any results. The Air Force had commissioned a Navy study to evaluate possible methods of searching underwater. The Air Force did not “anticipate a very complicated search since the water is relatively shallow (approximately 600 feet at the most) and the bottom of the bay has the characteristics of a small desert.” The Department of Defense was willing to support a “brief underwater survey” to determine the extent of a search. While an extensive search might be unsuccessful, “even a brief search might find sensitive classified debris which another nation might recover if we did not.”

Brig. General Edward B. Giller, Assistant General Manager for Military Application, to Atomic Energy Commission, “Underwater Search for Weapon Debris at Thule, Greenland,” 2 May 1968, Secret, Excised Copy
May 2, 1968 | Source National Security Archive, DOE Releases on Thule Crash
Giller forwarded to the AEC a Sandia study of an estimated “footprint” for the underwater trajectories of the missing weapons parts and further defined the “suggested search area with probabilities” of success.

Message from Air Force Chief of Staff to CNO, “Ocean Bottom Survey off Thule, Greenland,” 13 June 1968, Confidential
Jun 13, 1968 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net
After a presentation by Ocean Systems, Inc., on 9 May 1968, the Air Force had decided to support a “survey of the ocean bottom” near Thule using a “submersible deep sea diver.” The Air Force would cover the Navy’s costs after the completion of the operation.

State Department telegram 201649 to U.S. Embassy Denmark, “Ocean Bottom Survey at Thule, Greenland,” 12 July 1968, Secret
Jul 12, 1968 | Source RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1967-1969, box 1678.
The State Department informed the Embassy of the plan to deploy the Star III submersible to survey the bottom of North Star Bay. The “primary and confidential purpose of survey … is to assure that no visible and recoverable sensitive parts of the nuclear devices are on the bottom.” The U.S. would give the Danish government and the press a different explanation, treating the survey as part of a “US/Danish summer observation program, with Danes conducting surface effort and US sub-surface, in order to do everything physically possible to assure that no hazards exist in the area.” Anticipating “speculation … in Danish and international press that survey is really effort to find missing bomb or important components,” the project “would require approval highest levels Danish Government, and especially well thought out scenario for public affairs treatment.” In the “unlikely event” of the discovery of “significant and recoverable bomb parts,” a U.S Navy salvage vessel would go to Thule “almost immediately to undertake recovery,” which would “require new press guidance.”

U.S. Embassy Denmark Telegram 1805 to State Department, “Ocean Bottom Survey at Thule, Greenland,” 15 July 1968, Secret

U.S. AEC Washington to USAEC Albuquerque, et al., transmitting text of teletype from Thule Air Base to Air Defense Command, “Crested Ice Report No. 21,” 26 August 1968, Secret
Aug 26, 1968 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net
The Open-Net includes numerous reports on the Star III operations in North Star Bay during August 1968. This report conveys some of the problems encountered, including the failure of the manipulator, malfunctioning of the 35-millimeter camera, and the tangling of the tether line. Nevertheless, the “future look[s] brighter” because of improved video pictures and the discovery of what was causing problems with the camera. Use of the submersible permitted detection of a “considerable quantity of aircraft pieces.” Danish scientists wanted to try to collect bottom samples using small nets and worried that aircraft pieces could interfere with that.

Note by the Secretary, Atomic Energy Commission, W.B. McCool, “Thule Status Report,” 10 September 1968, AEC 907/39, Secret
Sep 10, 1968 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net
Owing to its improved performance, the Air Force gave a few more days to the Star III operation, through 28 August 1968, although it cancelled the last dive because of bad weather. “No parts of a weapon secondary were observed, and none of the weapon related parts have been recovered, nor do they show up in the photographs presently available.” During a briefing at Carl Walske’s office, there was speculation “that the missing [cylinder?] in view of its ballistic characteristics, may have come to rest beyond the observed concentration of the heavy debris.” The report also included details on the final stages of the Crested Ice removal of contaminated material. The USNS Towles had left for South Carolina carrying 268 1,800-gallon tanks filled with contaminated liquid, 192 containers of debris, and 11 empty 25,000-gallon tanks. The USNS Marine Fiddler had arrived at Thule and was to be loaded with many more tanks filled with contaminated liquid and debris. According to the manager of AEC’s Savannah River operations, the “total amount of liquid snow to be returned and disposed of is 550,000 gallons,” at an estimated cost of $504,000.

EUR/SCAN - David H. McKillop to EUR - Mr. John M. Leddy,
Dec 31, 1969 | Source Minister Tabor’s Press Remarks on Greenland Crash,” 22 January 1968, Confidential
Jan 22, 1968 Source: National Archives, Records Relating to Denmark, 1959-1974, box 5, Thule Crash -Internal Memos-Memcons- Conference Notes 1968 When Danish Foreign Minister Tabor announced the accident, he included language that Denmark’s no nuclear weapons policy included Greenland and “air space over Greenland.” Accordingly, “No nuclear weapons are stationed in Greenland.” U.S. authorities are “aware of Denmark’s nuclear policy, and we assume that there are no American flights over Greenland by aircraft carrying nuclear weapons.” Given U.S. practice to keep nuclear armed bombers in the air, Tabor treated the accident as part of an “attempt to make an emergency landing” reflecting the “lack of landing facilities in the Arctic area.”

Memorandum of Conversation, “U.S. Air Force Routes,” 23 January 1968, Secret, prepared by EUE/SCAN- E. Klebanov
Jan 23, 1968 | Source National Archives, RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1967-1969, box 1678
Meeting with Ambassador Torben Rønne to discuss a possible joint statement on the accident, Assistant Secretary of State John Leddy observed that the Danish statements about overflights and weapons storage “had come as a surprise to us.” He did not explain why but Krag’s statement that there “can be no overflights” may have raised hackles because it raised questions about the 1951 defense agreement and the secret understanding with H.C. Hansen, which U.S. officials assumed legitimated nuclear overflights. [7] When Rønne said that his government had simply “restated” its policy, Leddy responded that Washington “did not want to go any further into this question” and that it would be “unwise to open … a discussion” of alert flight routes. Washington would not “challenge” Danish statements.

Memorandum of Conversation, “Greenland Overflights,” 24 January 1968, Secret, prepared by EUE/SCAN- E. Klebanov
Jan 24, 1968 | Source National Archives, RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1967-1969, box 1678
When Rønne met with Leddy the next day, he stated that the Department of Defense statement to the press on 22 January “pleased” his government. According to the statement , the B-52 carried nuclear weapons that were unarmed and that there was no danger of a nuclear detonation at the crash site. The Ambassador brought several questions from the Foreign Ministry, one of which “concerned the purposes of the various U.S. flights in the area,” specifically whether the plane that crashed “had any surveillance function, apart from its nuclear alert function.” According to Rønne, that question had been a matter of “public discussion” in Denmark. Leddy said that “he could not say” but would investigate whether he could make information available. Apparently, the U.S. revealed nothing about the BMEWS monitoring task of the airborne alert B-52s at the time of the crash. It may have even been a secret at the State Department.

Memorandum of Conversation, “Danish Government Request for Public Information on Thule Flights,” 26 January 1968, Secret
Jan 26, 1968 | Source RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1967-1969, box 1678
Meeting again with Leddy, Rønne emphasized the need for more information about the crash—at least a “small amount” of daily information. He suggested a “statement to the effect that there had been no B-52s in Greenland since the crash, or that those B-52s reportedly seen by Danes in Greenland had non-nuclear functions.” He later asked “if we couldn’t say they were radar planes or in some other way demonstrate that there were no atomic weapons connected with the operation of Thule.”

State Department telegram 106059 to U.S. Embassy Denmark, 27 January 1968, Top Secret, excised copy
Jan 27, 1968 | Source LBJ Library, National Security File, Country File, Denmark, Vol. 1.
On 27 January, Assistant Secretary Leddy met with Ambassador Rønne and provided him with background concerning U.S. nuclear operations in Greenland. The State Department conveyed the same information to the Embassy in Denmark. This account sought to support U.S. claims that it had kept the Danes informed on key issues concerning storage and overflights through the discussions with Hansen in 1957 and Brun in 1964. Leddy also made a statement, which is excised, probably to the effect that the U.S. had no nuclear weapons in Greenland and that there were “[no] overflights of Greenland by U.S. strategic aircraft.” He emphasized “that in view of the sensitivity of military operations with nuclear weapons, the United States Government must continue to stand by its policy of neither confirming nor denying publicly the presence of nuclear weapons on its aircraft or bases anywhere in the world.” Leddy proposed that the Danish government make a public statement that included this and other language: “U.S. operations in Greenland are the subject of regular consultation between the two Governments and are in accord with the 1951 Defense Agreement as well as their respective policies.” The Government of Denmark is “fully satisfied that the interests of the Danish people are being protected.”

Memorandum of Conversation, “Danish Government Statement on Nuclear Overflights and Storage,” 28 January 1968, Secret
Jan 28, 1968 | Source RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1967-1969, box 1678.
The Danish Government had a public opinion problem that it needed to address. Dissatisfied by the U.S.’s proposed statement, which assumed Danish agreement with the U.S. interpretation of the 1951 agreement, Denmark’s government prepared an alternative, which Rønne discussed with Leddy. Corresponding to the essence of the briefing that Leddy had provided the day before, the statement read as follows: “The Danish Government which has had contacts with the US Government is in a position to confirm that in conformity with Danish atomic policy there are no nuclear weapons in Greenland and no overflights of Greenland by planes carrying such weapons are undertaken.” Leddy responded that it was not possible for the U.S. government to be “be identified with the Danish statement.” Rønne then met with Secretary of State Rusk, who also said that the U.S. could not associate itself with the Danish statement. One reason was that both U.S. and Danish security depend upon “US nuclear arrangements from which those countries receiving this protection cannot claim complete disassociation as if nuclear weapons did not exist.” The other was that the U.S. “had a serious problem of how to deal with events in one country so as not to set up a chain reaction with other countries throughout world that could impair the American nuclear deterrent.” That was the basis of the U.S. policy of neither confirming nor denying the presence of U.S. nuclear weapons, to which the U.S. had “adhered rigidly.” That policy made it possible for Denmark to say things that Washington could not or would not say. As an alternative, Rusk proposed that Denmark make a short statement to this effect: “The Danish Government confirms that there are no nuclear weapons stored in Greenland and no overflights of Greenland with nuclear weapons.” If, however, the Danish government made such a public statement, the U.S. “would refuse to comment.”

State Department telegram to Embassies in NATO Capitals, 30 January 1968, Limited Official Use
Jan 30, 1968 | Source RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1967-1969, box 1678
Following Rusk’s suggestion, on 29 January 1968, the Danish government issued a statement confirming “that there are no nuclear weapons stored in Greenland and no overflights of Greenland with nuclear weapons.” According to the State Department’s message, the U.S. government “did not associate itself” with the statement; it advised recipients to follow the neither confirm nor deny approach.

INR -Thomas Hughes to the Secretary, “Implications of the B-52 Crash for \
Dec 31, 1969 | Source Jan 31, 168
Source: RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1967-1969, box 1678 With the election of a new government in Denmark, a State Department intelligence report implied that the U.S. would have to change its approach to preserve its strategic access to Greenland. [8] The Bureau of Intelligence and Research (INR) estimated that the Government of Denmark would try to obtain assurances from Washington that it would no longer fly nuclear weapons over Greenland. “If the Danish Government fails to get such assurances, it and possibly also the Icelandic Government may have great difficulty in withstanding public pressure for forcing renegotiation of current base agreements to have explicit guarantees against such overflights and storage of nuclear weapons written into them.” Failure to secure U.S. assurances could lead to efforts by Denmark “to assume greater control over all US activities at Thule.”

State Department telegram 109698 to U.S. Embassy Denmark, “Greenland Nuclear Problem and Far East Situation,” 3 February 1968, Top Secret, Excised copy
Feb 3, 1968 | Source LBJ Library, National Security File, Country File, Denmark, Vol. 1.
Having returned from Denmark for consultations with the Foreign Minister of the recently elected government, Poul Hartling, Ambassador Rønne met with Under Secretary of State Nicholas Katzenbach. Rønne asked whether he could provide the new government with the same assurance that its predecessor had received: “to wit, the Danish Government confirms that there are no nuclear weapons stored in Greenland and no overflights of Greenland carrying nuclear weapons.” He also wanted to be able to state, for his Government’s “confidential information” that the U.S. “would not change this situation without first consulting” Denmark. Rønne added that he believed that the two governments “could explore in more relaxed way more formal assurances re nuclear question either in context of Greenland defense agreement or in diplomatic exchange.” Katzenbach made an assurance about nuclear weapons, excised from this telegram, probably to the effect that the U.S. was not storing nuclear weapons or overflying Greenland with them. He added that it “was difficult for him to conceive circumstances where we would depart from this assurance without consulting unless circumstances were so extreme reasons for departure would be readily apparent.”

EUR-SCAN David McKillop to EUR-Mr. Leddy, Talking Points - Anticipated Danish Request for Assurances re Nuclear Overflights and Storage in Greenland – ACTION MEMORANDUM,” 13 February 1968, Top Secret, with cover memo from Robert Beaudry attached
Feb 14, 1968 | Source National Archives, Records Relating to Denmark, 1959-1974, box 5, Thule Crash -Internal Memos-Memcons- Conference Notes 1968 (Published in excised form in FRUS )
What Rønne suggested—future discussions to formalize U.S. assurances about Greenland’s non-nuclear status—became a necessity after the Danish parliament, the Folketing , passed a resolution on 8 February requiring “absolute [U.S.] guarantees that no nuclear weapons are stored in Greenland, and by ensuring in order that Greenland airspace remains a nuclear weapon-free zone, that Danish nuclear policy is upheld in all parts of the kingdom and Danish sovereignty respected.” In the wake of the parliamentary resolution, David McKillop, chief of the Scandinavian Desk, anticipated that Rønne would make a request for talks on a formal understanding and that “some formal USG assurance is necessary in order to maintain our present defense capability in Greenland.” Recognizing that Denmark had a negotiating advantage because it held the “strongest cards,” McKillop advised that Washington could not take a “stance so rigid as to cause the Danes to question the desirability of retaining the 1951 Agreement on the Defense of Greenland.” He suggested that the U.S. could accept language providing for a “a nuclear free Greenland at present” but also permitting “the GOD to make a policy decision, in time of grave danger, to allow nuclear deployment and/or overflights.” McKillop noted that “we and the Danes realize that a situation might conceivably arise where there would be no time for consultations before initiating overflights or deployment.” A statement such as that made by Katzenbach to Rønne could cover that contingency.

State Department telegram 120936 to U.S. Embassy Denmark, “Greenland Nuclear Question,” 27 February 1968, Top Secret, Excised copy
Feb 27, 1968 | Source LBJ Library, National Security File, Country File, Denmark, Vol. 1.
As McKillop had predicted, Ambassador Rønne delivered a note on 26 February to Secretary of State Rusk requesting talks with the U.S. on a proposal to supplement the 1951 agreement with an understanding that “no nuclear weapons may under the agreement be stored in or introduced into Greenland including Greenland air space.” He made two points that he thought important: one was to reach an agreement “soonest” to end discussion of the nuclear problem in Denmark. The other was that his government was “flexible” about the procedure for reaching an understanding, whether through an “informal exchange of notes” or a supplementary protocol to the 1951 agreement. When Rusk asked if Denmark had any issue with the “continued U.S. presence” at Thule or the possible need to introduce nuclear weapons into Greenland in “NATO alert situations,” Rønne replied that “continuation of Greenland defense agreement [was] not involved” but that Denmark’s no-nuclear policy “in peacetime” would apply to Greenland. The two governments could discuss the emergency introduction of nuclear weapons. Rusk closed the discussion with an “expression of appreciation for the fine Danish cooperation which had greatly facilitated handling of this regrettable crash.” The declassification reviewers went overboard with this document, even excising text from the Parliamentary resolution and the Danish note which was published in its entirety in the State Department’s FRUS volume.

Department of State Telegram 139657 to U.S. Embassy Denmark, “Thule BMEWS Site,” 1 April 1968, Secret
Apr 1, 1968 | Source DNSA
This Defense/State Department message informed the U.S. Embassy that it is “our firm policy to support our requirement for the BMEWS site at Thule, not only for the immediate future, but, in fact, until such time in the indefinite future that proven BMEWS replacement systems are deployed.” The “central location” of the BMEWS system at Thule between the sites in Alaska and the United Kingdom “provides primary coverage of the most logical approach route for Soviet ICBMs and covers a gap which exists between the other two sites except at relatively high altitude and extreme range.” Although new missile detection systems were under development, they would have limitations, making it necessary to prevent the “issues involving nuclear storage and overflights of Greenland [from] overshadow[ing] our need for the Thule BMEWS site,” which could extend beyond the early 1970s.

EUR – John M. Leddy to the Secretary, “Agreement with the Government of Denmark on Nuclear Overflights and Storage in Greenland -ACTION MEMORANDUM,” with Danish and U.S. notes and proposals attached, 9 May 1968, Secret
May 9, 1968 | Source RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1967-1969, box 1678
Discussion of the Danish proposal, including State Department-Defense Department consultations, began in the weeks after the meeting between Rønne and Rusk. During the talks, Rønne “tentatively” accepted the U.S. view that the agreement would be secret as well as U.S. arguments that instead of an “absolute ban” “future nuclear overflights and storage in Greenland should be subject to consultation” between the two governments. The State Department proposed the following language: an assurance that “notwithstanding the provisions of the 1951 agreement” the U.S. would not “store nuclear weapons in Greenland or overfly Greenland” with nuclear-armed aircraft. But the U.S. wanted Denmark to recognize that “in circumstances of extreme emergency” advance consultation could be difficult but that the U.S. would “make every effort” to do so. After Rønne objected to the paragraph about “extreme emergency,” the State Department walked it back, omitting it from the text. As McKillop had suggested earlier in the discussions, Leddy proposed a U.S. “spoken” comment about the possibility of a “grave and sudden threat that did not allow time to obtain” Denmark’s agreement. Rusk approved the new formulation of the note and Leddy’s proposal for a supplementary statement.

State Department telegram 16287 to U.S. Embassy in Denmark, “Greenland - Nuclear Overflights and Storage,” 13 May 1968, Secret
May 13, 1968 | Source DNSA
At a meeting with Ambassador Rønne on 10 May, Leddy provided a draft U.S. text but said that when the two countries exchanged notes he would “reiterate possible requirement for US overflights under circumstances of a grave and sudden threat that does not allow time to obtain agreement of Danish Government.” When Rønne observed that the proposed statement would make the agreement “less than binding,” Leddy replied that the “written agreement would be [the] governing instrument” and that as with any U.S. government agreement “we would abide by it to full extent of our ability to do so.” When Rønne asked why the agreement had to be secret, Leddy replied that it “embodied a specific limitation on [the] deployment and movement of nuclear weapons.”

National Security Adviser Walt W. Rostow to President Johnson, enclosing “Proposed U.S. Note,” 27 May 1968, Secret
May 27, 1968 | Source LBJL, National Security Files, Memos to the President, box 35, Walt Rostow, Vol. 79: May 25‑31, 1968 [2 of 2]
This may be the one of the few memos involving the Greenland nuclear issue that crossed President Johnson’s desk. Rostow explained the state of play of the talks with Denmark over the proposed note, which had Rusk’s approval “subject to your concurrence.” Rostow informed Johnson that Leddy had made an oral statement “that there may be a need for nuclear overflight under conditions of a grave and sudden threat that did not allow time to obtain the agreement of the Danish government.” Rostow further noted that the agreement avoided “a full scale renegotiation of the 1951 agreement which covers our air base and radar installations in Greenland.”

EUR – John M. Leddy to Under Secretary, “Negotiations with Denmark on Nuclear Overflights and Storage in Greenland - BRIEFING MEMORANDUM,” 29 May 1968, Secret
May 29, 1968 | Source DNSA
The draft agreement went through more changes, with the Danes proposing to remove the language “notwithstanding the provisions of the 1951 agreement” because they saw it as an implicit justification for the U.S. interpretation that the agreement validated previous U.S. actions on nuclear overflights and storage. [9] Instead, they proposed more neutral language that State Department negotiators accepted. As the talks closed, Leddy briefed Under Secretary Katzenbach on their outcome. Besides giving the U.S. freedom of action during a defense emergency, the State Department had protected the “neither confirm nor deny” policy because Copenhagen “agreed to drop its request for any U.S. participation in or endorsement of a public statement concerning nuclear weapons in Greenland.” As Hans Kristensen has noted, there was an important “hole” in the agreement. Unlike the 26 February proposal, it did not include language prohibiting the “introduction” of nuclear weapons into Greenland, which would have been broad enough to exclude visits to ports by U.S. ships carrying nuclear weapons.

State Department telegram 174887 to U.S. Embassy in Denmark, “Greenland - Nuclear Overflights and Storage,” 1 June 1968, Secret
On 31 May 1968, Leddy and Rønne exchanged notes that, the State Department informed the U.S. Embassy, “would form an integral part of 1951 Greenland Agreement.” According to Rønne, the Danish government would make a statement that the State Department would find “acceptable and that USG interests, as expressed during recent negotiations, had been taken into account.” The same day, the Danish Foreign Ministry issued a statement that concluded with this language: “The result of the discussions in Washington creates harmony between the Defense Agreement of 1951 and Danish atomic policy and therewith assurance under international law, that this policy is respected in Greenland.” With some limitations, the Government of Denmark had successfully integrated Greenland into its no-nuclear policy.
