THE
UNITED STATES
IN
WORLD AFFAIRS
An Account of
American Foreign Relations
1932
PREPARED BY
WALTER LIPPMANN
WITH THEASSISTANCE OF THE RESEARCH STAFF
OF THE COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS
•U?
Published for the
COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS
by
HARPER & BROTHERS
NEW YORK AND LONDON
1 933

--- PAGE BREAK ---

COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS
43 East 65th Street, New York
RESEARCH COMMITTEE
ISAIAH BOWMAN, Chairman
HAMILTON FISH ARMSTRONG
EDWIN F. GAY
H. FOSTER BAIN
WALTER LIPPMANN
ALLEN W. DULLES
WHITNEY H. SHEPARDSON
PUBLICATIONS
FOREIGN AFFAIRS, edited by Hamilton Fish Armstrong (a quarterly review).
SURVEY OF AMERICAN FOREIGN RELATIONS
(in four volumes, 1928-1931),
prepared under the direction of Charles P . Howland.
POLITICAL HANDBOOK OF THE WORLD
(annual), edited by Walter H.
Mallory .
ORES AND INDUSTRY IN THE FAR EAST, by H. Foster Bain .
THE RECOVERY OF GERMANY, by James W . Angell (second printing) .
EUROPE: THE WORLDS BANKER,
I87o-1914, An Account of European
Foreign Investment and the Connection of World Finance with Diplomacy
before the War, by Herbert Feis
(second printing) .
DIRECTORY OF AMERICAN AGENCIES CONCERNED WITH THE STUDY OF
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, by Ruth Savord .
THE UNITED STATES IN WORLD AFFAIRS, 1931, by Walter Lippmann in
collaboration with William 0 . Scroggs .
FOREIGN AFFAIRS BIBLIOGRAPHY . A Selected and Annotated List of Books
on International Relations, 1919-1932 . Edited by William L. Langer and
Hamilton Fish Armstrong,
L

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE
UNITED STATES
IN
WORLD AFFAIRS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T S s UNITED
t T A T E S I N WORLD A F !AIR i
' Brothers
Printed in the United States
THIRD PRINTING
B-H

--- PAGE BREAK ---D STATES
IN
WORLD AFFAIRS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T S s UNITED
t T A T E S I N WORLD A F !AIR i
' Brothers
Printed in the United States
THIRD PRINTING
B-H

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FOREWORD
THE collection, selection, and organization of the material
and the writing of the text of this survey are the joint product
of Walter Lippmann, William O . Scroggs, and Charles Merz,
the collaboration being carried out under the direction of
Mr. Lippmann, with the advice and concurrence of the Re-
search Committee of the Council on Foreign Relations . The
committee has not attempted, however, to influence the re-
sult. The authors have been left wholly free to present their
arguments and state their conclusions in their own way .
Two objectives have been held in view-research and time-
liness. If the authors had deliberated longer the fruits of their
research would have been more mature, but the time would
also have passed when they would be most useful . Events
press the public and government relentlessly . We believe this
book to be a contribution to the understanding of many
current problems, financial and political, for which solutions
must be found forthwith. First-hand observations and per-
sonal contacts with leaders here and abroad are reflected in
the balanced judgments of the authors no less than in the
marshaled facts upon which their conclusions rest . The
sources include not only books but individuals and docu-
ments not generally accessible to students of international
affairs. Interviews with statesmen in European capitals and
Washington have played a part, and there are also inter-
woven the direct observations of the authors at the Disarma-
ment Conference at Geneva and the Imperial Economic Con-
ference at Ottawa. The results we believe to be of value, to a
puzzled world.
For the Research Committee
IsAIAH BOWMAN, Chairman
tv)

--- PAGE BREAK ---erence at Geneva and the Imperial Economic Con-
ference at Ottawa. The results we believe to be of value, to a
puzzled world.
For the Research Committee
IsAIAH BOWMAN, Chairman
tv)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In the preparation of this volume, the second of the series, the
authors have had the cooperation of many who are in dose touch
with the foreign relations of the United States . To make acknowledg-
ment to all of them is impossible . For expert criticism of certain
portions of the book, they are indebted to Messrs . - George H .
Blakeslee, Allen W. Dulles, C. P. Fuller, C. H. Haring, Shepard
Morgan, L. B. Pearson, William Phillips, and Allen Wardwell . They
are obligated to Mr. Benjamin Gerig for the preparation at Geneva
of a survey of the work of the Disarmament Conference.
They wish also to record their appreciation of the many courtesies
extended to them by the Secretariat of the League of Nations, by
officials of the Bank for International Settlements, by the Depart-
ment of External Affairs of Canada, by Secretary Stimson and his
associates in the Department of State, and by officials of the Navy
Department, the Department of Commerce, and the Tariff Com-
mission. It should be added that this cooperation has entailed no
responsibility for anything appearing in these pages .
The authors' greatest obligation is to the officers and the research
staff of the Council on Foreign Relations . They wish to thank the
members of the Research Committee who have read the book in
manuscript, and to express their appreciation especially to the retir-
ing Chairman, Mr. Edwin F. Gay, for his helpful suggestions and his
constant interest in their work . From Mr . Walter H. Mallory, the
Executive Director, and from Mr . Hamilton Fish Armstrong, the
editor of Foreign Affairs, they have had cooperation of many kinds .
Miss Ruth Savord, librarian of the Council, has prepared the bibli-
ography and rendered other useful services . Valuable help has been
given by Mr. Thacher Winslow in the compilation and checking of
statistical data, and by Miss Helen Barc and Miss Wilya Gallus
in the collection of material and the preparation of the man uscript.
The authors are under obligations to Mr. Cass Canfield for under-
taking on behalf of the publishers a task of an unusual character.
Mr. Alexander Kadison has assisted in the proofreading .
W. L .
W. 0. S .
C. M .re under obligations to Mr. Cass Canfield for under-
taking on behalf of the publishers a task of an unusual character.
Mr. Alexander Kadison has assisted in the proofreading .
W. L .
W. 0. S .
C. M .

--- PAGE BREAK ---to Mr. Cass Canfield for under-
taking on behalf of the publishers a task of an unusual character.
Mr. Alexander Kadison has assisted in the proofreading .
W. L .
W. 0. S .
C. M .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INTRODUCTION
IN zris history the authors have attempted to set down in an
orderly fashion, as objectively as possible, and in such per-
spective as they could, a record of American foreign relations
during the year 1932 . This volume, like its predecessor, was
prepared almost contemporaneously with the events it de-
scribes, and it makes no pretension to being a definitive his-
tory of the period. It is intended as a memorandum written
in the midst of affairs to assist those who wish to recall the
immediate past in appraising the immediate future.
The authors have sought to understand rather than to pass
judgment on policies or to advocate their own views. They
are well aware, however, that the mere selection and arrange-
ment of the materials of a history involve at every turn acts
of judgment and of interpretation, and that their own views
of what is desirable and undesirable in international affairs
have controlled their sense of what is relevant and significant .
They have, of course, endeavored to be conscientious in the
sense that they have not knowingly suppressed or knowingly
exaggerated in order to persuade the reader . But the reader
must be on guard, as he must be in any history, even the most
scholarly, against the unconscious bias of the historian .
It may be useful to explain certain considerations which
have guided the authors in the selection and arrangement of
the material . The events of 1932 were, of course, complicated
and diverse. As the principal purpose of such a book as this
is to be useful in clarifying the judgment, the authors have
sought the maximum of logical unity attainable without dis-
torting the facts by forcing them into a narrow formula . They
have tried to make the multiplicity of events coherent, because
vii Irs have
sought the maximum of logical unity attainable without dis-
torting the facts by forcing them into a narrow formula . They
have tried to make the multiplicity of events coherent, because
vii I

--- PAGE BREAK ---aximum of logical unity attainable without dis-
torting the facts by forcing them into a narrow formula . They
have tried to make the multiplicity of events coherent, because
vii I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that would help to make them intelligible. But where a choice
had to be made between the unity of the narrative and the
wayward facts, they have sacrificed neatness and simplicity
rather than the facts .
It should be said, too, that this book is not a history of
world affairs . It is a history of the United States in world
affairs. Therefore, events in other countries are described only
in so far as, in the opinion of the authors, it was necessary to
do so in order to throw light upon American experience and
action and policy during the year. Much was happening in
the world, though it is not touched upon in this book, which
is of greater consequence to more people than many matters
which are discussed at length. These happenings may in the
future have profound influence upon the United States . But
unless the United States was dearly affected by them in 1932,
the authors have ignored them .
This will explain why, for example, so fascinating a topic
as Russia is not touched upon in this book . The time will
come, no doubtperhaps soon after this volume is published
-when the United States will again have important relations
with Russia. But during 1932 Russo-American affairs were
unchanged; nothing happened which falls within the scope
of this history . Did this volume pretend to deal with the
subtler cultural relations among the peoples of the world,
did it deal with the imponderable elements which affect the
future, to pass by Russia would be absurd . But in a pedestrian
account of what actually happened, the authors have found
nothing to record .
They have also omitted consideration of American policy
with respect to the Philippines, although here, at the very end
of the calendar year, there occurred a specific event-the pas-
sage on December 29 of the Hawes-Cutting_ bill for Philip-
pine independence. It seemed best to reserve discussion of the
Philippine problem, with all its implications as to American
policy in the Pacific, for the succeeding volume of this series .
It also seemed best to reserve discussion of the St . Lawrence
[viii Ihe
Philippine problem, with all its implications as to American
policy in the Pacific, for the succeeding volume of this series .
It also seemed best to reserve discussion of the St . Lawrence
[viii I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Waterway Treaty until the attitude of the Canadian Parlia-
ment and of Congress had become clear.
Even after so much had been omitted, what remained to be
told seemed at times unmanageably complex . The year x932
was a momentous one in American foreign relations . The
United States was directly involved in events of the greatest
consequence in all parts of the world . It was active diplo-
matically in Europe, in South America, and in Asia, and it
was concerned at a thousand points in the progress of the
world-wide economic crisis .
If in some small measure this book helps the reader to
remember more clearly what happened, it will have served
its purpose .

--- PAGE BREAK ---ts in the progress of the
world-wide economic crisis .
If in some small measure this book helps the reader to
remember more clearly what happened, it will have served
its purpose .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
This record of American foreign relations in 5932. is in-
tended to aid in recalling the immediate past in appraising
the immediate future. No attempt is made to pass judgment
on matters of policy . The purpose is to aid others in clarify-
ing their own judgment. The discussion of world events is
limited to those affecting the United States vii
I. THE TEMPER OF CONGRESS
The Administration and Congress lose contact in the long
interval between sessions . Congressional opinion molded
mainly by local influences . Administration's attitude influ-
enced more largely by world events. The new Congress not
subject to party discipline because of narrow majorities in
both Houses . Popular sentiment unfavorable to collabora-
tion with Europe as economic difficulties increase in the
United States. Domestic relief demanded in lieu of plans to
help other countries . Ratification of the Hoover moratorium
assured by previous pledges of Senators and Representatives .
On ratifying, Congress declares against cancellation or re-
duction of the war debts, and also refuses to revive the
World War Foreign Debts Commission a
II. THE PERIOD OF POSTPONEMENT
J
The temper of Congress blocks further development of
foreign policies initiated by the Administration in 593' . A
waiting attitude necessary during the economic crisis . Con-
sideration of war debts postponed until after the election .
Other nations encouraged to seek settlement of their prob-
lems without American cooperation . Germany seeks relief
under the terms of the Young Plan . An advisory committee
reports that she is unable to make the postponable pay-
ments . Reparation conference called to meet at Lausanne in
anuary and then postponed until June . Official American
attitude toward reparations and debts . Second "standstill"
agreement allows further postponement of payment of Ger-
man private debts . Failure of London Danubian Conference
postpones settlement of Central European problems . Cond debts . Second "standstill"
agreement allows further postponement of payment of Ger-
man private debts . Failure of London Danubian Conference
postpones settlement of Central European problems . Con

--- PAGE BREAK ---andstill"
agreement allows further postponement of payment of Ger-
man private debts . Failure of London Danubian Conference
postpones settlement of Central European problems . Con

--- PAGE BREAK ---

gress makes half-hearted effort at tariff revision . Considera-
tion of Far Eastern question postpones pending report of
Lytton Commission
III . ECONOMIC DETERIORATION IN THE PERIOD
OF POSTPONEMENT
Conditions grow worse as governments defer settlement
of urgent problems . Recession in practically all lines of busi-
ness activity during first half of x932 .. Deflation of commodity
prices, weakness in security markets, decline of new financ-
ing, increase in unemployment, wage reductions, and shrink-
age of profits characterize this period . Farm incomes decline
while agricultural output is maintained . Foreign trade, espe-
cially in manufactured goods, sharply curtailed . Prices decline
even in countries with depreciating currency
IV. DISTURBANCES IN LATIN AMERICA
Deepening of the economic depression in Caribbean and
South American countries . Extent of defaults on external
debts. The financial stake of United States investors . Char-
acter of their investments. Revolts of 193o-3x increase the
economic difficulties. New political disturbances in x932.
Civil war in Brazil . Chain of revolutions in Chile. United
States government's recognition policy, as exemplified in
Chile and El Salvador. Foreign governments fail to follow
American lead in latter country . The Leticia dispute between
Colombia and Peru . The Chaco dispute between Bolivia and
Paraguay . Efforts of Pan-American group and of League
Council to effect a settlement . The Stimson doctrine invoked
for the Western Hemisphere
V. CREDITOR AND DEBTOR NATIONS
The international flow of capital in the post-war period .
Economic benefits from foreign lending . The United States
as a creditor maintains an export surplus by lending more
abroad . Three elements of weakness in post-war lending : an
increasing trend toward political lending ; insufficient atten-
tion paid to problem of repayment as a whole ; growing tend-
ency toward short-term lending . Stream of international
credit contracts after x927 . Debtors seek to balance their
international payments by exchange control, moratoria and
import quotas, licenses and surtaxes . Effect of these restric-
tions on world trade
VI. RISING TARIFF BARRIERS
Creditor nations meet the debtor nations' trade restric-
tions with new tariffs of their own . Great Britain abandons
Xii I
X4
38
49
70these restric-
tions on world trade
VI. RISING TARIFF BARRIERS
Creditor nations meet the debtor nations' trade restric-
tions with new tariffs of their own . Great Britain abandons
Xii I
X4
38
49
70

--- PAGE BREAK ---s on world trade
VI. RISING TARIFF BARRIERS
Creditor nations meet the debtor nations' trade restric-
tions with new tariffs of their own . Great Britain abandons
Xii I
X4
38
49
70

--- PAGE BREAK ---

free trade. Evolution of British protective system . The tariff
act of 1932.. Imperial preference at the Ottawa conference .
Conflicting interests at Ottawa . The question of "Empire
content ." Twelve trade agreements finally negotiated . Their
possible effect on the trade of the United States . Tariff rela-
tions of the United States and the Dominion . Direct Ameri-
can investments and branch factories . United States con-
cerns seek imperial preference in trade with Great Britain .
Holland and Belgium show reaction of low-tariff countries
to growing trade barriers
86
VII. TEE AMERICAN CRISIS
Large volume of short-term credit an element of danger
to currency stability. How and why short-term credit de-
veloped on such a scale . The liquidating crises in the United
States in the autumn of 1931 and the spring of 1932.. Reliance
of other countries on American currency stability. Inter-
national dangers from an unbalanced budget . The Adminis-
tration's attitude toward increased taxation . Measures for
the defense of credit : the Reconstruction Finance Corpora-
tion and the Glass-Steagall Act . Revolt in the House against
the sales tax threatens the budget-balancing program. Plans
for safeguarding the gold standard . The threat of inflation
in the Goldsborough bill, the bonus bill, and the public
buildings bill . How the crisis was met
104
VIII. THE LAUSANNE SETTLEMENT
Conference postponed until latest possible date, because
of German and French elections . Swing to the Right in Ger-
many, and to the Left in France . Parliamentary stalemate
in Germany is disquieting . This offset somewhat by realistic
attitude of new French Cabinet toward reparations . General
recognition at Lausanne that Young Plan was no longer
operative . Conference therefore more political than financial .
Details of the reparation settlement . Political results at Lau-
sanne seen in the Gentlemen's Agreement and the Anglo-
French Accord of Confidence. International significance of
the conference
x32.
Ix. THE SECOND POSTPONEMENT
Abatement of economic crisis at midyear . Check to com-
modity-price deflation, gold losses, and currency hoarding,
with rally in security markets . Improvement slackens in
early autumn, but defeatism and panic disappear. Funda-
mental problems still await solution, and little progress is
possible without a change in public opinion. Political leaders
in the United States refrain from detailed discussion of inter-
national affairs during the Presidential campaign Views of
Xiii Iress is
possible without a change in public opinion. Political leaders
in the United States refrain from detailed discussion of inter-
national affairs during the Presidential campaign Views of
Xiii I

--- PAGE BREAK ---hout a change in public opinion. Political leaders
in the United States refrain from detailed discussion of inter-
national affairs during the Presidential campaign Views of
Xiii I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Democratic and Republican candidates on domestic aspects
of the tariff. Other questions of international import-debts,
disarmament, World Court, Pact of Paris-receive passing
attention
X . THS WAR DEBTS
Between July and September, Greece, Poland, Estonia,
Latvia, and
' Germany take advantage of postponement
clauses in their agreements . In November, Greece and Hun-
gary default on non-postponable loans . France and Great
Britain seek suspension of their payments due on December
rs and ask negotiation of new agreements. President Hoover
and President-elect Roosevelt confer on debts . They agree
on fundamental principles, but disagree on procedure . British
and French requests rejected . France and four other coun-
tries defer payment . American public opinion concerning
the debts. Arguments for and against revision . Changes in
capacity to pay . Relations of war debts to world trade .
167
XI. SHANGHAI AND MANCHURIA
Interest of Western powers in the consequences of Japan's
Manchurian policy . Events in the Far East impinge on their
post-war covenants of peace . Creation of the Lytton Com-
mission. Renewal' of Japanese advance in Manchuria . United
States government promulgates the Stimson doctrine . Atti-
tude of European governments toward the pronouncement .
Anti Japanese boycott precipitates trouble at Shanghai, with
Japanese navy taking the initiative . Conciliatory efforts of
the Western powers . The case before the League . The new
state of "Manchukuo'" . The United States fleet concentrates in
the Pacific. The question of economic sanctions . League
Assembly adopts the Stimson doctrine . Japanese withdraw
from Shanghai, but later recognize and conclude an alliance
with "Manchukuo" . Lytton Commission submits its report .
19%
XII. REDUCTION
AND
LIMITATION
OF
ARMA-
MENTS
Duality of American policy concerning arms limitation .
Proceedings at Geneva show that disarmament cannot
be
separated from international politics . United States brought
closer to participation in the organization of political secu-
rity . The American proposals. Contrasting French and Eng-
lish views of disarmament . Qualitative disarmament accepted
in principle . Conference deadlocked in trying to apply this
principle . The Hoover Plan . Reasons for its acceptance by
Italy, Germany, and Russia . American delegation avoids
entanglement with the European revisionist bloc by reject-
ing some of its own proposals. The resolution of July 13-
[ xiv
'54its acceptance by
Italy, Germany, and Russia . American delegation avoids
entanglement with the European revisionist bloc by reject-
ing some of its own proposals. The resolution of July 13-
[ xiv
'54

--- PAGE BREAK ---aly, Germany, and Russia . American delegation avoids
entanglement with the European revisionist bloc by reject-
ing some of its own proposals. The resolution of July 13-
[ xiv
'54

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Withdrawal of Germany from the conference . Exploratory
negotiations during the autumn . Efforts to placate Germany.
The Five-Power declaration. Further discussion of
• naval
questions
EPILOGUE
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
259
APPENDICES
268
x. (a) Vote in the Senate and House of Representatives on the Rati-
fication of the Hoover Moratorium 170
(b) Various Estimates of German Payments on Reparation Ac-
count
171
(c) Payments Due the United States Postponed in 1931-32 under
the Hoover Moratorium, and Payments Falling Due in the
Fiscal Year 1931-33
172.
(d) Excerpts from the Agreement with Germany Negotiated at
Lausanne, June 16July 9, 1932 172-
n . (a) External Debts of Latin American Countries
.
.
177
(b) Cumulative Capital Movement between the United States
and Other Countries, 192.-1931 178
(c) Policy of the Department of State Concerning Foreign Loans
2.78
(d) A Note on Germany's Private Debts 2.81
n1. (a) Countries Suspending the Gold or Gold Exchange Standard
and Adopting Exchange Control
.
.
. 2.83
(b) Import Quotas in Operation in Continental Europe
.
.
.
.
184
(c) A Note on the Conference at Stresa 2.87
(d) Foreign Trade--Quantity Index 2.88
(#) Trade of Great Britain with Foreign Countries and with
Other Parts of the British Empire
.
.
2.89
(f) Balance of International Payments of the United States,
1911-31
2.90
1v.
Passages from Republican and Democratic Platforms Deal-
ing with Foreign Policy and the Tariff 2-92-
v. (a) Indices of Production in Important Countries 198
(b) Commodity Prices in Important Countries 2.98
(c) Unemployment in Important Countries 299
(d) Yield and Value of Staple Crops, United States, 1918-31
.
.
299
(a) Significant Business Indices, United States, 1919-31
.
199
(f) Trend of Dividend Payments and Railway Earnings, United
States, 1930-31
300
vx .
Note of the Nineteen American Governments to Bolivia and
Paraguay. August 3, 1932, Invoking the Stimson Doctrine
.
301
vu. (a) The Findings of the Lytton Commission 304
(b) Text of the Treaty between Japan and "Manchukuo"
.
.
.
308
Cxv}
258s to Bolivia and
Paraguay. August 3, 1932, Invoking the Stimson Doctrine
.
301
vu. (a) The Findings of the Lytton Commission 304
(b) Text of the Treaty between Japan and "Manchukuo"
.
.
.
308
Cxv}
258

--- PAGE BREAK ---

viii . (a) Arms Limitation : The First American Proposal 310
(b) Arms Limitation : The Second American Proposal 3zx
(c) Arms Limitation : President Hoover's Proposal
.
. 3 12-
(d) Resolution Adopted by the Conference for the Reduction
and Limitation of Armaments at Geneva, July 2.3 . 1932
.
.
314
(e) The Five-Power Declaration of December 11, 1932
.
.
.
.
319
Ix.
Chronology of Important Events Affecting American Foreign
Relations, 1932
321
INDEx
343
MAPS
The Chaco District
63
Shanghai-Area of Conflict, January-March,
1932
201
Manchukuo
211

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE
UNITED STATES
IN
WORLD AFFAIRS

--- PAGE BREAK ---lations, 1932
321
INDEx
343
MAPS
The Chaco District
63
Shanghai-Area of Conflict, January-March,
1932
201
Manchukuo
211

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE
UNITED STATES
IN
WORLD AFFAIRS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER ON.E
THE TEMPER OF CONGRESS
x . The Effect of the Long Separation between Congress
and the President
OUR story begins in December, x931 . For nine months the
Administration of President Hoover had carried on without
calling Congress to Washington . On several occasions, no-
tably in June, when he was preparing the moratorium on
intergovernmental debts, and in October, when he was seek-
ing to strengthen the banks, the President had consulted the
Congressional leaders and had obtained their approval of cer-
tain of his' measures. But Congress as a whole did not meet
until the time had come when under the Constitution a ses-
sion was compulsory .
This Congress had been elected thirteen months previously .
It contained a large number of new members. For in the
election of 1930 the Republican representation in the Senate
had been reduced from fifty-three to forty-eight and in the
House from 266 to 218 . The Democrats had gained five
Senators and forty-eight Representatives . As a result the Re-
publicans retained a nominal control of the Senate . But
owing to the sharp divergence of view between Progressive
and Administration Republicans, they could not hope to
exercise effective control. The House was nominally Demo-
cratic. But the majority was so slender that in fact the
Democratic leaders had little more hope of being able to
control the House than the Republicans had of controlling
the Senate.
The elections of 193o had shown a strong anti-Administra
t'3

--- PAGE BREAK ---tic leaders had little more hope of being able to
control the House than the Republicans had of controlling
the Senate.
The elections of 193o had shown a strong anti-Administra
t'3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lion tendency but the results had been indecisive. It was seen
clearly that under these circumstances party discipline could
not be maintained and that the opinion of the individual
member as to the wishes of his own constituents would gener-
ally prevail over the instructions of party leaders . Chiefly for
this reason the President decided to delay the assembling of
this Congress as long as it was legally possible to do so . His
hope was that, before Congress met, the course of events sup-
plemented by executive action would bring about the begin-
ning of a recovery from the depression .
His hope was not realized and conditions were, indeed,
worse when the Seventy-second Congress gathered in Wash-
ington on December 7, 1931, than they had been when the
old Congress adjourned on March 4. With events moving so
rapidly and so disastrously, the long separation between the
two branches of government during a period of nine months
had an outcome which had not been foreseen . The Congress-
men remained at home, where they saw daily the miseries and
anxieties of the people but had no first-hand contact with the
evolution of opinion and larger policy in Administration
circles. The Administration, on its part, though it no doubt
had reasonably reliable information as to the state of affairs
in the nation, was deprived of direct contact with the-mood
of the people in large parts of the country .
Thus the inherent difficulty of cooperation between the
President and a Congress which did not acknowledge his
leadership was accentuated by the fact that for nine months
Congressional opinion had been developing subject to local
influences and that Administration opinion had been develop-
ing subject to central influences originating in its necessary
contact with the heads of governments, with central banking
authorities, with financial leaders, and the chiefs of large cor-
porations . The events of 1931 were experienced by Congress
from the outside looking in and by the Administration from
the inside looking out. So long a separation, in such eventful
times had added to the normal difficulties of the separation
[2)d by Congress
from the outside looking in and by the Administration from
the inside looking out. So long a separation, in such eventful
times had added to the normal difficulties of the separation
[2)

--- PAGE BREAK ---he outside looking in and by the Administration from
the inside looking out. So long a separation, in such eventful
times had added to the normal difficulties of the separation
[2)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of powers the abnormal difficulty of a deep estrangement of
minds.: Intellectually and emotionally the two branches of the
government had a, quite separate orientation. They did not
know the same facts. They did not feel the same way . They
had not been educated together in the same school of experi-
ence, and even without the partisanship of an election year,
it would, with such preparation, have been excessively diffi-
cult to achieve a meeting of minds on problems which were
as complex and as unprecedented as those which confronted
the government in 1931-
2 . The Evolution of Administration Opinion Prior to the
Assembling of Congress
The chain of events which began with the collapse of the
Kredit Anstalt in Austria and culminated in the American
financial crisis of October had profoundly affected Adminis-
tration opinion as to the measures necessary to deal with the
depression . The story of this evolution of Administration
policy has been told in the preceding volume of this series,
and we shall not here do more than recall summarily the
main developments.'
The German crisis of June had brought the Administration
to a tacit recognition that reparations and war debts were in
fact, though not in law, related to each other and that both
were related to the world-wide depression . The necessity of
reducing the tax burden and of diminishing the political ten-
sion had brought the Administration into close collaboration
with the activities of the League of Nations in preparing for
a conference on armaments. The Japanese seizure of the three
Manchurian provinces had brought the Administration into
even closer association with the powers of the League . The
Austrian, German, and British financial crises in the summer
had compelled close cooperation between the Federal Reserve
System and the European central banks ; the American crisis
of October had called for additional cooperation. All in all,
2 The United Staten in World Affairs, 5931, Chapters VII-)U .
[ 3 )al Reserve
System and the European central banks ; the American crisis
of October had called for additional cooperation. All in all,
2 The United Staten in World Affairs, 5931, Chapters VII-)U .
[ 3 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---d the European central banks ; the American crisis
of October had called for additional cooperation. All in all,
2 The United Staten in World Affairs, 5931, Chapters VII-)U .
[ 3 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the President had concluded that "as our, difficulties during
the past year have plainly originated in large degree from
these [i.e., foreign] sources, any effort to bring about our
own recuperation has dictated the necessity of cooperation
by us with other nations in a reasonable effort to restore world
confidence and economic stability."a
In domestic affairs the strain put upon the banks by the
withdrawal of gold and by hoarding had reached a point
where the Administration and the bankers saw the necessity
of supporting the private credit structure with public credit .
To make this effective, the Administration was, after pro-
longed reluctance, compelled to undertake the task of dealing
with the deficit which by the autumn of 1931 had been ac-
cumulating for some fifteen months and was ominously large .
To save the banks, the public credit had to be employed . To
employ the public credit, it had to be sustained by balancing
the budget. To balance the budget, expenditures had to be
reduced and economies effected. To effect economies and yet
to provide relief was not easy, and the Administration took
a strong stand against Federal relief .
Thus, under the exigency of events, the Administration
policies had come to include not only ratification of the one-
year moratorium but reconsideration of the war debts, a sub-
stantial abandonment of the policy of isolation, international
banking cooperation, the mobilization of public credit to sup-
port the banks, retrenchment of expenditures, opposition to
new expenditures for relief, and a tax bill to raise new reve-
nues. These measures were dictated by the logic of events as
seen by those who occupied posts of responsibility or had
access to information there available. In principle they had
virtually the unanimous, support of Democrats and Republi-
cans who had had first-hand contact with the events of the
summer and autumn, but they constituted a hard program to
plump down before a Congress which had no preparation for
understanding them, was seething with the discontent of the
'Message to Congress, December 8, r93i .
[ 4 )they constituted a hard program to
plump down before a Congress which had no preparation for
understanding them, was seething with the discontent of the
'Message to Congress, December 8, r93i .
[ 4 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---hard program to
plump down before a Congress which had no preparation for
understanding them, was seething with the discontent of the
'Message to Congress, December 8, r93i .
[ 4 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

people at home, and was facing primaries, conventions, and
a general election within a few months. For the program
required concessions of money to foreigners, political collab-
oration in distant lands, public money for banks, no public
money for distressed individuals, a reduction of expenditures
which were popular in the districts, and new taxes levied on
large masses of voters.
That the purpose of the whole program was to relieve the
plight of the people need not be doubted, but the means
which had to be adopted were necessarily indirect . They in
volved immediate sacrifices, and they would under any con-
ditions have been unpopular. But because the Congressmen
had not shared the experiences which had brought the Ad-
ministration to this program, it was difficult for them to
understand it, and more difficult for them to make their con-
stituents understand it. It was but natural, then, that the cry
should go up that the Administration was displaying great
solicitude for the bankers and the foreigners, while it had
forgotten the ordinary man at home .
3. Congressional and Popular Opinion at the Assembling
of Congress
As soon as the Congressmen came to Washington for the
regular session, it was evident that in formulating its poli-
cies of international collaboration the Administration had
failed to carry with it the opinion of the country. So far
as we are able to judge the matter, it would appear that the
breach between the Administration purposes and popular
sentiment became serious about October x, x931. There is,
for example, abundant evidence that the Hoover moratorium
in June was well received. It had produced buoyant markets
for commodities and securities, and though the improvement
was short-lived, there is reason to think that the country was
enough impressed by the demonstration to believe that meas-
ures of this character might be what was needed to break the
evil spell under which trade was languishing . But by the
15)t the country was
enough impressed by the demonstration to believe that meas-
ures of this character might be what was needed to break the
evil spell under which trade was languishing . But by the
15)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ough impressed by the demonstration to believe that meas-
ures of this character might be what was needed to break the
evil spell under which trade was languishing . But by the
15)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

middle of September, the whole rise had been canceled and
the deflationary pressure was again grinding down
the'
people .
Thus, from August, when crops began to move, until
December, when Congress assembled, the prices of farm
products had fallen from 64, per cent of the 1 .926 level to
56 per cent. The total farm income was so drastically reduced
that the average farmer in December, 1931, had 75 cents as
against a dollar the year before, and as compared with 1929
he had lost in income about 42 cents in every dollar.
The decline in farm income was accompanied by a drastic
deflation of farm-land values. During the year ended March
15, 1931, the number of forced sales resulting from the fore-
closure of mortgages, bankruptcies, and delinquent taxes
showed an increase of 25 per cent over the preceding twelve
months, and the rate reached the highest point on record s
While the value of farm land steadily declined,
taxes on
rural property remained at more than double their pre-war
level,' and tax delinquencies in
rural communities were
widespread. The proportion of farms changing ownership on
account of delinquent taxes rose from-4 .7 per 1,ooo farms
in 1929 to 7 .4 in 1931 s
In Kansas a number of counties declared a moratorium on
local taxes." In some communities local taxes were collected
in monthly installments. Ten counties in New Jersey, one-
half the number in the State, failed to pay their quota of
State taxes when these fell due in December.' The delin-
' The Parm Real Estate Situation, r93o-3r
(United States Department of
Agriculture, Circular No . 209, December, 1931), pp. 7, 44, 45 .
'The index number of taxes on farm property, compiled by the United
States Department of Agriculture, with taxes for 1914 represented as zoo,
stood at 266 in 1930, while the index number of estimated value of farm
land per acre in 1931 stood at only 3 per cent above the level of 1914. The
ratio of prices received by farmers for their products to the price of com-
modities bought by them for use in both production and living stood
at an
average of 1oz in 1914, of 80 in 1930, and of 99 in August, 1931 .
'The Farm Real Estate Situation,
z93o-3r
(United States Department of
Agriculture, Circular No . 209, December, 1931), P . 45,
'New York Times, July 23, 1931 .
'Ibid., January 5, 1932 .
[ 6 ), 1931 .
'The Farm Real Estate Situation,
z93o-3r
(United States Department of
Agriculture, Circular No . 209, December, 1931), P . 45,
'New York Times, July 23, 1931 .
'Ibid., January 5, 1932 .
[ 6 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---eal Estate Situation,
z93o-3r
(United States Department of
Agriculture, Circular No . 209, December, 1931), P . 45,
'New York Times, July 23, 1931 .
'Ibid., January 5, 1932 .
[ 6 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

quent taxes in that State at the end of the year amounted to
3o per cent of the total levy . 8 In Wisconsin over a million
acres had been taken overfor unpaid taxes by the counties 9
Ground between falling prices on the one hand and their
fixed obligations represented by taxes, mortgages, and the
relatively small decline in the prices of manufactured neces-
sities on the other hand, multitudes of farmers were in a
desperate plight. Their troubles were greatly aggravated by
the impairment and sometimes by the total elimination of
the agencies of . credit in rural commodities . During 1931,
banks to the number of 2,298 were closed, 10 and more than
half of these were in communities of less than a thousand in-
habitants. Many towns found themselves without banking
facilities of any kind, and even where banks remained open,
credit was drastically curtailed. There was panic in the air.
In August, 1931, 158 banks suspended, in September 305,
in October 522 1.1 Men were afraid to leave money in the
bank, and between August and December money was exter
sively hoarded and the monetary circulation, in spite of fall-
ing prices and reduced business activity, increased by 664
million dollars."
In the industrial centers- unemployment was increasing.
No exact figures were available, but various private estimates
placed the number of unemployed at between six and ten
million 18 The need for relief had grown stupendously . In
'New York Times, July 28, 1932 .
$Richard T.
Ely,
"Taxation
in Hard
Times,"
Review of Reviews,
LXXXIV, 67, August, 1931 .
10 0f these, 276 were subsequently reopened. Cf. Seventeenth Annual Re-
port, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for Year Ending December,
1931 .
It is estimated that 6oo,ooo depositors were deprived
of the use of their
funds during 1931 . Henry Parker Willis, in Nation, CXXXIV, 422, April
13, 1932-
Federal Reserve Bulletin, September, 1932, 5
"Ibid., 565 .
The American Federation of Labor estimated the
number at the end
of
93,
at
8,300,000.
Senator Bingham of Connecticut,
after canvassing
the governors of all the States by telegraph, arrived at the estimate of
6,ooo,ooo, In less conservative quarters the estimate
was io,ooo,ooo . The
t 7 }nator Bingham of Connecticut,
after canvassing
the governors of all the States by telegraph, arrived at the estimate of
6,ooo,ooo, In less conservative quarters the estimate
was io,ooo,ooo . The
t 7 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---necticut,
after canvassing
the governors of all the States by telegraph, arrived at the estimate of
6,ooo,ooo, In less conservative quarters the estimate
was io,ooo,ooo . The
t 7 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---

testimony before a Senate committee it was said that the
number of families
.:c:eiving, relief had been tripled since
1929 and that the agencies were able to help only about half
the applicants." In the coal regions the condition of the
miners was deplorable ;, perhaps 1,200,000 persons in these
districts were in serious distress.
In November, 1931, Senator La Follette addressed a ques-
tionnaire to the mayors of 81o cities in every section of the
country. He received nearly 700 definite replies, and they
showed that in 156 cities unemployment had increased dur-
ing the past twelve months up to 50 per cent, in 115 cities
it had increased from 50 to loo per cent, and in 85 cities it
had increased loo per cent and more .
Their minds full of the knowledge of these conditions,
their feelings harrowed by personal contact with suffering,
despair, and anxiety among their constituents at home, their
mail choked with appeals for help, the Congressmen came
to Washington and found that they were expected to relieve
foreign debtors, to cooperate with Europe, to abstain from
voting relief, to retrench on expenditures, and to levy new
taxes. It was not an inviting program, especially in an elec-
tion year. The adventure in collaboration with Europe by
means of the moratorium had been followed not by better
but by worse conditions, and as against the popular reasoning
post hoc, ergo propter hoc, it was not easy to make much
headway. Nor had other events contributed anything to
arouse popular confidence in the efficacy of international
collaboration . By December the prestige of the League and
of the Kellogg Pact had been badly shaken by Japanese dis-
Federal census of unemployment taken in 1930, and palpably incomplete,
gave the total number as
3,187,000 .
Cf .
Congressional Record,
Seventy-
second Congress, First Session, 3872, 6301 . All references in this volume to
the Congressional Record are to the daily (unbound) edition . The page
numbers are not the same as in the bound edition, issued later .
" Statement of Linton B . Swift, Executive Chairman of the Family Welfare
Association of America. Cf. Unemployment Relief, Hearings on Senate 174
and Senate 262
before the Sub-committee of the Committee on Manufac .
tures, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 89.
[ 8 ]e
Association of America. Cf. Unemployment Relief, Hearings on Senate 174
and Senate 262
before the Sub-committee of the Committee on Manufac .
tures, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 89.
[ 8 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---rica. Cf. Unemployment Relief, Hearings on Senate 174
and Senate 262
before the Sub-committee of the Committee on Manufac .
tures, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 89.
[ 8 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

regard of the whole machinery . It was difficult at that mo-
ment for anyone to say that the post-war peace establish-
ments could be made effective, and everywhere` there was
deep disillusionment. In Congress and among the people the
natural disposition to demand' an isolationist policy was con-
firmed by the dreary humiliation which Japan was inflicting
upon all the powers .
To this disillusionment with the results of the moratorium
and of the collaboration as to Manchuria, the experience of
American investors in foreign bonds contributed strongly .
These bonds were widely held throughout the country . Dur-
ing 1931 the prices of foreign bonds listed on the New York
Stock Exchange declined nearly 40 per cent, and they reached
their lowest point just about the time that Congress met . A
number of governments, especially in South America and
Central Europe, had defaulted on their payments of interest,
and where there was no default the depreciation in value
was very large. The experience of bondholders expressed
itself naturally enough in resentment against international
bankers who had sponsored these issues, against foreign
financing, and against all proposals for economic cooperation
with foreigners .
The Congressmen lost no time in voicing the popular sen-
timent against international action . Here, for example, is
Representative Cross of Texas speaking a few days after
Congress had met :
I am sick and tired of this nation muddling around in the affairs
of the countries of Europe or any other country. Let Europe run her
own affairs. Let us quit meddling with international agreements .15
His colleague, Representative Dies, spoke in this vein :
I am disgusted with that maudlin sentiment that is continually urg-
ing us to save Europe. It seems to me that it is high time for us to
save America. For the past fifteen years we have been engaged in
the business of saving Europe ; we have poured billions of dollars
into the treasuries of Europe and enabled them to build up their
7b Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 384.
191usiness of saving Europe ; we have poured billions of dollars
into the treasuries of Europe and enabled them to build up their
7b Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 384.
191

--- PAGE BREAK ---rope ; we have poured billions of dollars
into the treasuries of Europe and enabled them to build up their
7b Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 384.
191

--- PAGE BREAK ---

industries and agriculture at the expease of the American people .
We are now faced with a $a,ooo,ooo,ooo deficit in our own Treas-
ury. Seven millions of our fellow citizens are walking the streets
in idleness, unable to secure the means of earning a decent liveli-
hood. Our farmers have been reduced to despair .16
On December 15, Senator Johnson of California, well
known for his antipathy to contacts with foreigners, said :
The time has come in this country finally when, however weak
the voice, or however humble the individual, or however small
may be the compass of those he may reach in words, someone must
cry aloud for America and Americans, and endeavor to protect these
people of ours, already staggering under taxation and crushed by
disaster, from those who would fasten upon them an additional sum
that is their due, and that they ought to have .17
About the same time Representative Glover of Arkansas
declared :
We have gone far enough . Let us say that America hereafter
shall be for the development of Americans .18
And Representative Eslick of Tennessee said :
Let us first be just to our home people before we are generous
to the peoples of Europe.19
Very little attempt was made to controvert statements of
this sort and they fairly represent the articulate sentiment in
Congress. The evidence was unmistakable that between the
time when the moratorium was acclaimed and the time when
Congress met there had taken place a sharp crystallization
of opinion along purely nationalist lines and that the country
demanded that strict attention be given immediately and ex-
clusively to domestic affairs .
Yet the first piece of business before Congress was the
moratorium on international debts . For on December 15 the
foreign debt payments would be due unless in the intervening
days Congress ratified the Hoover plan .
1A Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, a68.
"Ibid ., 536 .
'Ibid., 463 .
"Ibid., 8x8.
110)nts would be due unless in the intervening
days Congress ratified the Hoover plan .
1A Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, a68.
"Ibid ., 536 .
'Ibid., 463 .
"Ibid., 8x8.
110)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ess in the intervening
days Congress ratified the Hoover plan .
1A Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, a68.
"Ibid ., 536 .
'Ibid., 463 .
"Ibid., 8x8.
110)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4. Congress and the War Debts
The 'President's decision not to call Congress into session
before the appointed time meant that there were only seven
legislative days before December 15, 1931, when payment
on the war debts fell due . The moratorium being a measure
affecting revenue, its consideration was to begin in the House
of Representatives, and since in the elections of 1930 the
Democrats had obtained control of the House it was neces-
sary at the outset to elect a new Speaker and to install the
Democratic organization. The Ways and Means Committee,
to which the moratorium would be referred, was not chosen
until December 9, so that in fact there remained only six
days before December 15, even if the week-end were in-
cluded .
Although the President held that it was "highly desirable
that a law be enacted before that day authorizing the Secre-
tary of the Treasury, with the approval of the President, to
postpone all payments
.
.
. during the year ending June 30,
1932,"20 it was clearly impracticable to hold hearings, to
conclude the debate, and to vote in both houses within such
a brief working period. In order to relieve the anxiety of the
debtor governments that the inevitable delay would put them
technically in default, the Department of State notified Con-
gress that if any debtor government made inquiries it would
be informed that "under the special circumstances in which
the proposal was made and accepted, and without intending
in any way to vary the legal rights of this country, it appears
to this government that the postponement on the part of
your government of the December 15 payments, pending
action by Congress, will not be subject to any just criticism ."21
As to the eventual ratification of the moratorium, there
was never any real doubt. For the President had not made
his proposal until he had obtained pledges of support from
a substantial majority of both houses, and when Congress
"Message on foreign affairs, December xo, x931 .
'New York Times, December 14, 1931 .
1111,posal until he had obtained pledges of support from
a substantial majority of both houses, and when Congress
"Message on foreign affairs, December xo, x931 .
'New York Times, December 14, 1931 .
1111,

--- PAGE BREAK ---btained pledges of support from
a substantial majority of both houses, and when Congress
"Message on foreign affairs, December xo, x931 .
'New York Times, December 14, 1931 .
1111,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

met there were 276 Representatives and 68 Senators com-
mitted to the project. An attempt was made by the irrecon-
cilable opponents to vitiate these pledges by arguing that the
scheme of postponement actually adopted on July 6 differed
from the proposal made by the President on June 20 22 The
argument did not carry much weight. The pledges stood, and
ratification was certain .
The proceedings of Congress were, nevertheless, of im-
mense consequence to the foreign policy of the Administra-
tion. Although the opposition to a policy of collaboration
and concession was not strong enough to reject the mora-
torium itself, it was quite strong enough to impose an abso-
lute veto upon any further adjustment of the debts during
that session. It easily persuaded Congress to reject out of
hand the President's proposal to re-create the World War
Foreign Debt Commission "with authority to examine such
problems as may arise in connection with their debts during
the present economic emergency ." 23 The opposition also at-
tached to the resolution of ratification, as drafted
by the
Treasury experts,24 a rider saying :
Sec. 5 . It is hereby expressly declared to be against the policy of
Congress that any of the indebtedness of foreign countries to the
United States should be in any manner canceled or reduced and
nothing in this joint resolution shall be construed as indicating a
contrary policy, or as implying that favorable consideration will be
given at any time to a change in the policy hereby declared .
Having announced its opposition to a continuation of the
policy implied in the President's proposal of June and in the
Hoover-Laval statement of October
25,
Congress ratified
the moratorium. In the House the vote was 318 to xoo ; in the
Senate it was 69 to 12 . The majorities were ample, but the
significance of the proceedings lay in the fact that these ma-
= Cf. The United States in World Affairs, :93s, 166-172.
= Message of December 1o, 1931 .
"Hearings before the Committee on Ways and Means on House Resolution
123, Parts 1 and 2, December 15-17, 1931 .
1121The United States in World Affairs, :93s, 166-172.
= Message of December 1o, 1931 .
"Hearings before the Committee on Ways and Means on House Resolution
123, Parts 1 and 2, December 15-17, 1931 .
1121

--- PAGE BREAK ---

jorities were obtained only after Congress had with virtual
unanimity served notice upon the President that it would
make no further concessions of any kind. Thus ratification
marked a turning point in policy by bringing to an abrupt
end the evolution of Administration policy toward closer and
more active international cooperation . On December
23,
when the President signed the resolution of ratification, he
knew that Congress was actively opposed to the whole line
of policy which he had been developing during the summer
and autumn, and that for the time being at least he must
take no step in foreign policy which required the positive
approval of Congress .
For the remainder of the session, and indeed until after
the elections in November, the President knew that he could
make no commitment in foreign policy as to intergovern-
mental debts, as to disarmament, or as to the Far Eastern
situation. Congress had expressed its will unmistakably, and
the policy of the Administration was henceforward limited
to measures which in fact postponed decision on outstanding
international questions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---expressed its will unmistakably, and
the policy of the Administration was henceforward limited
to measures which in fact postponed decision on outstanding
international questions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

>»»?»»»>
CHAPTER TWO
THE PERIOD OF POSTPONEMENT
i . The Policy o f Collaboration Suspended
IN THE five months following the proposal of the mora-
torium, President Hoover and Secretary Stimson had caused
the United States to emerge further from political isolation
than at any other time since the Senate rejected the Treaty
of Versailles . In the moratorium they had, contrary to all
previous declarations, recognized an American interest in
the problem of German reparations and had acknowledged
that in fact, though not in law, the political debts arising out
of the war were organically related.' They had explored the
difficulties of a limitation of armaments and by September,
1931, had in effect agreed to the thesis that armaments and
political security were interdependent. It was to emphasize
this new conviction, even more than to uphold the traditional
American policy in the Far East, that they had taken so
active a part in the Manchurian affair, going to the point of
authorizing an American representative to sit with the Coun-
cil of the League of Nations . Having become convinced that
the world-wide depression could not be arrested without
international agreements dealing with debts,
armaments,
and political insecurity, they had held conversations
in
Washington with the Premier of France and then with the
Foreign Minister of Italy in which it was clearly indicated
that the United States was actively interested in these prob-
lems and would participate in their solution .
1 This was officially denied, however, during the exchange of notes with
Great Britain and France in December, 1932 .
[14)

--- PAGE BREAK ---hese prob-
lems and would participate in their solution .
1 This was officially denied, however, during the exchange of notes with
Great Britain and France in December, 1932 .
[14)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This line of development was halted when the temper of
Congress was made manifest in December, and in the subse-
quent months of domestic crisis the foreign policy
of the
Administration was controlled by the fact that Congress
would not approve any of the commitments which positive
collaboration implied . Since it was evident that any positive
decision would be rejected by Congress, =the Administration
had to pursue a course which would postpone the need of
making decisions. It did not abandon the ideas which it had
evolved in the second half of r93x, but it felt that if it
pressed those ideas, it would be compelled to abandon them .
Thus, beginning with December, 1931, the policy of the
Administration was to encourage other nations to proceed
as far as they could toward settlement of the vexed questions
and to avoid any move on its own part which would give
Congress the opportunity to slam the door against eventual
collaboration by the United States. Knowing that on none of
the great unsettled questions could they then say yes, the
President and his Secretary of State did their utmost not to
be forced to say no. The implication intended to be conveyed
to Europe was that the United States would return to a policy
of collaboration when the domestic crisis- and the national
elections were over, and that the measure of American col-
laboration would be enhanced by the progress toward settle-
ment made by European powers in the interval. The Ad-
ministration did not repudiate the political obligations it had
incurred in the summer and autumn of x931 ; it merely asked
a period of grace during the American domestic crisis. .
2 . The Postponement o f a Reparation Settlement
The effects of this paralysis of American policy were felt
immediately in the search for a solution of the reparation
question. The Hoover moratorium was to end on July
x,
x932, and on July 15, in the absence of a new agreement,
Germany had 'either to default or to resume payments . It
was, therefore, necessary to settle the future of reparations
["3s to end on July
x,
x932, and on July 15, in the absence of a new agreement,
Germany had 'either to default or to resume payments . It
was, therefore, necessary to settle the future of reparations
["3

--- PAGE BREAK ---x932, and on July 15, in the absence of a new agreement,
Germany had 'either to default or to resume payments . It
was, therefore, necessary to settle the future of reparations
["3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

before July. It was highly desirable that itt should be settled
even sooner; for the uncertainty as to the future made any re-
establishment of German credit, and in fact of Central Euro-
pean credit, impossible. The entanglement of German credit
with that of other countries was so considerable that the
whole world had an acute interest in a solution .
But as matters were arranged, while German reparation
payments fell due in July, European payments on war debts
to the United States did not fall due until December . Thus it
was possible to postpone the consideration of the war debts
six months longer than the consideration of reparations . The
Hoover Administration, took advantage of this time-table,2
which fitted so admirably with its domestic situation, by
taking the view that the European powers should settle rep-
arations before broaching the revision of war debts .
The French government' helped the Administration in
taking this line. It had always objected strenuously to the
manner in which President Hoover, when he proposed his
moratorium, had ignored the juridical and procedural prin-
ciples of the Young Plan . The Laval Ministry, having in
mind the French interest in maintaining the Versailles sys-
tem, regarded Mr. Hoover's unceremonious handling of rep-
aration principles as a threat to the sanctity of the whole
treaty system . The French official press had berated President
Hoover for his lack of regard for the letter of the law, and
when M. Laval arrived in Washington in October, he had
asked the President for assurances that in future the repara-
tion question would be dealt with in accordance with _the
Young Plan.
That a return to the Young Plan meant also a return to
the status quo ante in respect to debts does not seem to have
been dearly grasped by M . Laval. In any event, M. Laval
was asking for assurances which Mr. Hoover, who by that
*German reparations were payable in monthly installments, while payments
to the United States on the war debts were made twice a year . Germany's
creditors counted on the monthly reparation payments to enable them to
make the semiannual payments on their own debts .
C16)s
to the United States on the war debts were made twice a year . Germany's
creditors counted on the monthly reparation payments to enable them to
make the semiannual payments on their own debts .
C16)

--- PAGE BREAK ---es on the war debts were made twice a year . Germany's
creditors counted on the monthly reparation payments to enable them to
make the semiannual payments on their own debts .
C16)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

time had begun to realize the temper of the impending Con-
gress, was only too glad to give. A return to the Young Plan
meant that the Administration need not and in :fact could
not participate in the reparation settlement and that it could
postpone the debt problem until after the Presidential elec-
tions. Thus, by his insistence on the letter of the law, M .
Laval once again separated reparations and debts and put
his government in a position where it must settle reparations
before it had settled debts.
There is some reason to think that M . Laval did not com-
prehend the effects of what he regarded as a diplomatic
triumph, and that owing to the hurry of the Washington con-
versations and the difficulty of communication through inter-
preters, he went home thinking that he had preserved
France's legal rights under the Young Plan and had obtained
assurances from the President that the debts would be con-
sidered along with reparations .. The American negotiators
had a wholly different impression, and when at the end of
December the confusion was evident, ; the Secretary of State
informed the European debtors that the United States- had
not made any commitments about revision of the debts.
The result of the Hoover-Laval conversations was, there
fore,-to enable the United States to withdraw from the nego-
tiations about intergovernmental debts and to compel France,
Great Britain, and Germany to proceed without American
assistance and, in fact, without knowledge of Ameri-
can intentions .
On November 19, 1931, the German government, acting
in conformity with the Hoover-Laval statement, invoked
Article 119 of the Young Plan. It applied to the Bank for
International Settlements, asking that a special advisory com-
mittee be appointed to investigate Germany's capacity to
pay . The board of the bank, after considering the applica-
tion, announced that it had "come to the conclusion in good
faith that Germany's exchange and economic life might be
seriously damaged by the transfer in part or in full of the
£=71ering the applica-
tion, announced that it had "come to the conclusion in good
faith that Germany's exchange and economic life might be
seriously damaged by the transfer in part or in full of the
£=71

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion, announced that it had "come to the conclusion in good
faith that Germany's exchange and economic life might be
seriously damaged by the transfer in part or in full of the
£=71

--- PAGE BREAK ---

postponable portion of annuities," and duly . appointed a
committee .
On December 7, 1931-as it happened, the very day on
which the Congress of the United States convened in Wash-
ington-this committee met at Basle . On December 23 it
published a full report on Germany's credit position . The
committee brought
in a categorical verdict that Germany
was not able to make the conditional payments under the
Young Plan which would become due in July, 1 932 .
The text of this section of its report was as follows ;
It is evident from the facts outlined in the preceding chapters that
Germany would be justified in declaring:in accordance with her
rights under the Young Plan-that -in spite of the steps she has
taken to maintain the stability of her currency, she will not be, able
in the year beginning in July next to transfer the conditional part
of the annuity 3
The Young Plan provided a rising scale of payments on
the assumption that world trade would steadily expand in
both volume and value and that the payments would become
an item of steadily diminishing importance in the German
budget. This expectation was not fulfilled . The trade of the
world had declined in volume, and prices had receded
sharply at the same time, so that the burden not only of
reparations but of all payments based on gold was greatly
increased. In the opinion of the advisory committee, the prob-
lem which was thus thrust upon Germany was largely re-
sponsible for the growing financial paralysis of the world,
and could be solved only by the governments concerned .
The problem, moreover, did not affect Germany alone. The
diminishing volume of activity had made itself felt in all.
countries of the world, bringing increasing distress and gen-
eral political instability .
The committee emphasized especially the need of taking
into account not merely reparations but many closely allied
Report of the Special Advirory Committee Appointed by the Bank for
Isternational Settlements.ittee emphasized especially the need of taking
into account not merely reparations but many closely allied
Report of the Special Advirory Committee Appointed by the Bank for
Isternational Settlements.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ecially the need of taking
into account not merely reparations but many closely allied
Report of the Special Advirory Committee Appointed by the Bank for
Isternational Settlements.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

questions, and it set forth three considerations
which It
deemed of great importance .
The first is that transfers from one country to another on a scale
so large as to upset the balance of payments can only accentuate the
present chaos .
It should also be borne in mind that the release of a debtor
country from a burden of payments which it is unable to, bear may
merely have the effect of transferring that burden to a creditor coun-
try which, in its character as a debtor, it, in its him, may be unable
to bear.
Again, the adjustment of all intergovernmental debts [repara-
tions and other war debts] to the existing troubled situationn of the
world-and this adjustment should take place without delay if new
disasters are to be avoided-is the only lasting step capable of rees-
tablishing Confidence, which is the very condition of economic
stability and real peace .
The committee ended its report with an appeal to the
governments with which responsibility for action rested "to
permit of no delay in coming to a decision which will bring
an amelioration of this grave crisis which weighs so heavily
on all alike."
The most striking feature of this report, apart from its
direct recognition of Germany's inability to make the condi-
tional payments, was its insistence upon the connection be-
tween reparations and war debts and its intimation that re-
lief to Germany should be linked with relief to the countries,
which were both creditors to Germany and debtors to other
countries. The report clearly implied that the downward re-
vision of the American war debts should go hand in hand
with a reduction of reparation payments ."
AA week after the signing of the report, the British govern-
ment invited ten of the creditor governments of Germany to
a conference in Lausanne on January 18 to discuss the repara-
tion question and the future of the Young Plan . The Amer-
ican government was not invited, and Mr. Ogden L . Mills,
• The fact that the French member of the committee, Professor Charles Rist,
formally subscribed to the view that Germany could, not pay conditional
reparations was regarded as of much significance.
{i9)The fact that the French member of the committee, Professor Charles Rist,
formally subscribed to the view that Germany could, not pay conditional
reparations was regarded as of much significance.
{i9)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ench member of the committee, Professor Charles Rist,
formally subscribed to the view that Germany could, not pay conditional
reparations was regarded as of much significance.
{i9)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

then Under Secretary of the Treasury, announced that if it
had been invited it would not have accepted .5 Its attendance
at a conference on reparations was deemed unnecessary, since
the United States government was not officially concerned
with the reparation problem .
Meantime the German government made a move which
did not appear auspicious for an agreement with France . It
published figures in January tending to show that the cost
of reconstruction of the French devastated areas had been
more than met by the sums which France had already re-
ceived from Germany. According to this statement, France,
even on the basis of a more conservative estimate than the
German government's claim, had received over 19,000 mil-
lion reichsmarks, while her total expenditures for recon-
struction amounted, according to her own official figures,, to
less than 14,000 million reichsmarks.° Germany therefore in-
sisted that her debt for reparations proper had been fully
discharged, and the press took up the theme that any further
payments, which were not needed for reconstruction, were an
exaction of "tribute."
On January 9 Chancellor Bruening went a step further and
declared that the report of the advisory committee showed
not only Germany's inability to pay but also the close connec-
tion between German payments and the world depression .
"It is as clear as day,
he said, "that Germany's position
makes it impossible for her to continue political payments.
It is fully as plain that every attempt to maintain intact a
system of such political payments must lead to disaster not
only for Germany but for the whole world ." Dr. Bruening
announced that this would be the position which Germany
would take at the Lausanne conference.7
The German Chancellor evidently issued this statement
mainly for home consumption . He was at that time endeavor-
°Commercial and Financial Chronicle, CXXXIV, 7,
January 2, 1932.
'An Associated Press dispatch. Cf . New York Herald Tribune, January x7,
1932 . For various estimates of total German payments, see Appendix I (b) .
'New York Times, January so,
1932 .
[20)y 2, 1932.
'An Associated Press dispatch. Cf . New York Herald Tribune, January x7,
1932 . For various estimates of total German payments, see Appendix I (b) .
'New York Times, January so,
1932 .
[20)

--- PAGE BREAK ---iated Press dispatch. Cf . New York Herald Tribune, January x7,
1932 . For various estimates of total German payments, see Appendix I (b) .
'New York Times, January so,
1932 .
[20)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ing by means of a constitutional amendment to bring about
the extension of President von Hindenburg's term of office .
This measure required'- a two-thirds vote in the Reichstag,
and it had no chance of adoption without support from the
followers of Hitler and Hugenberg . It is possible, therefore,
that the Chancellor took this strong position against further
payments of reparations in order to win nationalist support
for his domestic political program .
Outside of Germany the effects were unfortunate . The
Bruening statement was made only nine days before the
scheduled meeting of the Lausanne conference, and it
aroused considerable resentment in France and Belgium .
The British government on the following day announced
that the conference had been postponed until January 25
.
This postponement was, however, attributable not so much
to the Chancellor's remarks as to the disorganization of
the French Cabinet following the death of Minister of War
Maginot and the illness of Foreign Minister Briand .
Dr . Bruening's pronouncement was viewed in Paris as a
virtual repudiation of the Young Plan. Premier Laval an-
nounced in the Chamber of Deputies that `he had filed a
protest with the German government against the Chan-
cellor's action, and M . Flandin, the Finance Minister, de-
dared that his government would not accept a one-sided
denunciation of a multilateral agreement which all the par-
ties had voluntarily signed . From Berlin there came an offi-
cial statement designed to placate French feelings . There
had been no intention, it said, to issue an ultimatum or a
categorical refusal to pay reparations.
By January 20 the negotiations in advance of the Lausanne
conference had reached such a state of deadlock that the
British government announced a second and indefinite post-
ponement. There was no settlement in sight . French and
German opinion had become frozen in an irreconcilable
contradiction, and the Laval Ministry
could make no
substantial concessions without some assurances
that the
[21]settlement in sight . French and
German opinion had become frozen in an irreconcilable
contradiction, and the Laval Ministry
could make no
substantial concessions without some assurances
that the
[21]

--- PAGE BREAK ---. French and
German opinion had become frozen in an irreconcilable
contradiction, and the Laval Ministry
could make no
substantial concessions without some assurances
that the
[21]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

American war debt would be correspondingly reduced. No
assurances were forthcoming, and therefore everyone de-
sired to postpone decision. In this atmosphere, the British
and French spokesmen offered to extend the German mora-
torium for a year. The offer was flatly rejected by Chancellor
Bruening, who insisted that a definite readjustment of repa-
rations should be made before the expiration of the existing
moratorium.
On the day the conference was postponed a brief but in-
accurate summary of a recent note from Secretary of State
Stimson to the French government was published in the
Paris newspapers, and in this garbled form it was cabled to
the United States. It seemed to offer little hope of a,settle-
ment. In this incorrect version the United States government
was reported as saying that Congress would neither grant a
new moratorium nor consider any proposal for cancella-
tion or reduction of the debts, and that the formation of a
"united front" by the debtor nations would be viewed with
displeasure . But at the same time there was a hint of the
possibility of an eventual revision by separate accords.
Those who had followed the developments in the debt
situation were somewhat confused by this announcement
until the Department of State denied its accuracy. For while
Congress had registered its opposition to cancellation and
reduction, it had not taken a position against further post-
ponement, as-the incorrectly reported note seemed to imply.
The government's pronouncement was sent to other debt-
ors as well as to France shortly after -Congress had ratified,
the moratorium, and its real purpose is now known
.. In the
first place, the government reiterated its thesis that there was
no connection between German reparations and the war
debts due the United States . In the second place, it insisted
that since reparations were a European problem the Euro .
pean governments should assume the initiative in any action
on- this problem . This position was in full harmony with the
Hoover-Laval agreement of October, 1931, to the effect that
[22)em the Euro .
pean governments should assume the initiative in any action
on- this problem . This position was in full harmony with the
Hoover-Laval agreement of October, 1931, to the effect that
[22)

--- PAGE BREAK ---overnments should assume the initiative in any action
on- this problem . This position was in full harmony with the
Hoover-Laval agreement of October, 1931, to the effect that
[22)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the next steps in dealing with reparations should be taken
under the terms of the Young Plan, to which the United
States was not a signatory. But the Department of State also
reminded the debtor nations that their initiation- of a new
reparation settlement was perhaps the only way by which
the people of the United States might be impressed with
the need of further, action on their part with regard to the
war debts. In other words, not until the European powers
had made more earnest efforts to work out their own salva-
tion would it be advisable for them to seek a reexamination
of their debt agreements with the United States ; and even
then the proposals for a reexamination should come sepa-
rately from each debtor .
The insistence of the United States upon European action
on reparations in advance of any proposal concerning the
war debts seems to have strengthened Dr . Bruening in his
determination not to accept any temporizing measure offered
by Germany's creditors. But the German Chancellor had gone
further than to reject a postponement ; he insisted that there
could be no more payments . The nationalist emotions
aroused by these developments made the holding of the Lau-
sanne,conference in January inadvisable.
It was assumed at first that this new postponement would
also be for a brief period, but in view of the approaching
elections in Germany and France it became necessary to defer
the conference until they were over . Since. the French elec-
tions were to be held not later than May, it was decided to
postpone the conference until June. In announcing the new
date, the British Foreign Office stated that the governments
of Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and Great Britain
had all agreed that the conference should undertake to reach
"a lasting settlement of the questions raised in the report of
the Basle experts on the measures necessary to solve the
other economic and financial difficulties which are respon-
sible for, and may prolong, the present world crisis ."
The European press laid especial emphasis on the use of
[23]necessary to solve the
other economic and financial difficulties which are respon-
sible for, and may prolong, the present world crisis ."
The European press laid especial emphasis on the use of
[23]

--- PAGE BREAK ---the
other economic and financial difficulties which are respon-
sible for, and may prolong, the present world crisis ."
The European press laid especial emphasis on the use of
[23]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the term "lasting settlement," which it generally interpreted
as indicating not another moratorium but a definite revision
both of the Young Plan and of the international debts. It
applauded the wide scope which would be given to the con-
ference. But there were some expressions of disappointment
that the meeting could not be held earlier, in order that the
uncertainties of the existing situation might be eliminated
sooner and that one great obstacle on the road to economic
recovery might be removed . Yet the fact emerged that, expert
and responsible opinion to the contrary notwithstanding,
every government concerned found it politically expedient to
postpone until the last possible moment the effort to reach a
decisive settlement. The French, the German, and the Amer-
ican governments all had elections impending, and none of
them, until the elections were over, could or would make
any concession that would render a settlement possible . Thus
the reparation question was postponed until June and the
debt question until after November .
3. The Second "Standstill" Agreement on Germany's
Private Debts
In the matter of Germany's private debts$ it was not pos-
sible to postpone action until June . The arrangement to main-
tain the volume of short-term credits for
six months,
generally known as the "standstill" agreement, expired by
limitation on February 29, 1932 . It was evident to the inter-
national bankers that unless the agreement was continued
the German currency would be destroyed by the chaotic
and competitive withdrawal of funds from Germany. There-
fore, in spite of their desire for a definite settlement of rep-
arations before the "standstill" agreement was renewed, they
sent a creditors' committee' to Berlin on December i 1, 1931 .
' Cf. The United States in World Affairs, r93r,
3145-152 . 179-x83 .
'The
creditor
countries
represented
at
the
conference
were
Belgium,
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, England, France, Holland, Italy, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, and the United States . Mr. Albert H. Wiggin, Chairman of the
Governing Board of the Chase National Bank, New York City, served as
[ 241, England, France, Holland, Italy, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, and the United States . Mr. Albert H. Wiggin, Chairman of the
Governing Board of the Chase National Bank, New York City, served as
[ 241

--- PAGE BREAK ---olland, Italy, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, and the United States . Mr. Albert H. Wiggin, Chairman of the
Governing Board of the Chase National Bank, New York City, served as
[ 241

--- PAGE BREAK ---

After prolonged negotiations with committees representing
the German debtors, a new agreement was reached on Janu-
ary 23, which extended the "standstill" agreement until
February 28, 1933 .
The new agreement made numerous changes in procedure
and cleared up a number of inconsistencies which existed in
the preceding one, and also differed from it in the following
particulars : First, the agreement was extended to include
additional foreign bank credits employed between July 3i
and October 8, 1931, and expiring within the period of the
agreement. Second, where the first agreement had made no
provision for repayment, the new one provided for a reduc-
tion in foreign credit lines outstanding of io per cent of the
gross through the cancellation of lines or parts of lines, or
by repayment. Further repayments, if any, were to be deter-
mined by a Consultative Committee which was to meet three
times a year, and was to take into consideration the capacity
of the Reichsbank to transfer reichsmarks into gold currency .
The short-term debts to be dealt with under the new ar-
rangement, already matured and maturing before March
x,
1933, amounted to 5,040 million reichsmarks . These, unlike
the reparation debt, were not the direct obligations of the
German government . They were the debts of German banks
and German business concerns to foreign banks. Under an
arrangement with the German government and the Reichs-
bank, no payments would be made outside the "standstill"
agreement to the prejudice of the "standstill" creditors .10
In the report accompanying the text of the new plan, the
creditors' committee was as emphatic as had been its prede-
cessor in August in saying that restrictive trade policies were
impeding the world's recovery . Declaring that "the whole
fabric of international credit is essentially dependent upon an
adequate movement of goods from one country to another,"
Chairman of the Creditors' Committee, as he had done at the previous
meeting in August, 193x .
"The German Credit Agreement of 1932 (official text),
;[25}vement of goods from one country to another,"
Chairman of the Creditors' Committee, as he had done at the previous
meeting in August, 193x .
"The German Credit Agreement of 1932 (official text),
;[25}

--- PAGE BREAK ---one country to another,"
Chairman of the Creditors' Committee, as he had done at the previous
meeting in August, 193x .
"The German Credit Agreement of 1932 (official text),
;[25}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and that "vast periodic payments cannot be made with gold,"
the committee pointed out that "trade barriers are growing
higher and higher" and that "trade policy should permit
goods to move in settlement of international debts and that
countries should make markets for one another ."" It de-
clared, too, that a settlement of all of Germany's interna
tional payments was essential to the restoration of German
credit, "as indeed are the inter-Allied debts, which are in
intimate connection with them," but concluded that "these
questions, although they profoundly affect private credit,
cannot be solved by bankers ."
In renewing the "standstill" agreement for another year,
the bankers were, of course, acting in their own interest, since
any effort to force immediate payment would have ruined
Germany without benefiting them . The year's postponement
did, however, signify also the conviction of the bankers that
during the next twelve months the reparation problem would
have to be settled by the governments, and believing as they
did that private debts should take precedence of political
debts, they undertook to freeze the private debts in state quo
for the period needed to arrive at a political settlement .
They were acting here on the belief which statesmen every-
where shared but could not yet publicly avow to their peo-
ples-namely, that the payment of German reparations in
any substantial amount would never be resumed .
The bankers realized that a public admission of this fact
could not be delayed more than a year, but in order to bind
the action of the governments to the doctrine of the validity
of the private debts, they stipulated that the new "standstill"
agreement could be terminated by the foreign bankers' com-
mittee in case of a discontinuance of the ioo-million-dollar
loan to Germany on June 26, 1931, made by the Bank for
International Settlements, the Bank of France, the Bank of
England, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York .12 This
"Report of the Foreign Creditors' "Standstill" Committee
(official text) .
'The United States in World Affairs, 1931, x74. 307.
26)e Bank of
England, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York .12 This
"Report of the Foreign Creditors' "Standstill" Committee
(official text) .
'The United States in World Affairs, 1931, x74. 307.
26)

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd the Federal Reserve Bank of New York .12 This
"Report of the Foreign Creditors' "Standstill" Committee
(official text) .
'The United States in World Affairs, 1931, x74. 307.
26)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

loan had originally been made for a period of three weeks .
It had been renewed four times and would fall due again on
March_ 4, 1932, and it was evident that if it were not then
renewed the foreign bank creditors might exercise their
option and abrogate the new agreement almost immediately
after it came into effect .
The stipulation was directed principally at France . For
while the French held but a small amount of the German
short-term paper, their only important direct interest
in
German finance, apart from reparations, was their share of
this ioo-million-dollar loan's Throughout the negotiations
the French had rebelled against any agreement that preferred
the private to the public creditors, and in February they had
consented to renew the central bank loan for one month only
instead of for three months as previously .
The bankers' stipulation, therefore, resulted in protracted
negotiations with the Bank of France. A three months' exten-
sion was finally agreed to on condition that the Reichsbank
would repay each of the central banks io per cent of its share
of the loan . This having been effected, the continuation of
the second "standstill" agreement became possible. As a
result, Germany's private indebtedness was given preference
over her political indebtedness, for the private creditors were
now able to outwait the statesmen . In spite of all political
protestations to the contrary, it was settled that a solution of
reparations, though it would be delayed as long as possible,
would have to be undertaken with the private obligations
intact.
Of course, in the background of the negotiations was the
fact, which no negotiations could do more than formulate,
that the payment of reparations depended in every practical
sense upon the maintenance of private credit . The reparation
claim might already be worthless anyway, but whatever
"The French held 473 million reichsmarks (ri3 million dollars)
of the
Dawes and Young loans, but as these, were long-term obligations, they did
not count in this situation.thless anyway, but whatever
"The French held 473 million reichsmarks (ri3 million dollars)
of the
Dawes and Young loans, but as these, were long-term obligations, they did
not count in this situation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hatever
"The French held 473 million reichsmarks (ri3 million dollars)
of the
Dawes and Young loans, but as these, were long-term obligations, they did
not count in this situation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

chance remained of reestablishing it depended on the restora-
tion of private credit, and not on wrecking it .
4. Postponement of the Central European Problem
Conditions similar to those which compelled the great
powers to pursue a policy of negation, avoidance, and post-
ponement-during the winter of 1931-32 prevented any agree-
ment designed to relieve the Danubian and the Balkan
nations. Their plight was a matter of great international con-
cern not only because of the vast misery of their people but
because the strangulation of their trade and the collapse of
their finance were a profoundly evil influence through-
out Europe.
The first ostensible effort at relief had been the aborted
proposal of an Austro-German customs union brought for-
ward with such disastrous political results in the early spring
of 1931. After the renunciation of this project in September
under the pressure of France and her Central European allies,
the plan of a Danubian federation setting up a customs union
of Czechoslovakia, Austria, Hungary, Rumania, and Yugo-
slavia, was proposed. The chief sponsor of this plan was the
Foreign Minister of Czechoslovakia, Dr . Eduard Bene$ . It
immediately encountered the objections of Germany and
Italy, who saw in it a scheme to consolidate the Danubian
states within the orbit of French influence, a result they
opposed as firmly as France had objected to bringing Austria
within the orbit of German influence .
Thus, owing to the rivalries of the great powers, nothing
came of this scheme, as nothing had come of all the schemes
that had preceded it. In January, 1932, the British govern-
ment, cognizant of the extent of British interests in Central
Europe, took a hand and proposed a customs union of the
five Danubian nations with Bulgaria added . The Germans
demurred. The next month the Austrian Chancellor, Dr .
Buresch, made a direct appeal for economic and political
assistance to the Ambassadors of France, Great Britain, Ger-
28 J
Vadded . The Germans
demurred. The next month the Austrian Chancellor, Dr .
Buresch, made a direct appeal for economic and political
assistance to the Ambassadors of France, Great Britain, Ger-
28 J
V

--- PAGE BREAK ---demurred. The next month the Austrian Chancellor, Dr .
Buresch, made a direct appeal for economic and political
assistance to the Ambassadors of France, Great Britain, Ger-
28 J
V

--- PAGE BREAK ---

many, and Italy . There was no immediate response . But there
was much discussion of the problem among the statesmen of
the great powers, and late in February the French Govern-
ment of M. Tardieu proposed a consultation by the four
Western powers to relieve the five Danubian states . The plan
seems to have been worked out by M. Tardieu and Sir John
Simon, and came to be known as the Tardieu plan . It con-
templated a restoration, in so far as that was possible, of the
economic solidarity of the old Hapsburg Empire .
The four-power conference was held in London in April,
and the Tardieu plan was laid before it by Prime Minister
MacDonald . It provided for a io per cent tariff preferential
of the Danubian states toward one another, the abolition of
the quota system, a renunciation of most-favored-nation
agreements by other nations, unilateral preferences to Danu-
bian agricultural exports, and a loan of forty million dollars
to meet the urgent necessities of these states
.
Both Germany and Italy flatly and promptly rejected the
plan, and thus ended all prospect of any immediate large so-
lution of the Central European problem . It had been shown
that the political rivalries of the powers were far stronger
than their desire to take measures to promote economic
recovery.*
5. Tariff Policy o f the United States
The difficulty of making decisions was exemplified further
by the treatment of the tariff in the Seventy-second Congress .
The Democratic party, having a nominal majority, felt called
upon to take some action to justify its criticism of the Haw-
ley-Smoot tariff, and yet plainly it had no appetite for a
general reduction of the rates. The Democratic leaders-
chiefly, it was believed, for the purposes of the political rec-
ord-decided to propose international action aimed at
"lowering excessive duties and eliminating discriminatory
"Hamilton Fish Armstrong, "Danubia: Relief or Ruin," Foreign Affairs,
X, 6oo-z6, July, 1932 .decided to propose international action aimed at
"lowering excessive duties and eliminating discriminatory
"Hamilton Fish Armstrong, "Danubia: Relief or Ruin," Foreign Affairs,
X, 6oo-z6, July, 1932 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---nternational action aimed at
"lowering excessive duties and eliminating discriminatory
"Hamilton Fish Armstrong, "Danubia: Relief or Ruin," Foreign Affairs,
X, 6oo-z6, July, 1932 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and unfair trade practices and other economic barriers." This
suggestion was advanced in a party bill introduced in the
House of Representatives by the Democratic Chairman of the
Ways and Means Committee . The measure was something ,
of a catch-all. In addition to a proposal for a "permanent
international economic conference' on tariffs, the bill pro-
vided for the appointment of a "consumers' counsel" in the
United States, ±present "the public" at the hearings of
the Tariff Commission ; it deprived the President of power
to raise or- to lower rates on the recommendation of the com-
mission and it transferred this authority to Congress ; it
plumped for the theory of a domestic tariff high enough to
"equalize the difference in the costs of production of the
domestic article and of the foreign article," and at the same
time urged the President to negotiate reciprocal trade agree-
ments with foreign governments under a policy of "mutual
concessions.""' How foreign governments were to be offered
concessions under a tariff still high enough to equalize any
native advantages they might enjoy in producing goods at
lower cost was not explained .
Though they called for the "lowering of excessive duties"
as a necessary step toward the recovery of trade, the Demo-
cratic leaders in the House proposed no change in the exist-
ing tariff rates imposed by the United States. Probably this
was due, as much as to any other single factor, to a well-
grounded belief that such action would have split the Demo-
cratic membership. The bill submitted to the Ways and
Means Committee was passed by the House on January 9 by
a vote of 214 to 182, with several changes in its text. The
word "permanent" was struck from the proposal for an in-
ternational tariff conference . The section authorizing the
negotiation of reciprocity treaties was also deleted. This was
not because the House Democrats had lost faith in it, but be-
cause it seemed appropriate that this section should originate
"Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 1650.
(30 1not because the House Democrats had lost faith in it, but be-
cause it seemed appropriate that this section should originate
"Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 1650.
(30 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---se Democrats had lost faith in it, but be-
cause it seemed appropriate that this section should originate
"Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 1650.
(30 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in the Senate, the body which had to be consulted by the
Executive in the negotiation of treaties .
In the Senate, where the Republicans had a nominal ma-
jority, the bill :encountered difficulties. It was referred to the
Finance Committee, headed by Senator Smoot, and was re-
ported unfavorably on January 28 . On the same day Senator
Harrison introduced a bill virtually identical with the original
House measure. This ensured the bill a place on the Senate
calendar.16 The measure was amended on the floor of the
Senate by inserting the section authorizing the negotiation
of reciprocal agreements. On April i it was passed by a vote
of 42 to 30 . Six Republicans, all of the insurgent wing of
the party,"" voted with the Democrats.
The House agreed to the Senate amendment, and on
April 3o the bill was sent to the President . He returned it on
May i i without his approval. In his veto message Mr .
Hoover expressed the opinion that "there never has been a
time in the history of the United States when tariff protection
was more essential to the welfare of the American people
than at present." He argued that prices had declined much
more in other countries than in the United States,1 8 and
warned Congress that foreign manufacturers in countries with
depreciated currencies enjoyed special advantages in compet-
ing in the American market . The transfer of control over the
"flexible" provisions from the Executive to Congress he
found objectionable, because he thought that the President
could act more .promptly than Congress to correct mistakes .
The proposal for an international conference seemed to him
futile, as it meant an effort to negotiate a world tariff among
sixty or seventy nations subject to the confirmation of their
legislative bodies . He pointed out that the American govern-
ment had participated in several international conferences
14 Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 2964.
"Senators Brookbart, Frazier, La Follette, Norbeck, Norris, and Nye .
"This statement is not ,supported by the price indices of the, United States,
Germany, or France, but it is correct as regards Great Britain, if currency
depreciation is taken into account .and Nye .
"This statement is not ,supported by the price indices of the, United States,
Germany, or France, but it is correct as regards Great Britain, if currency
depreciation is taken into account .

--- PAGE BREAK ---ement is not ,supported by the price indices of the, United States,
Germany, or France, but it is correct as regards Great Britain, if currency
depreciation is taken into account .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

for similar purposes since the war, and that little had been
accomplished.
Mr. Hoover took special exception to the provision of the
bill calling for the negotiation of reciprocal treaties under a
policy of mutual tariff concessions . He declared that such a
policy would foster discriminatory tariffs and provoke eco-
nomic wars . "A firmly established principle of the American
tariff policy," he insisted, "is the uniform and equal treat-
ment of all nations without preferences, concessions, or dis-
criminations (with the sole exception of certain concessions
to Cuba) ." The efforts of the Democrats to override the veto
were unsuccessful.°
Mr. Hoover's action marked the end of efforts in this
session of Congress to invoke the influence of the United
States in behalf of a general reduction of tariffs . The veto
was not unexpected . Nor was it unwelcome to those Demo-
crats who wished to keep intact their record as enemies of
Republican protectionist policy and at the same time to avoid
in the year of- a national election the political risks of reduc-
ing rates on specific commodities . As a matter of fact, while
they were applauding the principle of lower tariffs, a number
of Democratic Congressmen were actively at work to obtain
higher duties on commodities in which their constituents
were interested .
The consequences were soon made manifest. Following
the defeat of the sales tax in the House of Representatives,"
various substitute proposals were advanced as a means of
raising revenue, and among these was a plan for new tariffs,
euphoniously described as excise taxes, on coal and petroleum
products . These so-called excise taxes differed from all others
in the bill, such as those imposed on luxuries, by being made
to "apply only with respect to the importation of such arti-
cles." The obvious purpose was not to increase revenue but
!° Congressional Record,
Seventy-second Congress, First Session, xo3xx,
10312, 10316.
2OCf. Chapter VII.
(32 )the importation of such arti-
cles." The obvious purpose was not to increase revenue but
!° Congressional Record,
Seventy-second Congress, First Session, xo3xx,
10312, 10316.
2OCf. Chapter VII.
(32 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---such arti-
cles." The obvious purpose was not to increase revenue but
!° Congressional Record,
Seventy-second Congress, First Session, xo3xx,
10312, 10316.
2OCf. Chapter VII.
(32 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to prevent imports. The House adopted these tariffs, and
when the revenue- bill reached the Senate, , imports of copper
and lumber were also made subject to excise taxes."''
The tariffs on coal and petroleum products were voted by
a House controlled by the Democratic party ; the tariffs on
copper and lumber were imposed in the Senate with the aid
of Democratic votes. The country thus witnessed the curious
spectacle of a Congress voting for the abstract principle of
lower tariffs and reciprocal trade agreements, while at the
same time grafting on to a revenue bill a group of highly
protective duties which had been demanded by small but
well-organized groups of domestic producers .
Contemporaneously, it happened that there were mem-
bers of Congress who felt that existing tariffs were too low .
In both the Senate and the House a number of bills were
introduced,. calling for additional "compensating
duties,
that is to say, duties on goods imported from countries with
depreciated currencies.22 Of these the Hawley bill (H . R .
8688) received most attention. It aimed to bring the rates
on dutiable goods up to the amounts payable if there had
been no currency depreciation in England and other coun-
tries. It provided also for duties on goods still on the free
list, if they were of a kind produced in the United States, and
these duties would equalize the difference in the value of the
article computed in terms of the standard and of the depre-
ciated currency . Senator Reed of Pennsylvania at this time
introduced a resolution ordering the Tariff Commission to
make a "thorough investigation of the effect of the deprecia-
tion in value of foreign currencies, since the enactment of
"Copper was then on the free list, and the new tax on lumber was in
addition to that imposed by the Tariff Act of 1930 . Congress was also urged
to impose tariffs on newsprint and raw silk, but the campaign
for these
duties failed.
'*Senate bill
2350, introduced by Mr. Jones, December 21, 1931 ; H. R.
bills 8688 and 8752, introduced by Mr. Hawley and Mr. Goldsborough,
February x and 2, 1932
Senate Resolution 143 and x56, introduced by Mr.
Reed, January x9 and February x ; H. R . bill 9885, introduced by Mr. Knut-
son, February 27 ; H. R. bill 10797, introduced by Mr. Vinson, March 24-
[ 33)ate Resolution 143 and x56, introduced by Mr.
Reed, January x9 and February x ; H. R . bill 9885, introduced by Mr. Knut-
son, February 27 ; H. R. bill 10797, introduced by Mr. Vinson, March 24-
[ 33)

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd x56, introduced by Mr.
Reed, January x9 and February x ; H. R . bill 9885, introduced by Mr. Knut-
son, February 27 ; H. R. bill 10797, introduced by Mr. Vinson, March 24-
[ 33)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the tariff in 1930, upon the importation into and exportation
from the United States of all the important commodities ."
The Reed resolution was adopted by the Senate on April
M28 In reply the Tariff Commission submitted a detailed
analysis of the effect of currency depreciation on American
foreign trade. It found that during the period from October,
1931, to February, 1932, the value of imports from -six lead-
ing European countries off the gold standard had declined
28 per cent, compared with the corresponding period of the
preceding year, while the decline in the case of six leading
countries remaining on the gold standard was only 23 per
cent. In terms of value, therefore, the imports from the
countries off the gold standard, instead of increasing, as the
advocates of higher duties so willingly believed, had actually
declined. The Tariff Commission, however, pointed out that
the decline in the value of imports by the United States from
cheap-money countries, when expressed in terms of dollars,
might have been somewhat greater than the decline in the
price of goods imported from gold-standard countries, and
that this did not indicate a corresponding shrinkage of
volume 2s
In spite of these findings, Congress was subjected to con-
tinuous pressure by producers demanding higher duties on
articles imported from countries off the gold standard.
Representatives of the American Federation of Labor, of the
American Farm Bureau Federation, and of various manu-
facturers appeared before the House Ways and Means Com-
mittee in support of legislation imposing "compensating"
tariffs. The proposal was opposed by the Chairman of the
Tariff Commission, Mr. Robert L. O'Brien, who argued that
the measure would levy higher duties on the products of
some countries than of others, and urged that the proper
policy should be one of equal treatment .25 Under the pro-
'"' Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 8245, 8246 .
'United States Daily, May 17, 1932 .
'This view accorded with the President's veto message of May zz .
{343nder the pro-
'"' Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 8245, 8246 .
'United States Daily, May 17, 1932 .
'This view accorded with the President's veto message of May zz .
{343

--- PAGE BREAK ---ngressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 8245, 8246 .
'United States Daily, May 17, 1932 .
'This view accorded with the President's veto message of May zz .
{343

--- PAGE BREAK ---

posed plan Great Britain would be penalized, while France,
which did not accord the United States most-favored-nation
treatment, would not be touched .
On June i i the Tariff Commission submitted to the Senate
another report in which it was shown that the decline in
commodity, prices was actually raising the level of American
tariff duties, in so far as the rates were specific. With wheat,
for example, selling, at $1.25 a bushel, the specific duty of
42 cents was equal to an ad valorem duty of only 34 per
cent; but with wheat down to. 5o cents a bushel, the same
specific duty was equivalent to 84 per cent. The Tariff Com-
mission pointed out that about half the imports dutiable un-
der the Hawley-Smoot Act were subject to specific rates. On
the average, the ad valorem equivalents of these rates in
March, 1932, were 41 per cent, higher than in July, 1930 : As
a result, the general level of tariff duties under the tariff
of '93o bad risen approximately to 26 per cent.
Congress adjourned without enacting "compensating"
duties . The net result of its tariff deliberations during the
first session was a bill deploring the prevalence of high tariffs,
which was vetoed by, the President, and the enactment, in the
guise of a revenue measure, of duties on copper, lumber,
coal, and oil .
6. Postponement o f the Far Eastern Question :
the Stimson Doctrine
Finally, it is appropriate to notice here one of the most
striking consequences of the inability of governments to take
positive action during the winter of 1931-32 . For out of this
political paralysis a new and far-reaching doctrine of inter-
national law was projected upon the world : This is not the
proper place in our narrative for a discussion of the develop-
ments in Far Eastern affairs, but at this point the formulation
of the Stimson doctrine should be noted. This doctrine, de-
claring that no situation resulting from the breach of treaties
would be recognized by the United States, was announced
[ 35 )e formulation
of the Stimson doctrine should be noted. This doctrine, de-
claring that no situation resulting from the breach of treaties
would be recognized by the United States, was announced
[ 35 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---Stimson doctrine should be noted. This doctrine, de-
claring that no situation resulting from the breach of treaties
would be recognized by the United States, was announced
[ 35 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

at a time when it had been made manifest that Japan would
not halt her advance in Manchuria and that the powers of
the League and the United States could not and would not
attempt to take positive _measures to halt the advance .
By December of 1931 it was evident that the powers did
not dare to set the machinery of the League in motion to
restrain Japan and that the United States could not resort to
the usual method of upholding its rights under the Nine-
Power Treaty. It had become necessary to do something that
would reserve all rights for the future without entailing any
action to maintain them in the present . In this situation the
Stimson doctrine was invented, and later accepted by the
powers of the League when their impotence to enforce the
Covenant had been demonstrated in Geneva during March .
In saying this, we do not mean to pass judgment upon the
doctrine itself, and such comment on it as we are able to
make we are reserving for a later chapter. We simply desire
to note here the circumstances and the atmosphere in which
the doctrine was first formulated, because they bear directly
upon the fact that the winter of 1931-32 was a period when
domestic crises in all countries and a resurgence of national-
ist feeling under the impact of danger and distress compelled
the governments to invent devices for postponing action in
international affairs .
This the Stimson doctrine did. It permitted the United
States and the League to wait, without too much loss of face,
for the report of the Lytton Commission of Inquiry and to
postpone until November any further consideration of the
Manchurian question.
7. Democracies in a Crisis
Thus, during the winter of 1931-32, in all the principal
centers of power the statesmen in office found themselves
halted by the lag of public opinion . Most of them had
climbed to power by cultivating the public opinion which
now prevented them from taking the action which privately
[ 361office found themselves
halted by the lag of public opinion . Most of them had
climbed to power by cultivating the public opinion which
now prevented them from taking the action which privately
[ 361

--- PAGE BREAK ---

they desired to take. Most of them, were in a position where
plain speaking and an attempt to lead public opinion would
have meant their downfall and the rise to power of men
even more irreconcilable than they were themselves . In each
country, measures of international reconstruction were op-
posed by powerful special influences, by the sentiment of
nationalism, and by that mass opinion which still believed the
formulae of an earlier time and had not yet brought its con-
victions abreast of the situation .
It became necessary, therefore, for statesmen to wait until
the pressure of events brought public opinion to a realization
of the truths that public men did not dare to utter . Through-
out the winter of 1931-32 they watched the deterioration of
the economic life of the world and could do nothing but
hope that as conditions became worse, public opinion would
become wiser .
E 37 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---f 1931-32 they watched the deterioration of
the economic life of the world and could do nothing but
hope that as conditions became worse, public opinion would
become wiser .
E 37 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER THREE
ECONOMIC DETERIORATION IN THE PERIOD OF
POSTPONEMENT
x. The Decline in the United States
WHILE the governments found it impossible to take action
and to reach agreements, the expected happened . Conditions
grew worse. In the present chapter we shall note the economic
losses suffered during the period of postponement, in so far
as they can be measured by the yardstick of available sta-
tistics.
When Congress convened in December, 1931, business ac-
tivity in the United States had been contracting almost with-
out interruption for a period of twenty-nine months . The
indices of production, distribution, and employment then
showed an average decline of about 40 per cent from the
high point reached in 1929, and of about 30 per cent from
the level of 1923-25 . During the first six months of 1932
these indices fell still further .
By the end of June, 1932, industrial production was more
than go per cent below the average level for 1929 . Construc-
tion operations, outside of public works, were almost at a
standstill. Freight car loadings, one of the most dependable
indices of business activity, showed the smallest volume for
any year since 1918, when such data first became available .
Factory employment had fallen more than 40 per cent below
the level of 1929 and industrial payrolls had been cut in
half.'
These figures, however, do not adequately suggest the
a Cf. Appendix V (e) .
t 38 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---len more than 40 per cent below
the level of 1929 and industrial payrolls had been cut in
half.'
These figures, however, do not adequately suggest the
a Cf. Appendix V (e) .
t 38 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

extent of the losses suffered during the period of postpone-
ment. For a clearer picture of conditions in the United States
at the end of the first half of 1932, it is necessary to consider
changes at certain points in more detail and particularly to
note the effect of continued depression on (i) prices, (ii)
profits, (iii) financial and commercial failures, (iv) unem-
ployment and wage deflation, (v) the position of agriculture,
and (vi) foreign trade.
(i} Pricea
In itself both a cause and a consequence of the depression,
the downward trend of commodity prices continued without
respite during the first six months of 1932 . The index of
wholesale prices prepared by the United States Department
of Labor had fallen by 14 per cent in the period from Janu-
ary, 1931, to January, 1932 . Between January and June, 1932,
it had declined by an additional 5 per cent. Prices which had
seemed ruinously low in 1931 fell still lower in 1932 . Thus,
cotton, which had reached the low level of 81/2 cents a pound
in June, 1931, sold on June 8, 1932, below 5 cents a pound,
the lowest price in thirty-two years . Wheat fell from 56 to
50 cents a bushel during the same period, corn from 56 to
31
cents, copper from 8 to 51/2 cents, pig iron from $17.25 to
$14.85 a ton, rubber from $1/2 to 23/4 cents a pound, and silk
from $2 .30 to $1.2o a pound .
No important commodity escaped deflation . The recession
in the general level of prices between July, 1929, and June,
1932, amounted to 35 per cent. Not only was this one of the
most severe deflation of which modern business has record
;
the evil effects of so swift and so persistent a decline in the
value of goods produced by human labor were intensified by
a capricious disproportion in the extent of losses suffered by
different groups of commodities, with a consequent disloca-
tion of the equilibrium previously established between whole-
sale and retail prices, between prices of raw materials and
[391s suffered by
different groups of commodities, with a consequent disloca-
tion of the equilibrium previously established between whole-
sale and retail prices, between prices of raw materials and
[391

--- PAGE BREAK ---

prices of finished goods, between prices of producers' goods
and prices of consumers' goods, and between selling prices
and costs of production .
Meantime, as commodity prices fell, the trend of security
prices also continued downward . The following table shows
the average price of 421 stocks and of sixty high-grade bonds
in the last month of each quarter between January, 1931, and
June, 1932 :
Weakness in the security markets, so evident in this table,
was a deterrent to the flotation of new security issues . The
total for 1931 was only a little more than half (52 per cent)
of that for the previous year and only about a third (34 per
cent) of that for 1929 . During the first half of 1932, total
flotations, excluding refunding operations, amounted to only
$661,290,000, compared with $2,221,500,000 for the corre-
sponding period of 1931, $4,867,647,000 for the first half of
1930, and $5,433,621,000 for the first half of 1929 . Flota-
tions during the first six months of 1932 were smaller than
those for any corresponding period since the World War .
We shall have occasion in a later chapter to note a similar
contraction in the volume of foreign issues .
(ii) Profits
Deflation of prices necessarily played havoc with business
profits. Figures prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, based on the annual earnings statements of 719
business concerns, showed that net profits in 1931, after the
'Standard Statistics Company index .
{ 401
Stocks2
Bonds2
Mar., 1931
122
100.0
June, 1931
95
99.4
Sept.,1931
82
95 .6
Dec., 1931
58
81 .6
Mar., 1932
57
8o.6
June,1932
34
72.2

--- PAGE BREAK ---'Standard Statistics Company index .
{ 401
Stocks2
Bonds2
Mar., 1931
122
100.0
June, 1931
95
99.4
Sept.,1931
82
95 .6
Dec., 1931
58
81 .6
Mar., 1932
57
8o.6
June,1932
34
72.2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

payment of fixed charges, were 61 per cent smaller than in
193o, and 78 per cent below those in 1929 . Both railways and
industrial companies suffered severely. The net operating
income of x71 Class I railroads was 40 per cent smaller in
1931 than in 1930 and 58 per cent smaller than in 1929 .
During the first six months of 1932 earnings were still fall-
ing. There are no official data of dividend payments by all
classes of corporations, but unofficial records indicated an
average decline of 30 per cent in this period, compared with
the corresponding months of 1930 .'
As earnings declined, both railways and manufacturing
industries found it necessary to reduce or to omit dividends .
By the end of June, 1932, only four of the railways whose
stocks were active on the New York Stock Exchange were
still paying dividends on their common shares, and the divi-
dends of two of these had been reduced .4
(iii) Failures
The reduction or omission of dividends was followed in
many cases by receiverships and failures
.
During 1-931 nine-
teen railroads, with a total capitalization of $432,151,526,
were placed in receivership. The extent of bank and com-
mercial failures during 1931 and the first half of 1932 is
shown in the following table :
Commercial
Banks
Institutions
First quarter, 1931 365
8,483
Second quarter, 1931 320
7,627
Third quarter, 1931 456
5 .863
Fourth quarter, 1931 1 ,055
7,315
First quarter, 1932 514
9,141
Second quarter, 1932 307
8,292
'Cf
. Appendix V (f) .
"These four roads were the Chesapeake and Ohio, the Delaware and
Hudson, the Norfolk and Western, and the Union Pacific. The dividends of
the two last-named had been reduced .
[41]

--- PAGE BREAK ---"These four roads were the Chesapeake and Ohio, the Delaware and
Hudson, the Norfolk and Western, and the Union Pacific. The dividends of
the two last-named had been reduced .
[41]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The establishment of the Reconstruction Finance Corpora-
tion and the adoption of other remedial measures noted in
another chapter,' subs
tially reduced the number of bank
failures in the first
of 1932 from the appallingly high
figure reached in the last quarter of 1931. But commercial
failures continued in unprecedented
number and with
steadily increasing losses, as the following table shows :
Year
Number
Liabilities
192.9 1,909
$40,271,000
1930 2.,196
55,690,000
1931 1,357
60,776,000
1932 (six months) .
.
2,905
89,547,E
(iv) Unemployment and Wage Deflation
An, inevitable consequence of business failures, of falling
prices, and of operating deficits in place of operating profits,
was a reduction of employment and a deflation of wages .
During the first four months of 1931 the Federal Reserve
Board's index of factory employment, adjusted for seasonal
variations, had remained at a fairly constant figure, about 22
per cent below the average of 1923-25 . Between April and -
December, however, the index fell from 78 to'69 .4, and this
recession continued during the first six months of
1932 . In
June the index stood at 6o, only a little more than half the
figure for 1929, when the average for the year was 102 .
The decline in payrolls was still more marked, indicating
that wage reductions were accompanying the discharge or
suspension of workers . The Federal Reserve Board's index
of payrolls fell from an average of x09.1 in 1929 to 68.o in
1931 . In June, 1931, it stood at 67.6 ; by June, 1932, it had
fallen to 42 .6. This decline of 37 per cent in twelve months
reflected both the increase in unemployment and the de-
crease in wages.
For workmen who remained employed, lower wages and
'Cf. Chapter VII.
[42 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---of 37 per cent in twelve months
reflected both the increase in unemployment and the de-
crease in wages.
For workmen who remained employed, lower wages and
'Cf. Chapter VII.
[42 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fewer working hours were only partially offset by the decline
in the cost of living. Between June, 193x, and June, 1932,
the cost-of-living index
of the National Industrial Confer-
ence Board fell from 85 .9 to 77.2 .
(v) The Position of Agriculture
The Department of Agriculture estimated the total value
of farm crops in the United States in 1929 at 8,088 million
dollars, in 193o at 5,819 millions, and in 1931 at 4,213 mil-
lions. The decline in crop values between
1929 and 1931
amounted to 49 per cent and represented a decrease of nearly
4,000 million'dollars in the farmers' gross income . This great
shrinkage was the result of lower prices rather than of
smaller output. The yield of the leading crops in 2931 was
actually about 1o per cent greater than in 1929, but the
prices at which they could be sold declined by nearly 40 per
cent. Efforts of the Federal Farm Board to effect a substan-
tial reduction of output and a stabilization of prices failed
in their objective. The cotton crop of 1931 was 15 per cent
larger than the crop of 1928 and had a value of 6o per cent
less. The wheat crop of 1931 was about 2 per cent less than
that of 1928, and its value was 55 per cent less .e
(vi) Foreign Trade
Finally, among other evidences of economic deterioration
during the first half of 1932, it is necessary to note a heavy
loss of foreign trade . Between 1929 and 1931 the value of
American exports had already declined by more than 53 per
cent and the value of imports by more than 51 per cent .
During the first six months- of 1932 these losses were ex-
tended The table on the following page shows how far the
value of exports and of imports during_ these six months fell
below the corresponding figures for the same months of the
poor year 193 1 -
-Cf. Appendix V (d) ..
43he following page shows how far the
value of exports and of imports during_ these six months fell
below the corresponding figures for the same months of the
poor year 193 1 -
-Cf. Appendix V (d) ..
43

--- PAGE BREAK ---ows how far the
value of exports and of imports during_ these six months fell
below the corresponding figures for the same months of the
poor year 193 1 -
-Cf. Appendix V (d) ..
43

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FOREIGN TRADE or TEE UNITED STATES
Measured in terms of value, American exports during the
first half of 1932 were the smallest for the corresponding
period of any year since 1910, and imports were the smallest
since 1909. In both cases, part of the loss was due to lower
prices, particularly of raw materials . But when due allow-
ance is made for, price changes, the data show an unmistak-
able shrinkage in the volume of trade itself .
One significant consequence of the loss of foreign markets
was the reversal of a long-established trend in American
foreign trade. For many years before 1931, exports of manu-
factured goods had been increasing far more rapidly than
exports of raw materials . In 19oo, manufactures comprised
only about 24 per cent of the total value of the goods we
sold abroad ; by 1930, they had increased to more than 50
per cent . The figures furnish one means of measuring the
profound industrial and social changes which had taken
place in the United States during these years . Steadily ex-
panding markets in foreign countries for our manufactures
played an important part' in the development of American
industrialization, the establishment of a high wage scale, and
the perfection of modern methods of manufacturing .
With the deepening of the depression, the trend of Ameri-
can export trade was now reversed . The decline in exports
of raw materials was relatively small ; the shrinkage in ex-
ports of manufactures was much greater . During the first six
months of 1932, exports of raw foodstuffs and raw materials
[ 44 )
(In thousands of dollars)
Decline from
Decline from
1931
Exports Previous Year Imports Previous Year
Jan
150,07-2
39 .9%
135,530
25.6%
Feb
1 53,972.
31.2
130,978
25 .1
Mar
31 55,150
34 .3
131,189
41 .4
Apr
135,359
37.5
12.6,512-
3 1 .7
May
132,o65
35.3
112-,2.76
37.7
June
114,259
39.0
110,200
36 . 5150,07-2
39 .9%
135,530
25.6%
Feb
1 53,972.
31.2
130,978
25 .1
Mar
31 55,150
34 .3
131,189
41 .4
Apr
135,359
37.5
12.6,512-
3 1 .7
May
132,o65
35.3
112-,2.76
37.7
June
114,259
39.0
110,200
36 . 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---530
25.6%
Feb
1 53,972.
31.2
130,978
25 .1
Mar
31 55,150
34 .3
131,189
41 .4
Apr
135,359
37.5
12.6,512-
3 1 .7
May
132,o65
35.3
112-,2.76
37.7
June
114,259
39.0
110,200
36 . 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

declined by 10 .4 per cent and by 9 .3 per cent respectively,
but exports of manufactured goods declined by 40 .3 per cent
and exports of finished goods by 47 .3 per cent .
Loss of foreign markets was particularly severe in the case
of industries manufacturing steel products, farm machinery,
electrical apparatus, automobiles and motor trucks, office
equipment, and industrial machinery .
2 . The Decline Abroad
While conditions in the United States were thus growing
worse, no turn for the better appeared in countries which
purchased goods from us in steadily decreasing volume and
attempted, in turn, to sell us their own products . Occasion-
ally, as in England during the first quarter of 1932, there
came brief periods when the depression seemed to be lifting,
but the improvement in such cases proved to be of short
duration.
It is unnecessary to consider in detail losses of industrial
activity, profits, and employment which parallel at many
points our own experience during the depression . But the
rapid increase of surplus stocks of raw materials, accom-
panied by a general breakdown in the level of world prices,
must be noted as one of the most destructive influences at
work during the first six months of 1932 .
In Europe and Australia, the Far East and Latin America,
producers of raw materials were driven inexorably to in-
crease their output in an attempt to offset lower prices. The
result was a further decline in values and in the purchasing
power of producers of raw materials . The decline of pur-
chasing power played its inevitable part in the downward
spiral of diminishing demand, curtailment of industrial pro-
duction, and falling prices .
Since the production of raw materials could not be ad-
justed readily to reduced demand, the decline of purchasing
power was followed by an accumulation of surplus stocks .
The following table shows how rapidly the surplus increased
[451could not be ad-
justed readily to reduced demand, the decline of purchasing
power was followed by an accumulation of surplus stocks .
The following table shows how rapidly the surplus increased
[451

--- PAGE BREAK ---sted readily to reduced demand, the decline of purchasing
power was followed by an accumulation of surplus stocks .
The following table shows how rapidly the surplus increased
[451

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in the case of five commodities of great importance in world
trade:
During the first six months of 1932 the accumulation of
surplus stocks continued . In this period the carry-over in
world supplies of both wheat and cotton reached a new high
figure. More than one-third of a year's production of sugar
was begging for buyers . More than enough coffee and rubber
were available to supply a year's demand . There was also a
large accumulation of surplus stocks of the more important
metals, especially copper, lead, tin, zinc, and aluminum .
Under the weight of these unwanted surpluses, commodity
prices continued to sag, even in countries which had been
forced off the gold standard . In Great Britain, Japan, and
the Scandinavian countries the trend of prices during the first
half of 1932 was persistently toward lower levels, though
the currencies of these nations were no longer linked with
gold. In a few countries, notably Chile and Peru, where
actual currency inflation had made some headway, the price
trend was upward; but these cases were exceptional .
In general, it may be said that world prices in terms of
gold fell by 30 per cent, or perhaps by as much as 35 per
cent, between midsummer of 1929 and midsummer of 1932!
This estimate is based on indices which include numerous
commodities whose prices were maintained at wholly arti-
ficial levels by means of trade restrictions . Indices based only
on commodities whose prices were governed by free competi-
'This index is based on .data from the World Economic Survey,
1931-1932,
League of Nations Publication, Official No . A . x8 . 1932 . II, 93 . 94-
'Cf
. Appendix V (b) .
t 46 ]
1929 = 100)7
Month
1,929
1930
1931
Wheat Aug.
zoo
95
ro6
Cotton Dec .
zoo
129
148
Sugar Dec .
zoo
12.4
1S3
Coffee . .
. . Mar.
100
177
z88
Rubber Mar .
moo
151
2.33. 94-
'Cf
. Appendix V (b) .
t 46 ]
1929 = 100)7
Month
1,929
1930
1931
Wheat Aug.
zoo
95
ro6
Cotton Dec .
zoo
129
148
Sugar Dec .
zoo
12.4
1S3
Coffee . .
. . Mar.
100
177
z88
Rubber Mar .
moo
151
2.33

--- PAGE BREAK ---V (b) .
t 46 ]
1929 = 100)7
Month
1,929
1930
1931
Wheat Aug.
zoo
95
ro6
Cotton Dec .
zoo
129
148
Sugar Dec .
zoo
12.4
1S3
Coffee . .
. . Mar.
100
177
z88
Rubber Mar .
moo
151
2.33

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tion in-world-markets would undoubtedly show much greater
declines. Several such indices, composed solely of -prices of
the more sensitive . commodities, were assembled in x932 by
the Economic Intelligence Service of the League of Nations
In each case they showed a recession of from 55 to 66 per
cent during the three years of the depression.
3. The Decline of World Trade
Owing partly to this decline in the level of world prices,
foreign trade suffered a further sharp contraction in
1932 .
We have already noted that during the first half of this
year the value of our own exports reached the lowest point
for any corresponding period since 1910 . Our experience in
this respect was shared in varying degree by all other im-
portant trading nations. For the six months from January to
June, 1932, British exports of domestic products declined in
value by 6 per cent, compared with the corresponding figure
for the same six months of 1931 ; those of France declined
by 37.9 per cent ; of Germany, by 35.2 per cent ; of Italy, by
31.1 per cent ; and of Canada, by 23.7 per cent .
As in our own case, part of this decline was due to the
lower prices at which goods in international trade were
bought and sold . But the fact that volume declined as well
as value is clearly shown in those cases in which quantity
figures are available . On a basis of reported tonnage, Ger-
man exports and imports declined by 22.7 per cent and by
26 per cent respectively during the first half of 1932, com-
pared with corresponding figures for the first half of 1931 .
French exports and imports declined by 22.1 per cent and by
20 .5 per cent respectively .10
For many countries, no data concerning volume are avail-
able. But it is evident that in terms of value the total for-
* Cf. World Economic Survey, 1931-1931, 120-122 .
10 Though the data are not strictly comparable, it
, is possible
to give a
rough indication of the trend in the volume of the foreign trade of the four
leading commercial countries, the United States, Great
Britain, Germany,
and France. This is shown in Appendix III (d) .
[47}ugh indication of the trend in the volume of the foreign trade of the four
leading commercial countries, the United States, Great
Britain, Germany,
and France. This is shown in Appendix III (d) .
[47}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

eign trade of the world, which :had already fallen in 1931
about 4o per cent below the level of 1929, declined in the
first six months of 1932 to about half the figure for that year
of high prices, large profits and comparatively little unem-
ployment .
To this extent had the economic deterioration within the
different nations reflected itself in a paralysis of their inter-
national commerce.
{ 48 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---atively little unem-
ployment .
To this extent had the economic deterioration within the
different nations reflected itself in a paralysis of their inter-
national commerce.
{ 48 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER FOUR
DISTURBANCES IN LATIN AMERICA
r. The Economic Crisis
THE growing severity of the depression in the early months
of 1932 had its effect on the relations of the United States
with its Southern neighbors . The countries of Latin America
are producers mainly of primary materials, and these com-
modities continued during 1932 to bear the brunt of price
deflation. The prices of sugar, wheat, beef, cattle, hides,
wool, tin, and copper were all brought to new low levels .
There was some improvement during the year in the price of
coffee and of petroleum, but not enough to weaken the grip
of the depression in the regions where these commodities
were produced.
The volume as well as the value of exports had declined,
and the consequent disturbance of the trade balances led to
the general adoption of exchange control and high tariff
rates with a further strangulation of international com-
merce.' The governments found it increasingly difficult to
obtain the foreign exchange needed for service on their ex-
ternal debts. Bolivia, Brazil, Chile and Peru had defaulted
in 1931 . Colombia and Uruguay in 1932 were unable to meet
payments on their sinking funds, and a number of the state
and municipal governments of South American republics
were likewise in default .2 Colombia and Venezuela were the
only important countries whose foreign exchange was main-
' Every country in South America except Peru had resorted to some form
of exchange control between 2930 and 1932 . Cf. Appendix III (a) .
' Cf. Chapter V .
[491

--- PAGE BREAK ---exchange was main-
' Every country in South America except Peru had resorted to some form
of exchange control between 2930 and 1932 . Cf. Appendix III (a) .
' Cf. Chapter V .
[491

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tained near parity,$ and at the end of 1932 only vestiges of
the gold standard were to be found in Latin America .
2 . The Interest o f the United States
The financial difficulties of these countries were of especial
interest to the people of the United States because of their
large investments in that area. More capital from the United
States had been invested
in Latin America than in all of
Europe. An estimate by the Department of Commerce
showed a total investment in Latin America at the end of
1930 of between 5,150 and 5,350 million dollars, compared
with an investment of 4,500 millions in Europe
. 4
The amounts of Latin American securities publicly offered
in the United States during the years 192o-31, with refund-
ing issues deducted, are shown in the following table :
(In thousands of dollars)
This table gives only a partial picture of the financial stake
of American investors in the South American and Caribbean
' The countries using United States currency, as, for example, Cuba and
Panama, obviously had less of an exchange problem .
'A New Estimate of American Investments Abroad. U. S. Department of
Commerce, Trade Information Bulletin No. 767, 1931 .
' Including government-guaranteed .
'There was one issue in 1931
for a Cuban sugar company, but as' this
was for refunding other securities already outstanding it is not included in
this tabulation.
5
Year
Governments Corporate
Total
1920 . . . .
-
49,050
49,050
1921 . . . .
187,486
42,142
22..9,62.8
1922
1 59,775
63,899
223674
192-3 . . . .
67,500
47,191
114,691
1924 .
. . .
114,555
72,399
186,954
1925 . . . .
109,95 1
48 ,82-5
158,776
1826 . . . .
238,490
84,690
368,180
1827 . . . .
277,08,
62-,619
339,700
192.8 . . . .
283,198
91,880
330,078
1929 . . . .
65,548
109,402
174,950
1930 . . . .
177,11 2.
17,33 8
194,450
1831 . . .
None
None6
-. .
238,490
84,690
368,180
1827 . . . .
277,08,
62-,619
339,700
192.8 . . . .
283,198
91,880
330,078
1929 . . . .
65,548
109,402
174,950
1930 . . . .
177,11 2.
17,33 8
194,450
1831 . . .
None
None6
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

countries; for about 68 per cent of their investment was in
some form other than securities . The general character of
the investments was determined by the predominant indus-
tries in each country . Where the chief industry was mining,
as in Bolivia, Chile and Peru, the investment was made, for
the most part, directly in properties . On the other hand,
agricultural countries like Argentina and Brazil did not at-
tract direct investments and obtained the greater part of their
capital through the flotation of bonds in foreign financial
centers, mainly New York and London . The government of
Venezuela was unique in having no external debt, but there
was a large investment of American capital in the Vene-
zuelan petroleum industry.
The following table shows the total investment of capital
from the United States in the principal countries of Latin
America and the proportion of direct investments and of
security investments at the end of 193o, as, estimated by the
Department of Commerce :
As between Latin America and Europe, the American
methods of investment differed widely. Nearly two-thirds of
the investment in Europe had been effected through the
public .sale of securities, but barely one-third of the invest-
{51)
Total (in
thousands
of dollars)
Direct
Investment
(per cent)
Security
Investment
(per cent)
Cuba
1,066,551
85
15
Mexico
81o,571
85
15
Argentina
807,777
45
55
Chile
700,935
63
37
Brazil
557,001
38
62
Colombia
301,692.
43
57
Venezuela
247,238
100
Peru .
.
200,085
62
38
Bolivia
116,043
53
47
All others
551,878
76
24
Total
5,359,77 1
68
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---e
700,935
63
37
Brazil
557,001
38
62
Colombia
301,692.
43
57
Venezuela
247,238
100
Peru .
.
200,085
62
38
Bolivia
116,043
53
47
All others
551,878
76
24
Total
5,359,77 1
68
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ment in Latin America had been made in this way . The re-
mainder represented a direct investment in properties . Most
of the Latin American securities, moreover, had either been
issued directly by the central governments or their political
subdivisions, or they had the support of a government guar-
antee. Only 2 per cent of the Latin American securities held
in the United States had been issued on the unsupported
credit of private corporations, whereas 20 per cent of the
European issues were of that description .
3 . Political Disturbances
A series of political disturbances and revolutions had be-
gun in 1930, 7 and between 193o and 1932 only three of the
ten republics of South America-Colombia, Uruguay, and
Venezuela-had escaped. Of those which had undergone a
radical change of government, Argentina in 1932 was the
only one that appeared to be making progress. That country
in 1932 had a favorable balance of trade, and had maintained
the service on its external debt .
The revolutions of 1930-31 had not provided a cure for
any country's economic troubles ; they had indeed intensified
them. For even had there been no political upheavals, the de-
pression would probably have increased in Latin America, as
it did in the rest of the world during the first half of 1932 ;
but the military and political complications produced by the
revolts made conditions still worse . Consequently, the new
revolutionary governments faced problems far more difficult
than those which had caused the overthrow of the preceding
regimes. In South America during 1932 there was a civil
war in Brazil, a bewildering series of revolts in Chile, a vio-
lent but short-lived political disturbance in Ecuador, and a
naval mutiny and attempted revolution in Peru . There was
trouble also in the Caribbean area, with revolution in Hon-
duras, a brief disturbance in Costa Rica, and prolonged
political tension in Cuba .
"Cf. The United States in World Affairs, 1931, Chapter V.
[ 52 1also in the Caribbean area, with revolution in Hon-
duras, a brief disturbance in Costa Rica, and prolonged
political tension in Cuba .
"Cf. The United States in World Affairs, 1931, Chapter V.
[ 52 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---n area, with revolution in Hon-
duras, a brief disturbance in Costa Rica, and prolonged
political tension in Cuba .
"Cf. The United States in World Affairs, 1931, Chapter V.
[ 52 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Latin American revolutions of 1930 and 1931 had
been almost uniformly successful, and were marked by
comparatively little violence and bloodshed.$ The disturb-
ances of 1932 were of a different order . They were more
violent, and most of them were unsuccessful. It cost moree in
blood and treasure to prevent changes in 1932than it did to
effect sweeping changes in 1930-31 . The earlier movements
were for the most part popular uprisings against autocratic
and long-established regimes . In 1932, factional or regional
jealousies and misunderstandings played a greater part.
A. Civil War in Brazil
The Brazilian revolution of 1930 had created a grievance
in the large and populous state of Sao Paulo ; it had lost its
ascendency in the federation . President Washington Luis and
President-elect Julio Prestes, both of whom came from that
state, had been displaced, and a Provisional President, Dr .
Getulio Vargas from the state of Rio Grande do Sul, had
succeeded to the office? Sao Paulo was dissatisfied with the
new regime. It was treated somewhat like a conquered terri-
tory, being governed by a personal representative of Presi-
dent Vargas, supported by federal troops and the state police .
When 'the Provisional President showed little interest in a
prompt restoration of constitutional government, much fric-
tion followed, and this spread beyond Sao Paulo and led to
the resignation of the liberal members of the Vargas Cabinet .
In the spring of 1932 the issue came to be clearly defined
between the maintenance of a military dictatorship and a re-
turn to constitutional government . Unrest was intensified by
the growing economic depression, and opposition to the gov-
ernment was naturally centered in Sao Paulo. On July 9 at
midnight a popular uprising broke out in the city of Sao
Paulo. The revolt soon spread throughout the state. Among
the Paulistas there was tremendous enthusiasm for the new
Cf. The United States in World Affairs, s93r, Chapter V .
'Ibid., 57-58 .
1531f Sao
Paulo. The revolt soon spread throughout the state. Among
the Paulistas there was tremendous enthusiasm for the new
Cf. The United States in World Affairs, s93r, Chapter V .
'Ibid., 57-58 .
1531

--- PAGE BREAK ---olt soon spread throughout the state. Among
the Paulistas there was tremendous enthusiasm for the new
Cf. The United States in World Affairs, s93r, Chapter V .
'Ibid., 57-58 .
1531

--- PAGE BREAK ---

revolution . 'Women gait -up their jewels for the cause, and
recruiting was active fo - the Sao Paulo army. There was
much sympathy with the `revolt in the neighboring state of
Minas Geraes and in Rio Grande do Sul, but there the move-
ment was repressed by the prompt action of the federal
government . Both sides placed large forces in the field, well
equipped with moderrS_rtillery, tanks, and airplanes, but
the Federals were the stronger and gradually gained the up-
per hand .
The conflict came to an end on October 3, after federal
and revolutionary forces variously estimated at from 130,000
to 200,000 men had taken the field . The Vargas Govern-
ment dealt moderately with the revolutionists . Amnesty was
granted to all except those directly responsible for the war
;
the leaders were deported, and some others were deprived
of their civil rights . Sao Paulo was promised a civil govern-
ment under a Paulista governor ; a new federal constitution
was to be drafted, and general elections were to be held on
May 3, 1933 .
The revolution demonstrated the strength of the federal
government, and it apparently completed the work begun in
the revolution of 1930, in so far as that uprising was aimed
at preventing the state of Sao Paulo from becoming too
powerful in the Brazilian federation., But before the situation
could be stabilized the commission appointed to draft the
new constitution had to solve the problem of adjusting the
balance among the more powerful states of Brazil while
maintaining the principle of local self-government in each
state.
B. Revolutions in Chile
It was in Chile, which for decades had been a model of
political order and stability, that the revolutionary move-
ment during 1932 went to the greatest extremes. The over-
throw of General Ibafiez in July, 1931, had been followed by
the peaceful election of Dr . Juan Esteban Montero to the
{ 541volutionary move-
ment during 1932 went to the greatest extremes. The over-
throw of General Ibafiez in July, 1931, had been followed by
the peaceful election of Dr . Juan Esteban Montero to the
{ 541

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt during 1932 went to the greatest extremes. The over-
throw of General Ibafiez in July, 1931, had been followed by
the peaceful election of Dr . Juan Esteban Montero to the
{ 541

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Presidency." President Montero had not sought the office .
He was the involuntary candidate of the moderate element--
,
lawyers, doctors, and others in the same social stratum--who
persuaded, him to accept the position . According to one of
his critics, he was "too constitutional for these trying
times."11 The revolutionary fever which was responsible for
his accession had not run its course, but while the country
drifted into deeper economic distress he . acted as if it had
done so, and sought to govern as if nothing had happened .
The outcome was a comp d'etat on June 4, 1932, led by
Colonel Marmaduque Grove and Senor Carlos Davila. They
set up a military junta in place of the constitutional regime .
The junta announced a radical socialistic program and gave
proof of its purpose by taking possession of the Central
Bank and by issuing a decree confiscating deposits of foreign
money in all the banks 'and promising the owners the
equivalent in Chilean currency . The members of the junta
soon fell to quarreling among themselves. Colonel Grove
wished to establish a socialist regime at once and
to deal
brusquely with foreigners, while Seror Davila, who had
been Chilean Ambassador in Washington, was less radical
and more respectful of foreign governments . Senor Davila
was forced out of the junta and was about to be sent into
exile, when the army and navy revolted. On June 17 Colonel
Grove and his associates were forced out of the government,
and Davila was reinstated at the head of the new junta . It
was now Colonel Grove's turn to go into exile. He was ban-
ished to Easter island, about 2,300 miles off the Chilean
coast .
The Davila junta restored the Central Bank to its previous
status. But when the directors and officers found the govern-
ment committed to a program of currency inflation, they re-
signed, and new officers more amenable to government in-
70The United States in World
Affairs, r93s, 59-60'.
n Letter from Chile, June 27, 1932 . Information Service,
Council on
Foreign Relations.
E 551gned, and new officers more amenable to government in-
70The United States in World
Affairs, r93s, 59-60'.
n Letter from Chile, June 27, 1932 . Information Service,
Council on
Foreign Relations.
E 551

--- PAGE BREAK ---rs more amenable to government in-
70The United States in World
Affairs, r93s, 59-60'.
n Letter from Chile, June 27, 1932 . Information Service,
Council on
Foreign Relations.
E 551

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fluence were - appointed. More currency was issued, and
public expenditures were increased in an effort to reduce
unemployment. Senor Davila announced that everyone would
be employed and happy by September i . This prophecy was,
not fulfilled. On September 13, after less than three months
in office, he too was deposed by a group of army and navy
officers.
General Bartolome Blanche was next installed as Pro-
visional President. The new Administration announced that
an election would be held on October 30 to choose a new
President, but this did not satisfy the civilian political part
ties, which had grown weary of the intrigues of military
cliques. During the last week of September, revolt broke out
in the state of Antofagasta . The officials there threatened to
set up an independent government unless a civilian adminis-
tration promptly replaced the military regime at the capital .
To avert this threat of civil war, General Blanche retired in
favor of Senor Abraham Umberto Oyanedel, the Chief
Justice of the Chilean Supreme Court . The election of Octo-
ber 3o resulted in the choice of former President Arturo
Alessandri. Colonel Marmaduque Grove, who landed in
Chile from his distant place of exile on election day, won
second place in the contest .
Chile had suffered more acutely from the industrial depres-
sion than most of her neighbors . For her prosperity depended
almost whollyy on exports of nitrates and copper, and trade
in these had drastically declined . The result was such wide-
spread social unrest that after the overthrow of General
Ibanez no political group was able to rally enough support
to remain in office for more than a brief period . The intel-
lectual and professional classes had their chance to improve
conditions under Dr. Montero ; the radical groups next had
their chance under Colonel Grove and Senor Davila, and
the military group then had a, turn with General Blanche .
They all failed. All were powerless to control the economic
forces of which their country was a victim .
{56}nel Grove and Senor Davila, and
the military group then had a, turn with General Blanche .
They all failed. All were powerless to control the economic
forces of which their country was a victim .
{56}

--- PAGE BREAK ---Davila, and
the military group then had a, turn with General Blanche .
They all failed. All were powerless to control the economic
forces of which their country was a victim .
{56}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

On October 21 the governments of the United States and
Great Britain formally extended recognition to the Oyanedel
Government. In taking this action, the government of the
United States was following its established policy of accord-
ing recognition when the evidence showed that the : new
government was in actual control, that there was no active
resistance to its rule, and that it intended to discharge its
international obligations . It was also understood that in this
instance, as in the case of the Latin American revolutions of
193o and 1931, our Department of State hadacted promptly
in order that, under the unfavorable economic conditions,
there might be no political obstacles to the progress of trade
recovery.12
C. Non-Recognition o f El Salvador
The recognition policy to which the United States adhered
in dealing with Chile was not followed in the case of El
Salvador . There were special reasons . In December, 1931, a
revolution in that country resulted in the overthrow of Presi-
dent Arturo Araujo and the accession to the Presidency of
General Maximiliano Martinez, the Minister of War . It
appeared' that the new regime was accepted by the people of
that republic. But in accordance with the so-called five-power
treaty of 1923, which was negotiated by the Central Ameri-
can republics and endorsed by the United States, the Depart-
ment of State refused to recognize the new Salvadorean
Government .
The purpose of this treaty was to promote greater political
stability in Central America by withholding recognition from
governments set up by revolutionary means . This policy had
originated in an agreement reached at the Central American
Conference in Washington in 1907. An "additional conven-
tion" attached to the general treaty of peace and amity nego-
tiated at that conference contained the following clause :
"Department of State Press Releases, September 17, 1930, October 22,
1932 . See also The United States in World Affairs, 1931, 64.
157 3ego-
tiated at that conference contained the following clause :
"Department of State Press Releases, September 17, 1930, October 22,
1932 . See also The United States in World Affairs, 1931, 64.
157 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---conference contained the following clause :
"Department of State Press Releases, September 17, 1930, October 22,
1932 . See also The United States in World Affairs, 1931, 64.
157 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The governments of the. High Contracting Parties shall not recog-
nize any-other government which may come into power in any of
the five republics as a consequence of a coup d'etat or of a revolu-
tion against the recognize
verament, so long as the freely elected
representatives of the
e
dple thereof have not constitutionally reor-
ganized the country .'s
In the treaty of 1923 this was repeated and made more
effective by the addition of the following clauses :
And even in such a case they obligate themselves not to acknowl-
edge the recognition if any of the persons elected as President, Vice
President, or Chief of State Designate should fall under any of the
following heads :
(z)
If he should be the leader or one of the leaders of a coup
d'etat or revolution, or through blood relationship or marriage, be
an ascendant or descendant or brother of such leader or leaders
.
(2)
If he should have been a Secretary of State or should have
held some high military command during the accomplishment of
the coup d'etat, the revolution, or while the election was being
carried on, or if he should have held this office or command within
the six months preceding the coup d'etat, revolution, or the elec-
tion .14
General Martinez as Minister of War had held "some
high military command during the accomplishment of the
coup d'etat." Thus there was possibly a double bar to his
recognition as President ." Nevertheless, he was President
de facto and apparently a successful administrator, and it
was only after strong representations by our Department of
State that the British government, which had not endorsed
the five-power treaties, was persuaded to withhold recogni-
tion in the spring of 1932. For it is customary for Great
"Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, x907, part
2, 696 .
"Documents of the American Association for International Conciliation,
1923, 638-639 .
'El Salvador had ratified the treaty of X923 with reservations as to this
clause, and the extent to which the four other governments which had rati-
fied unconditionally were obligated to withhold recognition from its new
government on this ground was a moot question . But the question was also
-academic, since the revolutionary origin of the government brought it fully
within the prohibitions fixed by the treaty.
[58)government on this ground was a moot question . But the question was also
-academic, since the revolutionary origin of the government brought it fully
within the prohibitions fixed by the treaty.
[58)

--- PAGE BREAK ---round was a moot question . But the question was also
-academic, since the revolutionary origin of the government brought it fully
within the prohibitions fixed by the treaty.
[58)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Britain and the United States to consult before recognizing
new governments in their, respective spheres of influence.
The decision of the United States to abide by its commit-
ments in Central America caused some financial loss to its
citizens. Under a debt agreement of a9s3, American creditors
of El Salvador obtained six million dollars in bonds secured
by a first lien on the customs. British creditors held a some-
what smaller amount with a second lien on the customs.
After the revolution these bonds were in default, and the
United States could not approve the appointment of a
customs administrator in El Salvador to insure the service
on the debt, as provided for in the debt agreement, without
recognizing the new Government.
The British creditors also suffered from this policy . This
fact, plus the desire of the British to continue a trade agree-
ment with El Salvador and to safeguard their markets, made
their government anxious to maintain effective representa-
tion18 In September, in spite of the objections of our Depart .
ment of State, Great Britain and France simultaneously ex-
tended formal recognition to, the Salvadorean Government,
and Belgium, Ecuador, Italy, Poland, and Spain quickly fol-
lowed. In Washington this action was resented, for it seemed
that for the sake of an immediate small trade advantage
these governments had weakened a policy which would check
revolutions and in the long run vastly increase their, oppor
tunities for trade in Central America. At a time when revo-
lutions were so frequent, Washington regarded it as desir-
able that such machinery as existed for their prevention
should not be impaired but strengthened .
In the meantime there were indications that the five-power
agreement was unsatisfactory to several of the Central
American governments . The Martinez Administration in El
Salvador, naturally, found it objectionable . The government
of Costa Rica, for some reason, was sympathetic with the
Martinez regime, and on November 9 President- Ricardo
"Timer (London), September 28, 30, 1932 .
.[59), found it objectionable . The government
of Costa Rica, for some reason, was sympathetic with the
Martinez regime, and on November 9 President- Ricardo
"Timer (London), September 28, 30, 1932 .
.[59)

--- PAGE BREAK ---able . The government
of Costa Rica, for some reason, was sympathetic with the
Martinez regime, and on November 9 President- Ricardo
"Timer (London), September 28, 30, 1932 .
.[59)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Jimenez, after stating that the treaty of 1923 had not always
worked well, declared that it was the intention of his govern-
ment to denounce it before January i . Under the terms of
this five-power agreement, any signatory government might
denounce it on one year's notice and it would become in-
operative, so far as that government was concerned, within
twelve months. On November
18 it was reported at the
Costa Rican capital that the Foreign Minister, Dr. Leonidas
Pacheco, would visit the other Central American capitals by
airplane and urge a united movement for the abrogation of
the treaty.17
As the government of Honduras had been confronted with
a revolution since June, there were good reasons why it
should adhere to the treaty and retain the protection which
the non-recognition provision seemed to offer. In Nicaragua,
where political turmoil had long prevailed, the newly elected
President, Juan Sacasa, was about to take office, and there
were reasons also why he should desire the protection which
the five-power treaty would give his administration .
4. International Disputes
During 1932 the strife in Latin America was not confined
within the borders of individual states . The relations of sev-
eral republics toward their neighbors became so strained
that - diplomatic contacts were severed . Peru broke off 'rela-
tions with Mexico in May because of the alleged sympathy of
the Mexican legation with the revolutionist element in Lima .
Argentina and Uruguay suspended diplomatic relations on
July 3, as a result of the activities of Argentine political exiles
in Montevideo, but relations were resumed two months later.
Friction also developed between Argentina and Chile over
tariff restrictions on the shipment of their products across
the Andean boundary, and service on the Trans-Andine
Railway was temporarily suspended in April because the
i' On December
24 the Costa Rican government gave formal notice to
other governments that it had denounced the treaty .
[6o}on the Trans-Andine
Railway was temporarily suspended in April because the
i' On December
24 the Costa Rican government gave formal notice to
other governments that it had denounced the treaty .
[6o}

--- PAGE BREAK ---Railway was temporarily suspended in April because the
i' On December
24 the Costa Rican government gave formal notice to
other governments that it had denounced the treaty .
[6o}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

trade barriers between the two countries had almost de-
stroyed traffic.18
A. The Leticia Incident
A serious quarrel between Colombia and Peru
followed
the seizure of the Colombian settlement of Leticia on the
upper Amazon by a force of Peruvian civilians on September
x. This territory was not in dispute between the two govern-
ments. Leticia had been ceded to Colombia by Peru under a
treaty negotiated in 1922 and ratified by the respective gov-
ernments in 1925 and 1927 . The leaders of the foray insisted
that they were acting to protect Peruvians in this area from
ill treatment by Colombia. This seizure was accomplished
without bloodshed, and the local authorities of Iquitos, a
Peruvian settlement on the upper Amazon where the raid
had been organized, gave their support to the movement and
called on their government to obtain a revision of the treaty .
Neither government at first regarded the seizure as a
serious matter, and Colombia expressed confidence in the
readiness of Peru to uphold all treaty obligations
. The
Peruvian government, while disavowing and condemning the
seizure in confidential communications to the Colombian
government, hesitated to make a public disavowal . Because
of the expressed determination of the people of Iquitos and
the surrounding territory to retain control of the captured
town, it urged the Colombian government to take no forcible
action, as this might arouse "unrestrainable national aspira-
tions" and "evoke an alarming response throughout
the
country. Peru then took steps to have the issue submitted to
arbitration under the Washington Convention of 1929, but
Colombia insisted that inasmuch as the Peruvian government
had not disputed her territorial rights there was nothing to
arbitrate and that any action she might take toward the dis-
1° Dispatches from Buenos Aires in November announced plans for the
resumption of traffic as a result of a six-month agreement between Argentina
and Chile for the lowering of trade barriers .
{61}is-
1° Dispatches from Buenos Aires in November announced plans for the
resumption of traffic as a result of a six-month agreement between Argentina
and Chile for the lowering of trade barriers .
{61}

--- PAGE BREAK ---om Buenos Aires in November announced plans for the
resumption of traffic as a result of a six-month agreement between Argentina
and Chile for the lowering of trade barriers .
{61}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

turbers of the peace at Leticia was exclusively a matter of
domestic jurisdiction . When the Colombian
government
finally announced its intention to maintain its territorial
rights by force, its population responded with an outburst of
militant enthusiasm. The war spirit then flared up in Peru,
and both countries, in spite of their financial difficulties, be-
gan to mobilize their forces and to purchase supplies and
armament. This quarrel at least had the effect of uniting
the people behind their governments and warding off possi-
ble domestic political complications resulting from the un-
favorable economic situation.
B. The Chaco Dispute
The Chaco is a region about 700 miles long and 300 miles
wide between the Paraguay River and the foothills of the
Andes."' It is a geographical area rather than a well-defined
political unit . Title to the southern part is vested in Argentina
and is nott in dispute. This territory has been developed un-
der Argentine auspices, is served by railroads, and is an im-
portant producer of timber, cotton, and quebracho .
The profitableness of these industries gave the less devel-
oped and less inviting Northern Chaco, or Chaco Boreal,
much potential value in the eyes of both Bolivia and Para- .
guay, and a dispute between these two nations as to their
respective territorial rights in the region had been under
way for half a century . Bolivia based her claims on bounda-
ries supposed to have been established under the Spanish
colonial regime, while the opposing claims of Paraguay were
based mainly on the effective occupation and colonization of
the territory by her nationals. The Paraguayan government
offered these lands in vast tracts at low prices in order to en-
courage their settlement, and the territorial claims of Bolivia
'The name is supposedly derived from
charco, a Spanish word meaning
a stagnant pool. During the rainy season the pampas in this region are
flooded. When the floods recede, vast tracts of shallow water, some of
them many hundred square miles in area, appear at intervals over the plains .
[62)the rainy season the pampas in this region are
flooded. When the floods recede, vast tracts of shallow water, some of
them many hundred square miles in area, appear at intervals over the plains .
[62)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE CHACO DISTRICT
The Shaded Area Indicates the Conflicting Claims of Bolivia
and,
Paraguay and Also Shows How Bolivia Was
Seeking an Outlet
to the Atlantic by Way of the Paraguay River .

--- PAGE BREAK ---O DISTRICT
The Shaded Area Indicates the Conflicting Claims of Bolivia
and,
Paraguay and Also Shows How Bolivia Was
Seeking an Outlet
to the Atlantic by Way of the Paraguay River .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

challenged the validity of the titles. The Paraguayan claims
in the Chaco covered a larger area than Paraguay proper.
Bolivia has over six times the area and three times the
population of Paraguay, and unlike that country was not
impelled by land hunger to assert her claims to the Chaco .
She was interested not so much in territorial enlargement as
in obtaining direct access to the sea. Bolivia is the only re-
public in South America which has no such outlet. As a result
of the war of the Pacific (1879-83), in which she fought with
Peru against Chile, Bolivia had lost her Pacific ports . In 1889
she had relinquished her claims over a portion of the Chaco
to Argentina, and had thus weakened her claims to access
to the Atlantic by way of the Paraguay River .
While the Tacna Arica territory was in dispute between
Chile and Peru, there was a chance that Bolivia might regain
a seaport on the Pacific, but in the settlement of this ques-
tion in 1929 Bolivia was disregarded. She began, therefore,
to consider seriously the means for obtaining an assured out-
let to the Atlantic . She could reach the Paraguay River at
Port Suarez in the Northern Chaco, but the stream there is
barely navigable for boats of light draft, and it was to her
interest to establish a valid claim to access to this river at a
point much farther south . Apparently it was nationalist feel-
ing, rather than economic necessity, that accounted originally
for the desire of Bolivia for a direct route to the sea. Her
exports are largely minerals, produced on the high plateau
near the Pacific, and there are adequate railway facilities
for transporting them to Chilean ports . With the discovery
of oil in Argentina and Bolivia, however, not far from the
Chaco border, the interest of Bolivia and Paraguay in press-
ing their claims to the Chaco received a new stimulus .
It is unnecessary to enter into the mass of claims and
counter-claims which Bolivia and Paraguay had been putting
forward for many decades. Attempts to effect a settlement
seemed near success in 1879, 1887, and 1894, but for one
reason or another the agreements then reached were never
[64}raguay had been putting
forward for many decades. Attempts to effect a settlement
seemed near success in 1879, 1887, and 1894, but for one
reason or another the agreements then reached were never
[64}

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing
forward for many decades. Attempts to effect a settlement
seemed near success in 1879, 1887, and 1894, but for one
reason or another the agreements then reached were never
[64}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ratified. In 1907 and again in 1913 both sides agreed to re-
.
frain from occupying the disputed territory beyond a certain
line pending the settlement of their claims by arbitration.
As arbitration was not undertaken and as neither side abided
by the terms of the agreement, the dispute dragged on until
it again reached a serious stage in 1927-28 . At that time it
was only through strong representations by the Latin Ameri-
can neighbors of the disputants that war was averted.20
Both Bolivia and Paraguay had been building forts or
blockhouses at various points in the Chaco . In December,
1928, several encounters took place between the occupying
forces, and tension became acute . At this time the Interna-
tional Conference of American States on Conciliation and
Arbitration was sitting in Washington . It at once tendered
its good offices and obtained the consent of the two coun-
tries to the appointment of a Commission of Inquiry and
Conciliation, consisting of representatives of Cuba, Colombia,
Mexico, Uruguay, and the United States, with General Frank
McCoy as Chairman . The commission succeeded in effecting
the resumption of diplomatic relations between Bolivia and
Paraguay, but it did not remove the cause of the trouble, and
the troops remained facing each other in the Chaco forts .
In September, 1929, this commission expired by limitation,
but the five governments represented on it offered to con-
tinue their work of conciliation . The offer was accepted, and
the representatives, designated as the Neutral Commission,
labored earnestly for a settlement . In spite of friendly re-
sponses by the disputants to various proposals made by the
commission, there were a number of clashes in the Chaco
during the autumn, and in the spring of 1932 the commission
again attempted to have the two governments come to an
agreement21 On June 15, the quarrel came to a head when
90William
Spence, Robinson,
History o f the Latin American Nations,
374-375-
'Department of State Press Releases, August 8, October
24 .
31932 .
[65)ment21 On June 15, the quarrel came to a head when
90William
Spence, Robinson,
History o f the Latin American Nations,
374-375-
'Department of State Press Releases, August 8, October
24 .
31932 .
[65)

--- PAGE BREAK ---he quarrel came to a head when
90William
Spence, Robinson,
History o f the Latin American Nations,
374-375-
'Department of State Press Releases, August 8, October
24 .
31932 .
[65)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bolivia captured one of the Chaco forts held by Paraguay,
and both sides were soon engaged in active hostilities .
The renewal of, the Chaco dispute was brought officially
to the attention of the Secretary General' of the League of
Nations on J ily 21 by Bolivia in a letter complaining of
Paraguayan aggression. These accusations brought a reply
from Paraguay on July 27, and from then on a constant
stream of charges and counter-charges flowed from the dis-
putants to the League's Secretariat 2r The League officials at
all times cooperated whole-heartedly with the Neutral Com-
mission.
On August 3, after the Bolivian government had refused
the commission's appeal for an armistice, the entire neutral
membership of the Pan-American Union, consisting
nsisting of nine-
teen nations, resorted to an unprecedented procedure. In an
identic note sent from Washington to Bolivia and Paraguay,
they endorsed the principle of the Stimson doctrine, which
had already been invoked in the dispute in Manchuria,2 8 and
declared that it applied also to the Americas. This pronounce-
ment appeared in the final paragraph of the note, which read
as follows :
The American nations'further declare that they will not recognize
any territorial arrangement of this controversy which has not been
obtained by peaceful means, nor the validity of the territorial ac-
quisitions which may be obtained through occupation or conquest
by force of arms.
The note urged Bolivia and Paraguay "to submit imme-
diately the solution of this controversy to an arrangement
by arbitration or such other peaceful means as may be ac-
ceptable to both ." It also invited them to "make a solemn
declaration to the effect that they will stop the movement of
troops in the disputed territory ." But the most important
feature of the note was its formal application of the Stimson
"Montbly Summary of the League of Nations, August-September, x932,
259-264 .
"Cf. Chapters fI and XI.
[ 661tory ." But the most important
feature of the note was its formal application of the Stimson
"Montbly Summary of the League of Nations, August-September, x932,
259-264 .
"Cf. Chapters fI and XI.
[ 661

--- PAGE BREAK ---important
feature of the note was its formal application of the Stimson
"Montbly Summary of the League of Nations, August-September, x932,
259-264 .
"Cf. Chapters fI and XI.
[ 661

--- PAGE BREAK ---

doctrine to the Western hemisphere. The pronouncement
from Washington was not only a warning to Bolivia and
Paraguay to refrain from aggression, but it assured all the
other Latin American countries that international opinion
was being mobilized against aggression by stronger powers .
The possible effect of this on Latin American relations with
the United States was evidently recognized in Washington"
This joint action by the-nineteen nations was for the time
being ineffective . The Bolivian government replied that the
declaration interpreted "with perfect exactness Bolivian
thought" and was "inspired by the ideas underlying Ameri-
can public law, which does not admit occupation by usurpa-
tion as a title of ownership." It therefore received "with
enthusiasm the new doctrine being initiated in America that
force does not confer rights ." But while thus adhering in
form to the Pan-American declaration, Bolivia steadfastly
refused the suggestion of the Neutral Commission for an
armistice and insisted on holding the territory occupied in
the Chaco "until a final solution of the controversy modifies
the sovereignty of said positions,"" an attitude wholly in-
consistent with her previous acceptance of the thesis that
forceful possession does not constitute rightful occupation .
The Neutral Commission, with the moral support of the
League, labored long and sincerely for a peaceful settlement
of the dispute. At a meeting of the League Council on Sep-
tember 27, a committee consisting of the President of the
Council, Mr. de Valera, Senor Matos of Guatemala, former
President of the Council, and Seiior de Madariaga, the Span-
ish representative, was appointed to follow the developments
in the Chaco dispute, and at the same time the Council sent
identic notes to the Bolivian and Paraguayan governments
reminding them of their obligations under the League Cove-
" It was only, five days after this Pan-American declaration that Secretary
Stimsbn elaborated his doctrine of non-recognition
in an address in New
York before the Council on Foreign Relations . For text of the Pan-American
note, see Appendix VI .
"Department of State Press Release, August i9, 1932 .
[ 671of non-recognition
in an address in New
York before the Council on Foreign Relations . For text of the Pan-American
note, see Appendix VI .
"Department of State Press Release, August i9, 1932 .
[ 671

--- PAGE BREAK ---in an address in New
York before the Council on Foreign Relations . For text of the Pan-American
note, see Appendix VI .
"Department of State Press Release, August i9, 1932 .
[ 671

--- PAGE BREAK ---

nant and urging them to accept the recommendations of the
Neutral Commission and
t an immediate stop to the mili-
tary acts and preparations .
On September 23 the Neutral Commission repeated its
proposal for a truce, with a new suggestion that a delegation
of neutral military officers should be sent to the Chaco to
report on the measures taken for its observance . It was also
proposed that if this delegation reported either of the dis-
putants as a violator, of the truce, the commission would de-
clare that country an aggressor and suggest the severance of
diplomatic relations with it by all the American governments .
This plan did not find favor with the Argentine government,
which on several previous occasions had manifested a lack
of whole-hearted cooperation with the other American neu-
trals, and which now took the view that the dispatching of
an international commission to the Chaco to fix responsibility
and supervise the cessation of hostilities would be a coercive
measure unauthorized by any existing treaty
.26
The disputants, as the year neared its end, were still deaf
to appeals from Geneva and Washington,, and the Stimson
doctrine was awaiting its final test in South America as well
as in Manchuria . The conflict in the Chaco brought into
South America an idea which had already become prevalent
in the par East, namely, that in spite of hostilities war does
not exist unless it is formally recognized or declared by the
parties to the conflict . Bolivia and Paraguay had each placed
in the field forces variously estimated at figures ranging
from 8,000 to 40,000, and unofficial reports indicated that
several thousand had been', killed, wounded, or captured .
Both countries, in spite of the financial stringency, had made
heavy purchases of armament 27 Yet, officially, there was no
war. What had happened had been only a chain of "untoward
Department of State Press Release, November 18, 1932 .
"Reports from Geneva indicated that a substantial amount of the money
borrowed- in Bolivia had been used for the purchase of munitions . The Bo-
livian debt thus incurred was in default . New York Times, September z6,
1932.
[681ed that a substantial amount of the money
borrowed- in Bolivia had been used for the purchase of munitions . The Bo-
livian debt thus incurred was in default . New York Times, September z6,
1932.
[681

--- PAGE BREAK ---

incidents ." In this and various other ways the Chaco dispute
offered interesting parallels to certain developments in Man-
churia which will be described in a later chapter .
Events in the Latin American republics during 193= and
1932 showed the futility of hoping for a surcease from
political turmoil so long as those countries were gripped by
the depression. Changes of government did not bring pros-
perity, and their failure precipitated still other changes, all
of which merely aggravated the economic difficulties . The
cure for the distress in Latin America was beyond the power
of any single government. For what these countries needed
was the reopening of foreign markets to their products, and
world trade was languishing.
[69]

--- PAGE BREAK ---America was beyond the power
of any single government. For what these countries needed
was the reopening of foreign markets to their products, and
world trade was languishing.
[69]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER FIVE
CREDITOR AND DEBTOR NATIONS
x . The Function o f Foreign Lending
THE decline in world trade, when examined mote closely,
shows a relatively greater fall in the exports of creditor na-
tions than of debtors. For an explanation of this, it is neces-
sary to consider the part played in international commerce
by foreign lending .
Rightly managed, the process of foreign lending was of
great value to both borrower and lender . It facilitated the
orderly progress of new and undeveloped nations which
lacked capital. It furnished an outlet for surplus funds of the
creditor nations with a reasonable assumption of security,
provided that the funds were invested in enterprises that paid
their way . It created new markets for the lender, by increas-
ing the ability of the borrower to buy his goods
.
Among the nations of the world, there are only seven im-
portant creditors-that is, nations whose people owe less
abroad, on both public and private account, than they are
owed. These seven are Great Britain, France, Belgium, the
Netherlands, Switzerland, Sweden, and the United States .
Our own place in the list was achieved during the World
War. In x914, American investments abroad were estimated
at 2,500 million dollars, but the United States was also a
debtor to the amount of about 5,500 millions. At the end of
the war our position had changed from a net debtor of 3,000
millions to a net creditor of io,ooo millions .
In the years after the war but before the depression, a
steady flow of capital from these seven creditors to their
t 70 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---r of 3,000
millions to a net creditor of io,ooo millions .
In the years after the war but before the depression, a
steady flow of capital from these seven creditors to their
t 70 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

i
debtors was one means by which international balances were
adjusted . The chief debtor nations were Germany (which
had been a creditor before 1914), Canada, Australia, Japan,
and Poland. The net indebtedness incurred by these and by
other important nations between 1924 and 1928 is shown
in the following table :
FLOW of CAPITAL To DEBTOR NATIONS1
• Outflow of capital .
In no year during this period did the credits advanced to
these nine debtors amount to less than i,ooo million dollars,
and in 1927 and 1928 they amounted to nearly 2,000 mil-
lions. The creditor nations furnished funds through the pur-
chase of foreign securities, _through the direct acquisition of
foreign properties, and through payment of interest and
dividends to foreign investors in their securities. In so far as
the debtor nations repaid their creditors, they did so partly
in commodities and services and partly in gold .
2 . American Balance of Payments
The part played by foreign lending in the international
accounts of the United States during the pre-depression years
can best be understood by examining figures of the Depart-
ment of Commerce. Since 1922 the Bureau of Foreign and
"These are estimates made by the League of Nations Economic Intelli-
gence Service and are based on the difference between debits and credits
(visible and invisible) in each country's balance sheet .
{713
(In millions of dollars)
1924
x92.5
r9z6
1917
1918
Germany
411
857
151
1,072-
1,007
Hungary
2.7
26
89
91
Poland
48
69
°7z
81
114
Yugoslavia
8
2 .3
17
Argentina
12.6
12.2.
181
Australia
to
110
170
2.57
193
Canada . :
107
177
173
51
164
India
71
°69
178
12.0
67
Japan
2.26
74
118
50
8o

--- PAGE BREAK ---d
48
69
°7z
81
114
Yugoslavia
8
2 .3
17
Argentina
12.6
12.2.
181
Australia
to
110
170
2.57
193
Canada . :
107
177
173
51
164
India
71
°69
178
12.0
67
Japan
2.26
74
118
50
8o

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Domestic Commerce has prepared each year an estimated
balance of international payments .' Some of its figures, par-
ticularly those concerned with the so-called invisible items
of exchange, are necessarily estimates based on incomplete
data. But on the whole the annual balances give a reliable
picture of the commercial and financial relationships be=
tween the United States and the rest of the world .
If we study these balances for the seven years immediately
before the depression
'(1922 to 1928 inclusive), we find
three items consistently on the credit side of the ledger-
that is, calling for payment by other nations to the United
States. These items are the surplus of American exports over
imports; the net amount due to Americans in interest on
their foreign investments, after deducting the amount due
to foreigners on their investments in this country ; and pay-
ments due to the United States government on the war
debts. On the debit side of the ledger we find five items : net
expenditures by Americans traveling abroad, after deducting
similar expenditures of foreigners traveling, in the United
States; immigrant remittances ; gold imports; the net flow
of capital to foreign countries, including both long-term and
short-term loans, after deducting movements° of capital in
the opposite direction ; and a group of small miscellaneous
items, including shipping charges, insurance, charitable and
missionary contributions, royalties, etc .
During the period from 1922 to 1928 the average pay-
ment on account of each of these eight items was as follows :
(In millions of dollars)
Credit Items
Export surplus
Interest
War debts
f 72 )
593
465
199
Total 1,257
A detailed statement of these balances will be found in Appendix III

--- PAGE BREAK ---ows :
(In millions of dollars)
Credit Items
Export surplus
Interest
War debts
f 72 )
593
465
199
Total 1,257
A detailed statement of these balances will be found in Appendix III

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Debit Items
Tourist expenditures
Immigrant remittances
Gold movement
Miscellaneous
Capital investment
467
237
41
50
472-
Total 1,2.57
These figures show that in the seven years before the de-
pression the rest of the world was called upon to pay us an
average of 1,257 million dollars a year. How did it make
payment? It sent us 41 millions in gold. It charged off 467
millions on account of tourist expenditures, 227 millions on
account of immigrant remittances and 50 millions on account
of miscellaneous items. This fell short of meeting the sum
due to the United States by 472 million dollars . How was
this gap bridged? It was bridged, as the table shows, by new
American foreign loans in this amount .
It was solely the extension of foreign loans which enabled
the United States to receive payment on its public and private
investments abroad, in the years from
1922 to 1928, and at
the same time to refuse payment in terms of goods .
3. Weaknesses in Foreign Lending ,
Because the practice of foreign lending bridged the gap
between creditor and debtor nations, and because it enabled
the United States to maintain an anomalous position as a
great creditor exporting more goods than it purchased, it
must not be suggested that foreign lending was in all cases
wisely undertaken or that the system itself did not invite
great risks . On the contrary, the manner in which loans were
made in the post-war years exposed' the system to danger at
three points.
r . Before 1914, loans were advanced primarily for eco-
nomic rather than governmental purposes. By far the greater
[73)

--- PAGE BREAK ---st-war years exposed' the system to danger at
three points.
r . Before 1914, loans were advanced primarily for eco-
nomic rather than governmental purposes. By far the greater
[73)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

part went to railways and to industrial corporations .$ After
the war, and particularly toward the close of the decade
1921-30, government flotation in .the United States were
substantially greater than corporate issues, as is shown in
the following table :
(In millions of dollars)
The large volume of public issues indicated that the inter-
national movement of capital was being directed in some
measure toward other than industrial purposes. National,
state, and municipal governments were borrowing not only
to finance public utilities, some self-supporting and some
not, but also to balance budgets, stabilize currencies, build
strategic railways and ports, and even to erect fortifications
and buy munitions 4
During 1927 and 1928 the appetite of the American pub-
lic for foreign bonds was particularly keen, and certain in-
vestment houses took
advantage of the situation
to
underwrite securities which, as subsequent events showed,
should not have been issued. Thus, a number of Latin
American governments were persuaded to borrow money
which they did not need, on terms which, with the coming
of adversity, they could not meet .
0 Cf. Herbert Feis, Europe : The World's Banker,
27 ; World Economic
Survey, 1913-32, 36 .
' See above, p. 68, footnote 27.
[ 74 }
Government Corporate
Issues
Issues
Total
Issues
Total, less
Refunding
1911
554,376
138 ,037
691,41 3
613308
1912
711,601
151,447
863,048
763,627
1923
377,180
12.0,417
497,597
43.0,597
191.4
1 ,035,344
181,874
1,217,218
969,22.4
1925
939,670
376,496
1,316,166
1,076,466
1926
715,006
573,453
1,288,459
1,12.5,481
1827
1,074,512
501,902
1,577,414
1,336,760
1928
900,481
588,88o
1,489,361
1,2-50,951
192.9
262,319
443,449
705,768
671,231
1930
735,539
351,02.1
-
1 ,087,560
90 5.333

--- PAGE BREAK ---,12.5,481
1827
1,074,512
501,902
1,577,414
1,336,760
1928
900,481
588,88o
1,489,361
1,2-50,951
192.9
262,319
443,449
705,768
671,231
1930
735,539
351,02.1
-
1 ,087,560
90 5.333

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This phase of the practice of foreign lending was described
before the Senate Finance Committee at its hearings during
the winter of 1931-32, pursuant to a resolution introduced
by Mr Johnson of California, authorizing an investigation
of the sale of foreign securities in the United States.5 Not
only were debtor countries persuaded to overborrow, but
American investors were persuaded to advance loans which
were not used for productive purposes . So keen was the
competition among the bankers for 'the privilege of floating
new issues that in some instances large commissions were
paid to promoters and to others supposed to be in a position
to, wield influence with the governments to which the bankers
wished to lend their clients' money.e High interest rates
were frequently paid in connection with such loans . These
rates, instead of serving as a warning, actually proved to be
an attraction to inexperienced investors .
2 Even where loans were made for clearly productive pur-
poses, credit was often advanced without consideration of
certain larger aspects of the problem of repayment . This
weakness in post-war methods of international lending was
strikingly illustrated in the case of Germany. Many of the
American loans to public and private borrowers in that coun-
try were based on sound security. But when gold took flight
from Germany and the government found it necessary to
resort to exchange control, the problem of meeting charges
due on any of these loans was immediately merged with the
larger problem of meeting charges due on all of them . It
became apparent that a sound policy of international lending
required consideration not only of the security behind the
individual loan, but also of the extent to which the people
`Hearings on Senate Resolution x9, parts I-IV . Congressional Record,
Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 203 .
Onee such payment of $415,000 attracted especial attention because the
investigation revealed that it was made to a son of President Leguia of
Peru for alleged services in connection with the flotation of three loans to
the Peruvian government amounting to too million dollars. See Hearings
on Senate Resolution 19, Seventy-first Congress, First Session, 1286 IF.
[75}in connection with the flotation of three loans to
the Peruvian government amounting to too million dollars. See Hearings
on Senate Resolution 19, Seventy-first Congress, First Session, 1286 IF.
[75}

--- PAGE BREAK ---the flotation of three loans to
the Peruvian government amounting to too million dollars. See Hearings
on Senate Resolution 19, Seventy-first Congress, First Session, 1286 IF.
[75}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of a debtor nation, individually and collectively, could afford
to borrow.z
It is true that the American government had attempted
during the post-war years to exercise an informal control over
American lending which would view the problem as a whole .
It had undertaken this experiment somewhat casually in
192r, as a corollary to its efforts to negotiate agreements for
repayment of the war debts . On several occasions, in 1924
and 1926, it had privately warned American bankers that a
time might come when a scarcity of foreign exchange would
make it difficult for Germany to maintain service on debts
due to creditors in this country.' But the policy on which the
government thus embarked was indifferently pursued, lacked
authority of Congress, and failed to attain its objective .
3. A third weakness in the post-war system of lending was
the great increase in the volume of short-term credits . Before
1914,
short-term international borrowing was employed
chiefly as a device to meet a temporary deficit in a trade, bal-
ance, due to a seasonal expansion of imports or to some
other short-lived influence . To borrow on short-term was
more economical than to ship gold which might be reshipped
a few weeks later, when the flow of trade was altered. But
in the post-war years short-term money was often called
upon to serve long-term or even capital purposes. The coun-
tries in the war area were short of liquid funds at the close
_of the war, and their limited stock was further depleted by
inflation. If capital was to be found at all, it had to be ob-
tained on terms made by the lender . Even for some time
after the formal restoration of currency stability, investors
hesitated to commit themselves for long terms . But the sup-
ply of short-term money in the hands of creditor countries
was exceptionally large, and the high rates paid in the capi-
' In fairness to. Germany it should be said that in spite of the great diffi-
culties involved during
31932, interest and sinking-fund charges on the long-
dated debt were always met.
'Cf. Appendix II
(c) .
{ 76 }to. Germany it should be said that in spite of the great diffi-
culties involved during
31932, interest and sinking-fund charges on the long-
dated debt were always met.
'Cf. Appendix II
(c) .
{ 76 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---ld be said that in spite of the great diffi-
culties involved during
31932, interest and sinking-fund charges on the long-
dated debt were always met.
'Cf. Appendix II
(c) .
{ 76 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tal-poor countries attracted it at first tentatively, and then in
great volume.
Long-term lending followed in-due time . To some extent
and in certain years, as for instance in Germany in 1926,
long-term lending was frequently used to refund short debt
already incurred . Subsequently short-term
and long-term
lending went on simultaneously, partly because short-term
loans carried lower rates of interest . The vast volume of
short-term debt thus built up was recognized by central banks
in every nation as an element of danger, since an y incident
shaking confidence on the part of the lenders would in-
evitably put a stop to long-term loans and result in whole-
sale withdrawals of short-term funds .
4. The Drying Up o f Foreign Loans
The post-war system of international lending thus con-
tained elements of risk at three points . There was an increas-
ing tendency to lend to governments, rather than to private
borrowers, and to employ the proceeds of such loans for
political rather than productive purposes . There was a tend-
ency to consider the security behind individual loans without
considering the problem of repayment as a whole . There was
a tendency to advance loans on short-term, a practice subject
to great risk for the borrowers in case of sudden loss of con-
fidence by the lender. We have now to note the contraction
of the stream of international' credit, partly in consequence
of
these weaknesses in post-war methods of extending loans
and partly in consequence of new influences which made
their appearance after 1927 .
After reaching a high figure in 1927, the volume of foreign
lending showed a slight decline in 1928, because of a con-
gested bond market and high money rates . A new boom in
stock prices at the same time shifted the interest of investors
into more speculative undertakings . In 1929 a further de-
cline took place in foreign offerings both in New York and
in London. During the first half of this year the boom in
{77}terest of investors
into more speculative undertakings . In 1929 a further de-
cline took place in foreign offerings both in New York and
in London. During the first half of this year the boom in
{77}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

stocks was still having its effect ; in the second half came
the crash in the stock markets which destroyed confidence
and arrested the flotation of new securities .
A temporary improvement in business and in the security
markets during the first half of 1930 was accompanied by a
slight increase in foreign lending . Then came a drastic de-
cline in 1931, followed by an even greater shrinkage in
1932 . During the first half of the latter year the volume of
new issues offered in London was reduced to a mere trickle,
while in New York the stream of long-term credit dried up
entirely. Not a single foreign bond issue was floated in the
United States during this six-month period. The following
table tells the story :
NEW FOREIGN CAPITAL IssuEs
This abrupt decline in the flow of international credit re-
flected the progressive stagnation of business throughout the
world, accompanied by the destruction of investors' con-
fidence, a persistent decline in prices, and a general curtail-
ment of lending power in all creditor countries.
5. The Debtors' Defense
A. Financial Measures
The stoppage of foreign loans, in conjunction with these
other destructive forces, compelled debtor nations to act in
•Department of Commerce estimates.
=Bank of England estimates.
"First six months.
[ 78 }
New York9
(In millions
of dollars)
London to
(In millions
of pounds)
192
:
1,336.7
15o.8
1928
1,2.51.0
150.1
19zq
671.2.
107.3
.
1930
905.3
112.8
1931
2.2.8.8
49.6
1S32.u
0
2.0.4

--- PAGE BREAK ---York9
(In millions
of dollars)
London to
(In millions
of pounds)
192
:
1,336.7
15o.8
1928
1,2.51.0
150.1
19zq
671.2.
107.3
.
1930
905.3
112.8
1931
2.2.8.8
49.6
1S32.u
0
2.0.4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

defense of their currencies and to adjust their balances of
international payments by other means, now that new credits
were denied, them.
During the last four months of t93x many countries found
it necessary to set up rigid restrictions on foreign exchange.
G
any resorted to exchange control as early as July 15,
1931, in order to check the flight from the mark and to allay
the financial panic which .then gripped that country . The
suspension of the gold standard the following September by
Great Britain resulted in a number of restrictions on exchange
dealings by the British government, but these were revoked
in March, 1932, when it became apparent that they were no
longer needed . A large number of other countries,. however,
found such restrictions desirable .. In 1932 this method of con-
trol was in use in Austria, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Den-
mark, Estonia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Yugoslavia,
Latvia, Norway, Rumania, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colom-
bia, and India." Control was usually exercised by the central
bank in cooperation with some department of the govern-
ment.
In certain cases debtor nations found it necessary to go
beyond restrictions of exchange and to declare moratoria -on
the transfer of their currency. In December, 1931, Hungary
resorted to an emergency measure whose immediate effect,
so far as holders of her external obligations were concerned,
was equivalent to a default. For the purpose of conserving
the country's holdings of foreign exchange and safeguarding
the cover of banknotes, the government ordered the tem-
porary suspension of the transfer of funds required for serv-
ice on certain classes of obligations . In April, 1932, Greece
and Bulgaria adopted similar measures, after appealing un-
successfully to the League of Nations for financial assist-
ance." Austria followed with a partial transfer moratorium
on June 2314
"Finland resorted to exchange restrictions in 1931, but abandoned them
at the end of that year, Cf . Appendix III (a),
League of Nations Publication, Official No. C.328.M.199 .x932.II.A.
0 1 New York Timer, June 24, 1932 .
(791ge restrictions in 1931, but abandoned them
at the end of that year, Cf . Appendix III (a),
League of Nations Publication, Official No. C.328.M.199 .x932.II.A.
0 1 New York Timer, June 24, 1932 .
(791

--- PAGE BREAK ---931, but abandoned them
at the end of that year, Cf . Appendix III (a),
League of Nations Publication, Official No. C.328.M.199 .x932.II.A.
0 1 New York Timer, June 24, 1932 .
(791

--- PAGE BREAK ---

These unilateral arrangements by four debtor nations dif,
fered in detail, but their general purpose was the samel°
Greece suspended amortization payments entirely, but con-
tinued to make interest payments, depositing funds for this
purpose in a special account at the central bank until such
time as an improvement in the exchange situation made their
transfer practicable. Bulgaria suspended the transfer of only
half of her interest and amortization charges .
These arrangements must be distinguished from outright
defaults, as in some of the Latin American countries, where
payments were completely discontinued because governments
lacked funds . Between Aril i and December 3 i, 1931, there
were defaults by six South American countries
Bolivia,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Peru, and Uruguay-on the bonds
either of the central governments or of their political subdi-
visions, and in some cases on the bonds of both. The total
amount of the American investment in these countries in,
default was over Boo million dollars .16 This sum represented
practically one-half of the Latin American obligations held
in the United States,, Bolivia, Chile, and Peru had suspended
all service on their foreign debts, and the central govern-
ments of Colombia and Uruguay had suspended payments
on their sinking funds . The state and municipal governments
of these two countries were also unable to maintain foreign
debt payments . The central government of Brazil was meet-
ing its interest payments by issuing new obligations. The
state of Sao Paulo was making payments partly in cash and
partly with notes, and the other Brazilian states and their
political subdivisions, were in default .
B. Commercial Measures
Another device to which hard-pressed debtor nations re-
sorted in increasing measure during x931 and x932 was a
'The Greek moratorium applied only to government obligations ; that of
Hungary applied also to long-term private debts .
"The amount of Latin American debt in default was approximately
1,200
bullion dollars, the American share being about two-thirds of the total .
[ 8o)Hungary applied also to long-term private debts .
"The amount of Latin American debt in default was approximately
1,200
bullion dollars, the American share being about two-thirds of the total .
[ 8o)

--- PAGE BREAK ---o to long-term private debts .
"The amount of Latin American debt in default was approximately
1,200
bullion dollars, the American share being about two-thirds of the total .
[ 8o)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

deliberate curtailment of commodity imports. We have noted
how large a part foreign lending played before 1929 in fi-
nancing international trade. With the cessation of such lend-
ing, debtor nations had no recourse save to curtail purchases
abroad in order to reduce demands upon their currency.
While a protective tariff was in itself an effective means
of restricting trade, other devices were now invented or per-
fected to reinforce such high tariffs .
x. Quotas:Under this method of control, governments
restricted either by volume or by value the- importation of
specified commodities . France, a creditor nation, led the
way in 1931 in the,adoption of the quota system . Following
the abandonment of the gold standard by a number of Euro-
pean countries, the French government imposed quota re-
strictions on lumber and on many articles of food. In 1932
these restrictions were extended to include radio equipment,
certain electrical devices, household enamel ware, various
kinds, of leather, hardware, furniture, machine tools, steel
sheets, textiles, paper, and photographic
films/1
Spain,
Poland, Latvia, and Turkey were among the debtor coun-
tries following this French example. In addition, a number
of other countries, notably Austria, Czechoslovakia, Ger-
many, and Greece, agreed by treaty with their neighbors to
admit specified quotas of each other's products, in some in-
stances at reduced rates 18
Closely allied to this means of controlling trade was the
practice of requiring a fixed percentage of a domestic prod-
uct to be, combined with an imported product . Certain coon-
i1 On March 3o a resolution adopted by the American Chamber of Com-
merce in Paris urged our government to take action
to obtain relief for
American exporters from losses occasioned by French quotas . On August 4
Ambassador Edge presented a memorandum on this question to the French
Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Informal
discussions of the matter during
August and September had led to no agreement by the time Mr. Edge re-
turned to this country on a visit'in the fall. New York Times, March 31,
August 3, September 22, 1932 .
"Henry Chalmers, "Current Trends in Foreign Tariffs
and Commercial
Policy ; Review of 1931" ; United States Department of Commerce, Trade
Information Bulletin No . 790-August 3, September 22, 1932 .
"Henry Chalmers, "Current Trends in Foreign Tariffs
and Commercial
Policy ; Review of 1931" ; United States Department of Commerce, Trade
Information Bulletin No . 790-

--- PAGE BREAK ---22, 1932 .
"Henry Chalmers, "Current Trends in Foreign Tariffs
and Commercial
Policy ; Review of 1931" ; United States Department of Commerce, Trade
Information Bulletin No . 790-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tries specified that imported gasoline must be mixed with
domestic alcohol. But wheat was the favorite target for regu-
lations of this type. A common requirement in many Euro-
pean countries in 1932 was the use of a certain percentage of
domestic wheat with foreign wheat in the milling of flour-,
the proportion usuaaily fluctuating according to the nearness
of the harvest.
2. Import Licenses. Austria, Japan, and a number of
other debtor nations required their nationals to obtain
licenses in order to import certain specified commodities . In
most countries these restrictions were applied only to a small
number of commodities, but Czechoslovakia made use .of the
plan on an extensive scale .
3 . Import Surtaxes.-As a means of offsetting depreciated
currencies, several debtor nations imposed a special surtax
on imports . The Union of South Africa levied such a- duty on
all imports from countries whose currencies had depreciated
more than 1o per cent."' In Germany the establishment of
compensatory duties on imports from countries with depre-
ciated exchanges was authorized by presidential decree in
January, 1932. Canada also imposed such surtaxes .
4. Administrative Restrictions.-Finally, technical require.
ments, such as those relating to marking, branding, packing,
and certificates of origin, continued to multiply . _ As they
multiplied, they added to the cost and difficulty of trading
with foreign nations. Meantime, the number of debtor na-
tions in which administrative officials were authorized to
revise customs duties steadily increased . As a rule, this dele-
gated authority was closely circumscribed . But in some coun-
tries the executive authority was empowered to limit and
even to prohibit imports, according to the dictates of its
judgment. 0
"Commerce Reports, February 8, x932, 330 .
"The legal provisions in effect in 1932 for the administrative regulation
of the tariff in fifty foreign countries have been compiled by the United
States Tariff Commission in its special_ publication entitled Regulation of
Tariffs in Foreign Countries by Administrative Action .
[82}iff in fifty foreign countries have been compiled by the United
States Tariff Commission in its special_ publication entitled Regulation of
Tariffs in Foreign Countries by Administrative Action .
[82}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6. Compa'ative Trade Losses
As we have said, the purpose of all these restrictive meas-
ures on the part of debtor nations was to enable them to
reduce demands upon their currencies and to adjust
their
balances of international payments without the aid of .foreign
loans . The result of their efforts is shown in two tables pre-
pared by the National Industrial Conference Board."
The first table gives the exports and imports of fifteen
important debtor nations in 1930 and in 1931, with the per-
centages of change in each instance :
VALU* of EXPORTS AND IMPORTS op FinzEN DEBTOR NATIONS IN
1930 AND 1931
It will be seen that both exports and imports declined in
the case of all fifteen of these nations. But it will also be
noted that, except in the case of Norway, Denmark, and
"A Picsnre of World Economic Condition; at the Beginning of
1932, 3.
(831
(In millions of dollars)
Exports .
Imports
Per Cent
Per Cent
1930
1931
Change
1930
1931
Change
Germany 2,867
2,286
-20.2
2,476
1,602
-35 .3
Italy 638
52.8
--17.3
912
611
33.0
Norway 183
117
-36.1
285
215
-24.6
Denmark 433
333
-23.1
463
367
-20.7
Czechoslovakia
518
389-24.9
466
349
-25-7
Poland 273
210
-23 .1
252
164
-34 .9
Yugoslavia, . . . .
120'
85
-29.2
123
85
-30,9
Austria 386
310
-19.7
2.65
1,88
-29.1
Canada 886
605
-3 1 .7
1,009
628
-37.7
Argentina 513
42.7
-16.8
617
345
-44 .1
Brazil 32-0
225
-29,7
261
130
-50 -2-
Chile 161
113
-29.8
170
96
- 49 .4
Colombia . . .
109
95
-12.8
61
40
-34 .4
Australia 431
328
-23 .9
519
187
-64.0
Japan 726
560
-22.9
764
604
-20.9
Total 8,564
6,611
-22.8
8,643
5,601
-35- 2-

--- PAGE BREAK ---3
-29.8
170
96
- 49 .4
Colombia . . .
109
95
-12.8
61
40
-34 .4
Australia 431
328
-23 .9
519
187
-64.0
Japan 726
560
-22.9
764
604
-20.9
Total 8,564
6,611
-22.8
8,643
5,601
-35- 2-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Japan, the decline of exports was proportionately smaller
than that of imports. The differences in some instances are
particularly striking. Germany's exports declined by only
20.2 per cent, but her imports fell off by 353 per cent. Aus-
tralia's exports were cut 23.9 per cent, but her imports were
reduced by 64 per cent. For the group of fifteen debtor na-
tions as a whole, the loss of exports amounted to
22.8 per
cent and the loss of imports to 35 .2 per cent.
Similar figures for the seven creditor nations show the
following changes:
VALUE OF EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF SEVEN CREDITOR NATIONS IN
1830 AND 1931
It thus appears that the experience of the creditor nations
reverses that of the debtors . With the single exception of
.
Belgium, all the creditor nations show a larger proportionate
loss, of exports than of imports . While the fifteen debtors
were losing 22.8 per cent of their export trade, but manag-
ing to reduce their imports by
3 5 .2 per cent, the seven
creditors were losing 31 per cent of their exports and cutting,
their imports by only 21 .8 per cent.
In seeking to protect its exchange position, each debtor
nation aimed at maximum exports and minimum imports .
From a purely national point of view such a policy was
(841
(In millions of dollars)
Exports
Per Cent
Imports
Per Cent
1930
1931 Change,
1930
I93I
Change
United Kingdom 2.,777
1,894
-31 .8
5,o81
4,x96
- 117.4
France
1,678
1,193
-29.0
2,058
1,654
-19.6
Belgium . .
730
647
-11 .4
866
668
-22.9
Netherlands . .
.
691
52.7
-2 3 .7
972.
761
-21 .7
Sweden . .
. .
416
285
-3 1 .5
446
364
-18.4
Switzerland . . . .
342
2.62.
-23.4
51-6
437
-15 .3
United States . .
3,843
2,4114 -36.9
3,061
2,090
-31 .7
Total 10,478
7o2-32-
-3 1 -0
13,000 10,170
-2.1 .8

--- PAGE BREAK ----3 1 .5
446
364
-18.4
Switzerland . . . .
342
2.62.
-23.4
51-6
437
-15 .3
United States . .
3,843
2,4114 -36.9
3,061
2,090
-31 .7
Total 10,478
7o2-32-
-3 1 -0
13,000 10,170
-2.1 .8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

necessary, but obviously it could not have the desired result
if pursued by all the debtor nations simultaneously.
For
then the combined activities of all neutralized the individual
effort of each, and the last state of the debtor countries was
worse than the first . The problems of none were solved, and
the difficulties of many were increased .
C85)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ndividual
effort of each, and the last state of the debtor countries was
worse than the first . The problems of none were solved, and
the difficulties of many were increased .
C85)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER SIX
RISING TARIFF BARRIERS
x. The Creditors' Defence
ON FINDING themselves under pressure from debtors seeking
to curtail their purchases abroad and simultaneously
to
stimulate their exports, the creditor nations responded with
new tariffs of their own . In a previous chapter' we have noted
the reluctance of the American Congress to reduce tariff
barriers, despite the creditor position of the United States,
and its willingness to impose new tariffs on coal, copper,
petroleum products, and lumber. In another chapter we have
also noted the expansion by France of her exceedingly effec-
tive quota system .' On the side of the creditors, however, the
most striking development of the early months of 1932 was
the adoption of a protective tariff by Great Britain. In this
decision of the British government the United States had a
large interest . For in the decade after 1921 more American
goods were sold to the United Kingdom than were sold in
any other market, more than were sold in all of Asia and
more than twice the amount sold in South America .
The reversal of the historic policy of free trade in Eng-
land was not so sudden as it had seemed to be when the
newspapers reported late in 1931 that the new Coalition
Government was headed in the direction of protective tariffs
As early as 1915- the so-called McKenna duties had been
adopted as a- war measure, in order to discourage the pur-
chase of foreign luxuries and thereby to protect sterling
a Cf. Chapter II .
• Cf. Chapter V .
[861

--- PAGE BREAK ---Kenna duties had been
adopted as a- war measure, in order to discourage the pur-
chase of foreign luxuries and thereby to protect sterling
a Cf. Chapter II .
• Cf. Chapter V .
[861

--- PAGE BREAK ---

exchange, which had been weakened by the purchase of war
materials. Despite their temporary repeal in 1924 by the first
Labor Government, these duties still remained in force . Also
still in force was the Safeguarding of Industries Act of 1921,
another peace-time
adaptation
of
a war-time measure
originally designed to protect "unstable key
industries"
against dumping of goods by foreign nations . In 1926 the
duties levied under this act had been extended for ten years }
and new products had been added to the list of those on
which tariffs were imposed .
Nevertheless, the decision in favor of a frankly protective
policy late in 1931 seemed to come with stunning force. In
the general election of October the tariff bad played an un-
important part, though many of the Conservative candidates
for Parliament had championed protection . To support tra-
ditional arguments for such a policy, they could now point
to the recent abandonment of the gold standard and the
risk that an adverse trade balance would cause further weak-
ness in the pound . Moreover, business stagnation in Eng-
land had reached a point where any change of policy seemed
worth a trial .
Despite the reluctance of Mr. MacDonald and the opposi-
tion of four other members of the Cabinet, the new Coalition
Government accordingly prepared three tariff bills at the
end of 193x . Two of these were emergency measures, the
Abnormal Importation Act of November, 193x, and the
Horticultural Products Act of December . The third act, a
general tariff law, required more time for its preparation and
did not go into effect until March _, 1932.
Of the two emergency measures, the first authorized the
Board of Trade to impose duties up to x oo per cent ad
valorem on commodities whose importation had "abnor-
mally" increased. The duration of these duties was limited
to six months . Their purpose was to prevent other nations
from flooding British markets with their goods, in advance
of a general tariff . Three orders were issued by the Board
Ie duties was limited
to six months . Their purpose was to prevent other nations
from flooding British markets with their goods, in advance
of a general tariff . Three orders were issued by the Board
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---to six months . Their purpose was to prevent other nations
from flooding British markets with their goods, in advance
of a general tariff . Three orders were issued by the Board
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of Trade, covering forty-nine- classes of commodities, the
imports of which in 1929 and 193o had an average value of
£6o,ooo,ooo. Empire products were exempt
from these
duties .0
Since the Abnormal Importation Act did not cover food
products, Parliament was urged to extend the new duties at
least to fruits, vegetables, and flowers imported out of sea-
son. It was argued that .such imports were luxuries and that
their restriction was desirable in order to strengthen British
exchange as well as to encourage domestic production . This
action was taken in the Horticultural Products Act . The
Minister of Agriculture was authorized to impose emergency
duties on fruits, vegetables, and flowers which competed with
English products, but such duties were to be levied only
during the season when domestic products were not ready for
the market. Empire products were excluded from these
duties also .
Both emergency measures were put into effect at about
the time the Seventy-second Congress was assembling in
Washington for its first session .
2 . The British Tariff o f 1932
The Coalition Government claimed that it had received a
"doctor's mandate
at the last election . It had asked for a
free hand to administer such remedies for Great Britain's
troubles as it saw fit to prescribe, and believed that the deci-
sion of the electorate had given it this authority. A general
tariff to take the place of temporary defensive measures was
one of the remedies it now proposed . In order to prevent the
disruption of the Cabinet on this issue,' free-trade members
'Cf.
British Tariff
Policy, 1932 .
Prepared for the Fifth Conference of
Institutions for the Scientific Study of Foreign Relations
by members of e
joint-study group of the Royal Institute of
International Affairs and the
London School of Economics and Political Science .
'Philip Snowden, now raised to the peerage, and a member of the Mac-
Donald Cabinet as Lord Privy Seal, announced his purpose to resign and to
join the opposition if a protective tariff was adopted as a policy of the
Government.
{ 88 }peerage, and a member of the Mac-
Donald Cabinet as Lord Privy Seal, announced his purpose to resign and to
join the opposition if a protective tariff was adopted as a policy of the
Government.
{ 88 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---r of the Mac-
Donald Cabinet as Lord Privy Seal, announced his purpose to resign and to
join the opposition if a protective tariff was adopted as a policy of the
Government.
{ 88 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---

were granted the unusual privilege of opposing the Govern-
ment's own tariff bill in Parliament .
The new bill for a general tariff was offered in the House
by Neville Chamberlain, Chancellor of the Exchequer, on
February 4, 1932 . It provided for duties of io per cent on all
imports not already dutiable or on the free list . Products of
the British Empire were to be exempt from these new duties
until November 15, 1932, and the door was thus left open
for bargaining at the coming, Imperial Economic Conference
at Ottawa. Although the bill encountered opposition from
the dwindling ranks of free-traders, it passed the House of
Commons on February 25 by a vote of 442 to 62 . The House
of Lords promptly concurred, and the measure became a law
on March i .
The flat rate of io per cent established by this statute was
merely the foundation stone of the new protective system .
The structure was to be completed by an Import Duties
Advisory Committee, patterned somewhat after the Tariff
Commission of the United States . Its members were to be
appointed by the Treasury.5 They were authorized to make
investigations and to submit to the Lords of the Treasury
recommendations for changes in existing duties. If they ap-
proved, the Lords of the . Treasury were in turn empowered
to issue orders making these changes effective. Under the
law these orders were subject to confirmation or rejection by
Parliament .
Since the duties imposed in November of the previous-'
year by the Abnormal Importations Act would expire by
limitation on May i9, the committee at once gave its atten-
tion to the preparation of a new schedule of rates . This
schedule went into effect on April 26. Tariffs on those manu-
° The first appointees to the committee were Sir George May, Chairman,
Sir Sidney Chapman, and Sir Allan Powell . Sir George May was also Chair-
man of the committee which produced the famous May Report in
1,931 . This
report contributed to the government crisis in August of that year and directly
led to the collapse of the Labor Government . Cf. The United States in World
Affairs, r93r, Z9r-192 .
{ 89 },931 . This
report contributed to the government crisis in August of that year and directly
led to the collapse of the Labor Government . Cf. The United States in World
Affairs, r93r, Z9r-192 .
{ 89 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---ontributed to the government crisis in August of that year and directly
led to the collapse of the Labor Government . Cf. The United States in World
Affairs, r93r, Z9r-192 .
{ 89 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---

factured goods for which the law authorized additional
duties were fixed at an average rate-of about 20 per cent, the
lowest rate being 15 per cent and the highest 33 =/3 per cent .
These readjustments were generally regarded as preliminary
to later changes. For the new law prepared the way for bar-
gaining with other nations by authorizing reductions, as well
as increases in prevailing duties, On the recommendation of
the Board of Trade, the Treasury was empowered to issue
orders stipulating that goods from a specific country were
not subject to the rates generally imposed, or that they were
dutiable at less than the full rate .
It was apparent that in abandoning free trade, England
intended not only to play the game of protection with the
highly protected nations, but to employ her great commer-
cial power in an attempt to set up a new system of bargain-
ing tariffs for nations which still hoped to dispose of their
surplus goods in British markets .
3. The Ottawa Conference
In the development of its new tariff policy, the British
government hoped first of all to negotiate a series of trade
agreements with other members of the Empire before the
period for the free admission of their goods into the United
Kingdom expired on November 15, 1932. It expected to ac-
complish this at the Imperial Economic Conference which
had been called to meet at Ottawa . This conference convened
on July 21, with delegates in Attendance from Great Britain,
the Irish Free State," Australia, New Zealand, Canada, New-
foundland, India, South Africa, and Southern Rhodesia .
The British delegates hoped to achieve a substantial reduc-
tion in the tariffs on Empire goods and thereby to open the
way for the easing of trade restrictions elsewhere. Mr. Stan-
ley Baldwin, their leader, paid at least lip service to Lord
° Because of the tariff war then waging between Great Britain and the
Irish Free State as a result of the dispute over land annuities, the Irish dele-
gation confined their negotiations for
trade agreements to certain of the
Dominions.
90g between Great Britain and the
Irish Free State as a result of the dispute over land annuities, the Irish dele-
gation confined their negotiations for
trade agreements to certain of the
Dominions.
90

--- PAGE BREAK ---ain and the
Irish Free State as a result of the dispute over land annuities, the Irish dele-
gation confined their negotiations for
trade agreements to certain of the
Dominions.
90

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Beaverbrook's scheme of Empire free trade when he stated
in the House of Commons on June 16 that . the objective of
the Government would be "the nearest practicable approach
to ;reciprocal free trade . within the Empire." But he went
further and said that some of the Dominions would be asked
"to consider if they have not gone a little too fast in their
industrial development both for their own good and for that
of the Empire as a whole."
Mr. Baldwin and his colleagues wishedd especially to
persuade the Dominions to modify the defensive trade meas-
ures to which as debtor countries they had seen fit to resort
during the depression. Most of them during the post-war
decade had applied protective duties on an, ascending scale.,
It was now proposed that Great Britain should give them an
assured market for their natural products, in return for
which they were to relax their efforts at self-containment and
provide a better market for Britishh manufactures . In this way
there would develop a kind of intra-imperial division of
labor, with each region specializing in what it could produce
to the best advantage and exchanging its products for others
which could be produced more advantageously elsewhere .
When the British delegates reached Ottawa, they soon
discovered that the representatives of the protectionist
Dominions entertained different ideas from their own con-
cerning their respective needs. Yet the opening addresses re-
vealed at least a common aim among them all to seek tariff
preferences for their chief products without resorting to meas-
ures which would restrict world trade. Thus, Mr. Richard
B. Bennett, the Canadian Prime Minister, stated that the
hope of the conference was "greater markets within the Em-
pire,"' but that "greater Empire markets mean as well greater
world markets."8
Mr. Baldwin was more explicit. There were two ways, he
'Newfoundland was the conspicuous exception, as it had no industries
demanding protection.
'Report of the Conference (Canadian official edition), 69 .
191 1was more explicit. There were two ways, he
'Newfoundland was the conspicuous exception, as it had no industries
demanding protection.
'Report of the Conference (Canadian official edition), 69 .
191 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---There were two ways, he
'Newfoundland was the conspicuous exception, as it had no industries
demanding protection.
'Report of the Conference (Canadian official edition), 69 .
191 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

said, by which increased preferences could be given-"either
by lowering barriers among ourselves or by raising them
against others .
.
.
It seems to us that we should endeavor
to follow the first rather than the second course . For how-
ever great our resources, we cannot isolate ourselves from
the world."'
When negotiations began, many divergences quickly ap-
peared in the views of the delegations as to the methods of
achieving their common aims . The British pointed out that
between 5o and 6o per cent of their exports went to foreign
countries, and that they could not make concessions which
would offend such good customers as the United States,
Argentina, France, and Germany. Yet the British were then
seeking better markets for their coal and manufactures
through Dominion tariff preferences which would
divert
trade from some of these good customers .
The Dominions, meantime, were vociferously demanding
favors from Great Britain, but were reticent concerning what
they might give in return . For they had become more and
more industrialized under the protectionist policies of the
post-war decade and were naturally, unwilling to subject
their tariff-shielded industries to the unfettered competition
of British imports .
The negotiations between Canada and Great Britain took
first place in the proceedings of the conference, inasmuch as
they involved the largest amount of Empire trade and would
have the greatest effect on world commerce . Premier Bennett,
who was both the originator and the Chairman of the con-
ference, was an ardent protectionist . He had come into office
in 1930 with a high-tariff program when the resentment of
Canadians against the new American tariff was keen . More-
over, the Canadian delegates, being on home ground, were
subjected to constant
local pressure from the high-tariff
advocates in the Dominion .
Ottawa swarmed with lobbyists bent on seeing that no
'Report of the Conference (Canadian official edition), 74-
[ 92]jected to constant
local pressure from the high-tariff
advocates in the Dominion .
Ottawa swarmed with lobbyists bent on seeing that no
'Report of the Conference (Canadian official edition), 74-
[ 92]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ocal pressure from the high-tariff
advocates in the Dominion .
Ottawa swarmed with lobbyists bent on seeing that no
'Report of the Conference (Canadian official edition), 74-
[ 92]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Canadian interest should lose any of its existing tariff pro-
tection through an imperial agreement . The textile manu-
facturers insisted that the home market be reserved for
themselves. The lumber industry insisted that England should
exclude Russian lumber, which was obtainable at very low
prices, and that greater preference should be given to their
product. The Canadians also :were disposed to follow what
Mr. Baldwin had called the less desirable course and to give
tariff preferences by raising their duties against foreign goods
instead of lowering them in favor of Empire goods. Obvi-
ously, if the existing duties on Empire products were already
highly restrictive, the proposed preference would be an
illusion. The British were unwilling to follow the example of
Canada in laying an embargo on Russian products, because
this might close the Russian market to their own goods and
possibly lead to the repudiation of debts owed by the Soviet
government to British subjects.
Because of the wide divergence of interests, an agreement
on a definite plan of imperial economic unity was impossible
.
Although the negotiations were secret, there was ample evi-
dence that they were not proceeding smoothly, and the dis-
putants at times carried on their quarrels indirectly through
the newspapers. Because of the difficulty of reaching agree-
ments, the conference was prolonged for two days beyond
the time originally fixed for adjournment, and the nature
and extent of its achievements were in doubt until the final
session on August 20 .
In the meantime certain matters of less importance-
notably the proposals for an Empire currency and an Empire
bank, the silver question, and the requirement of a uniform
minimum percentage of "Empire content" 10--were disposed
of by postponement or honorable burial at the hands of some
committee. The "reflation" of commodity prices, while gen-
erally desired as a means of economic recovery, was also
10 The amount of Empire material and labor required in goods produced
in part outside the . Empire to qualify them for tariff preference .
[93]erally desired as a means of economic recovery, was also
10 The amount of Empire material and labor required in goods produced
in part outside the . Empire to qualify them for tariff preference .
[93]

--- PAGE BREAK ---means of economic recovery, was also
10 The amount of Empire material and labor required in goods produced
in part outside the . Empire to qualify them for tariff preference .
[93]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

recognized as not attainable by the empire alone and was
deferred for consideration at the World Economic Confer-
ence, later scheduled to meet in 1933 .
In spite of the clash of interests which was in evidence to
the very end and seemed at one time about to disrupt the
conference and even to weaken the structure of the Empire
itself, the negotiations were finally productive beyond ex-
pectation. Twelve trade agreements emerged from the con-
ference. Seven of these were between Great Britain and the
Dominions," three were between Canada and other Domin-
ions," and two were between South Africa and other
Dominions."'
The conference formulated a single general statement of
principle regarding the agreements, namely :
That by the lowering or removal of barriers among themselves
provided for in those agreements the flow of trade between . the
various countries of the Empire will be facilitated, and that by the
consequent increase of purchasing power of their peoples the trade
of the world will also be stimulated and increased .14
Great Britain agreed that the Dominion goods then pro-
visionally on the free list until November r55 should continue
to enjoy free entry for a minimum period of five years . This
was consistent with Mr. Baldwin's pronouncement at the
opening of the conference that no rates should be increased,
but in pursuing its bargaining the British delegation found
it necessary to depart from this policy in some important
particulars.
r . Certain foreign articles formerly on the free list, nota-
bly wheat, linseed, and copper, were subjected to a duty in
order to give preference to Dominion products.
2. The duties on certain other foreign commodities, for
'Australia, Canada, India, Newfoundland, New Zealand,
South Africa,
sad Southern Rhodesia. India and Southern Rhodesia
did not have full
Dominion status, but this distinction was not made at
the conference, and
for convenience they are included here with the Dominions proper .
The Irish Free State, South Africa, and Southern Rhodesia.
"The Irish Free State and New Zealand .
"Report of the Conference (Canadian official edition), ao-az .
(941
cere with the Dominions proper .
The Irish Free State, South Africa, and Southern Rhodesia.
"The Irish Free State and New Zealand .
"Report of the Conference (Canadian official edition), ao-az .
(941
c

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns proper .
The Irish Free State, South Africa, and Southern Rhodesia.
"The Irish Free State and New Zealand .
"Report of the Conference (Canadian official edition), ao-az .
(941
c

--- PAGE BREAK ---

example, fruits and dairy products, were increased so as to
give preference to the Dominions.
3. The quota system, was applied to meats so as to in-
crease purchases-from the Dominions .
The continuancef
of the free' list, the imposition of
fresh
duties on certain foreign goods, and the meat quota consti-
tute the body of Great Britain's concessions to the rest of
the Empire. In return, the Dominions made certain cones-
sions to Great Britain. Canada agreed to revise some 215
rates of its existing tariff, reducing the duties on British
goods in 132 cases and giving the British greater preference
in 83 cases by raising the rates on foreign goods. Canada
agreed further : (I) to adjust rates on British goods so as
to equalize production costs between the two countries ; (2)
to set up a Tariff Board to revise the rates in accordance
with the foregoing principle ; (3) to increase duties only
after an inquiry by this board and to give British producers
a hearing at this inquiry ; (4) to protect against British
imports only "those industries which are reasonably assured
of sound opportunities of success" ; . (5) to abolish, as soon
as the finances of Canada allowed, the surcharges on British
imports, imposed to offset the depreciation of sterling .
The agreements of Great Britain with Australia and New
Zealand embodied concessions to British goods very similar
to those made by Canada . Agreements with other members
of the Empire were simpler and involved mainly an increase
in tariff preferences both numerically and in degree.
The extension of imperial preference introduced no new
principle. Canada had adopted such a system at the begin-
ning of the century, and it had been generally employed
within the Empire since the imposition of the McKenna
duties in 1915 . Great Britain, however, had previously
granted preference only on dutiable goods, and the Ottawa
agreements extended it to goods hitherto on the free list .
One result was a British tariff on foods, a radical departure
from a long-established policy . Another innovation was the
('951d the Ottawa
agreements extended it to goods hitherto on the free list .
One result was a British tariff on foods, a radical departure
from a long-established policy . Another innovation was the
('951

--- PAGE BREAK ---nts extended it to goods hitherto on the free list .
One result was a British tariff on foods, a radical departure
from a long-established policy . Another innovation was the
('951

--- PAGE BREAK ---

provision in some of the treaties between Great Britain and
the Dominions that the British government could not change
certain rates without the consent of the Dominion govern-
ments. Great Britain thus lost some part of her fiscal au-
tonomy,"' but at the same time a new link was established
between the members of the Empire .
While the Canadians did not succeed in obtaining a, British
embargo on Russian timber, they succeeded in embodying
in their treaty with Great Britain a stipulation that if the
preferences were likely to be frustrated "through state action
on the part of any foreign country," each government would
undertake "to prohibit the entry from such foreign country
directly or indirectly of such commodities into its country
for such time as may be necessary to make effective and
maintain the preferences hereby granted by it ."16
The effects of the treaties on, world trade cannot be gauged
with statistical accuracy. Even after they have been in opera-
tion for a considerable period, the results can be only
roughly estimated, inasmuch as a tariff is but one of the
many influences affecting the flow of international com-
merce, and its relative importance is constantly changing . It
was the consensus of trade experts that producers in the
United States would incur some loss of trade in Great Britain
and Canada, hitherto their best foreign markets. r According
to the London Economist, 83 per cent of British imports
were admitted free of duty in 1930, whereas under the new
agreements at Ottawa the proportion would be only 25 per
cent. Of imports from the United States,
70 per cent were
free of duty in 1930, as against an estimated s0 per cent after
the Ottawa agreements became effective .18 Since most of the
"It was pointed out at the time that this clause in the agreements might
tie the hands of the British in negotiating with other countries and possibly
handicap them later at the World Economic Conference .
"Imperial Economic Conference at Ottawa, Cmd . 4174, 22-23 .
"The United States Department of Commerce estimated that about r8o'
million dollars of exports would be affected in some measure by the Ottawa
agreements.
"Economin, Ottawa Supplement, October 22. 193.2.e United States Department of Commerce estimated that about r8o'
million dollars of exports would be affected in some measure by the Ottawa
agreements.
"Economin, Ottawa Supplement, October 22. 193.2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rtment of Commerce estimated that about r8o'
million dollars of exports would be affected in some measure by the Ottawa
agreements.
"Economin, Ottawa Supplement, October 22. 193.2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

British duties were relatively low, the new tariff walls were
not so formidable as these figures themselves might seem to
indicate. Even after the changes made at Ottawa, it was esti-
mated that only' 7 .7 per cent of non-Empire imports into
Great Britain would be subject to duties in excess of
20
per cent.i°
It was impossible at the end of 1932 to strike a balance
between the advantages and disadvantages which might re-
sult from the Ottawa conference . Great Britain seemed
destined to profit in some degree by Dominion trade diverted
from foreign countries . On the other hand, the duties she
imposed on raw materials and foodstuffs would
indicate
higher production costs and a handicap to the expansion of
her export trade outside the Empire . The Dominions, like-
wise, in gaining assured preferential treatment over a term
of years, at the same time incurred the risk of losing some
part of the foreign markets for their natural products by
raising their walls against foreign goods. The adoption of
the quota system by Great Britain and the acceptance by the
chief members of the Empire of the high-protectionist prin-
ciple of "compensatory tariffs" or "equalizing production
costs," seemed to point to' higher trade barriers rather than
the freer flow of world commerce which the various delega-
tions had announced at the opening of the conference
as
their ultimate goal.
4. The American Tariff and Canada
Canada had played the leading part in bringing about the
Ottawa conference. For this there was a reason . The Domin-
ion was a debtor on international account, and as in the case
of many other countries the problem of meeting her obliga-
tions was made more difficult by the sharp decline in com-
modity prices, by the depreciation in the value of Canadian
exchange, by the lack of adequate gold reserves, and by
"Economist, Ottawa Supplement, October 22, 1932.
[97)t by the sharp decline in com-
modity prices, by the depreciation in the value of Canadian
exchange, by the lack of adequate gold reserves, and by
"Economist, Ottawa Supplement, October 22, 1932.
[97)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ne in com-
modity prices, by the depreciation in the value of Canadian
exchange, by the lack of adequate gold reserves, and by
"Economist, Ottawa Supplement, October 22, 1932.
[97)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tariff barriers which severely restricted payment in terms of
goods.
Without sufficient gold to adjust her international bal-
ances, it became more necessary than ever for Canada to
pay her debts in goods. But the sale of Canadian goods in
American markets was effectively discouraged by American
tariffs. The Hawley-Smoot Act of 1930 imposed very high
duties on timber, cattle, and leather, all important items
among Canadian exports to the United States, as well as on
a multitude of smaller items, such as halibut and potatoes
from the maritime Provinces, and dairy products
from
Quebec. In an effort still further to discourage imports from
Canada,, Congress enacted new tariffs on copper and lumber
in the revenue act of 1932."
To many Canadians it seemed that the United States was
pursuing an inconsistent policy when it advanced large loans
and made direct investments in Canada and at the same
time placed obstacles in
the way of payment on these
investments.
A. American Branch Factories
One phase of American investment in Canada attracted
special attention in 1932 and raised questions directly con-
cerned with the tariff policy of both countries. This was the
capital invested by Americans in branch factories, subsidiary
companies, and assembling plants in Canada . The United
States Department of Commerce estimated the amount so
invested in 1929 at 540 million dollars," distributed as
shown in the following table:
° Cf. Chapter II.
s` American Branch Factories Abroad,
31. Senate Document 258, Seventy-
first Congress, Third Session. An estimate by the Dominion Bureau of Sta-
tistics, published in 1931, gave the number of Canadian branch plants and
eTh]iated establishments of United States ownership as 1,071, with an in-
vested capital of 1,190 millions . This includes plants not wholly American-
owned and also paper and pulp mills, which were omitted from the
American estimate.States ownership as 1,071, with an in-
vested capital of 1,190 millions . This includes plants not wholly American-
owned and also paper and pulp mills, which were omitted from the
American estimate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The motives which persuaded American interests to estab-
lish branches and subsidiaries in Canada were summed up
by the Department of ' Commerce in a report submitted to
Congress on January 22, x931" Among these motives were
listed a desire in certain cases to take advantage of lower
costs of transportation, a desire in other cases to operate
successfully under the "working
clauses of Canadian patent
laws, and a desire to appeal to the national sentiment of
the Canadian purchaser by offering a product "made in
Canada." But the most powerful of all motives was the
desire to transact business behind the Canadian tariff wall .
On this point, in view of what happened at Ottawa in
1932, the opinion of the Department of Commerce is espe-
cially significant .
In the case of Canada the tariff factor is based not only on the
tariff policy of Canada itself, but also onn the policies of the mother
country and such parts of the British Empire as grant preferential
treatment to Canadian products . Thus the migration of the Ameri-
can industries to Canada has been motivated to a very large degree
by the desire to facilitate the en6y of American products into the
markets of a good share of the British Empire, taking into considera-
° American Branch Factories Abroad,
7-17.
C 991
BsANCu FACroaiss IN CANADA
(Values in millions of dollars)
Number
Value
Automotive products
43
69.3
Chemicals .
113
448
Electrical equipment
21.
55 .9
Foodstuffs
5 1
53 .3
Machinery
62
68.2
Iron and steel products . . .
.
23
30.6
Other metal products
78
57.9
Lumber and products
37
5r.=
Rubber products
8
47.5
Textiles
39
19 .2.
Miscellaneous
58
42.8
Total
52 .4
340.6

--- PAGE BREAK ---and steel products . . .
.
23
30.6
Other metal products
78
57.9
Lumber and products
37
5r.=
Rubber products
8
47.5
Textiles
39
19 .2.
Miscellaneous
58
42.8
Total
52 .4
340.6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tion not only the actual but also the future preferential tariff rela-
tions between the various parts' of the Empire.
The migration of American industry to Canada brought
from the American Federation of Labor a protest against
loss of employment in factories on our own side of the
border. It armed the Democratic candidate for the Presi-
dency in the campaign of ,1932 with an additional argument
for revision of existing tariffs. It initiated a movement among
Canadian manufacturers to restrict the, advantages enjoyed
by American branch factories in Empire trade.
With this end in view, the Canadian delegation attending
the Imperial Economic Conference at Ottawa proposed the
adoption of a uniform formula of "Empire content ." The
United Kingdom and the Irish Free State generally required
that 25 per cent of the value of any manufactured article
should represent Empire material and Empire labor if the
article was to enjoy preferential treatment in Empire trade ;
Canada and New Zealand required 50 per cent, and Aus-
tralia 75 . The advocates of a uniform formula now sought
to fix the proportion in all parts of the Empire at 50 or 6o
per cent. The purpose of this proposal was to prevent Ameri-
can branch factories from producing most of their products
in the United States and then shipping finished parts across
the border, to be assembled in Canada and exported to Great
Britain with the advantage of imperial tariff preference .
The British delegates to the Ottawa conference were di-
vided on the desirability of the Canadian proposal . Since
British industries were dependent on foreign raw materials,
they feared that the requirement of an Empire content of as
much as 50 per cent might make it difficult for the United
Kingdom to obtain preferential tariffs on its own exports
to other parts of the Empire. Canada herself had found it
necessary to depart from her 50 per cent requirement in the
case of certain textiles and to reduce the proportion to 33 1/3
per cent in order to enable the British textile industries to
obtain preferential treatment .
[ 10o )her 50 per cent requirement in the
case of certain textiles and to reduce the proportion to 33 1/3
per cent in order to enable the British textile industries to
obtain preferential treatment .
[ 10o )

--- PAGE BREAK ---irement in the
case of certain textiles and to reduce the proportion to 33 1/3
per cent in order to enable the British textile industries to
obtain preferential treatment .
[ 10o )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Spokesmen
of American
business
interests
at
Ottawa
strongly protested against the Canadian proposal . They as-
serted that such an increase in Empire content would force
many American branch factories to leave
Canada. The
local communities in which these factories were operating
joined American manufacturers in opposing the plan and
declared that it would result in further unemployment .
The matter was finally disposed of by the adoption of a
resolution limited to expressing the desirability of a uniform
requirement of Empire content . Settlement of the question
was thus postponed without a definite rejection or acceptance
of the Canadian plan .
5. World Trade in Fetters
With creditor nations matching their wits and their power
against debtor nations in an attempt to curtail imports and
to force exports, the trade of the world became entangled
in a mass of regulations without parallel in history . High
tariffs prevented repayment of debts incurred in large part
to facilitate an exchange of goods ; the import-license system
hampered the orderly processes of trade ; the quota system
forced it into new and unaccustomed channels, at times run-
ning counter to the normal conditions of supply. and de-
mand ; exchange control frequently subjected international
trade to the decisions of subordinate officials ; resort to so-
called flexible provisions kept rates in a state of anarchy .
The height of a country's tariff wall could no longer be
measured by a study of the duties fixed in its tariff legisla-
tion. For the prescribed duties were supplemented and at
times supplanted by administrative regulations, in some .in-
stances completely prohibiting imports of goods on which
the tariff duty fixed by statute might not seem excessive .
Some idea of the obstacles encountered, by business men
in selling goods may be gleaned from Commerce Reports,
an official publication of the United States Department of
Commerce. In the issue of August 15,
1932, selected at
t 101ountered, by business men
in selling goods may be gleaned from Commerce Reports,
an official publication of the United States Department of
Commerce. In the issue of August 15,
1932, selected at
t 101

--- PAGE BREAK ---s men
in selling goods may be gleaned from Commerce Reports,
an official publication of the United States Department of
Commerce. In the issue of August 15,
1932, selected at
t 101

--- PAGE BREAK ---

random, the news of a single week's foreign tariff changes
ran as follows :
France renewed the quotas on fresh fruits for August and Sep-
tember .
The Swedish Parliament temporarily amplified the government's
authority to increase existing duties and to levy new duties on goods
then on the free list.
Denmark temporarily increased the excise taxes on both domestic
and imported gasoline and cigarettes .
Latvia increased the duties on about half the items in its tariff
law.
Poland made temporary and conditional reductions in duties on
certain kinds of machinery and some miscellaneous products .
China increased the duties on silk and rayon products, medicines,
and dyes .
Mexico increased the duties on various foodstuffs and certain
iron, steel, and chemical products .
Honduras increased the duties on lard, butter, eggs, cheese, rice,
beans, and fresh vegetables.
Brazil reduced the duties on equipment for the meat industry
on condition that similar domestic products were not available .
China reduced the duty on gasoline .
Canada imposed an excise tax on all lumber imported from the
United States.
The difficulty of transacting business between nations
under such conditions was demonstrated by the sharp con-
traction of world trade .
One conspicuous exception to this general tendency to
raise tariff walls ever higher was offered during the summer
of 1932 by Belgium, Holland, and Luxemburg. Declaring
that "the progressive realization of greater freedom of trade
is one of the essential conditions of world prosperity," they
signed a convention at Ouchy on July 18 which provided
for a gradual and reciprocal reduction of their tariffs, and
they invited the collaboration of other nations to the same
end. But before this new arrangement could go into effect,
it was necessary for the signatories to consult the govern-
ments-with which they had most-favored-nation agreements
L 102ations to the same
end. But before this new arrangement could go into effect,
it was necessary for the signatories to consult the govern-
ments-with which they had most-favored-nation agreements
L 102

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and ascertainn whether they regarded the reciprocity propos-
als as consistent with these agreements . As some of the
governments consulted were disposed to reserve all their
rights under the most-favored-nation clauses of their treaties,
the outcome of this new effort to bring down European trade
barriers seemed at the end of the year to be very uncertain
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s under the most-favored-nation clauses of their treaties,
the outcome of this new effort to bring down European trade
barriers seemed at the end of the year to be very uncertain
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER SEVEN
THE AMERICAN CRISIS
IN AN earlier chapter we noted briefly that in the post-
war era a large amount of international lending consisted of
short-term credits and of demand deposits . It will be re-
called, too, that the Austrian, German, and British crises in
May, June, and September, 1931, were provoked primarily
by the panicky withdrawal of the liquid funds . Quite
plainly the existence of this large volume of credit which
was subject to sudden and unpredictable movement from one
money center to another was a phenomenon charged with
explosive power. We propose, therefore, to examine it some-
what more closely here, particularly since in the period be-
tween October,
1931,
and June,
1932,
it was such an
important element in the American monetary crisis
.
i . The Development o f Large Short-Term Balances up to
June, 1931
A. Causes of the Accumulation
The accumulation of a large volume of liquid funds in
the international money markets began before the onset of
the depression in 1929 . The accumulation was in the first
instance a consequence of the settlement of the war and then
of the efforts, which began in 1924, to achieve a stabilization
of currencies. Many peoples of Europe, especially the Dutch,
Swiss, Belgians, and French, were keeping their liquid funds
on deposit in the United States.
The break-up of the four empires of Southern Europe
Cf. The United States in World Affairs, 1931, Chapters VII, VIII, X.
[104)

--- PAGE BREAK ---g their liquid funds
on deposit in the United States.
The break-up of the four empires of Southern Europe
Cf. The United States in World Affairs, 1931, Chapters VII, VIII, X.
[104)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

brought many new nations into existence . There were in
1919 twenty-pine independent sovereignties in Europe,
whereas in 1914 there had been only twenty. Each new na-
tion insisted upon establishing its own currency and its own
central bank. As a result, when the task of stabilizing the
currencies, of the world was undertaken, it was seen that the
new nations would have great difficulty in laying their hands
upon sufficient stocks of gold . Because of this difficulty, it
was generally agreed that measures must be undertaken to
economize in the use of gold. One of these measures was
the substitution of the gold-bullion for the gold-coinage
standard in some European countries. This relieved the cen-
tral banks of the fear that their gold reserves would be easily
withdrawn into circulation. The reserves were held in the
form of gold bars, and were too expensive and too unwieldy
for any general popular use. Another measure of economy
in the use of gold was the adoption by many countries of
the so-called gold-exchange standard .
Under this device a central bank had the option of secur-
ing its notes either with gold bullion or with balances in
banks of foreign countries whose money was on the gold
standard. Thus the gold held in one country, which was
already the basis of credit in that country, became also the
banking reserve of a foreign country . Clearly the system was
inflationary, and although the banks in gold-standard coun-
tries took precautions to increase their own gold reserves in
order that they might be ready to meet demands arising from
these external claims upon their gold, the net result might
be an expansion of the volume of bank credit .
Even before the depression this credit mechanism had en-
couraged the accumulation of a large volume of liquid funds
subject to sudden withdrawal . The gold-exchange countries
were keeping part or even the whole of their bank reserves
abroad in the form
of demand deposits, and the gold-
standard countries deemed it advisable to maintain a con-
siderable holding of foreign currencies to meet demands
[1051hole of their bank reserves
abroad in the form
of demand deposits, and the gold-
standard countries deemed it advisable to maintain a con-
siderable holding of foreign currencies to meet demands
[1051

--- PAGE BREAK ---eserves
abroad in the form
of demand deposits, and the gold-
standard countries deemed it advisable to maintain a con-
siderable holding of foreign currencies to meet demands
[1051

--- PAGE BREAK ---

upon them. At the end of 1930 the published data, which
are admittedly incomplete, show that the floating foreign
balances of the central banks were approximately 3,000
million dollars?
The volume of these short-term credits was greatly in-
creased by the gradual cessation of long-term foreign lending
during the great American stock-market speculation of
1928-29 . During that period the American investing public
would buy only common stocks and the market for foreign
bonds virtually disappeared . Moreover, the boom in Wall
Street attracted funds from all the money centers of the
world either for speculation or for loans on call, and for
some time the rate on the call loans on the New York Stock
Exchange exercised a greater influence on the international
movement of funds than the discount rates of the great cen-
tral banks. The result was that the United States, while a
large creditor on long-term, became a debtor on short-term .
B. Liquidation
The volume of floating balances was increased also by the
flight of capital from those countries of Europe which had
depreciating currencies during the post-war years . Liquid
funds were sent abroad, often in spite of the legal prohibi-
tion of capital exports, and payments due from foreigners
for goods and services were allowed to accumulate in coun-
tries which had sounder currencies . This expatriated capital
thus became a new source of foreign short-term credit .
The liquidation in the security markets, following the
stock-market collapse of October, 1929, was an important
factor in the movement of short-term capital in 1930 and
1931- In 1929 (when the stock market for most of the year
was booming), the net outflow of capital from the United
States to foreign countries was roughly only 300 million
'Report o f the Gold Delegation o f the Financial
Committee. League of
Nations Publication, Official No, C.5o2.M.243.x9321I .A.
{ 1o6le United
States to foreign countries was roughly only 300 million
'Report o f the Gold Delegation o f the Financial
Committee. League of
Nations Publication, Official No, C.5o2.M.243.x9321I .A.
{ 1o6l

--- PAGE BREAK ---

dollars, while in 1930, a year of depression, it was 780 mil-
lion dollars, and in 1931 it was approximately 550 million
dollars. During the boom years the United States was a
debtor on short-term account, and in 1926 and 1927 its net
indebtedness amounted to approximately goo millions . In
1931 it had ceased to be a debtor on short-term account and
had become a creditor with net credits estimated at 571
millions .
C. The Volume of Short-Term Credit in z93z
Exact figures for the volume of short-term funds which
were, so to speak, on the loose in the world at the beginning
of the world financial crisis of 1931, are not obtainable, but
sufficiently accurate estimates are available to enable us to
say what was the order of magnitude of this phenomenon .
The totals of short-term obligations at various dates in
1931
have been computed for, Great Britain in the Macmillan
Report of August, 1931, and in the Report of the Special
Advisory Committee under the Young Plan in December ;
for the United States the estimates have been made by the
Department of Commerce, and for Austria and Hungary they
have been made by the League of Nations.
Although these estimates are not strictly comparable, since
they cover different classes of credits, it may be said that at
the beginning of 1931 the distribution in various countries
of short-term credits due to foreign banks was approximately
as follows,:
(In millions of dollars)
United States 2.,785
Great Britain 1,980
Germany . :
1,2.15
Austria .
.
. 12.7
Hungary
z43
Sweden
102
Other short-term debts of these six countries have been
estimated at approximately 3,300 million dollars, bringing
1 1071

--- PAGE BREAK ---ny . :
1,2.15
Austria .
.
. 12.7
Hungary
z43
Sweden
102
Other short-term debts of these six countries have been
estimated at approximately 3,300 million dollars, bringing
1 1071

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the estimated total to something like 9,500 millions, or, say,
in round numbers, xo,ooo millions .'
2 . The International Liquidating Crisis
The inherent danger of these mobile and sensitive credits
was made manifest in the series of financial crises during
1931. The international movement of capital in that year was
directed not toward investment and the stimulation of trade
but toward salvaging the principal wherever possible . The
hysterical violence of the movement may be inferred from
estimates of the reduction of the outstanding short-term
indebtedness of six countries :'
(In millions of dollars)
a The estimates of repayment for Germany and Sweden
approximate the estimates of the total short-term indebted-
ness at the beginning of the year. This may be due to the
fact that there was a large volume of short-term borrowing
before the flight of funds was precipitated by the Austrian
crisis.
Estimates by the Department of Commerce show a slightly
smaller figure and indicate that demand liabilities of Ameri-
can banks to foreigners and short-term investments carried
by foreigners in the United States declined
1,275 million
dollars during 193 1 ! In other words, that sum was drawn
out of the country. The total, however, was offset by a de-
dine of similar obligations of foreign debtors to American
creditors by 510 million dollars, that is, by American with-
drawals from other countries, so that the net outflow of
• Based on estimates from official and confidential sources supplied to
the Council on Foreign Relations .
`Data from authoritative and confidential sources supplied to the Coun-
cil on Foreign Relations .
4Th* Balance of International Payments of the United States it 1931, 6s .
(xo8)
United States (year 1931)
1,500
Great Britain (July-Sept ., 1931)
1,000
Germany (year 1931)a
31,810
Austria
"
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
Hungary
. .
. . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
. . .
40
Sweden
. .
. .
137-1931)
1,500
Great Britain (July-Sept ., 1931)
1,000
Germany (year 1931)a
31,810
Austria
"
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
Hungary
. .
. . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
. . .
40
Sweden
. .
. .
137-

--- PAGE BREAK ---Britain (July-Sept ., 1931)
1,000
Germany (year 1931)a
31,810
Austria
"
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
Hungary
. .
. . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
. . .
40
Sweden
. .
. .
137-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

short-term capital from the United States during the year
amounted to 765 million dollars
Following the collapse of the Austrian Kredit Anstalt,
there had been violent withdrawals of foreign funds and a
flight of capital first from
Germany, then from Great
Britain, and finally from the United States. There is reason
to believe that during 1931 the volume of short-term inter-
national indebtedness was reduced at least by one-third, and
possibly by as much as 40 per cent. The reduction would
have been greater had it not been checked by freezing much
of the short-term debt by means of the so-called "standstill"
agreements. The effect was violently deflationary, and it is
probable that, combining the foreign withdrawals
with
domestic liquidation, something like 6,ooo millions of dol-
lars was withdrawn from commercial use in the debtor
countries. This caused a precipitous decline in world prices
and a tremendous dislocation of production and trade .
3. The Liquidity Crisis in the United States
The beginning of the American phase of the international
financial crisis coincided with the suspension of gold pay-
ments in Great Britain on September
21, 1931. The conclu-
sion of the crisis coincided with the completion of the
withdrawal of the foreign balances, the reparation settle-
ment at Lausanne, and the adjournment of the Seventy-
second Congress, in June and July, 1932 . The American
phase was divided, broadly speaking, into three periods :
there was a crisis in the autumn of 1931, a lull in the winter,
and a renewed and more violent crisis in the spring of 1932 .
'At the end of x930, foreign short-term investments in the United States
were computed at 2,737 millions; at the end of 1931, they were 1,462 mil-
lions. In both these cases they represent gross short-term , indebtedness and,
as indicated above, these amounts were offset
by short-term indebtedness
of foreigners to the United States. These offsets, however, were largely
mathematical ; that is, debtors and creditors in the United States had no means
of matching their respective claims against one another, and the net in-
debtedness in the time of violent' movement of capital out of the country is
not so important as the gross sum .
[ 109 3means
of matching their respective claims against one another, and the net in-
debtedness in the time of violent' movement of capital out of the country is
not so important as the gross sum .
[ 109 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---heir respective claims against one another, and the net in-
debtedness in the time of violent' movement of capital out of the country is
not so important as the gross sum .
[ 109 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. The Autumn Crisis of z93 r
The events of this period have already been dealt with
in the preceding volume of this series.? It may, however, be
useful to recall that beginning with the suspension of gold
payments in Great Britain, the American banking system,
already strained by bank failures and the domestic hoarding
of currency, was subjected to additional strain by sudden
large foreign withdrawals of gold, by increased bank fail-
ures, and by more intensive domestic hoarding of currency .
In the four days following Great Britain's action,
18o
million dollars in gold was earmarked for foreign account .
The weekly losses in millions of dollars, thereafter, were as
follows : 159, 189, 102, 200, 72, 26. By October 28 the with-
drawals had been completed, but the net loss had been 748
millions. The bank failures which occurred simultaneously
with these withdrawals amounted to 305 for September and
522 for October. The domestic panic reflected itself in the
increase of the Federal Reserve note circulation. On August
5, 1931, it stood at 1,773 millions, on September 23 at 2,045
millions, and on October 28 at 2,384 millions, the gain ex-
ceeding the normal seasonal movement . The note circulation
had increased 1,oz6 millions in twelve months of stagnant
business, and the gold holdings had declined 748 millions
in six weeks .
The
combination of gold withdrawals and hoarding
created some concern abroad as to the stability of the Ameri-
can gold standard . For the Federal Reserve note circulation
then had a much larger gold cover than the legal minimum
of 40 per cent . Under the Federal Reserve Act, before its
amendment by the Glass-Steagall bill, the security for Fed-
eral Reserve notes had to be at least 40 per cent in gold
and the remainder in eligible paper. Any decline in the
amount of eligible paper would have to be balanced by a
corresponding increase in gold reserves . When the note cir-
'Cf. The United States in World Affairs, 'g3', Chapter XI.
L I10Any decline in the
amount of eligible paper would have to be balanced by a
corresponding increase in gold reserves . When the note cir-
'Cf. The United States in World Affairs, 'g3', Chapter XI.
L I10

--- PAGE BREAK ---mount of eligible paper would have to be balanced by a
corresponding increase in gold reserves . When the note cir-
'Cf. The United States in World Affairs, 'g3', Chapter XI.
L I10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

culation was rapidly expanding, as a result of hoarding, and
the banks were not increasing their holdings of eligible
paper, the amount of gold required as a cover for the notes
necessarily increased .
Thus, while the United States was
losing gold to Europe, the amount of "free gold," or gold
not required either for security against bank deposits or
bank currency, was being reduced . The larger the amount of
"free gold," the more successfully the country could with-
stand the strain resulting from violent shifts of foreign
short-term credit calling for gold withdrawals.
The crisis, so far as bank failures were concerned, was ar-
rested at the end of October by the formation of the
National Credit Corporation and by the pledges of the gov-
ernment and of the party leaders that they would take all
necessary measures to meet it. In November, just before
Congress convened, the small shipments of gold still de-
manded by Europe were more than offset by gold imports,
mainly from the Far East ; the number of bank failures was
reduced from 522 in October to 175, in November, and al-
though the note circulation continued to increase, this was
believed to represent a normal expansion for expenditures in
the Christmas season.
B. The Lull from December to March
The gravity of the situation was even more apparent in
December than it had been two months earlier . Investors ap-
peared to be withdrawing from the bond market, and the
effect on bond prices was catastrophic . Bank failures rose
again to 358 in the month of December, and there was gen-
eral liquidation and deflation throughout the economic sys-
tem. It was evident that a very large part of the. structure of
private debts, railroad and utility bonds, urban real estate,
farm debts, and municipal bonds was dangerously compro-
mised at the existing level of prices and the existing level of
business activity. Moreover, it was at last realized that the
Federal deficit was alarmingly high .
till]bonds was dangerously compro-
mised at the existing level of prices and the existing level of
business activity. Moreover, it was at last realized that the
Federal deficit was alarmingly high .
till]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ly compro-
mised at the existing level of prices and the existing level of
business activity. Moreover, it was at last realized that the
Federal deficit was alarmingly high .
till]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Both the Administration and the public had been slow in
recognizing the significance of this deficit and the necessity
of taking steps to protect the public credit. The Administra-
tion had been reluctant to consider higher taxes . It had once
reduced them, early in the depression, in an effort to stimulate
confidence in a prompt recovery . During the greater part of
1931 it continued to hope that the problem presented by rap-
idly declining revenues could be solved by paring expendi-
tures. In May it was reported that the President had begun a
series of conferences with department heads in order to find
means of reducing costs. In July, when the deficit for 193o-31
had reached $903,000,000, he dispatched a letter to each of
the ten Cabinet officials and to all of the thirty or more heads
of independent bureaus, urging that estimates for the new
fiscal year and provisional estimates for the year following be
cut to "the lowest point attainable without serious detriment
to the public welfare ." As late as September, it was reported
from Washington that consideration of the new budget
had been postponed, "in the hope that a change in the gen-
eral economic situation will relieve the stress on the gov-
ernment."e
By this time a deficit of $375,000,000 for the first three
months of the new fiscal year had been added to the deficit
of $903,000,000 for the fiscal year ended on June 30. In
October there was still no mention of the possibility of in-
creased taxes in a statement made by the President that he
hoped "to reduce expenditures to the last cent consonant
with the obligations of the government," though "no conclu-
sions have been reached on any particular proposed econ-
omy."1° It was not until November
16, twenty-one days
before Congress reconvened, that the first admission came
from the Administration that new taxes would be necessary.
The task of protecting the public credit had thus been
"New York Times, July 25, 1931.
'Ibid
., September 2, 1931.
10 Ibid., October 17, 1931 .om the Administration that new taxes would be necessary.
The task of protecting the public credit had thus been
"New York Times, July 25, 1931.
'Ibid
., September 2, 1931.
10 Ibid., October 17, 1931 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---n that new taxes would be necessary.
The task of protecting the public credit had thus been
"New York Times, July 25, 1931.
'Ibid
., September 2, 1931.
10 Ibid., October 17, 1931 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

thrust upon Congress suddenly and without preparation . The
budget submitted by the President on December 9 included
a plan for a temporary increase of taxes, to "be definitely
terminated in two years," which the Treasury believed
would add $390,000,000 to the government's revenues in
1931-32 and $920,000,000 in the year following. The Presi-
dent also proposed- to create what was in effect a huge gov-
ernment bank with funds which it could lend to other banks
on the security of their frozen but reasonably good collateral .
This bank was named the Reconstruction Finance Corpora-
tion, and one of its functions was to lend other banks money
at long terms which they could use in liquidating demand
deposits. For the crisis in the banks arose from the fact that
they had put their depositors' money into long-term loans
and were being called upon by depositors to pay back this
money on demand . The theory of the scheme was that if
depositors became convinced that the public credit was avail-
able to protect their banks, the run on the banks would cease .
Submission of this plan, together with the President's pro-
posal for increased taxes in order to bring the Federal budget
more nearly into balance, made a favorable impression both
in this country and in international money centers . Although
some gold began to move out again in the month following
the announcement of the President's program, although there
was much disquiet in Europe over what were held to be
inflationary tendencies in Congress, although hoarding was
renewed and bank failures increased, a certain equilibrium
was maintained during the winter months of 1931-32 .
C. The Crisis in the Spring of 1932
The development which aroused fresh fears at home and
abroad concerning the government's financial condition and
created foreign apprehension concerning the soundness of
the dollar was a revolt in Congress on the tax bill .
In drafting this legislation, the task of the Ways and
Means Committee had been made more difficult by the fact
11131concerning the soundness of
the dollar was a revolt in Congress on the tax bill .
In drafting this legislation, the task of the Ways and
Means Committee had been made more difficult by the fact
11131

--- PAGE BREAK ---dness of
the dollar was a revolt in Congress on the tax bill .
In drafting this legislation, the task of the Ways and
Means Committee had been made more difficult by the fact
11131

--- PAGE BREAK ---

0
that, two months after submission of the Administration's
program in December, the Treasury reported it would be
necessary to raise nearly 500 million dollars in additional
revenue, in order to offset a continuing decline in the yield
of existing taxes and the prospective yield of the new taxes
which the Administration had proposed. But since the Ad-
ministration plan relied largely upon excise taxes on a se-
lected list of industries, spokesmen of these industries now
appeared in Washington and expressed bitter opposition
to such taxes on the ground that they would handicap the
recovery of business . At the same time doubts steadily in-
creased as to whether even the Treasury's reduced estimates
of their yield could be relied upon . As a result, the committee
gradually fell back upon an alternative plan to raise a sub-
stantial part of the required revenue by means of a small
general tax on the sale of manufactured articles .
As introduced in the House of Representatives on March
7, the new bill imposed a tax of 21/4 per cent on the sales
value of all manufactured goods, except for a few necessities,
with an estimated yield of $595,000,000 . The bill also in-
creased existing rates on personal and corporate incomes,
doubled existing rates on estates, and imposed new taxes on
amusements, stock transfers, and telegraph messages . The
yield of these taxes was estimated at $501,000,000 . Added
to the estimated yield of the sales tax, this gave a total of
$1,096,000 . This was about $125,000,000 short of the latest
estimate of the Treasury's requirements. The committee sug-
gested that the gap be closed by reduction of expenditures .
When the bill was written, its sponsors predicted that
there would be little opposition in the House . The Repub-
lican floor leader found "an easy majority" for it, after poll-
ing his side of the House, and the Democratic leader had
"no doubt whatever of its passage."" Nevertheless, dissatis-
faction with the bill appeared as soon as the debate began.
The attack was centered on the sales tax . The committee
,"Now Yosk Timaa, March 9, 15, 1932.
1I4 )f its passage."" Nevertheless, dissatis-
faction with the bill appeared as soon as the debate began.
The attack was centered on the sales tax . The committee
,"Now Yosk Timaa, March 9, 15, 1932.
1I4 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---ertheless, dissatis-
faction with the bill appeared as soon as the debate began.
The attack was centered on the sales tax . The committee
,"Now Yosk Timaa, March 9, 15, 1932.
1I4 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

counted upon this tax to raise more than half the addi-
tional revenue. The opposition described it as an attempt
to shift the burden of the deficit from the propertied classes
to those least able to pay additional taxes . Under the leader-
ship of Mr. La Guardia, a Republican Representative from
New York, a group of "allied progressives" banded together
on the second day of the debate in opposition to the plan .
Five days later a group of fifty insurgent Democrats met
in a night caucus and voted to "leave no honorable means
unemployed" to defeat this section of the bill ."
This was the first revolt within the ranks of the new
Democratic majority in the House, and vigorous efforts were
made to bring the insurgents back into line . Shortly before
the night caucus, the Chairman of the Democratic National
Executive Committee, Mr . Shouse, had issued a statement
calling upon all members of the party to unite behind the
sales tax, not because he regarded it as good from the point
of view of the Democratic philosophy, but because no sub-
stitute "that will yield the necessary money, and that will
not prove more inequitable and undesirable, had been found
by the House Committee." The argument was put forth by
many Democrats that disunion within the party on this, the
first large test of the party's ability to make an important
decision, would cost it the confidence of the country .
Nevertheless, opposition to the sales tax continued to in
.crease, and with it a desire to shift a larger part of the burden
to the propertied classes . On March
18, at the end of a
week's debate, a coalition of insurgent Democrats and Re-
publicans routed the regular party leaders and by a vote of
153 to 87 raised the income taxes in the pending measure to
practically war-time levels, with a maximum of 65 per cent
on incomes in the highest bracket . This action was taken
at a stormy session . The temper of the House was on edge .
During the intermission over the ensuing week-end, the
"New York Times, March x7, 1932 .
'Ibid., March 14, 1932 .et . This action was taken
at a stormy session . The temper of the House was on edge .
During the intermission over the ensuing week-end, the
"New York Times, March x7, 1932 .
'Ibid., March 14, 1932 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---taken
at a stormy session . The temper of the House was on edge .
During the intermission over the ensuing week-end, the
"New York Times, March x7, 1932 .
'Ibid., March 14, 1932 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

committee attempted to make the sales tax more acceptable
by amending it to exempt farm implements, wearing apparel,
medical supplies, and various other items . These changes
reduced the effectiveness of the tax as a means of raising
revenue, but failed to appease the opposition .
On March 24 the sales tax came to a decisive vote . A last
appeal for it was made by Mr. Crisp, who described it as
"the most equitable, the least injurious, and the surest"
means of balancing the budget . "I say to you that you can-
not raise the money needed to maintain the financial integrity
of your government through the present income-tax struc-
ture." Only forty-four Democrats stood with Mr . Crisp when
the roll was called. By the decisive vote of 223 to 153, the
sales tax was defeated ." More votes were cast against it on
the side of the Democrats, whose committee had sponsored
it, than on the side of the Republicans, theoretically the
party of the opposition ."
Rejection of the sales tax eliminated from the bill taxes
meant to raise more than half the revenue which
the
bill originally called for. The Ways and Means Committee
had no alternative plan which it was prepared to offer . It
had no hold upon the loyalty of the House and no enthusi-
asm for the task before it . After nearly four months of labor,
the program to balance the budget was thus thrown into
complete confusion . The proposals of the Administration
had been found to be inadequate ; the proposals of the bi-
partisan coalition in the House had been rejected decisively .
It was difficult to see how a satisfactory tax bill could be
passed with Congress in a mood where its authorized
leaders could not control the Democratic majority nor the
Administration the Republican membership.
To observers abroad, this appeared to signify the same
paralysis of government which had preceded financial col-
' Congressional Record,
Seventy-second Congress, First Session,
7001 .
'As the Democratic membership of the House at this time was
219, and
the Republican 214, 20 per cent of the Democrats and go per cent of the
Republicans supported the sales' tax .
1116lession,
7001 .
'As the Democratic membership of the House at this time was
219, and
the Republican 214, 20 per cent of the Democrats and go per cent of the
Republicans supported the sales' tax .
1116l

--- PAGE BREAK ---he Democratic membership of the House at this time was
219, and
the Republican 214, 20 per cent of the Democrats and go per cent of the
Republicans supported the sales' tax .
1116l

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lapse in so many other countries . What everybody saw was
that the leaders of both parties had been defied by the rank
and file of the people's representatives . This was taken to
mean not only that the sales tax was unpopular with a
large part of the voters, but that it was uncertain whether
other forms of taxation would not be equally unpopular,
and therefore that Congress might rebel at accepting the
principle of a balanced budget .
It was plain that if Congress proved unwilling to vote new
taxes and to curtail expenditures, the government would be
spending something like two dollars for every dollar of its
revenue, and that borrowing to meet the difference would
impair the public credit . The creditor classes realized . that if
there was no dependable purpose to make both ends meet,
government securities could be floated only at rising interest
rates, and that the next stage might be an inflation of the
currency by means of the printing press .
These fears of inflation were not unfounded . Various pro-
posals for the relief of the unemployed, for the benefit, of the
ex-soldiers, and for the artificial control of prices had already
been brought forward by members of Congress, and there
was evidence that some of them would command strong
support. Moreover, part of this support was based not so
much on the professed purpose of the measures as on the
broader principle that they would make money more abun-
dant, would cheapen credit, and would raise prices. The
voice of the debtor classes and the debtor communities had
been raised once more against hard money .
European fears as to the possibility of inflation were re-
flected in the outflow of gold . Net exports of gold in March
were 25 millions ; in April, 30 millions; in May, 195 millions,
and in June, 2o6 millions .16 France, Switzerland, ' Belgium,
and Holland were feverishly repatriating their American
"'These figures of exports do not tally with dat .. of gold stocks, owing
to earmarking operations .illions .16 France, Switzerland, ' Belgium,
and Holland were feverishly repatriating their American
"'These figures of exports do not tally with dat .. of gold stocks, owing
to earmarking operations .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

credits. They were unwilling any longer to put their trust in
the soundness of the dollar. From March to the middle of
June the dollar was at a discount in the markets of the
foreign gold-standard countries, and at one time all avail-
able transportation facilities were engaged in advance for
moving gold outside of the United States.
In the nine months beginning September
1, 1931, the
United States exported or earmarked 1,547 million dollars in
gold. This was offset by an inflow of 434 millions from
debtor countries--Canada, Latin America,
and the Far
East-so that the-net loss was 1,113 millions. Never before
had the country's financial mechanism been subjected to such
a strain, and it may perhaps be added in retrospect, never
before had its inherent strength been so thoroughly dem-
onstrated .
4. Measures to Meet the Crisis
The measures taken to meet the crisis fall into three cate-
gories: there was the central banking policy adopted by the
Federal Reserve System ; there was the effort of the govern-
ment to preserve the national credit by proving its adherence
to the principle of a balanced budget ; and there was the
effort to defeat inflationary proposals . When the Federal
Reserve policy had been put into operation, when the budget
had been balanced in principle, when the inflationary meas-
ures had been defeated, and Congress had adjourned, fears
concerning the gold standard were allayed, and a radical im-
provement in the financial situation began almost im-
mediately .
A. Central Banking Policy
American banking policy during the crisis had as its fun-
damental premise a determination to impose no obstacles to
the withdrawal of gold. The banking authorities in Wash-
ington and in New York did not waver in their refusal to
1 118 1sis had as its fun-
damental premise a determination to impose no obstacles to
the withdrawal of gold. The banking authorities in Wash-
ington and in New York did not waver in their refusal to
1 118 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---damental premise a determination to impose no obstacles to
the withdrawal of gold. The banking authorities in Wash-
ington and in New York did not waver in their refusal to
1 118 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

consider artificial restrictions upon gold payments . They
dung to the well-tested theory that an inherently sound
bank can most effectively stop a run of its depositors by
meeting their demands promptly and cheerfully .
But, of course, the Federal Reserve banks had somehow
to fill up the void created by the large foreign gold with-
drawals. This they did by expanding their credit and by
maintaining easy-money conditions through the purchase
of securities. They took advantage of the new powers con-
ferred upon them by the Glass-Steagall Act, which altered
the powers of the Federal Reserve banks by authorizing
them, under certain conditions, to lend to member banks on
long-term government banks, and they began the purchase
of government securities on a large scale . From February 24
to June 29, Federal Reserve holdings of United States se-
curities increased by i,o6o million dollars . By this means the
Federal Reserve banks were able not only to reduce the
indebtedness of their member banks by 36 .5 millions but to
offset the new withdrawals of gold in the spring .
Discussion of this bold policy falls outside the scope of
this volume. We may be sure that this critical experiment in
the management of credit will long be remembered and its
significance examined. For our purpose it suffices to note one
of its consequences, which was that enough credit was created
by central banking action to enable American banks to meet
all the foreign demands made upon them without incurring
severe pressure to liquidate other loans . This would have
come if the banks had been forced to meet these demands
by further borrowing .
B. The Effort to Balance the Budget
(i) The Tax Bill
On March 29, after the House of Representatives had been
in open revolt against its leaders for more than ten days,
Speaker Garner made an earnest appeal to the members to
1 191udget
(i) The Tax Bill
On March 29, after the House of Representatives had been
in open revolt against its leaders for more than ten days,
Speaker Garner made an earnest appeal to the members to
1 191

--- PAGE BREAK ---ll
On March 29, after the House of Representatives had been
in open revolt against its leaders for more than ten days,
Speaker Garner made an earnest appeal to the members to
1 191

--- PAGE BREAK ---

put aside their partisanship and "economic theories" and
show the country that they were going to balance the budget .
In camp-meeting fashion he called on every member who
desired a balanced budget to testify to that fact by rising in
his seat. The House rose in a body ."'
A new tax bill was hastily compiled, the intention being
to transfer the debate as quickly as possible from the de-
moralized House to the Senate. The new bill, with the manu-
facturers' sales tax eliminated, was adopted by a vote of 327
to 64. In lieu of the sales tax, the bill provided for excise
taxes on luxuries, for taxes on stock transfers, for higher
postage rates, and for higher taxes on incomes . In theory the
bill was supposed to supply 1,032 millions in additional reve-
nue, and when supplemented by 230 millions in government
economies, was supposed to balance the budget with a small
margin of safety. The estimates of revenue were, however,
known to be optimistic and the proposed economies uncer-
tain of achievement .
The Senate Finance Committee soon made it known that
it intended to rewrite the measure. Finally, on May 9, the
bill was laid before the Senate . It differed from the House
measure in several important particulars, notably in its pro-
vision for still higher taxes on incomes . In dealing with the
measure, the Senate showed its usual deliberation . The
debate dragged on till the end of May, causing much anxi-
ety. Gold was leaving the country during that month at the
rate of nearly 40 millions a week. On May 31, President
Hoover appeared before the Senate and urged speed in bal-
ancing the budget . As a matter of fact, an agreement had
been reached the night before, and at the same sitting,
shortly after midnight, the bill, with rates finally adjusted so
as to bring the budget into theoretical balance, provided that
the expected economies were adopted, was passed by a vote
of 72 to if .
"New York Times, March 30, 1932 .
1 120rates finally adjusted so
as to bring the budget into theoretical balance, provided that
the expected economies were adopted, was passed by a vote
of 72 to if .
"New York Times, March 30, 1932 .
1 120

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed so
as to bring the budget into theoretical balance, provided that
the expected economies were adopted, was passed by a vote
of 72 to if .
"New York Times, March 30, 1932 .
1 120

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(ii) The Economy Bill
All the various versions of the tax bill were based on the
assumption that government expenditures would be reduced
.
The first measure taken was to reduce the regular appropria-
tion bills by 184 millions below the departmental estimates .
But this was clearly insufficient, and on February r9 the
House appointed an Economy Committee to find other ways
of curtailing expenses. It was planned to include all provi-
sions for the reduction of services, personnel, and appropria-
tions, and for the consolidation of overlapping agencies, in
an omnibus economy bill. After much wrangling, the com-
mittee reported such a measure to the House on April 25 .
It promised savings of 263 millions through a reduction of
salaries above $i,ooo by 11 per cent, through savings in the
Veterans' Bureau, and through consolidation of the War and
Navy Departments. In the House the measure was torn to
tatters. So many provisions were struck out that when it
finally passed on May 3, it provided for no more than 30
millions in savings.
Then the Senate took a hand with somewhat better results,
though its measure fell far short of the savings originally
contemplated . It reduced salaries above $x,ooo by xo per
cent, but overwhelmingly rejected the reduction of 48 mil-
lions proposed by its committee in expenditures for war
veterans; and the bill as finally passed on June 8 made pos-
sible savings estimated at from 134 to 146 millions, or about
half the amount originally deemed necessary.
In conference the bill was amended, at Mr . Hoover's in-
sistence, so as to provide a thirty-day furlough without pay
in lieu of percentage wage-cuts. This provision, and the en-
forced retirement of employees who had reached the age
limit, were the chief features of the bill which the President
signed on June 30. He announced that he signed it "with
but, limited satisfaction ." The estimated savings for the en-
suing year were 150 million dollars, to which should be
[12I Jhich the President
signed on June 30. He announced that he signed it "with
but, limited satisfaction ." The estimated savings for the en-
suing year were 150 million dollars, to which should be
[12I J

--- PAGE BREAK ---igned on June 30. He announced that he signed it "with
but, limited satisfaction ." The estimated savings for the en-
suing year were 150 million dollars, to which should be
[12I J

--- PAGE BREAK ---

added reductions in the regular appropriation bills of 184
millions.
(iii) The Budget in Theoretical Balance
The total appropriations at this session of Congress
amounted to 4,036 millions, 18 and both Democratic and Re-
publican leaders insisted that this represented a decrease
of 184 millions in the departmental estimates . This, added to
the 150 millions saved by the economy bill, brought the total
savings, according to their estimate, up to
334 millions .
By adding to this the 1,118 millions of new revenue promised
in the tax bill, the budget was theoretically balanced . For
these two items amounted to 1,452
millions, and slightly
exceeded the estimated deficit of 11416 millions in the fed-
eral budget presented to Congress in December.
It was, of course, generally realized that in fact the budget
was not balanced and that the fiscal year ending June 30,
1933 would show a large'deficit . But the investment markets
of the world chose to take the will for the deed on the as-
sumption that Congress had shown a desire to balance the
budget and that with ample resources of revenue as yet
untouched, the credit of the United States was good . Sea-
soned observers felt that Congress had done as well as, and
perhaps somewhat better than, any other popular legislature
confronted with the same problem, and that after the na-
tional election the balancing of the budget could be under-
taken with greater promise of success.
"This did not include the special outlays of the Reconstruction Finance
Corporation other than the purchases authorized by Congress of its capital
stock. The disbursements by this organization from proceeds of the loans
which it negotiated directly were carried in an extraordinary budget. At
the end of the fiscal year on June 30, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation
had authorized total loans of x,o55 million dollars and had actually ad-
vanced 80 5 millions. Repayments of 76 millions left the net outlay at 729
millions . If these disbursements had been included, in the regular budget,
the deficit at the end of the fiscal year would have been larger, and the
prospective outlays by the Corporation for the ensuing years would have
destroyed the theoretical balance of the Federal budget at the end of the
Year 1932-33 .
11221r would have been larger, and the
prospective outlays by the Corporation for the ensuing years would have
destroyed the theoretical balance of the Federal budget at the end of the
Year 1932-33 .
11221

--- PAGE BREAK ---rger, and the
prospective outlays by the Corporation for the ensuing years would have
destroyed the theoretical balance of the Federal budget at the end of the
Year 1932-33 .
11221

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C. The Struggle against Inflation
We have now to consider a series of measures which, had
they been adopted, would have signified an intention to
inflate the currency or to throw the budget hopelessly out of
balance.
'(i) The Goldsborough Bill
The first of these was known as the Goldsborough bill?'
According to its title, it was a measure "for restoring and
maintaining the purchasing power of the dollar." It stipu-
lated that the policy of the United States should be to restore
and maintain "the average purchasing power of the dollar
as ascertained by the Department of Labor in the wholesale
commodity markets for the period covering the years 1921
to 1929 inclusive ." This would have required a rise in prices
of 5o per cent above the current level indicated by the index
of the Department of Labor. The Federal Reserve Board, the
Federal Reserve banks, and the Secretary of the Treasury
were charged with the duty of making this policy effective
"by the control of the volume of credit and currency ." The
bill was in fact the expression of a hope. For it fixed no time
limit and prescribed no detailed procedure for attaining its
object, and it provided no penalties if the Reserve authori-
ties failed to achieve the desired price level .
In a report brought in on April 23 favoring the passage of
the bill, the House Committee on Currency and Banking
declared that it had "reached the conclusion that unless the
price level was raised substantially
the burden of debt
would not only seriously hamper production and destroy the
producing class as now constituted, but that the creditor
class, being unable to collect their fixed obligations, would
also go down in the crash." The committee declared, too,
that the Federal Reserve system was "in a position to put into
the market $4,000,000,000 in Federal Reserve notes and still
maintain its 4o per cent reserve requirements . By utilizing
H. R 11499-
't 123t the Federal Reserve system was "in a position to put into
the market $4,000,000,000 in Federal Reserve notes and still
maintain its 4o per cent reserve requirements . By utilizing
H. R 11499-
't 123

--- PAGE BREAK ---e system was "in a position to put into
the market $4,000,000,000 in Federal Reserve notes and still
maintain its 4o per cent reserve requirements . By utilizing
H. R 11499-
't 123

--- PAGE BREAK ---

its power to lower reserve requirements of the Federal Re-
serve banks the system could put into the market nearly
$9,000,000,000 of Federal Reserve notes ."
Here was a hint of inflation on a vast scale . Some of the
supporters of the measure sought to explain away the ex-
tremely inflationary mandate to the Reserve authorities by
stating that the bill merely directed them to proceed more
vigorously with their policy of buying securities in the open
market and injecting liquid funds into the banks to stimulate
a revival of business. The bill really intended that they
should go much further. For it was a far call from a policy
of creating easy money by open-market operations to the
pumping of credit into the money markets until prices were
raised 50 per cent above existing levels .
So confident were the sponsors of this measure, that on
May 2 they brought it up in the House under a suspension
of the rules, requiring a two-thirds vote . On its final passage
in the House the opposition was completely routed, the vote
being 289 to 6o. The vote by parties was as follows :
For the bill : Democrats, 165 ; Republicans, 123 ; Farmer
Labor, i ; against the bill : Republicans, 57 ; Democrats, 3 20
This vote was disturbing to confidence . It indicated that
the House was out of control by the recognized leaders of
both parties, and it proved the existence of a very powerful
desire for outright inflation .
The action of the House attracted wide attention in Eu-
rope. To many countries, especially in Central Europe, the
dollar was a kind of secondary currency. It was often sub-
stituted for the less stable national currencies in business con-
tracts; it was hoarded, and dollar exchange formed a large
part of bank reserves. On the passage of the Goldsborough
bill, dollar quotations fell in the European markets .
When the measure came from the House, many Senators
declared themselves in favor of it . But within a week it was
evident that the bill would not receive the favorable treat-
9 D Congressional Record,
Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 9688
.
{1241eclared themselves in favor of it . But within a week it was
evident that the bill would not receive the favorable treat-
9 D Congressional Record,
Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 9688
.
{1241

--- PAGE BREAK ---n favor of it . But within a week it was
evident that the bill would not receive the favorable treat-
9 D Congressional Record,
Seventy-second Congress, First Session, 9688
.
{1241

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ment accorded it in the House and that European holders of
dollars had little to fear from this project. The measure was
referred to the Committee on Banking and Currency and
there it was eventually displaced by a bill which Senator
Glass offered frankly as a means of getting rid of the Golds-
borough bill . The Glass bill authorized national banks to in-
crease their note circulation up to the amount of their paid-up
capital by depositing as security government bonds bearing
not over 3%g per cent interest . This privilege was limited to
three years. The only change that this bill made in the
existing currency system was to increase the list of bonds
available as security for national bank notes . It was regarded
as a backward step toward the inelastic currency which the
Federal Reserve notes were intended to supplant, but it was
not a dangerously inflationary measure, and was not ex-
pected greatly to increase the volume of bank currency .
(ii) The Patman Bill
A greater threat was made when it appeared that members
of the House were willing to heed the demand of the ex-
soldiers .for full payment of the adjusted compensation cer-
tificates. Many bonus bills were introduced and all of them
were measures which in one way or another required an
inflation of the currency.
The face value of the outstanding bonus
certificates
amounted, in round numbers, to 3,639 million dollars. Loans
which had been made to the ex-soldiers on these certificates
under previous legislation amounted to 1,248 millions, leav-
ing the sum of 2,390 millions owed to the veterans in =945
•
It was proposed that this sum be paid to the veterans at once
in cash. With the Treasury facing another huge deficit and
with the country unable to stand the burden of taxation
which the bonus payment would entail, the only way to
obtain the money was by a bond issue or some form of cur-
rency inflation . Senator Thomas of Oklahoma proposed, for
example, that the Treasury issue bonds equal to the amount
[ =25 Ithe only way to
obtain the money was by a bond issue or some form of cur-
rency inflation . Senator Thomas of Oklahoma proposed, for
example, that the Treasury issue bonds equal to the amount
[ =25 I

--- PAGE BREAK ---ain the money was by a bond issue or some form of cur-
rency inflation . Senator Thomas of Oklahoma proposed, for
example, that the Treasury issue bonds equal to the amount
[ =25 I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the bonus payments and distribute them among the_ Fed-
eral Reserve banks in proportion to the number of applica-
tions received for the bonus payments . These bonds were to
serve as security for Federal Reserve bank notes which were
to be issued up to ioo per cent of the face value of the bonds
and paid to the applicants for the bonus . The new notes
were to be legal tender in payment of all public and private
debts .
A similar measure was brought forward in the House and
was known as the Patman bill. The advocates of the cash
bonus agreed on this bill . It was introduced on January 14
and referred to the Ways and Means Committee, from which
on May 7, by a vote of 15 to io, it was returned with an
unfavorable report. The bonus advocates were not deterred .
On June 13, with the galleries and corridors packed with
bonus sympathizers, the House, by a vote of 226 to 176,
adopted a motion to discharge the Rules Committee from
further consideration of the bill and made this measure a
continued order until it was finally disposed of . After two
days of debate, it passed the House on June 15 by a vote of
211 to 176.
As it passed the House, the Patman bill provided that the
Veterans' Administration should pay the full face value, less
amounts previously borrowed and accrued interest, of the
adjusted service certificates . The Secretary of the Treasury
was authorized to issue additional currency to the amount
necessary to meet the obligations. He was to issue a like
amount of United States bonds bearing 31/2 per cent interest
and deposit them with the Federal Reserve banks as agents
of the government. The Federal Reserve Board was author-
ized at any time to direct the sale to the public of such
portions of these bonds as it deemed expedient, and the cur-
rency received from their sale was to be returned to the
Treasury to redeem the notes issued in payment of the bonus .
The measure at once went to the Senate and on the follow-
ing day, June x6, the Senate Finance Committee made an
E 126)be returned to the
Treasury to redeem the notes issued in payment of the bonus .
The measure at once went to the Senate and on the follow-
ing day, June x6, the Senate Finance Committee made an
E 126)

--- PAGE BREAK ---reasury to redeem the notes issued in payment of the bonus .
The measure at once went to the Senate and on the follow-
ing day, June x6, the Senate Finance Committee made an
E 126)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

adverse report by a vote of 14 to 2 . On June 17 it was
brought before the Senate and defeated by the-decisive vote
of 62 to V1
The-total stock of money in the United States at this time
was 5,400 million dollars . The Patman bill would have in-
creased this amount immediately by about 45 per cent. Natu-
rally such a proposal was viewed with alarm both at home
and abroad by the supporters of hard money, and the defeat
of the measure was interpreted as a victory for the gold
standard.
(iii) The Garner Bill
The struggle in Congress over federal relief of unemploy-
ment- did not raise directly the question of currency inflation
but it did involve the balancing of the budget and thus in-
directly foreshadowed the possibility of deficit-financing by
inflation. On May 12 President Hoover had asked the Demo-
cratic and Republican leaders in the Senate to consider a
three-point program for the relief of unemployment :
x. That the Reconstruction Finance Corporation should issue ad-
ditional debentures to the amount of =,500 millions, to be advanced
in part to the states for general relief: measures and also to finance
assured and productive enterprises of private business .
2 . That state bonds which could not be sold in the open- market
might be bought by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation so that
the proceeds could be used for unemployment relief .
3. That the Reconstruction Finance Corporation
should make
loans for self-liquidating public- works such as
toll bridges, and
so forth .
Shortly thereafter, in a letter to the American Society of
Civil Engineers, the President elaborated this program and
stressed, among other things, the necessity of avoiding fur-
ther issues of credit securities, the desirability of authorizing
public works which would not place additional burdens on
'n Congressional Record,
Seventy-second
Congress,
First
Session,
z34o3 .
13450, r3508-r3509,. 1-3700 -
1 1271, the desirability of authorizing
public works which would not place additional burdens on
'n Congressional Record,
Seventy-second
Congress,
First
Session,
z34o3 .
13450, r3508-r3509,. 1-3700 -
1 1271

--- PAGE BREAK ---f authorizing
public works which would not place additional burdens on
'n Congressional Record,
Seventy-second
Congress,
First
Session,
z34o3 .
13450, r3508-r3509,. 1-3700 -
1 1271

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the taxpayer or require government borrowing, the impor-
tance of expanding credit by the Federal Reserve banks
through the open-market policy, and the balancing of the
budget as the foundation of all these measures . On May 25
Senator Wagner of New York introduced a relief bill in the
Senate which embodied some of the proposals made by the
President, but differed in important particulars .
But in the meantime Speaker Garner had drafted a relief
bill which ran counter to the President's proposals, and on
May 26 a caucus of the Democratic members of the House
approved this bill. It was introduced in the House on May
27, and was reintroduced in a revised form on May 28 . The
original bill contemplated a federal expenditure . of 2,147
million dollars . After revision, the contemplated expenditure
was raised to 2,309 millions. It provided a total of x,209
millions for public-works construction, including buildings,
highways, and waterway improvements.
In sixty closely
printed pages it carried a list of about 2,300 new post-office
buildings which would cost about 150 millions. In addition
to the amount approved for construction, the funds of the
Reconstruction Finance Corporation were to be increased by
i,ooo millions for loans to states and their political sub-
divisions and to private industry, and 100 million dollars
was set aside for use by the President for direct relief .
The Garner bill was severely arraigned by the President,
who issued a public statement in which he denounced the
measure as inflationary and, declared that it "would require
appropriations to be made to the federal departments, thus
creating a deficit in the budget that could only be met with
more taxes and more federal bond issues . That makes the
balancing of the budget hopeless ." The President continued
by saying that "an unbalanced budget means the loss of con-'
fidence of our own people and of other, nations in the credit
and stability of the government, and that the consequences
are national demoralization and the loss of ten times as many
1 128 1of con-'
fidence of our own people and of other, nations in the credit
and stability of the government, and that the consequences
are national demoralization and the loss of ten times as many
1 128 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---our own people and of other, nations in the credit
and stability of the government, and that the consequences
are national demoralization and the loss of ten times as many
1 128 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

jobs as would be created by this program, even if it could be
physically put into action." He cited the fact that the interest
and upkeep of the post-office buildings alone would amount
to 14 million dollars per annum, as against the present cost
of less than 3 millions .
On June 7 the House passed the Garner bill by a vote of
216 to 182 .22 The measure was adopted under a special rule
which permitted only committee amendments, and the adop-
tion of this rule was made possible by the help of thirteen
Republican insurgents led by Representative La Guardia of
New York.
On June 23 the Wagner bill, carrying about the same total
appropriations, passed the Senate. This measure provided
300 million dollars for loans to the states for direct relief
of the unemployed, 500 millions for federal construction
projects, and 1,460 millions for loans to states and their
political subdivisions and to private corporations for public
self-liquidating enterprises .
While providing practically the same amount of expendi-
ture as the Garner bill, the Wagner bill differed from it in
two important particulars : it reduced the appropriation for
federal construction projects by one-half, but increased the
amount for self-liquidating enterprises . In the provision for
loans to the states for relief purposes and for loans through
the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to self-liquidating
enterprises, the Wagner bill was in substantial agreement
with the recommendations previously made by the President .
It varied from the President's program by authorizing a
larger amount for federal construction than was already
carried in the budget, but this larger expenditure was not
made mandatory.
The Wagner bill was sent to conference -to be, compro-
mised with the Garner bill . The measure which was reported
from the Conference Committee and which passed the House
"Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session. r26r5.
11291compro-
mised with the Garner bill . The measure which was reported
from the Conference Committee and which passed the House
"Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session. r26r5.
11291

--- PAGE BREAK ---he Garner bill . The measure which was reported
from the Conference Committee and which passed the House
"Congressional Record, Seventy-second Congress, First Session. r26r5.
11291

--- PAGE BREAK ---

on July 7 and the Senate on July 9 eliminated the safeguards
around the r,5oo-ollion-dollar fund to be used by the Re-
construction Finance Corporation, and at Speaker Garners
insistence provided that loans might be made to private indi-
viduals, partnerships, and corporations "on any conceivable
security and for every purpose."28 In a public statement,
while the bill was still pending, President Hoover declared
that it would make the Reconstruction Finance Corporation
"the most gigantic banking and pawnbroking business in
, all
history." On July' i z he returned the measure without his
approval, and at the . same time urged Congress to enact a
more practicable relief measure .
Five days after the veto of this bill, Congress passed a sub-
stitute which abandoned the plan for loans to private indi-
viduals but empowered the Federal Reserve banks to make
such loans on certification that the borrowers had been un-
able to obtain credit from -other institutions. This provision
was not conducive to inflation. The loans were properly safe-
guarded. Only paper of the kind already eligible for redis-
count under the Federal Reserve Act might be employed as a
basis for the new credits . Furthermore, an affirmative vote of
no fewer than five members of the Federal Reserve Board
was required for the approval of these loans . Therefore the
extent to which this could lead to the expansion of bank
credit would depend on the manner in which the Reserve
Board exercised its powers .
After a confused struggle, a measure was enacted which
in its essentials conformed to what were regarded as suffi-
ciently sound principles. The investment markets took the
view that the credit of the government had not been im-
paired. The defeat of inflationary or extravagant measures,
the evidences of a national opinion favorable to the balancing
of the budget by taxation and economy, the effective relief
to the banks provided by the Reconstruction Finance Cor-
poration and by the open-market operations of the Federal
"President Hoover's description .
1x30 )y taxation and economy, the effective relief
to the banks provided by the Reconstruction Finance Cor-
poration and by the open-market operations of the Federal
"President Hoover's description .
1x30 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Reserve banks, -and the completion of the gold withdrawals,
brought the American financial crisis to an end . When Con-
gress adjourned on July a6, anxiety about the national credit
and American adherence to the gold standard had largely
disappeared .

--- PAGE BREAK ---American financial crisis to an end . When Con-
gress adjourned on July a6, anxiety about the national credit
and American adherence to the gold standard had largely
disappeared .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER EIGHT
THE LAUSANNE SETTLEMENT
CONTEMPORANEOUSLY with the successful meeting of the
crisis in the United States, the Western powers of Europe
made important progress at Lausanne toward the liquidation
of the consequences of the World War . They had, as we
have already pointed out, postponed until the last possible
moment the' conference which would decide what was to be
done about German reparations . During the autumn and
winter their efforts to come to a decision had all been abor-
tive, and the only agreement they had been able to reach was
contained in the announcement of February 13 that in June
they would hold 'a conference at Lausanne for the purpose of
making "a lasting settlement" and of concerting "measures
necessary to solve the other economic and financial difficul-
ties." At the time of the announcement small hope was
entertained anywhere that they would be able to agree on
anything beyond a prolongation of the moratorium, so pro-
found was the general sense of political impotence . There
was uncertainty even as to the meaning of the announcement,
it being pointed out by some commentators in Paris that the
French text used the word "durable," which did not neces-
sarily mean, "lasting" or "permanent."'
The month of June had been chosen for the Lausanne con-
ference because the Hoover moratorium expired on June 30,
1932, and a German payment under the Young Plan would
fall due on July 15, the conference could not, therefore,
be held later than June. On the other hand, it could not be
1 New York Times, February 14, 1932 .
( 132 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---Young Plan would
fall due on July 15, the conference could not, therefore,
be held later than June. On the other hand, it could not be
1 New York Times, February 14, 1932 .
( 132 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

held earlier, for in both France and Germany national elec-
tions were appointed for the spring, and negotiations were
out of the question until they had been concluded . These
elections were watched with anxiety as to whether the two
nations most concerned in the complex of post-war problems
could set up governments that were strong enough in the
confidence of their people to adopt a policy of conciliation.
i. The French and German Elections in the Spring of 2932
A. The German Swing to the Right
Germany had first of all to vote on the question whether
von Hindenburg should succeed himself as President of the
Reich. In this election his chief rival was Adolf Hitler,
leader of the National Socialists, but there were two other
candidates in the field who had sufficient strength to count
importantly in the result . One was the Nationalist candidate,
Theodor Duesterberg, the leader of the Steel Helmets, an
organization of war veterans, and the other was Ernst Thael-
mann, the Communist candidate . Around Hindenburg there
rallied the Social Democrats, the Catholic Center, and the
liberal bourgeoisie ; around Hitler, a vast following of the
discontented, half _ boishevist and half nationalist ; around
Duesterberg, a small but powerful remnant of the old mili-
tary and bureaucratic caste which would not follow Hinden-
burg in his loyalty to the Republic .
The vote was taken on March 13 with the following
results :
The Weimar Constitution provides that if at the first elec-
tion no candidate receives a majority of all the ballots, a
[133)
Hindenburg x8,654,69o
49. 55 per cent
Hitler 11,341 ,3 60
30.12
Thaelmann
4,982..939
13.23
. •
.'
Duesterberg
2.,558939
6.8o "
Winter
111,488
0.30
"
37,649,416
100

--- PAGE BREAK ---lots, a
[133)
Hindenburg x8,654,69o
49. 55 per cent
Hitler 11,341 ,3 60
30.12
Thaelmann
4,982..939
13.23
. •
.'
Duesterberg
2.,558939
6.8o "
Winter
111,488
0.30
"
37,649,416
100

--- PAGE BREAK ---

second election must be held . Von Hindenburg thus failed
of election by 174,329 votes in a poll of over 37 millions
and another election was called for April io . Duesterberg,
the Nationalist candidate, withdrew and Hindenburg
re-
ceived 19,359,642 votes, or 53 per cent of the total, defeating
his nearest rival, Hitler, by 5,942,182 votes.
This settled the question of the Presidency and seemed to
indicate a determination on the part of the majority of the
Germans not to turn to the desperate course symbolized by
Hitler and his National Socialists . But there had still to be
decided the question whether the moderate parties could
command sufficient strength to pursue a positive policy of
moderation. This question was put to the test on April 24 in
the balloting for members of the Diets of the various states
of the Reich .' The result was disquieting. The National So-
cialists obtained a plurality of seats in all the states except
Bavaria ; in the Prussian Diet they won 1.62 seats out of a
total of 422 . Germany found herself in a condition of parlia-
mentary stalemate . The National Socialists were not strong
enough to govern alone . They were so strong that no com-
bination of opposing parties could govern without them, and
they were unwilling to cooperate with any of the other par-
ties except on terms which would have meant a virtual sur-
render on all points .
It appeared that the Germans were too deeply divided
among themselves to achieve a responsible government by
the process of democratic election. The differences between
the parties were deeper than issues of policy ; they were con-
stitutional and revolutionary, and popular government has
always been unworkable where there are lacking common
premises and common loyalties. The choice before. Germany
seemed to be between civil war and a dictatorship, and faced
with this choice, President von Hindenburg opted for a dic-
'The last election to the Reichstag on September r4, 1930, had given the
National Socialists 18 .6 per cent of the seats, the Communists 13 .3 per cent,
the Nationalists 7.1 per cent, and the Social Democrats 24 .8 per cent.
[ 1341stag on September r4, 1930, had given the
National Socialists 18 .6 per cent of the seats, the Communists 13 .3 per cent,
the Nationalists 7.1 per cent, and the Social Democrats 24 .8 per cent.
[ 1341

--- PAGE BREAK ---, 1930, had given the
National Socialists 18 .6 per cent of the seats, the Communists 13 .3 per cent,
the Nationalists 7.1 per cent, and the Social Democrats 24 .8 per cent.
[ 1341

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tatorship and placed the power in the hands of the Prussian
soldiers and noblemen of the old regime . On May 3o he
forced the resignation of the Bruening Cabinet and appointed
Lieutenant-Colonel Franz von Papen Chancellor .
Thus, on the eve of the Lausanne conference, Germany
appeared on the scene with a Government radically differ-
ent in character and personnel from that of any other Gov-
ernment since the overthrow of the monarchy. The negotia-
tions had to be conducted at Lausanne with nationalists who
rejected totally the ideas of the Versailles settlement and
were avowedly determined upon the prompt liberation
,of
Germany from all the servitudes of the treaty .
B. The French Swing to the Left
On May = and 8 the French voters cast their ballots for
members of the Chamber of Deputies . Under the electoral
system of France, a candidate for the Chamber must receive
a majority of the votes cast in his district on the first ballot
or face a second contest a week later . On the second ballot,
only a plurality is required for election . The Tardieu Gov-
ernment, then in office, obtained its support in the Chamber
from the parties of the Right and the Right-Center . This had
been true also of the preceding Laval Government and in-
deed of all the Governments that had held office for more
than a very brief period since the previous general election
in 1928 .
In spite of his energy and brilliance, M. Tardieu had re-
cently lost prestige at home following the cold reception
given at the Disarmament Conference to his proposal for an
international army under League supervision$ and the re-
jection at the London conference of his plan for a system
of tariff preferences for the Danubian states 4 France was
also beginning to feel the rigors of the depression . She was
the last of the important commercial countries to do so . Un-
Cf. Chapter XII.
Cf. Chapter II.
[135)for the Danubian states 4 France was
also beginning to feel the rigors of the depression . She was
the last of the important commercial countries to do so . Un-
Cf. Chapter XII.
Cf. Chapter II.
[135)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ates 4 France was
also beginning to feel the rigors of the depression . She was
the last of the important commercial countries to do so . Un-
Cf. Chapter XII.
Cf. Chapter II.
[135)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

employment had become a problem ; the trade balance was
growing more unfavorable; the budget deficit was increasing ;
there was loud complaint of-the high cost of living and heavy
taxation. All these things reacted against the Tardieu Gov-
ernment, and it entered the campaign under a handicap
.
On the other hand, the strength shown by the National
Socialists in the recent German elections indicated the possi-
bility of a counter-movement toward nationalism in France,
and this strengthened the hopes of the parties of the Right
.
Without the threat of Hitler, all signs would have pointed to
the replacement of the Right-Center leadership in the Cham-
ber of Deputies by a bloc of the parties of the Left . The
German situation increased the uncertainty of the election .
The first balloting on Sunday, May i, showed a pro-
nounced shift to the Left and indicated that the French voters
were not greatly influenced by developments in Germany but
were more deeply swayed by domestic politics . The second
election the following Sunday fully confirmed the indications
of the first! The parties of the Right and Center, upon which
the existing Government depended for support, lost
811 seats
with a corresponding gain for the parties of the Left
.6
The leader of the opposition to the Tardieu Government
was Vdouard Herriot, chief of the Radical Socialist party,?
,who had been Premier in =924-25 . Before the election the
Radical Socialists, with io9 deputies, were the largest party
in the Chamber. The election increased their number to 158,
while the party of Premier Tardieu, the Left Republicans,'
found its membership reduced from 92 to 66 .1
'The assassination of President Doumer by a Russian emigre on the eve
of the second balloting may have aroused nationalist emotions to some ex-
tent, but it had no. appreciable effect on the vote .
°L'Europe Nouvelle, XV, 633, May 14, '932 .
'The names of French political parties are sometimes confusing to Ameri-
cans . The Radical Socialists are neither radical nor socialist in the sense in
which these terms are used in the United States. The nearest American
equivalent for Radical Socialist would probably be Progressive .
*This is another illustration of the complexities of French politics . The
Left Republicans sat with the Center but their policies were conservative .
'L'Europe Nouvelle, XV, 633, May 14, 1932 .ive .
*This is another illustration of the complexities of French politics . The
Left Republicans sat with the Center but their policies were conservative .
'L'Europe Nouvelle, XV, 633, May 14, 1932 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---er illustration of the complexities of French politics . The
Left Republicans sat with the Center but their policies were conservative .
'L'Europe Nouvelle, XV, 633, May 14, 1932 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

After this defeat of the parties of the Right, M . Tardieu
and his Cabinet on May io teadered their resignations to
M. Lebrun, the newly elected President of France . But at the
President's request they agreed to remain in office until the
new Chamber of Deputies met on June 2 . The outcome of
the election made M. Herriot the logical choice as Premier .
He completed the task of forming a new Government on
June 4, and chose his ministers mainly from the conservative
element in his own party and from their close associates of
the Center.
It would be a mistake to assume that in rejecting the Tar-
dieu Government the French voters were advocating any
radical change of foreign policy. During the campaign the
speeches of both Tardieu and Herriot indicated no funda-
mental difference in their views on the international rela-
tions of France . M. Herriot, when he was Premier some eight
years before, had himself originated the French formula of
"arbitration, security, and disarmament," thus indicating the
priority of security over the reduction of armament . In an
attack on the Hoover moratorium in one of his preelection
speeches, M. Herriot had again shown that in matters of
foreign policy his opinions were not basically different from
those of MM . Tardieu and Laval .
It was not so much in his belief in fundamentals as in his
personal attitude and mode of approach that the new Premier
differed from his conservative predecessors. While formally
insisting, as his predecessors had done, on the maintenance
of pledges, M. Herriot refused to close his eyes to the reali-
ties of the reparation problem. He knew that the Young Plan
could not be resurrected, but insisted that any modification of
the formal settlement should be made by mutual agreement
and not by outright repudiation with all its untoward conse-
quences. In spite of the fact, therefore, that Germany and
France had swung in opposite ways at the recent elections,
the attitude of understanding taken by Premier Herriot
,['1371its untoward conse-
quences. In spite of the fact, therefore, that Germany and
France had swung in opposite ways at the recent elections,
the attitude of understanding taken by Premier Herriot
,['1371

--- PAGE BREAK ---quences. In spite of the fact, therefore, that Germany and
France had swung in opposite ways at the recent elections,
the attitude of understanding taken by Premier Herriot
,['1371

--- PAGE BREAK ---

seemed to improve the prospect that something would be
accomplished at Lausanne .
2 . The Position before the Lausanne Conference
These developments made it evident that the negotiations
at Lausanne would deal only nominally with the , financial
aspects of reparations but actually with the diplomatic bal-
ance of power in Europe and with the American war debts.
The Germans had made it plain that they would pay no
more reparations even if they could, and expert opinion had
pronounced Germany incapable of making the conditional
payments for some years to come ." The French people, with
a relatively small minority dissenting, had dearly become
convinced that the Young Plan was obsolete and that the
system of reparation payments could not, and probably
should not, be preserved .
The interest of the French government at Lausanne was
not in bargaining with Germany about money but in bar-
gaining with Great Britain about a policy toward the debts
to the United States and about a defense against the avowed
determination of Germany to revise the Versailles settlement .
As to reparations, the task of the statesmen at Lausanne was
a simple one. They had merely to arrange a formula which
in fact liberated Germany from the obligation to make any
immediate payment whatsoever and any important payment
at any time. They had to concede the virtual abolition of
reparations while retaining certain technical
reservations
which could be used as elements of the European case in dis-
cussions about revision of the war debts . M. Herriot was
ready to let Germany off. His task at Lausanne was on the,
one hand to prepare the ground for dealing with the United
States, and on the other for dealing with the larger ambitions
i0 Cf.
Chapter II .
The Young
Plan
Advisory
Committee,
which had
brought in this report on Germany's ability to pay, was authorized to consider
only the conditional payments, but by implication its report may have applied
also to the unconditional payments .
(x38 3brought in this report on Germany's ability to pay, was authorized to consider
only the conditional payments, but by implication its report may have applied
also to the unconditional payments .
(x38 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---rt on Germany's ability to pay, was authorized to consider
only the conditional payments, but by implication its report may have applied
also to the unconditional payments .
(x38 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of Germany in regard to equality of armaments and, perhaps
eventually, to revision of frontiers .
Though it was advertised as financial and economic, the
Lausanne conference was essentially political. The real prob .
lems-ot which M. Herriot and Mr. MacDonald had to reach
an understanding were, apart from the special question of
their future course of action toward the American debt, the
same problems which at Geneva, some forty miles away, had
produced a stalemate in the discussion of disarmament . For
that reason the technical description of the reparation settle-
ment which follows is in a sense an interruption of the main
story of European events in June and July of 1932. We deal
with the reparation settlement first because the real object of
the Lausanne conference was not to settle reparations but
to deal with the more important consequences of a settlement
which were ordained by circumstances before the conference
met and were beyond anyone's power to avoid.
3. The Reparation Settlement at Lausanne
The date fixed for the conference was June x6, less than
a fortnight after the formation of the Herriot Government .
In the days just before the meeting, a certain amount of
diplomatic maneuvering took place, which in the light of
subsequent events may be interpreted as the effort of M .
Herriot to put pressure upon Mr. MacDonald in order to
win his assent to French political objectives . M. Herriot with-
held his consent to the abolition of reparations, which he
must have known was now unavoidable, so as to make it
harder, for Mr . MacDonald to refuse political concessions
and to make it easier for Mr . MacDonald to justify them to
British opinion .
A. Preliminary Maneuvers
On June 8 the announcement was made in London that
M. Herriot had invited Mr . MacDonald and Sir John Simon,
the British Foreign Secretary, to Paris to discuss matters
['1391A. Preliminary Maneuvers
On June 8 the announcement was made in London that
M. Herriot had invited Mr . MacDonald and Sir John Simon,
the British Foreign Secretary, to Paris to discuss matters
['1391

--- PAGE BREAK ---uvers
On June 8 the announcement was made in London that
M. Herriot had invited Mr . MacDonald and Sir John Simon,
the British Foreign Secretary, to Paris to discuss matters
['1391

--- PAGE BREAK ---

which were to engage their attention at Lausanne . It was
intimated that the British and French governments would
not undertake to devise -a common plan before going to the
conference . For on taking office M. Herriot had observed the
conventional French theses and had shown his disapproval
of the British thesis that reparations should be completely
annulled. He had declared that "France cannot permit those
rights to be contested which are the outcome not only of
treaties but of contractual agreements protected by the honor
of the signatories." Nevertheless, he bad left the door open .
For he had added that his government was "ready to discuss
any project, to take any initiative which will produce the
compensation of greater world stability or loyal reconcilia-
tions in peace."11 But a few days later it was announced
in London that he had notified the British government
through diplomatic channels that he would not
accept
the British suggestion that reparations be abandoned . The
situation was further complicated by an oral announcement
from the State Department in Washington that the American
government had not abated its opposition to the ending of
reparations on condition that the war debts owing to the
United States should be annulled .
Mr. MacDonald and his Cabinet colleagues were not de-
terred by these difficulties, and no doubt understood the deli-
cacy of the maneuvers which M. Herriot was conducting .
Mr. Neville Chamberlain, the Chancellor of the Exchequer,
shortly before leaving for the conference, expressed the be-
lief, in the House of Commons, that the meeting at Lausanne
might be "a turning point in the history of Europe . during
these difficult days," and gave as his reason for this view
the increasing gravity of the depression, which had "brought
home to other peoples the realities of the situation ."12
On the morning of June i i, Mr . MacDonald and Sir John
Simon left London for Paris. The purpose of their visit, as
u New York Times, June 8, x932.
"New York Herald Tribune, June ii, 1932.
{ I4o )"12
On the morning of June i i, Mr . MacDonald and Sir John
Simon left London for Paris. The purpose of their visit, as
u New York Times, June 8, x932.
"New York Herald Tribune, June ii, 1932.
{ I4o )

--- PAGE BREAK ---f June i i, Mr . MacDonald and Sir John
Simon left London for Paris. The purpose of their visit, as
u New York Times, June 8, x932.
"New York Herald Tribune, June ii, 1932.
{ I4o )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the Prime Minister later said, was to have the French and
British representatives "think out loud ." The conversations
were held, and there was issued the somewhat cryptic an-
nouncement that the Premier and the Prime Minister had
arrived at a full and friendly understanding of their respec-
tive positions. On at least one matter the two governments
were said to have reached an agreement in advance of the
meeting. This was that all payments which might become
due between European governments at the expiration of the
moratorium on June 30 should be "reserved during the
period of the conference."18 This proposal was accepted by
the conference at its second meeting .
B. Lausanne, June z6-July 8
The conference opened on June i6 with more than boo
delegates from thirteen countries in attendance . The condi-
tions under which it assembled seemed highly unfavorable
to any substantial accomplishment, and pessimism prevailed
both at Lausanne and in the world capitals
. Only Mr. Mac-
Donald and his colleagues seemed really hopeful of a
posi-
tive result. The British meant business . Their delegation con-
tained five Cabinet ministers-the Prime Minister, Sir John
Simon, Mr. Chamberlain, Mr. Runciman, and Sir Herbert
Samuel-and they did everything to impress the world with
their conviction that affairs were
ere at such a critical state that
the further postponement of all great issues would be highly
dangerous.
Mr. MacDonald's opening address was pitched on an
emotional plane, but it was restrained in its argument. He
called for "bold proposals which by their very character will
command the respect of the whole world ." His speech re-
vived the hope that a genuine effort would be made to effect
that "lasting settlement" which had been promised in the
invitation to the conference, and a more optimistic view of
the proceedings became noticeable.,. On the following day,
"New York Times, June x8,1932 .
[ 141 1ettlement" which had been promised in the
invitation to the conference, and a more optimistic view of
the proceedings became noticeable.,. On the following day,
"New York Times, June x8,1932 .
[ 141 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---been promised in the
invitation to the conference, and a more optimistic view of
the proceedings became noticeable.,. On the following day,
"New York Times, June x8,1932 .
[ 141 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the decision was made to "reserve" the European intergov.
ernmental debts during the life of the conference ;"' this was
interpreted as meaning that the governments would afford
themselves the time necessary to reach a settlement by bold
measures .
Such a view was expressed by Chancellor von Papen- of
Germany, who welcomed this action as the. first visible proof
that the nations intended to take the final action necessary to
solve the problem of reparations . The Chancellor's speech
before the conference was notable for its moderation. He did
not exploit the victory which he was now almost certain to
achieve. He took account of 'Eren:h sensibilities, and his con-
ciliatory attitude, together with his personal friendliness to
France, made easier the eventual success of the conference .
He did not dispute the legality of the Young Plan and gave
no hint of the possibility of Germany's repudiation of repara-
tion payments. But he insisted that palliatives would not
suffice, that experience had shown the impossibility of re-
suming payments, and that any attempts at their resumption
would bring nothing but defeat. For while reparations had
been intended originally for reconstruction, their continuance
could result only in destruction .
The German Chancellor was followed by Premier Herriot,
who agreed that Germany for the time being could not con-
tinue payments. At the same time he insisted upon the con-
nection nection between reparations and the other war debts and
declared that a European settlement could "operate
only
within a world framework. Europe cannot act alone ." Thus,
at the very beginning of the conference, the close relation
between war debts and reparations was brought into the dis-
cussion .
Premier Herriot insisted that the cancellation of repara-
tions without a corresponding readjustment of the allied war
The signatories to this agreement of June r7 were Great Britain,
France,
Italy, Belgium, and Japan. Payments of approximately 43 million dollars were
due between July i and July. z5 .f the allied war
The signatories to this agreement of June r7 were Great Britain,
France,
Italy, Belgium, and Japan. Payments of approximately 43 million dollars were
due between July i and July. z5 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---signatories to this agreement of June r7 were Great Britain,
France,
Italy, Belgium, and Japan. Payments of approximately 43 million dollars were
due between July i and July. z5 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

debts would place Germany in a privileged position . He cited
the heavy fixed charges which had to be met by the railroads
of Great Britain and France and maintained that the aboli-
tion of reparations would leave the German railway system
with only a nominal amount of fixed charges . This would
enable the German railways to haul German goods at such
low rates that British and French manufacturers' would be
wholly unable to compete with the Germans .
During the two following weeks, almost every phase of
European international relations received attention at the
conference . The French expressed their willingness that all
reparations should be suspended for several years, until nor-
mal economic conditions returned, and that at the end of
this moratorium the Young Plan should be subjected to radi-
cal downward revision . While making this concession they
continued to insist that the United States should recognize
this generosity to Germany by a parallel effort toward Amer-
ica's war debtors. The Germans finally ceased to urge com-
plete cancellation and offered to pay a lump sum in final
settlement . They attached to this, however, the political con-
dition that the payments should not be made dependent upon
American debt cancellation and should not be construed as
an admission by Germany of war guilt' as stated in the Treaty
of Versailles .
On July 4 the negotiations received a new impetus when
Foreign Minister Grandi of Italy submitted a note of his
government urging that "cancellations be applied equally to
all European powers, creditors and debtors, of reparations
and war debts." The powers at Lausanne were urged to "take
their full share of the responsibilities, sacrifices, and risks
called for by the gravity of the situation ." The Italians, re-
alizing that they would collect little or nothing from Ger-
many, were anxious to assure themselves that they would
never be called upon for further payments on their Brit-
ish debt .
In the meantime, the injection by the Germans of the po-
.( 143 }from Ger-
many, were anxious to assure themselves that they would
never be called upon for further payments on their Brit-
ish debt .
In the meantime, the injection by the Germans of the po-
.( 143 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---e anxious to assure themselves that they would
never be called upon for further payments on their Brit-
ish debt .
In the meantime, the injection by the Germans of the po-
.( 143 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---

litical issue of war guilt into the proceedings produced a
deadlock. The French flatly refused to link political and
financial questions, and the British sided with them, regard-
ing the war-guilt issue as something to be decided later.
There was also disagreement over the amount of the final
payment. The creditor powers at first fixed the sum at 4,000
million reichsmarks ($952,000,000), payable in bonds which
were to be marketed after conditions became favorable . The
Germans made a counter-offer of 2,000 million reichsmarks
($476,000,000), and it was encouraging to their creditors
that they were willing to pay something after all. The matter
remained in this trading stage for four days . A final agree-
ment was reached on July 8 . . It provided for :
x. A final payment by Germany of
3,000 million reichsmarks
($714,000,000), which was to be placed in a general fund for
European reconstruction .
2 . An issue of 5 per cent bonds, guaranteed by the Reich, to
cover this amount. These bonds were to be issued at 9o and not less
than three years nor more than fifteen years after 1932 .
3. The deposit of these bonds in the Bank for International
Settlements and their sale only when Germany's economic situation
made it practicable .15
An agreement with the Germans became possible when
they consented to drop the war-guilt issue . They had at least
carried their point by implication when the creditor govern-
ments agreed to wipe out reparations, for it was only upon
war guilt that the claim for reparations was founded . The
preamble of the agreement also gave some promise that the
Germans might hope for future concessions to appease their
sensibilities. "The, signatory powers," it said, "do not claim
that the task accomplished at Lausanne, which will com-
pletely put an end to reparations, can alone assure that peace
which all nations desire, but they hope that an achievement
of such significance and so arduously attained will be un-
derstood and appreciated by all pacific elements in Europe
s Final Act of the Lausanne Conference, Cmd . 4126 .
144 }ope that an achievement
of such significance and so arduously attained will be un-
derstood and appreciated by all pacific elements in Europe
s Final Act of the Lausanne Conference, Cmd . 4126 .
144 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---ent
of such significance and so arduously attained will be un-
derstood and appreciated by all pacific elements in Europe
s Final Act of the Lausanne Conference, Cmd . 4126 .
144 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and the world and that it will be followed by
fresh
achievements ."
4. The Political Settlement at Lausanne
The agreement with Germany was made public on July 8 .
On the 13th it became known that underlying the agreement
there were two political understandings .
A. The Gentlemen's Agreement
One of these referred to the American war debts and was
known as the Gentlemen's Agreement . It was an arrange-
ment initialed on behalf of Great Britain by Mr . Neville
Chamberlain, on behalf of France by M . 11douard Herriot,
on behalf of Italy by Signor Antonio Mosconi, and on behalf
of Belgium by M. Jules Renkin . The text was as follows :16
The Lausanne Agreement will not come into final effect until after
ratification as provided for in the Agreement . So far as the Creditor
Governments on whose behalf this
Proces-Verbal is initialed are
concerned, ratification will not be effected until a satisfactory settle-
ment has been reached between them and their own creditors
. It
will be open to them to explain the position to their respective
Parliaments, but no specific reference to it will appear in the text
of the agreement with Germany . Subsequently, if a satisfactory
settlement about their own debts is reached, the aforesaid Creditor
Governments will ratify and the agreement with Germany will come
into full effect. But if no such settlement can be obtained,
the
agreement with Germany will not be ratified ; a new .situation will
have arisen and the Governments interested will have to consult
together as to what should be done .. In that event, the legal position,
as between all the Governments, would revert to that which existed
before the Hoover Moratorium .
The German Government will be notified of this arrangement .
July 2, 1932 .
The fact that this document had been held secret for nearly
two weeks provoked violent criticism,
especially in the
United States, where it was widely held to constitute a
1° Further Documents Relating to the Settlement Reached at the Lausanne
Conference, Cmd . 4129.
{X45]voked violent criticism,
especially in the
United States, where it was widely held to constitute a
1° Further Documents Relating to the Settlement Reached at the Lausanne
Conference, Cmd . 4129.
{X45]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ism,
especially in the
United States, where it was widely held to constitute a
1° Further Documents Relating to the Settlement Reached at the Lausanne
Conference, Cmd . 4129.
{X45]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"united front" by the European debtors against the American
creditor. So much suspicion arose from the secrecy which
surrounded the origin of the agreement, that President
Hoover felt called upon to make public a letter which he
had written to Senator Borah, Chairman of the Senate Com-
mittee on Foreign Relations, stating the attitude of the Ad-
ministration. In this letter the President said :
Our people are, of course, gratified at the settlement of the
strictly European problem of reparations or any of the other political
or economic questions that have impeded European recovery . Such
action, together with the real progress in disarmament, will con-
tribute greatly to world stability .
I wish to make it adequately clear, however, that the United States
has not been consulted regarding any of the agreements reported by
the press to have been concluded recently at Lausanne and that of
course it is not a party to, nor in any way committed to, any such
agreements .
While 1 do not assume it to be the purpose of any of these agree-
ments to effect combined, action of our debtors, if it shall be so
interpreted, then I do not propose that the American people shall be
pressed into any line of action or that our policies shall be in any
way influenced by such a combination, either open or implied .
The confusion which followed the publication of the
Gentlemen's Agreement was augmented by the conflicting
interpretations offered by spokesmen of the French and Brit-
ish governments. The Havas News Agency, a French con-
cern, reported on semiofficial authority that Premier Herriot
had told the Finance Commission of the Chamber of Depu-
ties that under this agreement neither Great Britain nor any
of the debtors signing the instrument could effect a separate
debt settlement with the United States without consulting
France.1 7 This report was never authoritatively denied, and it
was received with such displeasure in the United States and
with so much misgiving in London that M . Herriot promptly
reinterpreted the agreement and declared that it would
merely "prevent any single debtor of the United States from
"New York Herald Tribune, July x6,
31932.
X461ng in London that M . Herriot promptly
reinterpreted the agreement and declared that it would
merely "prevent any single debtor of the United States from
"New York Herald Tribune, July x6,
31932.
X461

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Herriot promptly
reinterpreted the agreement and declared that it would
merely "prevent any single debtor of the United States from
"New York Herald Tribune, July x6,
31932.
X461

--- PAGE BREAK ---

making a new arrangement without the consent of the
others."18
Mr. Chamberlain about the same time created further be-
wilderment . In endeavoring to prove that the agreement was
not intended as a "united front" against the United States,
he informed the House of Commons on July ii that the
Lausanne delegates had been in touch with American repre-
sentatives, and that consequently there was no reason to
think that the proceedings at the conference would have ".un-
fortunate results . When this statement brought official de-
nials from Washington, he declared that his remarks had
been misunderstood and that he "had no intention of sug-
gesting that representatives of the United States approved,
either tacitly or explicitly, what was done in the Lausanne
proceedings ."'
The European diplomats by their maladroitness thus suc-
ceeded in enveloping an entirely legitimate transaction in an
atmosphere of mystery. The only mysterious thing about the
agreement was their own method of dealing with it . In-
formed opinion in the United States was not greatly dis-
mayed or astonished at its content, though it recognized that
the project had been presented in a manner so bungling as to
leave it open to the worst possible-construction. But apart
from annoyance at the manner of presentation, the American
view was that the agreement contained no promises of action
which in the nature of things would not have been taken
without it . It was obvious that the debtor powers would in
one way or another have to reach some , common understand-
ing if they were to avoid the danger of becoming rival sup-
plicants before their common creditor. The agitation in the
United States quickly died down when the good effects of
the Lausanne settlement were made manifest by heavy Euro-
pean buying of American securities, and the incident of the
"New York Times, July x6,1932 .
"New York Herald Tribune, July
12 and 15, x932.
[ 1471Lausanne settlement were made manifest by heavy Euro-
pean buying of American securities, and the incident of the
"New York Times, July x6,1932 .
"New York Herald Tribune, July
12 and 15, x932.
[ 1471

--- PAGE BREAK ---were made manifest by heavy Euro-
pean buying of American securities, and the incident of the
"New York Times, July x6,1932 .
"New York Herald Tribune, July
12 and 15, x932.
[ 1471

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Gentlemen's Agreement was never referred to during the
Presidential campaign .
B. The Accord o f Confidence
There was, however, another agreement reached at Lau-
sanne, in this case between Great Britain and France, which
had the appearance of much greater consequence to the
future of European, politics. It became known as the Accord
of Confidence and it was published on July 13, 1932, in the
form of a declaration, which read as follows :'
In the declaration which forms part of the Final Act of the
Lausanne Conference the signatory Powers express the hope that
the task there accomplished, will be followed by fresh achievements .
They affirm that further success will be more readily won if nations
will rally to a new effort in the cause of peace, which can only be
complete if it is applied both in the economic and political sphere .
In the same document the signatory Powers declare their intention to
make every effort to resolve the problems which exist at the present
moment or may arise subsequently in the spirit which has inspired
the Lausanne Agreement .
In that spirit His Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom
and the French Government decided themselves to give the lead
in making an immediate and mutual contribution to that end on the
following lines :
r. In accordance with the spirit of the Covenant of the League
of Nations they intend to exchange views with one another with
complete candor concerning, and to keep each other mutually in-
formed of, any questions coming to their notice similar in origin
to that now so happily settled at Lausanne which may affect the
European regime . It is their hope that other Governments will join
them in adopting this procedure .
2. They intend to work, together and with other Delegations at
Geneva to find a solution of the Disarmament question which will
be beneficial and equitable for all the Powers concerned .
3. They will cooperate with each other and other interested Gov-
ernments in the careful and practical preparation of the World
Economic Conference .
4. Pending the negotiation at a later date of a new commercial
=Declaration Issued by His Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom
and the French Government Regarding Future European Co-operation,
Cmd . 4131 .the negotiation at a later date of a new commercial
=Declaration Issued by His Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom
and the French Government Regarding Future European Co-operation,
Cmd . 4131 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---later date of a new commercial
=Declaration Issued by His Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom
and the French Government Regarding Future European Co-operation,
Cmd . 4131 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

treaty between their two countries they will avoid any action of the
nature of discrimination by the one country against the interests of
the other.
The heart of this declaration was the agreement of Great
Britain "to exchange views" with France in a spirit of "com-
plete candor" on "any questions" which were "similar in
origin" to those settled at Lausanne . This was taken in
France to mean that Great Britain would work in consulta-
tion with France on all questions pertaining to the liquida-
tion of the war, and it was hailed in France as signifying
the resumption of a relation not unlike the old
Entente
Cordiale. In this accord M. Herriot hoped he had found the
essential guaranty of security that France had been seeking
since the end of the war-that is to say, a promise by Great
Britain that France would not be left in isolation to defend
the Versailles system which embodied the existing constitu-
tion of Europe .
When the war ended in 19x8, the old European system
had been destroyed. The Russian, the Austrian, and the
Turkish empires had disintegrated as a result of defeat in
the field and of revolution at home . In place of these three
ancient sovereignties, there were left a large number of new
nations which the Allies had encouraged in their demand for
independence. The German Empire had been more or less
forcibly transformed into a republic, and it was in a military
and economic sense prostrate. Thus, when the victors assem-
bled in Paris, they were committed to the independence of
the new nations and were in a position to dictate terms to
Germany .
The Versailles settlement had three main elements . It fixed
the frontiers of a new Europe . It imposed upon Germany a
huge indemnity ; it dismembered German territory, going so
far as to leave a part of Germany physically detached from
the rest ; and it deprived Germany of control over her own
armaments. Finally, the Versailles settlement set up
the
League of Nations as an agency, not merely for the general
C 1491ally detached from
the rest ; and it deprived Germany of control over her own
armaments. Finally, the Versailles settlement set up
the
League of Nations as an agency, not merely for the general
C 1491

--- PAGE BREAK ---he rest ; and it deprived Germany of control over her own
armaments. Finally, the Versailles settlement set up
the
League of Nations as an agency, not merely for the general
C 1491

--- PAGE BREAK ---

maintenance of world peace, but also for the correction of
errors and injustices in the peace settlement .
It was evident from the first that this settlement could be
enforced only if the victors resolutely insisted upon it . It was
not a
- self-executing settlement resting upon general consent
or upn a natural balance of power . It was a dictated peace,
which called for continual pressure to exact the reparations
and for a long vigilance backed by overwhelming power to
keep the vanquished, particularly Germany and Hungary,
from moving to recover some of their lost territory. It was no
less evident that the League could hope to exert a healing
and modifying influence only if it had the authority of all the
principal powers and the general confidence and affection of
all the peoples.
The abrupt withdrawal of the United States from Euro-
pean affairs knocked away one of the chief supports of the
whole settlement and left the burden of enforcement upon
France and Great Britain . It soon transpired that Great Brit-
ain was unwilling to carry this burden, which had been more
than doubled for her by the American withdrawal, and a very
large part of the diplomatic history of the post-war years
was concerned with the gradual retreat of the British from
the Versailles regimeand the development of their open op-
position to its continuation .
Thus France had been left alone . She was the only great
power committed to the Versailles system . For more than
ten years France, by a series of alliances with the new states,
had maintained the territorial arrangements and insisted
upon the preservation of reparations and German disarma-
ment. But as France became more and more isolated, Ger-
many became more and more rebellious . In her revolt against
the Versailles system, Germany had the support of experi-
ence, in that it was demonstrated that reparations were harm-
ful to all of Europe . Germany had also the support of Great
Britain and Italy, who openly avowed their opposition to
what they called the. French domination of Europe . This
['5o 1rations were harm-
ful to all of Europe . Germany had also the support of Great
Britain and Italy, who openly avowed their opposition to
what they called the. French domination of Europe . This
['5o 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---ul to all of Europe . Germany had also the support of Great
Britain and Italy, who openly avowed their opposition to
what they called the. French domination of Europe . This
['5o 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

domination was, of course, simply the French attempt to
execute the treaty which Great Britain, Italy, and the United
States had helped her to impose .
At the time of the Lausanne conference these conditions
had produced what amounted to a division of Europe into
two coalitions : the one a highly organized French coalition
insisting upon the status quo, the other, a loose coalition
composed of Germany, Italy, Great Britain, and the dissatis-
fied nations that insisted on revision . The farseeing realized
that there would be supreme danger in this alignment if it
was allowed to harden . For then trouble between Germany
and Poland, or between Hungary and Rumania, would in-
volve the whole continent . Moreover, the fact that popular
sympathies were becoming so intense for or against revision
meant that wild men would feel themselves encouraged to
undertake adventures. There was war talk in Europe in
1931-32. While no one seriously believed that war was im-
minent, the European did believe that they were on the steep
and slippery incline which would eventually lead to war . It
was this belief that withered with hot blasts of suspicion
every measure of economic reconstruction and every essay in
the limitation of armaments .
This was the problem that Messrs . Herriot and MacDonald
took m hand at Lausanne. The French knew when they went
to Lausanne that the reparation system was finished and
had to be abandoned. It had taken them a long time to
realize it. But they had realized it and they had ceased to
count upon collecting money from Germany. There were two
things that they did care greatly about . One, and this was
the less important of the two, was that they should obtain the
best possible terms on the war debts owing the United States ;
this meant in practice that they should not be abandoned
by the British, who had a stronger theoretical case for revi-
sion. The other matter which worried them at Lausanne was
infinitely more important than the war debts . It was whether,
in abolishing so central a part of the Versailles system as
[151 3se for revi-
sion. The other matter which worried them at Lausanne was
infinitely more important than the war debts . It was whether,
in abolishing so central a part of the Versailles system as
[151 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---he other matter which worried them at Lausanne was
infinitely more important than the war debts . It was whether,
in abolishing so central a part of the Versailles system as
[151 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

reparations, they were not unsettling the whole post-war
constitution of Europe. M. Herriot's problem at Lausanne
was how to give up reparations without undermining the
territorial constitution of Europe . For he knew that, having
got rid of reparations, the Germans would next demand
equality of armaments, and then proceed to seek a revision
of frontiers.
By midsummer of 1932, French opinion was reconciled to
the abandonment of reparations and to the impossibility in
the matter of armaments of trying to treat Germany perma-
nently as a prisoner out on parole. These two features of the
Versailles regime they were prepared eventually to abandon .
But on the frontiers they were adamant . Their position, as
we understand it from our own inquiries, was substantially
this: "Granting that the Polish Corridor is a monstrosity, the
lesson of history is that vital frontiers have never been
altered in Europe except by war . The Poles say they will fight
to retain the Corridor, and at present they certainly mean it .
We have no particular affection for the Corridor but we
have a horror of another war . So our position is that to
preserve peace we must not open up this discussion of territo-
rial questions."
The significance of the Lausanne settlement, particularly
the Accord of Confidence between Great Britain and France,
was that it gave the French the right to believe that Great
Britain would make no move that directly or indirectly re-
opened the frontier. question . Only with that assurance could
M. Herriot make the French people feel secure in abandon-
ing the right to reparations and in proceeding in the near
future to a reduction of armaments with equality of legal
status for Germany . In other words, by the Accord of Con-
fidence, the French were able to concede a large and definite
revision of the Versailles system without throwing everything
into the melting pot.
Therefore, the heart of the Lausanne settlement was not
the ending of reparations but the resumption of Franco-
[ 1 52 Jsion of the Versailles system without throwing everything
into the melting pot.
Therefore, the heart of the Lausanne settlement was not
the ending of reparations but the resumption of Franco-
[ 1 52 J

--- PAGE BREAK ---

British cooperation in European diplomacy . As to repara-
tions, Lausanne had merely to recognize an accomplished
fact, but in the Accord it pointed to the possibility of a new
chapter in the history of Europe .
The British did not take so high a view of the matter . In
fact they threw a good deal of cold water on the agreement,
but nevertheless they observed it and on the part of France
at least there was a noticeable relaxation of the tension . M .
Herriot was able to proceed on the premise that the Accord
was a sincere and effective partnership which fortified the
constitution of Europe by placing at its core the union in-
stead of the rivalry of the two strongest powers . The danger
of an alignment of Europe into hostile coalitions appeared
at least to be checked and, therefore, the sense of security in
France was promoted. There was a general feeling, too,'that
Europe was better prepared to withstand the shock of a res-
toration of the old Prussian ruling class than it would have
been six months previously, when France and Great Britain
were estranged and in a state of diplomatic rivalry .
The Lausanne settlement was received with optimism
throughout the world and was hailed as a turning point in
the history of Europe .
i I531

--- PAGE BREAK ---d and in a state of diplomatic rivalry .
The Lausanne settlement was received with optimism
throughout the world and was hailed as a turning point in
the history of Europe .
i I531

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER NINE
THE SECOND POSTPONEMENT
THE outcome of the events recorded in the two preceding
chapters brought relief and a renewal of confidence. The
deflationary influences arising from the threat to the Ameri-
can dollar had, it was generally believed, been removed. The
system of reparation payments, with all that it involved in
the way of strain on the monetary mechanism of the world,
of distortion of the course of international trade, and of po-
litical disturbance, had for all practical purposes been abol-
ished, The Accord of Confidence had given promise of a
closer diplomatic understanding between Great Britain and
France, and had thus brought at least a semblance of unity
when there had been dangerous rivalry between the two
most powerful nations in Europe . Progress in these three
matters was established between the middle of June and
the middle of July, and it was followed by a decided
improvement in the commodity and security markets, in
the credit system, and to a lesser extent in industrial produc-
tion .
It is not for us to say how much the summer rally was the
direct consequence of these political achievements. Among
multitudes of producers there had been a profound readjust-
ment of costs and prices through liquidation and reorganiza-
tion and economy, which with the long-deferred demands of
consumers had created a condition favorable to some resump-
tion of economic activity. But the psychological effect .of the
Lausanne agreements and of the final conclusion of the work
of Congress was unmistakable . Hope displaced fear, and
[=541

--- PAGE BREAK ---of economic activity. But the psychological effect .of the
Lausanne agreements and of the final conclusion of the work
of Congress was unmistakable . Hope displaced fear, and
[=541

--- PAGE BREAK ---

much of the depression that was subjective in character was
for the time being relieved .
x . The Summer Rally,
About the middle of June two items of news appeared
which may be said to mark the turn of the tide in this phase
of the depression. On June 15 it was announced that the
Bank of France, which had been repatriating its funds, for
nine months, had completed the transaction, and that all the
gold that France could take had been withdrawn. What
remained of French deposits were the minimum necessary
working balances of ordinary trade . The other item of news
dealt with the sudden and sharp advance in the price of
live stock, the first important improvement since the onset
of the depression . Between the middle of June and the
middle of July the price of hogs advanced from $3 .45 per
hundred pounds to $4.90, a gain of nearly 40 per cent .
There were also substantial but less spectacular increases
during the early summer in the prices of cattle, sheep, lard,
cottonseed oil, hides, tin, petroleum, cotton, silk,
refined
sugar, cocoa, and coffee.
The announcement that the gold withdrawals had been
completed successfully was heralded as evider.ce that the
American dollar was impregnable against external forces
like those which had dragged sterling off the gold standard .
The fact that basic commodity prices were advancing meant,
of course, that if the advance was to continue, the economic
depression was ending. For it was universally recognized that
the collapse of commodity prices, particularly of the prices
of agricultural products and raw materials, was a controlling
cause of the world crisis .
After the completion of the French withdrawals and of
some others, it was estimated that foreign balances in the
United States had been reduced from their peak of 1929 at
3,000 millions to some boo or 700 millions. Since approxi-
"New York Times, June 15, 1932 .
[I55~t was estimated that foreign balances in the
United States had been reduced from their peak of 1929 at
3,000 millions to some boo or 700 millions. Since approxi-
"New York Times, June 15, 1932 .
[I55~

--- PAGE BREAK ---foreign balances in the
United States had been reduced from their peak of 1929 at
3,000 millions to some boo or 700 millions. Since approxi-
"New York Times, June 15, 1932 .
[I55~

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mately
1,000 millions had been considered necessary for
routine financial operations in normal times, the financial
markets concluded that the demand for gold was exhausted
and that a return flow, particularly since crops were about to
move to Europe, might soon be expected .
This expectation proved to be correct, and indeed there
was an additional influx of gold owing to the fact that in-
vestors in Northern Europe took advantage of the panic
prices prevailing and began to buy American securities . From
June 15 to the end of September, 275 millions in gold were
added to the country's stocks . Simultaneously, hoarded cur-
rency, which at one time was considerably in excess of i,ooo
millions, was reduced by about 250 millions .2 This return
of deposits from foreign and domestic sources so greatly
relieved the strain upon the banks that their position as a
whole was radically altered. They were able to reduce their
indebtedness at the Federal Reserve banks and at the same
time to accumulate excess reserves .
The New York Federal Reserve Bank had already re-
duced its discount rate from 3 to 22 per cent . By the end of
the summer, what with the return of deposits and the appear-
ance of a surplus of money in the banks, the Federal Reserve
authorities could point out that the monetary conditions had
finally been achieved which, according to the accepted theory,
ought in the course of time to bring about a "reflatiori " of
prices .
The renewal of confidence was reflected spectacularly in
the security markets. The average price of 421 common
stocks, as computed by the Standard Statistics Company, rose
from 34 in June to 35 .9 in July, to 53 .3 in August, and to
58 in September. This advance practically canceled all the
recession in stock prices during the first half of the year,
bringing the average back to the level of December and
January. It surpassed any previous rise during the depression,
'Federal Reserve Bulletin, October,
11932, 621 .
1 156}he first half of the year,
bringing the average back to the level of December and
January. It surpassed any previous rise during the depression,
'Federal Reserve Bulletin, October,
11932, 621 .
1 156}

--- PAGE BREAK ---year,
bringing the average back to the level of December and
January. It surpassed any previous rise during the depression,
'Federal Reserve Bulletin, October,
11932, 621 .
1 156}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as well as any of the recoveries that had signalized the end
of bear markets in past years .
Bond prices also shared in this upturn, but the advance
was naturally more conservative. The rise during July and
August, as measured by the Standard Statistics Company's
index of 6o selected bonds, amounted to I5 per cent and
wiped out all the losses since the previous November . This
was especially beneficial to banks, insurance companies, and
similar financial institutions whose surplus and reserves had
been invested in bonds .
2. The Rally Checked
Early in September it became evident that the stock mar-
ket had overestimated the improvement in the general busi-
ness situation and had advanced too speedily and too far
.
The volume of trading, which on a number of days during
the rapid upturn had been around four million shares, ta-
pered off and the market operations became largely of a
professional character. Prices then reacted, but the market
averages at the end of October were still substantially above
the low levels reached in mid-July . The New York Times
average of 5o stocks rose from 33.98 on July 8, when it had
touched bottom, to 72 .38 on September 8, an upturn of over
10o per cent. By October 1o the average had dropped to
51.63, but by the last day of the month had rallied to 56.32 .
The recession in September and October still left the aver-
ages substantially above the low level of the midyear and at
approximately the level prevailing in April .
The first optimism was being tempered more and more by
caution. There was no return of the panic and pessimism of
the spring and early summer, but there was disappointment
at the slowness of the improvement in many of the basic
industries. The indices registered only slight recovery . The
record of business failures in September was better than at
any other time within twelve months . Car loadings by the
[157)y of the basic
industries. The indices registered only slight recovery . The
record of business failures in September was better than at
any other time within twelve months . Car loadings by the
[157)

--- PAGE BREAK ---tries. The indices registered only slight recovery . The
record of business failures in September was better than at
any other time within twelve months . Car loadings by the
[157)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

middle of October had reached the high point of the year .
Employment conditions also were slightly better . Neverthe-
less such progress as was recorded was proceeding unevenly .
There were still reports of poor earnings by corporations
during the third quarter and of occasional receiverships, and
these tended to dampen enthusiasm .
Broadly speaking, it may be said that despair had largely
disappeared and that an undercurrent of hopefulness, rather
than of actual confidence, had taken its place. At the same
time it was recognized that there were many obstacles block-
ing the road to recovery, and there were no indications of
any definite action directed at their removal . Most of the
constructive legislation enacted by Congress at the recent
session bad taken the form of new mechanisms for supplying
credit with a view to preventing or postponing further trou-
bles rather than to attacking fundamental economic evils .
The public began to realize that the midsummer achieve-
ments at Washington and Lausanne were at best a small first
installment in the solution of the world's problems . In many
parts of the American economy, notably among the producers'
of agricultural staples, in the mining industry, in railroad
transportation, in urban real estate and municipal financing,
there were deep disorders which remained to be dealt with.
The budget was after all not balanced and the task of bring-
ing it into balance was formidable. American monetary
policy showed no likelihood of being able to raise the level
of world prices by its own motion .
The barriers to international trade were being raised in
almost all countries, and a state of general economic war
prevailed in the world . The American debt question hung
like a thundercloud over relations between the United States
and Europe. No German government had been established
that seemed secure, and
' in its weakness the Ministry of
Chancellor von Papen turned toward a foreign policy which
greatly disturbed Franco-German relations . The question of
x58]ad been established
that seemed secure, and
' in its weakness the Ministry of
Chancellor von Papen turned toward a foreign policy which
greatly disturbed Franco-German relations . The question of
x58]

--- PAGE BREAK ---that seemed secure, and
' in its weakness the Ministry of
Chancellor von Papen turned toward a foreign policy which
greatly disturbed Franco-German relations . The question of
x58]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

disarmament had reached a dangerous stage . In South Amer-
ica war was threatened at two points and in the Far East the
internal difficulties of China and the Manchurian entangle-
ments became aggravated. Finally, in the United States there
was the normal hesitation caused by the alarms and commo-
tions of a Presidential election.
3. A Political Moratorium
The great majority of these questions required action by
governments to settle them . But on the really vital questions,
such as political security and disarmament, the readjustment
of intergovernmental debts, and the achievement of com-
mercial peace, no further progress was possible without a
very considerable change in public opinion . The attempts
to deal with these problems had to be postponed until the
people were prepared to consent to a solution. Pending this
education of opinion, statesmen could only explore the
ground privately in the hope of finding formulae which could
ultimately be rendered acceptable to the voters .
In the United States this course of education had itself to
be postponed because of the necessity of holding a national
election. For the responsible leaders of both parties recog-
nized that an attempt to discuss the major issues of concern
to the world could result only in a gross perversion of the
facts and the consolidation of ruinous commitments under
the stress of partisan appeals for votes . Therefore, by com-
mon consent under something in the nature of a gentlemen's
agreement, foreign policy, with the exception of the tariff,
was not debated in the campaign .
During the early stages of the campaign, it seemed for a
time that the truce thus arranged might be broken and that
a choice between foreign policies differing at important
points might be presented to the country .
The first formal campaign speech of either candidate for
the Presidency after the conventions was made by Governor
[1591eign policies differing at important
points might be presented to the country .
The first formal campaign speech of either candidate for
the Presidency after the conventions was made by Governor
[1591

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing at important
points might be presented to the country .
The first formal campaign speech of either candidate for
the Presidency after the conventions was made by Governor
[1591

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roosevelt on July 30. In this address he discussed the plat-
form adopted by his party and gave his own interpretation of
its various commitments! When he reached the section on
tariffs, he said : "One of the great needs of the world is to
set international trade flowing again. The proper procedure
is to ascertain all the pertinent facts, to publish them widely,
and then to negotiate with each country affected. Trade bar-
riers of all kinds ought to be lowered-not by rule of thumb,
but with due regard to safety and justice-lowered, never-
theless, as quickly and as definitely as possible . Policy needs
to be dominated by the realities we discover and by the
national purposes we seek."
That tariffs are a matter of foreign as well as of domestic
policy,
Governor Roosevelt clearly recognized. American
action in this respect- could not be separated "from our other
relations with foreign countries ; the whole thing ties in
together. Here he cited the pledges of his party in favor of
the entry of the United States into the World Court "with
the pending reservations" ; its support of the Pact of Paris, "to
be made effective by provisions for consultation and confer-
ence in case of threatened violation of treaties" ; its advocacy
of "international agreement for reduction of armaments" ; its
pledge "of good faith and of good will in financial obliga-
tions" ; and its opposition to "cancellation" of the war debts .
"This problem of the debts is complex," said Mr . Roose-
velt. "Its solution has, however, been brought measurably
nearer by the recent results at Lausanne. Great Britain,
France, and Germany have at last agreed among themselves
concerning reparations. The danger now is that they may
turn a united front against us. This comes, I am convinced,
not so much from the debts they owe us, as from our barriers
against their trade, which make the problem so difficult . The
debts will not be a problem-we shall not have to cancel
them-if we are realistic about providing ways in which
'New York Times, July 31, I932 .
[16o)r trade, which make the problem so difficult . The
debts will not be a problem-we shall not have to cancel
them-if we are realistic about providing ways in which
'New York Times, July 31, I932 .
[16o)

--- PAGE BREAK ---the problem so difficult . The
debts will not be a problem-we shall not have to cancel
them-if we are realistic about providing ways in which
'New York Times, July 31, I932 .
[16o)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

payment is possible through the profits arising from the re-
habilitation of trade. The Republican platform said nothing
at all about, this ; but their position has been the-absurd one
of demanding payment and at the same time making pay-
ment impossible. This policy finally forced a moratorium, as
it was bound to do. Our policy declares for payment, but at
the same time for lowered tariffs and resumption of foreign
trade which open the way for payment ."
Two weeks after this address by the Democratic candi-
date, Mr . Hoover made his speech accepting the Republican
nomination . He declared himself "squarely for the protective
tariff" and "against the proposal of 'a competitive tariff for
revenue,' as advocated by our opponents." Of the war debts,
he said: "My views in opposition to cancellation
.
.
. are a
matter of detailed record in many public statements and a
recent message to the Congress .* They mark a continuity of
that policy maintained by my predecessors . I am hopeful of
such drastic reduction of world armament as will save the
taxpayers in debtor countries a large part of the cost
of
their payment to us, and if for any particular annual payment
we were offered some other tangible form of compensation,
such as the expansion of markets for American agriculture
and labor, and the restoration and maintenance of our pros-
perity, then I am sure our citizens would consider such a
proposal . But it is a certainty that these debts must not be
canceled or these burdens transferred to the backs of the
American people."
Mr. Hoover thus opposed any reduction of existing tariffs,
but suggested the possibility of remitting "particular" pay-
ments on the war debts in return for larger purchases by
Europe of American goods . Mr. Roosevelt took a contrary
position, favoring "quick and definite" lowering of tariffs
and suggesting a method of easing payment of the war debts
through larger purchases by Americans of European goods .
`The United States in World Affairs,
1931. 349.
`New York Tirtes, August 12, 1932 .
[x61]ggesting a method of easing payment of the war debts
through larger purchases by Americans of European goods .
`The United States in World Affairs,
1931. 349.
`New York Tirtes, August 12, 1932 .
[x61]

--- PAGE BREAK ---easing payment of the war debts
through larger purchases by Americans of European goods .
`The United States in World Affairs,
1931. 349.
`New York Tirtes, August 12, 1932 .
[x61]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4. The Debate on the Tariff
Had the debate continued on these lines, and had the two
candidates amplified these early statements on the war debts,
American opinion would have been focused more clearly on
the alternatives before the United States as a creditor na-
tion which had been seeking to maintain a favorable trade
balance by means of protective tariffs . However, as the cam-
paign progressed, the war debts played a smaller part in
the discussion. Mr. Roosevelt's proposal was criticized by
Senator Moses of New Hampshire, who estimated that "the
debtor countries would have to sell $3,000,000,000 of addi-
tional goods in the American market," in order to obtain
"profits from which the debts could be paid ." The proposal
was criticized also by Secretary Mills in a campaign address
at Portland, Maine, on the ground that it would compel the
American public to shoulder the burden of the debts .7 Mr .
Roosevelt did not defend his position against this criticism .
Nor did Mr. Hoover develop his own plan in greater detail,
though he referred to it again in campaign speeches at Des
Moines, Cleveland, and Springfield, Illinois."
Of the tariff much more was said ; but here too the sharp
edge of disagreement in the early statements of the candidates
was subsequently blurred . Mr. Roosevelt continued to attack
the Hawley-Smoot Act; he continued to champion the pro-
posal for reciprocal tariffs with other nations, endorsed by
his party in its Chicago platform . But he coupled his advo-
cacy of this plan with a declaration in favor of tariffs still
high enough "to give the American producer an advantage
over his foreign competitor ." 9 Speaking before a farm audi-
ence at Sioux City in the course of his Western tour, 10 he
insisted that it was unfair "to stigmatize the Democratic
party as a free-trade party. The Democrats would not aban-
'New York Herald Tribune, August 4, 1932 .
'New York Times, September 11, 1932.
'Ibid., October g, 16, November 5, 1932 .
' Ibid., September 30, 1932 .
°1Ibid.
1 162)ty. The Democrats would not aban-
'New York Herald Tribune, August 4, 1932 .
'New York Times, September 11, 1932.
'Ibid., October g, 16, November 5, 1932 .
' Ibid., September 30, 1932 .
°1Ibid.
1 162)

--- PAGE BREAK ---uld not aban-
'New York Herald Tribune, August 4, 1932 .
'New York Times, September 11, 1932.
'Ibid., October g, 16, November 5, 1932 .
' Ibid., September 30, 1932 .
°1Ibid.
1 162)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

don tariff protection ; they would go no further than to bring
duties down "as low as the preservation of American industry
will permit." Such revision would "injure no legitimate inter-
est." It would preserve intact the theory of a tariff "which
will put the American producers on a market equality with-
their foreign competitors-one that equalizes the difference
in the cost of production." Such a tariff would differ only
in degree and not in principle, in practice and not in theory,
from the protective tariff favored by the Republican party.
This Mr. Roosevelt frankly recognized : "I appreciate that
the doctrine thus announced is not widely different from that
preached by Republican statesmen and politicians."
By the end of September both candidates were thus
pledged to a protective tariff at least high enough to equalize
"production costs" at home and abroad and to prohibit com-
• peting imports. Mr. Roosevelt continued to favor reciprocal
treaties and to advocate the reduction of existing schedules
wherever this could be accomplished without injury to any
"legitimate interest"; but at least in the agricultural sched-
ules he saw no opportunity whatever for reduction, "It is
absurd to talk of lowering duties on farm products," he-said
in an address at Baltimore, late in the campaign ." "I know
of no effective excessively high tariffs on farm products . I do
not intend that such duties shall be lowered ."
On the Republican side Mr . Hoover expressed the opinion
that any change in existing,duties should be toward higher
rather than toward lower levels . At Des Moines he said :
"The Republican party originated and proposes to maintain
the protective tariff on agricultural products. We will even
widen that tariff further, where necessary to protect agricul-
ture ." 1a At Charleston, West Virginia, in the closing weeks
of the campaign, he said that "due to depreciated currencies
in foreign countries, the tariffs have been seriously impaired
u New York Times, October 26, 1932 .
"New York Herald Tribune, October 5, 193 .
{x63)mpaign, he said that "due to depreciated currencies
in foreign countries, the tariffs have been seriously impaired
u New York Times, October 26, 1932 .
"New York Herald Tribune, October 5, 193 .
{x63)

--- PAGE BREAK ---"due to depreciated currencies
in foreign countries, the tariffs have been seriously impaired
u New York Times, October 26, 1932 .
"New York Herald Tribune, October 5, 193 .
{x63)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lately in a'number of commodities ."1$ Two days later he sent
a letter to the Chairman of the Tariff Commission on the
subject of depreciated currencies, though the commission
had already considered the question earlier in the year and
had opposed an upward revision of existing rates ." In this
letter he urged a report "at the earliest possible moment" on
means of affording "all possible relief to unemployment"
in
communities whose welfare might be jeopardized by com-
petitive goods from countries which had abandoned the gold
standard ."' At Cincinnati he again called attention to the
question of depreciated currencies, and asserted that "one
competitor-that is, Japan, whose currency has depreciated
40 per cent is today shipping goods into your city in com-
petition with your industries . In Japan the standard of living
has been lowered to the extent that the power of their work-
men of purchasing bread and butter is just one-eighth that
of your workmen in this city .""
As far as tariffs were concerned, the campaign thus ended
with a declaration by both candidates in favor of some form
of the protective-tariff system . Both accepted as desirable
the doctrine of duties based on production costs . Both agreed
that existing rates on agricultural products could not be re-
duced. They differed chiefly on the question of applying the
theory of production costs fairly and effectively to the restric-
tion of industrial imports .
5. Domestic Problems Foremost
While early differences over the tariff were thus narrowed
considerably as the campaign progressed, and while the war
debts failed to play a part of much importance in the later
stages of the debate, no other question of foreign policy was
brought prominently into the discussion . We have noted that
in his first campaign address Mr . Roosevelt commended the
"New York Times, October 23, 1932 .
"Cf. Chapter II .
"New York Times, October 25, 1932 .
"Ibid., October 29, 1932 .
{ x641e have noted that
in his first campaign address Mr . Roosevelt commended the
"New York Times, October 23, 1932 .
"Cf. Chapter II .
"New York Times, October 25, 1932 .
"Ibid., October 29, 1932 .
{ x641

--- PAGE BREAK ---his first campaign address Mr . Roosevelt commended the
"New York Times, October 23, 1932 .
"Cf. Chapter II .
"New York Times, October 25, 1932 .
"Ibid., October 29, 1932 .
{ x641

--- PAGE BREAK ---

position taken by his party on American adherence to the
World Court, on international agreements for the reduction
of :armaments, and on implementing the Pact of Paris "by
provisions for consultation and conference in case of threat-
ened violation of treaties." In his speech accepting the Re-
publican nomination, Mr. Hoover commended similar dec-
larations in his own party's platform on these three points .
He also called attention to the plan he had recently submitted
to the international conference on armaments : "We have
made concrete proposals at Geneva to reduce the armaments
of the world by one-third . It would save the taxpayers of the
world over a billion a year."17 On the question of Manchuria
he said: "I have projected a new doctrine into international
affairs, the doctrine that we do not and never will recognize
title to possession of territory gained in violation of the
peace pacts which were signed with us ."18
In early campaign addresses both candidates thus outlined
their views on certain large questions of foreign policy . But
at no later stage did either candidate add substantially to the
opinion then expressed. Neither Mr. Roosevelt nor Mr.
Hoover discussed at length his party's position on the Pact
of Paris, the World Court, or other instruments of coopera-
tion by the United States in establishing conditions of politi-
cal security. Aside from the tariff, the issues on which the
campaign centered were exclusively domestic questions, such
as prohibition, farm relief, public utilities, national finance,
currency inflation, and the record of the Democratic House of
Representatives.
In the landslide that elected Mr . Roosevelt President of
the United States on November 8, questions of foreign policy
were of small importance . The interest of the country was
"New York Times, August 12, 1932 .
"During the campaign the question
of American policy with respect to
the Far Eastern situation was discussed by secretary Stimson in an address
before the Council on Foreign Relations in New York on August 8, and in
later addresses at Pittsburgh and Philadelphia . Cf. New York Herald Tribune
.
August 9, 1932 ; New York Times, October 2, 26, 1932 .
t 165 1uncil on Foreign Relations in New York on August 8, and in
later addresses at Pittsburgh and Philadelphia . Cf. New York Herald Tribune
.
August 9, 1932 ; New York Times, October 2, 26, 1932 .
t 165 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

focused almost exclusively on domestic issues, and leaders
of both parties guided it in this direction in order to avoid
impossible commitments concerning our relations with other
countries. Little attention was given even to the problem in
foreign affairs that lay immediately ahead, the problem aris-
ing from the fact that in the month following the election,
payment of more than ioo million dollars on the war debts
would fall due, in circumstances which made full payment
doubtful .
[x66 j

--- PAGE BREAK ---fact that in the month following the election,
payment of more than ioo million dollars on the war debts
would fall due, in circumstances which made full payment
doubtful .
[x66 j

--- PAGE BREAK ---

»)>>>)»>»»>>>>»»)«<««««<«<<««,4«
CHAPTER TEN
THE WAR DEBTS
i . The Shadow o f Coming Events
THOUGH the campaign thus failed to focus much attention
on the war debts, it was tacitly assumed by at least part of
the electorate that an effort would be made by European na-
tions to reopen the question, once the campaign had ended .
There was abundant evidence to support this assumption .
President Hoover had warned Congress in December of the
previous year that some of the governments indebted to the
United States would be "unable to meet further payments to
us in full, pending recovery in their economic life ." He had
insisted that it was "useless to blind ourselves to an obvious
fact" and asserted that it would be "necessary in some cases
to make still further temporary readjustments ."1 The reply
of Congress had been its resolution repudiating the sugges-
tion that the war debts "be in any manner canceled or re-
duced ."2 But as time passed and the third year of the
depression lengthened, it became apparent both that no real
recovery in the debtor nations had taken place and that no
change had occurred in their conviction that war debts were
closely linked with reparations . On the contrary, the depres-
sion had deepened steadily during the first six months of
x932; and, as we have noted, the agreements reached at Lau-
sanne on reparations were made to depend for their ratifica-
tion on "a satisfactory settlement" of the war debts due to
the United States.
'Cf
. The United States in World Affairs, r93r, 349-359 .
Cf. Chapter I.

--- PAGE BREAK ---o depend for their ratifica-
tion on "a satisfactory settlement" of the war debts due to
the United States.
'Cf
. The United States in World Affairs, r93r, 349-359 .
Cf. Chapter I.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This theory of debts and reparations as inseparable parts
of a single problem was emphasized on several occasions dur-
ing the course of the Presidential campaign in the United
States. On July ro Premier Herriot of France said in an
interview with the newspaper L'Intransigeant : "What must
be clearly understood is that the link is now clearly estab-
lished between the settlement of reparations and the solu-
tion of the debt problems with relation to the United States .
Everything is now subordinated to an agreement with Amer-
ica."3 A few weeks later it was reported from London that
no provision had yet been made for war-debt payments in
the supplementary budget which the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer was then preparing to submit to Parliament .' In
October an effort on the part of the Nationalists to debate
the war debts in the French Chamber of Deputies was de-
feated by M . Herriot with the aid of his friends in Parlia-
ment. The Paris Bureau of the New York Times reported :
"Not only the Ministry but a considerable section of the
Chamber felt that it would be extremely inopportune to hold
a debate {on the debts} just before the American Presidential
election."' In France as well as in the United States the
necessity of postponing discussion until the campaign had
ended was clearly understood by responsible authorities .
Meantime, a series of events in the summer and early
autumn clearly forecast developments which were to take
place later in the year . These events began promptly with the
expiration of the moratorium on June 30 . The first sched-
uled payment on the war debts after that date was the small
sum of $130,000 in principal due from Greece on July i .
On the day before this payment fell due, the Greek govern-
ment notified the Treasury Department that it would take
advantage of a clause in its agreement with the United States
permitting it to postpone payment for two and a half years,
'New York Times, July 11, 1932 .
' Ibid., September 12, 1932 .
' Ibid., October 26, 1932 .
{ 168 )e in its agreement with the United States
permitting it to postpone payment for two and a half years,
'New York Times, July 11, 1932 .
' Ibid., September 12, 1932 .
' Ibid., October 26, 1932 .
{ 168 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

with interest to accrue on the postponed amount at 41/4
per cents'
A few weeks later, three other small debtors-Poland,
Estonia, and Latvia=also notified the Treasury that they
would act under similar provisions in their treaties with the
United States and would postpone for two years payments of
principal due on December i5, amounting to $1,125,000 for
Poland, $90,000 for Estonia, and $37,000 for Latvia. The
Treasury announced that "in accordance with the terms of
the agreement, the amount of principal so postponed will
bear interest at the rate of
31/2
per cent, payable semi-
annually."7
Finally, late in September the German government noti-
fied the Treasury that it would postpone
payment of
$7,800,000 due on the 3oth of that month on account of war
claims and costs of the American army of occupation . Repre-
sentatives of the German Embassy in Washington explained
that their government had been unable to obtain foreign
exchange and that other conditions made it impossible to
meet the payment due.8
By October x five of the smaller debtors had thus post-
poned payments amounting to $9,182,oo0, and all of the
larger debtors had made clear their belief that debts and
reparations must be considered pari passu . These circum-
stances explain why it was generally assumed that discussion
of the debts would be reopened soon after the Presidential
election .
2 . The Exchange of Notes
Evidence to support this view was not long in making its
appearance. On November io, two days after the national
election, the Treasury announced that a payment of $444,920
due to be made by Greece had not been received 9 This pay-
0 New York Times, July z, 1932 .
'Ibid
., September 15, 1932 .
*Ibid., September 29, 1932 .
'Ibid., November
11, 1932.
t 1 69 It of $444,920
due to be made by Greece had not been received 9 This pay-
0 New York Times, July z, 1932 .
'Ibid
., September 15, 1932 .
*Ibid., September 29, 1932 .
'Ibid., November
11, 1932.
t 1 69 I

--- PAGE BREAK ---be made by Greece had not been received 9 This pay-
0 New York Times, July z, 1932 .
'Ibid
., September 15, 1932 .
*Ibid., September 29, 1932 .
'Ibid., November
11, 1932.
t 1 69 I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ment, unlike the smaller sum due on July i, was not post-
ponable under the terms of the existing treaties . The failure
of the Greek government to tender the amount due consti-
tuted the first default on the American war loans .
On the same day the Treasury also announced that the
Hungarian government had informed the United States that
it did not have the necessary exchange with which to make
payment of $40,729 due in principal and interest on De-
cember 15 .
More important, on the same November ro it was authori-
tatively reported that the British Ambassador in Washington
had delivered at the State Department a note from his gov-
ernment on the subject of the debts and that the French
,Ambassador had informed the department that a note on
the same subject was on its way from Paris .
These notes were the first of a long series to be exchanged
between various debtor nations and the government of the
United States . In addition to Great Britain and
France,
Belgium, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Latvia, and Lithuania sent
notes to Washington . These notes are listed in the chronol-
ogy published in this volume .10 Here it will be convenient
to discuss the subject matter of this diplomatic correspond-
ence under five headings :
(a)
the appeal of the debtor
nations for suspension of payments ; (b) the American reply
to this request ; (c) the plans proposed for facilitating trans-
fer of funds to the United States ; (d) the appeal of the
European nations for reconsideration of the debt agreements ;
and (e) the opinions of President Hoover and of President-
elect Roosevelt on the question of how to deal with this
request for reexamination of existing contracts
.
A. Suspension o f Payments
In order to prepare the way for the broader study which
they hoped to initiate, seven of the debtor nations requested
permission to suspend payments of principal, interest, or
toCf. Appendix IX.
1170]In order to prepare the way for the broader study which
they hoped to initiate, seven of the debtor nations requested
permission to suspend payments of principal, interest, or
toCf. Appendix IX.
1170]

--- PAGE BREAK ---the way for the broader study which
they hoped to initiate, seven of the debtor nations requested
permission to suspend payments of principal, interest, or
toCf. Appendix IX.
1170]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

both, due on December 15 . On this point the Britis govern-
ment argued that while suspension "would in no way affect
any ultimate settlement,
it was "necessary in order to create
conditions favorable to a successful issue of subsequent con-
versations.""
This procedure had been followed in dealing with repara-
tions at Lausanne, and both the British and French notes
called attention to the fact .12 "It is not possible to hope that
agreements can be achieved in five weeks [the period be-
tween receipt of the first notes and the date of payment)
on matters of such vast scope," said the British government.
"Confronted last summer with, a similar difficulty, the con-
ference of Lausanne found it necessary, in order to allow its
work to proceed undisturbed, to reserve during the period
of the conference the execution of the payments due to the
participating powers." It was hoped that the United States,
which had applauded the Lausanne agreement, would recog-
nize this precedent.
A further argument for postponement was provided by
the economic situation. To the British government the diffi-
culties of transferring funds under existing circumstances
seemed "so great, and would involve such far-reaching re-
actions, both financial and political, that the resulting doubts
and anxieties in regard to the immediate situation would
distract the attention of the governments and peoples, when
the chief need was an objective and systematic approach to
the problem to be solved .""
Some of the smaller debtor nations flatly stated that in
the turbulent state of international finance at the end of
1932 they lacked means of transferring payment .
B. The American Reply
To all debtors seeking suspension of payment, the reply
of the American government was, first, that "no authority
13 Department of State Press Release, December x, 1932 .
°Department of State Press Releases, November 14, 1932 .
"Department of State Press Release, December x,
1932 .
L 171 )rst, that "no authority
13 Department of State Press Release, December x, 1932 .
°Department of State Press Releases, November 14, 1932 .
"Department of State Press Release, December x,
1932 .
L 171 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---ity
13 Department of State Press Release, December x, 1932 .
°Department of State Press Releases, November 14, 1932 .
"Department of State Press Release, December x,
1932 .
L 171 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lies witlL the Executive to grant such an extension" and,
second, that "payments of the sums due on December
:15
would greatly increase
.
.
. the prospects of a satisfactory
approach to the whole question ."14 These opinions were
stated in the first American replies to Britain and France,
and were repeated in later notes to these powers and to
smaller nations seeking suspension of payments .
In a -special message to Congress on December i9, the
President gave additional reasons which had determined
refusal of these requests . He then said that the government
had declined to postpone payments due, "as we considered
that such action would amount to practical breakdown of
the integrity of the agreements ; would impose an abandon-
ment of the national policies of dealing with these obliga-
tions separately with each nation ; would create a situation
where debts would have been regarded as being a counter-
part of German reparations and indemnities and thus not
only destroy their individual character and obligation but
become an effective transfer of German reparations to the
American taxpayer ; would be no real relief to the world situ-
ation without consideration of the destructive forces militat-
ing against economic recovery ; would not be a proper call
upon, the American people to further sacrifices unless there
were definite compensations ."15
C. Facilitation o f Payments
While the American government thus opposed suspension,
it sought in the case of its largest debtor, Britain, to facili-
tate the payment which it insisted must be made .
In a statement issued at the White House before the
American reply to the first British note was published, Mr.
Hoover suggested that "if extraordinary circumstances, such
as depreciation of currencies and general fall in world trade,
have rendered immediate transfers of this next payment in
"Department of State Press Release, November 25. 1932 .
"Message to Congress, December r9, 1932 .
[172)ncies and general fall in world trade,
have rendered immediate transfers of this next payment in
"Department of State Press Release, November 25. 1932 .
"Message to Congress, December r9, 1932 .
[172)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ll in world trade,
have rendered immediate transfers of this next payment in
"Department of State Press Release, November 25. 1932 .
"Message to Congress, December r9, 1932 .
[172)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

dollars impossible to some nations without losses on both
sides," the United States should be willing to "consider a
proposal that payments of this installment be made to our
account in foreign currencies, transfers to be effected from
time to time as the situation of the exchanges permits, of
course with guarantees as to the value of such currencies ."16
This proposal for "blocked payment," to be made in Lon-
don in British currency, with transfer later to the United
States at par, was discussed by the American and British gov-
ernments, but rejected by the latter . In its note of December
i the British government said : "The exchange
difficulty
would remain even if the device were adopted of payment
in sterling to a blocked account ; for the existence of a large
sum awaiting transfer would affect the market almost as
seriously as an actual purchase of exchange ."17
An alternative was then suggested by the American gov-
ernment through diplomatic channels . It was proposed that
payment of the installment due on December 15 be made in
serial bonds, which would become payable at different ma-
turities but which would be issued in such form as to be
marketable on the New York Stock Exchange. This proposal
was likewise rejected by the British government, since, in the
words of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, it "was not post-
ponement at all," but "merely another way-not a very
agreeable way-of making the payment .
.
. . Therefore,
while we appreciated the efforts of the American govern-
ment to facilitate payment, we did not feel able to take
advantage of them . We were obliged to express to it our
conviction that suspension alone would overcome the diffi-
culties, and our regret at its decision that it had not been
able to recommend this solution to Congress ."18
In these circumstances, the British government determined
to make payment on December 15 in gold . The French
"Department of State Press Release, November 23, 1932 .
14 Department of State Press Release, December i, 19
" Parliamentary Debates. House of Commons, CCLXXIII, No . 17, De-
cember 14, 1932 .
1=731h
"Department of State Press Release, November 23, 1932 .
14 Department of State Press Release, December i, 19
" Parliamentary Debates. House of Commons, CCLXXIII, No . 17, De-
cember 14, 1932 .
1=731

--- PAGE BREAK ---

governm&nt likewise determined to make payment ; but after
a dramatic debate on the night of December
13 the Cham-
ber of Deputies refused by a vote of 402 to 187 to authorize
such actions France thereupon "deferred" payment, and the
Herriot Cabinet resigned . On December 15 the United States
Treasury published the following figures :
PAYMENTS RECEIVED
Great Britain $ 95,550 ,000
Czechoslovakia 1,500,000
Italy
1,145,437
Finland
186,135
Latvia
111,857-
Lithuania 91,386
Total $98,685,910
PAYMENTS DEFERRED
France $ 19, 2_6r,43 2-
Poland
3,301,980
Belgium 2.,115,000
Estonia
2.66,370
Hungary
40,719
Total $24,99 6,513
Five nations were thus in default. Six made the payments
due. But the act of making payment in December, 1932, did
not in itself signify an intention to continue to comply with
the requirements of existing contracts when the next pay-
ment fell due in June, 1933 . On this point the British Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer said in his address to the House of
Commons: "We could not leave our payment to be taken as
though we were resuming [after the moratorium] the old
system of war-debt payments. We could not leave Congress
under any misapprehension as to what our views, were about
the possibility of continuing such payments in their previous
form in the future, and therefore we considered it necessary,
3°New York Times, December 14, 1932 .
[ 1741

--- PAGE BREAK ---were about
the possibility of continuing such payments in their previous
form in the future, and therefore we considered it necessary,
3°New York Times, December 14, 1932 .
[ 1741

--- PAGE BREAK ---

while informing the United States government of our deter-
mination to pay the installment, to intimate at the same time
our intention, when discussions on the final settlement began,
to put forward our contention that the old regime which was
interrupted by the Hoover, moratorium can never be re.
vived."20
D. The Request for Revision
The argument of the debtor nations for revision of this
"old regime" was based partly on economic and partly on
political grounds. On the first point the notes of the British
government placed more emphasis than those of other na-
tions. The second point was the chief concern of the French
government and the French Chamber.
Pointing out that payments across exchange, being re-
stricted by tariffs and trade barriers, are essentially different
from payments by the taxpayer in his own currency, the
British government argued that the burden of the war debts
must be judged by comparison, not with the volume of in-
ternal revenue, but with the balance of trade . Considered
in this light, the transfer of large sums seemed clearly to
compel the debtor nations "to augment their export surpluses
in order to meet intergovernmental debt burdens" and to
diminish their power to purchase goods in the creditor coun-
try, "with a consequent fall in prices, depression of industry,
and unemployment." It therefore "would not profit a credi-
tor country to collect a few million pounds or dollars, if it
thereby perpetuates a world disorder, which reacting
on
itself, involves losses of revenue many times greater.
Con-
versely, a settlement relieving "the economic machinery of
the world by clearing up these intergovernmental payments
would be repaid again, and again by the contribution it would
make to world recovery ."
For these reasons the British government "based their re-
9D Parliamentary Debates . House of Commons, CCLXXIII, No.
17, De-
cember 14, 1932 .
( =75 1e contribution it would
make to world recovery ."
For these reasons the British government "based their re-
9D Parliamentary Debates . House of Commons, CCLXXIII, No.
17, De-
cember 14, 1932 .
( =75 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---uld
make to world recovery ."
For these reasons the British government "based their re-
9D Parliamentary Debates . House of Commons, CCLXXIII, No.
17, De-
cember 14, 1932 .
( =75 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

quest for a reexamination of the whole situation on the fact
that payment of the war debts has in their view been proved
to be inconsistent with the present economic organization of
the world, and that any resumption of these payments is
bound to accentuate the gravity of the present crisis and to
compromise fatally all efforts to counteract it
."21
The French government also discussed the economic im-
plications of the debts ; but it dealt at greater length than
did the British government with the political aspect of the
question . It was on the initiative of President Hoover, the
French notes pointed out, that a year's moratorium on all
intergovernmental payments had been arranged in
1931 .
This action "affected directly all existing agreements, and
in particular suspended the working of the mechanism which
the Young Plan had set up for taking care of the problem of
reparations." Furthermore, at the time of his visit to Wash-
ington in October, 1931, the French Premier had "agreed
with the President of the United States on the terms of a
communique, stating that in the matter of intergovernmental
debts a new arrangement, covering the period of the de-
pression, might be necessary, provided the initiative came
from the European powers principally concerned ."22 In con-
formity with this text, "which seems to constitute a novation
in equity in the r€gime of international debts," this initiative
was taken .
Within the sphere of reparations where only the . European
powers were involved, the arrangement provided for had
been brought about. Recognition of this fact by the United
States now seemed to be an equitable and a necessary sequel
.
While the French government was "familiar with the formal
reservation made at the time of the ratification of the Hoover
moratorium by the American Congress, whose prerogatives
it fully recognizes," it felt that it "must recall that the ap-
s British note of December i . Department of State Press Release, December
1, 1932 .
° Cf. The United States in World Affairs, 1931, z16 .
[ 1761recognizes," it felt that it "must recall that the ap-
s British note of December i . Department of State Press Release, December
1, 1932 .
° Cf. The United States in World Affairs, 1931, z16 .
[ 1761

--- PAGE BREAK ---that it "must recall that the ap-
s British note of December i . Department of State Press Release, December
1, 1932 .
° Cf. The United States in World Affairs, 1931, z16 .
[ 1761

--- PAGE BREAK ---

proval of the French Parliament likewise was subordinated
to its own interpretation of the moratorium proposed by
President Hoover."28
Belief that the United States had in fact acknowledged the
relationship between war debts and reparations in proposing
the moratorium, and that by this proposal it had broken
irreparably Germany's will to pay, was suggested at many
points in the French notes and vigorously asserted in the
debate in the French Chamber .
The United States rejected this argument that debts had
been linked with reparations . On this point President Hoover
and President-elect Roosevelt found themselves in agreement
at a conference held at the White House on November 22 24
The notes dispatched by the State Department to Britain and
France on the day following this conference insisted that
"reparations are solely a European question in which the
United States is not involved" ; our government had always
maintained that the debts "must be treated as entirely sepa-
rate from reparation claims arising out of the war .""
This was a correct statement of the diplomatic position
taken by the United States since President Wilson's first
statement on the question in 192o . But in point of fact Con-
gress itself had on occasion been forced to recognize the
dose practical relationship between the two great sets of
financial obligations created by the war. Thus, in 1926, in
recommending to Congress ratification of the debt-funding
agreement with France, the Committee on Ways and Means
of the House of Representatives stated in its report that the
settlement had been based on an estimate of France's capacity
to pay, in the determination of which the principal considera-
tions taken into account were an expected improvement of
the general fiscal situation in that country and the fact that
"French note of December i . Department of State Press Release, December
2, 1932 .
" New York Times, November 24, 1932 .
Department of State Press Releases, November 2s, 1932.
{177)and the fact that
"French note of December i . Department of State Press Release, December
2, 1932 .
" New York Times, November 24, 1932 .
Department of State Press Releases, November 2s, 1932.
{177)

--- PAGE BREAK ---French note of December i . Department of State Press Release, December
2, 1932 .
" New York Times, November 24, 1932 .
Department of State Press Releases, November 2s, 1932.
{177)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"the Dawes payments from Germany should, if all goes well,
aggregate this year approximately 3 .5 billion francs ."26
Nevertheless, since the United States had never formally
recognized the connection between debts and reparations,
and since it was not prepared to do so now, the political
argument for revision of the existing agreements was re-
jected. The economic argument met with more sympathetic
consideration. In its replies to the debtor nations, the State
Department agreed that the burden of the debts had been
"greatly increased
. . in the present conditions of world-
wide depression, accompanied by a sweeping fall of prices ."
It also agreed that the debts "have a very definite relationship
to the problem of recovery, in which both the British [or
French] and the American people have so vital an interest ."
It agreed, moreover, that it was desirable "to survey the
entire situation and to consider what means may be taken to
bring about the restoration of stable currencies and exchange,
the revival of trade, and the recovery of prices ."27
E. Method o f Review
In such a survey, both President Hoover and President-
elect Roosevelt believed that it would be desirable to deal
individually with each debtor nation . Mr. Hoover insisted
that "the United States government from the beginning has
taken the position that it would deal with each of the debtor
governments separately, as separate and distinct
circum-
stances surrounded each case ." Mr. Roosevelt said : "In deal-
ing with the debts each government has been and is to be
considered individually, and all dealings with each govern-
ment are independent of dealings with any other debtor
government ."28
In the State Department's notes, this theory of separate
"Combined Annual Reports of the World War Foreign Debt Commission,
267 .
"American notes of December 7 and 8 to Great Britain and France.
Department of State Press Releases, December 8, 9 . 1932.
"New York Times, November 24, 1932 .
[ 1781ar Foreign Debt Commission,
267 .
"American notes of December 7 and 8 to Great Britain and France.
Department of State Press Releases, December 8, 9 . 1932.
"New York Times, November 24, 1932 .
[ 1781

--- PAGE BREAK ---ission,
267 .
"American notes of December 7 and 8 to Great Britain and France.
Department of State Press Releases, December 8, 9 . 1932.
"New York Times, November 24, 1932 .
[ 1781

--- PAGE BREAK ---

treatment led also to certain differences in treatment . The
first reply by the American government to Britain began with
this statement by Secretary Stimson : "I fully appreciate the
importance of the proposal contained in your note of No-
vember io and the seriousness of the situation upon which it
is predicated ."29 In the note delivered to the French Ambas-
sador on the same day, the second half of this sentence did
not appear. France was accordingly invited to believe that
the United States did not recognize in her case a situation
comparable in "seriousness" with that of England . Doubtless
this reflected American opinion. But at this point, as at
others, the State Department drew distinctions in the case of
different debtors, not after completion of the survey' which
it favored, but before this study was begun . Discriminations
which thus seemed to indicate less favorable treatment for
France than for Britain may have helped to shape the opinion
of the French Chamber in favor of "deferring" payment .
While Mr. Hoover and Mr. Roosevelt agreed on the de-
sirability of separate negotiations with each debtor,
they
disagreed on the question of how these negotiations should
be conducted . Mr. Hoover pointed out that in the matter of
the war debts Congress had always "insisted upon participa-
tion in initiation of negotiations and in any ultimate deci-
sions." He therefore proposed to recommend "the creation of
an agency to exchange views" with governments seeking revi-
sion of their debts. This agency would "report to Congress"
such recommendations as it might choose to make 8 0
Mr. Roosevelt held a different opinion. He believed that
an adequate agency for discussion of the debts was already
provided by the regular diplomatic service of the govern-
ment. In his opinion, "no action by the Congress has limited
or can limit the constitutional power of the President to
carry on diplomatic contacts or conversations with foreign
0 Department of State Press Release, November 25,
31932 .
'White House Press Release, November
23,
31932 .
[ 1791l power of the President to
carry on diplomatic contacts or conversations with foreign
0 Department of State Press Release, November 25,
31932 .
'White House Press Release, November
23,
31932 .
[ 1791

--- PAGE BREAK ---dent to
carry on diplomatic contacts or conversations with foreign
0 Department of State Press Release, November 25,
31932 .
'White House Press Release, November
23,
31932 .
[ 1791

--- PAGE BREAK ---

governments. The advantage of this method of maintaining
contacts with foreign governments is that any one of the
debtor nations may at any time bring to the attention of the
government of the United States new conditions and facts
affecting any phase of its indebtedness."' Mr. Roosevelt
thus proposed to restore the traditional American system in
which the -executive branch of the government initiates nego-
tiations with foreign governments on its own responsibility
and the legislative branch passes on concrete proposals based
on ascertained facts.
Since responsibility for a decision at this time rested with
Mr. Hoover, rather than with Mr. Roosevelt, negotiations
with the debtor nations would doubtless have been begun
through the agency of a new Congressional commission, had
Congress been willing to cooperate in such an undertaking .
But by the time Congress reconvened, sentiment in both
houses against any reconsideration of the debts was unmis-
takable. The President was obliged, therefore, to abandon
his plan for a Congressional commission and to fall back
upon an alternative plan for a commission which he himself
would appoint, with certain members of Congress included
in its personnel .
Since he believed that this commission could not complete
its work before the expiration of his term, and since he
thought continuity of policy was desirable, the President
sought, through an exchange of telegrams, to persuade Mr .
Roosevelt to cooperate with him in selecting members for the
new agency which he proposed to constitute . To this request,
Mr. Roosevelt replied that he could not accept such responsi-
bility before entering office and that he still believed a satis-
factory medium for negotiations was provided by the existing
diplomatic service. He suggested, however, that for purposes
of "preliminary exploration" the President appoint such a
commission as he had in mind, "making it clear that none
xNew York Times, November 24, 1932 .
[ i8o )He suggested, however, that for purposes
of "preliminary exploration" the President appoint such a
commission as he had in mind, "making it clear that none
xNew York Times, November 24, 1932 .
[ i8o )

--- PAGE BREAK ---r, that for purposes
of "preliminary exploration" the President appoint such a
commission as he had in mind, "making it clear that none
xNew York Times, November 24, 1932 .
[ i8o )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of these representatives is authorized to bind this govern-
ment as to any ultimate policy ."82
Here the exchange of telegrams between the President and
his successor ended, with a brief statement by the former
which suggested that he had gone as far as he could go . The
swift sequence of events during the six weeks between
November io and December 23 had brought an avalanche of
notes and a long series of statements . It had shown that the
United States was unwilling, to waive the December pay-
ments and that in the face of this refusal five debtors felt it
necessary or desirable to default . It had revealed a willing-
ness on the part of the American government "to survey the
entire situation ." But owing to a disagreement over methods
of review, the initiation of this survey seemed at least tem-
porarily to be bogged.
3 . The Drift of American Sentiment
It is outside the scope of our narrative to follow the dis-
cussion of the war debts into the new year . Within the limits
thus defined, two major developments must be recorded . The
first was the announcement by the European nations of their
intention to seek a readjustment. This we have already noted .
The second was the change in American sentiment which
made itself felt in 1932, as an influence likely to play an
increasingly important part despite the suspicion and
hostility of Congress .
The nature of this change in sentiment can best be sug-
gested by considering the temper of the country on the sub-
ject of the war debts a few years earlier . In August, 1926, the
first plea for a revision of the debt agreements by an Ameri-
can prominent in public life was made by Mr . Newton D .
Baker. In a long and carefully argued statement, Mr . Baker
insisted that the United States needed above all else "a con-
fident, prosperous, and peaceful world as a field
for its in-
dustrial and commercial operations ." This condition could
"New York Times, December 23, 1932 .
x81d States needed above all else "a con-
fident, prosperous, and peaceful world as a field
for its in-
dustrial and commercial operations ." This condition could
"New York Times, December 23, 1932 .
x81

--- PAGE BREAK ---e all else "a con-
fident, prosperous, and peaceful world as a field
for its in-
dustrial and commercial operations ." This condition could
"New York Times, December 23, 1932 .
x81

--- PAGE BREAK ---

not be brought about, he felt, "so long as we continue to
exact payments up to the capacity of the debtors to pay ."
The settlement with England, "instead of being a magnificent
achievement," had been "a magnificent disaster ." It had set
a precedent impossible to follow in the case of other nations
and had therefore compelled the United States to discriminate
between different debtors and to ignore the fact that all the
debts "could be paid only in goods or the proceeds from the
sale of goods ." Neither "in morals nor in a long view of its
own best industrial and commercial interests" was the United
States justified in pursuing its present policies . In Mr. Baker's
opinion, the time had come "when these questions, including
the British settlement, ought to be reopened .
.
.
. This
should be done at a round-table, where a representative of
the United States should be authorized to speak with author-
ity and to demonstrate to the rest of the world that America's
interest is not in dollars, but in a reconstructed international
order, with as much as possible of the grief of the World
War swept into oblivion and the great industrial nations of
the world free to start afresh ."38
Public reception of this statement showed how little ap-
proval, and what little interest, a proposal for revision of the
debts could stimulate in 1926 . No direct comment on Mr .
Baker's proposal was made by the Coolidge Administration,
then in office ; but "those close to the President" pointed out
"that Mr . Baker had specialized in lost causes," and they "at-
tached little importance to his new move .1114 Treasury offi-
cials were reported as not interested. Mr. Ogden L. Mills,
then a member of the House of Representatives, declared
that "whatever motives lie back of the statement of Mr .
Baker, the immediate result of his words is to make it harder
for us to help Europe get on its feet ."" In an editorial en-
titled "A Visionary Summons," an Administration news-
°° New York Times, August 30, 1926 .
"New York Herald Tribune, August 31, 1926.
'Ibid., August 31, 1926.
[ 182 ]its feet ."" In an editorial en-
titled "A Visionary Summons," an Administration news-
°° New York Times, August 30, 1926 .
"New York Herald Tribune, August 31, 1926.
'Ibid., August 31, 1926.
[ 182 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---editorial en-
titled "A Visionary Summons," an Administration news-
°° New York Times, August 30, 1926 .
"New York Herald Tribune, August 31, 1926.
'Ibid., August 31, 1926.
[ 182 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

paper, the New York Herald Tribune, found in Mr. Baker
"a victim of false idealism," "carried away by a flighty emo-
tionalism ." "There can be no moment less propitious for an
American to attack the refunding policy and its successful
working out and to demand wholesale cancellation ."36 In
Mr. Baker's own party, Senator Harrison, then on the spot in
Paris, described cancellation "as a gross betrayal"
and
charged that Americans who favored such action were "de-
laying economic readjustment . 1187
An equally unfavorable reception met a similar proposal
for reconsideration of the debts, advanced in December of
the same year by forty-two members of the Faculty of Polit-
ical Science of Columbia University . These gentlemen argued
that the existing settlements were "unsound in principle,"
since they were based on a formula of "capacity to pay"
which was "difficult if not impossible of just application in
the case of debts so vast as to reach over two or three genera-
tions." They believed that "for the unfair and inappropriate
principle of capacity to pay" it was desirable to substitute a
policy which aimed at "promoting the future peace and pros-
perity of the world," with a frank recognition that "our
debt settlements are part and parcel of the whole network of
the settlements between the other powers ."88 This appeal
aroused little interest. Senator Smoot of Utah, a member of
the World War Foreign Debt Commission, described it as
a "publicity effort" which would achieve no useful purpose :
"Like so many good-intentioned people, the Columbia pro-
fessors, instead of accomplishing the benefits which they
seek to confer, are actually doing harm to those they say
they would help. What Europe needs is certainty."89
In contrast to the indifference and hostility which thus met
any proposal for revision in 1926, we find in 1932 an active
movement in favor of reopening the question of the debts
New York Herald Tribune, August 3z,
1926 .
"New York Times, September z, 1926.
"Ibid., December 20, 1926.
Ibid., December 22, 1926 .
{ 183 )ve
movement in favor of reopening the question of the debts
New York Herald Tribune, August 3z,
1926 .
"New York Times, September z, 1926.
"Ibid., December 20, 1926.
Ibid., December 22, 1926 .
{ 183 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---of reopening the question of the debts
New York Herald Tribune, August 3z,
1926 .
"New York Times, September z, 1926.
"Ibid., December 20, 1926.
Ibid., December 22, 1926 .
{ 183 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and reexamining the terms of the agreements . The most not-
able characteristic of this movement was the diversity of
the groups participating in it. The General Conference of the
Methodist Episcopal Church approved
a report urging
the American government "to arrange a new settlement of
the war debts, based upon the present economic situation,
upon drastic reduction of armaments and of military expendi-
tures."" The National Association of the Mutual Savings
Banks called for the "immediate appointment of a commis-
sion to negotiate with foreign countries for an equitable ad-
justment of the debts due to the United States on the basis of
active cooperation on the part of debtor governments in the
stimulation of international
trade between them
and
the United States ."4 1 The master of the farmers' National
Grange suggested a period of postponement of interest
charges, during which the debtor nations would be given a
"credit of from io to 20 per cent debt reduction on all pur-
chases of agricultural products in the United States that can
be moved at a price which will allow a marginal profit to
the producer ."42 A committee representing seven of the Rail-
way Brotherhoods submitted to the President a plan for a
twenty-five-year moratorium, in order to stimulate American
foreign trade 4s
The last two proposals caught up a suggestion made by
ex-Governor Alfred E. Smith, in an address at the Jefferson
Day dinner of the Democratic party : "Let us say to the na-
tions of Europe which owe us money that we will forget all
about it for twenty years, and not only will we do that, but
we will write off as paid each year 25 per cent of the gross
value of American products which they buy from us .
.
.
.
This will help the farmer ; it will help the mill-owner ; it
will help the manufacturer ; it will help the railroads and the
transportation industries and in turn help all the various
"New York Times, May 24, 1932 .
"Ibid., May 21, 1932 .
' Ibid., November 7, 1932 .
"Ibid., May 14, 1932 .
£ 184 1help the railroads and the
transportation industries and in turn help all the various
"New York Times, May 24, 1932 .
"Ibid., May 21, 1932 .
' Ibid., November 7, 1932 .
"Ibid., May 14, 1932 .
£ 184 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---and the
transportation industries and in turn help all the various
"New York Times, May 24, 1932 .
"Ibid., May 21, 1932 .
' Ibid., November 7, 1932 .
"Ibid., May 14, 1932 .
£ 184 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lines of activities that are dependent upon the railroads . I
assert that this is a far better way to restore trade than the
present method of sitting idly by, clamoring for the payment
of debts we know cannot be paid, and thereby losing for the
farmers and manufacturers and workingmen of the United
States more billions of dollars than the whole European
debt.""
The movement in favor of some fundamental change in
the status of the debts was joined in 1932 by other party
leaders whose opinion carried weight . In an address in Wash-
ington during the early weeks of the Presidential campaign,
a statesman whose influence had long been cast on the side
of American isolation and against "internationalism"
de-
clared : "We are compelled to consider these international
problems not as things incidental or distant, but as things
which reach down to and affect for better or for worse the
welfare of the man on the farm, stunned by the startling and
persistent fall of prices, the laborer seeking work, or the
merchant waiting for buyers of the goods on his shelf ." This
spokesman was Senator Borah ; and of the war debts he said :
"There can be no reason for urging a reduction or cancella-
tion of these debts other than that it would be in the interest
of the people of the United States to do so . Upon that the-
ory, and that alone, it seems to me, is the subject open to dis-
cussion. Will reduction or cancellation bring to the people
of the United States an equal or a greater benefit than the
amount which they may collect from the debts? Will such a
course open foreign markets for the products of the farm and
the factory, cause the price level to rise, put an end to un-
employment, and thaw out the frozen credits of the banks?
I entertain the belief that the cancellation of the debts in
connection with, and as part of, a program including the
settlement of the other war problems, would have the effect
above indicated."'
"New York Timer, April 14, 1932 .
"New York Herald Tribune, July 24, 1932 .
[1$5}and as part of, a program including the
settlement of the other war problems, would have the effect
above indicated."'
"New York Timer, April 14, 1932 .
"New York Herald Tribune, July 24, 1932 .
[1$5}

--- PAGE BREAK ---ogram including the
settlement of the other war problems, would have the effect
above indicated."'
"New York Timer, April 14, 1932 .
"New York Herald Tribune, July 24, 1932 .
[1$5}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Among the "other war problems," Mr . Borah mentioned
reparations, armaments, and tariffs .
4. Arguments for and against Revision
To this extent the change in American sentiment between
1926 and 1932 was unmistakable : advocates of revision were
no longer members of a wholly insignificant minority, power-
less to obtain serious consideration of their opinions . A
vigorous debate was now in progress between large numbers
of Americans who favored revision and probably still larger
numbers who opposed it . Since the course of this debate
seemed likely in the long run to affect the attitude of Con-
gress, it is useful to consider the arguments on which it
turned. These arguments were concerned chiefly with three
points : (a) the character of the existing settlements, (b) the
present capacity of the borrowing nations to meet their obli-
gations, and (c) the relation of debts to trade .
A. The Existing Settlements
Those who defended the existing settlements argued that
the United States had treated its debtors with exceptional
generosity and had already canceled a large part of their
obligations. In commenting upon the report of the Young
Plan Advisory Committee, stating Germany's inability to
make full payment of reparations, Representative Snell of
New York, the Republican floor leader in the House, as-
serted : "The people do not generally understand that the
United States virtually canceled all of the money loaned dur-
ing the war. The debts are not war debts ; they are for money
loaned for reconstruction purposes ."46
This argument was based on the fact that in the debt-
funding agreements negotiated after the war the United
States had charged its debtors less than commercial rates of
interest. In the case of the three largest borrowers, whose
debts accounted for nine-tenths of the total borrowing, these
10 New York Times, December 25, 1931 .
[ 1861rs less than commercial rates of
interest. In the case of the three largest borrowers, whose
debts accounted for nine-tenths of the total borrowing, these
10 New York Times, December 25, 1931 .
[ 1861

--- PAGE BREAK ---ial rates of
interest. In the case of the three largest borrowers, whose
debts accounted for nine-tenths of the total borrowing, these
10 New York Times, December 25, 1931 .
[ 1861

--- PAGE BREAK ---

rates of interest were : 3.306 per cent for Great Britain, 1 .640
per cent for France, and .405 per cent for Italy .
Great Britain borrowed 3,696 million dollars before the
end of the war and 581 millions afterward, a total of 4,277
millions. Her debt was thus 86 per cent pre-Armistice and
14 per cent post-Armistice . Assuming that she should have
been charged interest at 5 per cent, the rate which the original
demand notes bore when credits were advanced during and
after the war, 30.1 per cent of her total debt was canceled
in the funding agreement . Assuming that she should have
been charged interest at 41/4 per cent, the average cost of
money to the government at the time the loans were made,
19 per cent of her debt was canceled. Assuming interest at
3 per cent, the Treasury's estimate in 1926 of what money
would on the average cost the United States during the whole
period covered by the funding agreement, none of her debt
was canceled ; on the contrary, she was charged 4 .4 per cent
in excess of her borrowing . In order to prove the thesis that
Great Britain's pre-Armistice debt was canceled, it was neces-
sary to show that the total debt was reduced 86 per cent
.
None of the three theoretical rates of interest used by the
Treasury in its calculations showed a reduction of more than
30.1 per cent.
France, our second largest debtor, borrowed 1,970 millions
before the end of the war and 1,434 millions afterward, a
total of 3,404 millions. Her debt was 58 per cent pre-
Armistice and 42 per cent post-Armistice . Assuming interest
charged at 5, 41/4, and 3 per cent, the percentages of cancella-
tion authorized by the French debt agreement were 60 .3,
52.8, and 35 .4 respectively . Only on the assumption that in-
terest should have been set at 5 per cent can it be shown that
the pre-Armistice debt of France was canceled .
Italy borrowed 1,031 millions before the Armistice and
617 afterward, a total of 1,648 millions. The debt was 63
per cent pre Armistice and 37 per cent post-Armistice . The
settlement with Italy was more lenient than that with either
01$7 1Armistice and
617 afterward, a total of 1,648 millions. The debt was 63
per cent pre Armistice and 37 per cent post-Armistice . The
settlement with Italy was more lenient than that with either
01$7 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---fterward, a total of 1,648 millions. The debt was 63
per cent pre Armistice and 37 per cent post-Armistice . The
settlement with Italy was more lenient than that with either
01$7 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Great Britain or France. At 5 per cent, 80.2 per cent of the
debt was canceled; at 41/4 per cent, the amount was 75 .4 per
cent ; at 3 per cent, it was 63 .6. Any one of these percentages
shows a complete cancellation of the pre-Armistice debt.
In the debate over the extent of cancellation authorized by
the debt agreements, those who defended the existing settle-
ments generally assumed that interest could properly have
been charged at 5 per cent, though even this high rate could
not be used to show cancellation of the pre-Armistice debt
in the case of Great Britain. Critics of the existing settle-
ments believed that 3 per cent was a more realistic basis for
such calculations and pointed out that at this rate cancella-
tion of the pre-Armistice debts of the large borrowers had
been authorized only in the case of Italy.
These critics also argued that the doctrine of "capacity to
pay," which theoretically determined the widely different
rates of interest granted to different debtors, had caused us
to discriminate both unfairly and unwisely . This doctrine had
required the World War Foreign Debt Commission to at-
tempt to guess what the economic position of fourteen debtor
nations would be twenty years from the date of its delibera-
tions, forty years, and even sixty years . Inevitably, the com-
mission guessed badly. It decided that Great Britain could
pay interest at the rate of 3 % per cent, but France only at the
rate of i s/s per cent. That is, it estimated British capacity to
pay at more than double that of France . In less than seven
years the whole outlook had been reversed .
B. Present Capacity to Pay
Whatever the merits of the original contracts, opponents
of their revision argued that they imposed no charges in
1932 beyond the present capacity of the debtor nations . In
support of this argument it was pointed out that the govern-
ments of these nations continued to spend much more on
armaments than they were required to pay in principal and
interest on their debts to the United States.
1 188}t was pointed out that the govern-
ments of these nations continued to spend much more on
armaments than they were required to pay in principal and
interest on their debts to the United States.
1 188}

--- PAGE BREAK ---at the govern-
ments of these nations continued to spend much more on
armaments than they were required to pay in principal and
interest on their debts to the United States.
1 188}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Advocates of revision of the debts agreed that it would be
possible for the debtor governments to save money by re-
ducing their armies and their navies . But they believed that
it was a mistake to assume that reduction of armaments
would in itself increase ability to pay debts due to the United
States, if the debtor lacked an adequate reserve of gold. This
assumption ignored the problem of transfer. Armies could
be paid with domestic currency and navies built with domes-
tic credit; but under the terms of their agreements with the
United States the debtor nations were required to make pay-
ment in American dollars . This compelled them either to
ship gold or to build up credits in the United States through
the sale of goods and services .
The difficulty of transfer was increased by tariffs, by the
decline of commodity prices, and by the depreciation of
various European currencies . The debtor governments had
not borrowed gold from the United States during the war
years. They had borrowed wheat, flour, cotton, wool, tobacco,
cloth, gun carriages, and high explosives . They had borrowed
these goods at prices which reached their peak in the years
from 1917 to 1920. Prices had subsequently fallen more than
40 per cent . This had automatically increased the burden of
the debts. In Great Britain, Yugoslavia, Finland, Greece,
and other debtor nations, an additional increase had occurred
in consequence of currency depreciation. With the pound
sterling at par, the British Treasury needed 120,000,000 to
purchase the dollars required to pay principal and interest
falling due in December, 1932 . With the pound sterling at
$3.22, it needed nearly £30,000,000 .
A still more fundamental difficulty in "present capacity
to pay" was the failure of the war debts to create assets pro-
viding for their own refunding . The goods which were bor-
rowed during the war years were used for a destructive
purpose . Unlike sound commercial loans, the war loans failed
to increase the productivity of the borrower . The resultant
debts were deadweight charges .
(1891e war years were used for a destructive
purpose . Unlike sound commercial loans, the war loans failed
to increase the productivity of the borrower . The resultant
debts were deadweight charges .
(1891

--- PAGE BREAK ---d for a destructive
purpose . Unlike sound commercial loans, the war loans failed
to increase the productivity of the borrower . The resultant
debts were deadweight charges .
(1891

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C. War Debts and Trade
A third point in dispute in X932 concerned the practical
consequences to the United States which would follow a
policy of revision . Those who opposed any change in the
existing debt agreements argued that revision would merely
shift the burden of the war debts from the European nations
to, the shoulders .of the American public; that a source of
revenue amounting to about 280 million dollars annually
would either be lost entirely or be substantially reduced ;
that new taxes would necessarily be imposed to increase the
revenues of the government ; and that no theoretical benefits
accruing to the United States would compensate for this loss
of European payments .
Advocates of revision believed that a scaling-down of the
debts would help to solve the difficult problem of transfer ;
that it would assist European nations in stabilizing their cur-
rencies; and that the loss of a source of revenue amounting
at best to one-tenth of the expenditures of the federal gov-
ernment was a small matter compared with the advantages
to be gained through an increase of foreign trade
.
This point of view was stated by the economists whose
report was made public by the Committee for the Considera-
tion of Intergovernmental Debts 4' on the same day that the
British and French notes were published. The economists
argued that however large the payments from Europe might
seem to be, as an immediate source of revenue for the gov-
ernment, they were "small in comparison with the gains
which would follow even a partial return of the prosperity
of three years ago ; an increase of i per cent in our national
income over the present low levels would amount to more
than twice the current annual installment on the war debts ."
"The Chairman of this civic organization was Mr. Alfred P. Sloan, Jr .,
president of the General Motors Corporation . The Vice-Chairmen were
Messrs. Nicholas Murray Butler, John W. Davis, Frank O . Lowden, D. B .
Robertson, Louis J. Taber, R. F. Whitney, Alfred E . Smith, James M . Cox,
Edward A. O'Neal, Henry P . Fletcher, Henry A . Wallace, and George W .
Wickersham.
{190}W. Davis, Frank O . Lowden, D. B .
Robertson, Louis J. Taber, R. F. Whitney, Alfred E . Smith, James M . Cox,
Edward A. O'Neal, Henry P . Fletcher, Henry A . Wallace, and George W .
Wickersham.
{190}

--- PAGE BREAK ---Lowden, D. B .
Robertson, Louis J. Taber, R. F. Whitney, Alfred E . Smith, James M . Cox,
Edward A. O'Neal, Henry P . Fletcher, Henry A . Wallace, and George W .
Wickersham.
{190}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If foreign trade could be "restored to the levels of 1929, the
additional revenues from customs duties alone would amount
to nearly 300 million dollars-more than enough to com-
pensate the Treasury for any loss resulting from reduction
or even cancellation of war-debt payments ." In these circum-
stances, revision of the debts appeared to promise
"far
greater material benefits to the American people than the
direct income which would be received if direct payment
could be made."48
It was inevitable that this question of material benefit
should come more and more into the discussion of the war
debts in the later months of 1932 . Business activity in the
United States was still at an exceedingly low level when the
British and French notes of November io arrived. A large
part of an early-autumn recovery in commodity prices had
been lost . The measures enacted by Congress before its ad-
journment in July for the purpose of balancing the national
budget had proved to be inadequate. By mid-November the
Treasury had incurred a deficit of 700 million dollars. The
postponement of war-debt payments due in December meant
the loss of an additional 125 millions on which the govern-
ment had been counting .
With its national income at a low point, higher taxes in
prospect, a great burden of domestic debt, and no assurance
that the worst of the depression had been witnessed, the
American public was primarily concerned with the difficulties
of its own position . In so far as the advocates of revision
could persuade the public that one way out of these -diffi-
culties lay through recovery of foreign trade and restoration
of world confidence, they won support for reconsideration of
the debts. How far American opinion had actually moved in
this direction by the time Congress reconvened, it is impos-
sible to say .
`8 New York Times, November 14, 1932.
C19_)for reconsideration of
the debts. How far American opinion had actually moved in
this direction by the time Congress reconvened, it is impos-
sible to say .
`8 New York Times, November 14, 1932.
C19_)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER ELEVEN
SHANGHAI AND MANCHURIA
THROUGItoUT the year the events in the Far East cast their
shadow upon the Western world . Regarded from the Jap-
anese and Chinese points of view, the stakes in this great
conflict were the control of large territories and the hegemony
of the northeastern mainland of Asia . But from the Western
point of view, the direct national interests of the powers in
the Far East were subordinate to their interest in the indirect
consequences of Japanese policy and action. Among
the
great powers, this was certainly true of the United States . It
may be said with reasonable confidence that the moving
cause of American policy was not so much the defense of
such material rights as the United States had previously
claimed in the Far East as it was the defense of the post-war
treaty system upon which, it was believed, depended the
pacification of the Western world and the consequent limita-
tion and reduction of armaments .
The great efforts put forth by the Western powers, in-
cluding the United States, were actuated by the belief that
the safety of the Western world was bound up with the vin-
dication of the League of Nations, of the Pact of Paris, and
of multilateral treaties like those which had been agreed to
at the Washington conference of 1922. A generation earlier,
perhaps even as late as a decade earlier, the Western powers
had taken it upon themselves to intervene in the Far East for
commercial, financial, and strategic reasons of their own .
But in 1931, when Japan began her advance in Manchuria,
the Western powers were too weak and too much distracted
t192J

--- PAGE BREAK ---r
commercial, financial, and strategic reasons of their own .
But in 1931, when Japan began her advance in Manchuria,
the Western powers were too weak and too much distracted
t192J

--- PAGE BREAK ---

by the consequences of the war and of the depression to con-
sider intervention in the old style. It might almost be said .
that if by some magic the East could have been isolated en-
tirely, they would have stood aside and let China, Japan, and
Russia, the powers directly concerned, settle the issues
- as
best they could .
They could' not stand aside, however . much they might
have wished to do so, because through the multilateral
treaties events in the Far East were interlocked with the
primary concerns of the Western powers . In the limitation of
armaments, precarious and incomplete as it was, the Japanese
navy was a prime element ; in the whole vast complicated
effort to pacify Europe, which was being carried on at Lau-
sanne and Geneva, the faith and credit of the collective ma-
chinery of peace were of controlling importance. The Far
Eastern powers were participants in this diplomatic system,
and if it was broken in the Far East, not much dependence
could be put upon it in the West .
Therefore, reluctantly, with much hesitation, with deep
misgiving, the Western nations, including the United States,
felt themselves compelled to go to the defense of the peace
machinery, and to use what influence they could collectively
muster to bring the Asiatic conflict to a solution within the
forms and according to the spirit of the post-war covenants
of peace.
x . The Events Preceding the Announcement of the
Stimson Doctrine
On December io, 1931, the Council of the League meeting
in Paris had with the approval of the United States adopted
a resolution' creating a Commission of Enquiry which came
to be known as the Lytton Commission .
In its resolution the Council recalled the undertaking given
1 Cf. Appeal by the Chinese Government. Report of the Commission of
Enquiry . 6.
League
of
Nations
Publication,
Official No. C.663 . M .32o,
1932. VII. Referred to hereafter as Lytton Report .
t'93 11 Cf. Appeal by the Chinese Government. Report of the Commission of
Enquiry . 6.
League
of
Nations
Publication,
Official No. C.663 . M .32o,
1932. VII. Referred to hereafter as Lytton Report .
t'93 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Chinese Government. Report of the Commission of
Enquiry . 6.
League
of
Nations
Publication,
Official No. C.663 . M .32o,
1932. VII. Referred to hereafter as Lytton Report .
t'93 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

by the Japanese government on September 3o as to the with-
drawal of Japanese troops within the railway zone . The
Japanese representative accepted with a reservation saying
that the resolution "was not intended to preclude
the
Japanese forces from taking such action as might be rendered
necessary to provide directly for the protection of the lives
and property of Japanese subjects against the activities of
bandits and lawless elements rampant in various
parts
of Manchuria ."' Some discussion took place in the Council
on this reservation, and several Council members admitted
that "circumstances might arise there causing danger to Japa-
nese lives and property, and in such an emergency it might be
inevitable that Japanese forces in this neighborhood should
take action."' But no formal attempt was made to define the
scope of the Japanese reservation .
While these diplomatic moves were being made in Paris,
the military situation in Manchuria was about as follows :4
Japanese forces were in control of the railroad from Dairen
in the South to Tsitsihar in the Northwest, to Kirin in the
Northeast, and to Antung in the Southeast ; there were two
Chinese forces in the region of Harbin and the Chinese East-
ern Railway, and another Chinese army, under Marshal
Chang Hsueh-liang, was strung along the Peiping-Mukden
Railway, from Tungliao in the North, through Chinchow, to
the Great Wall . After the action of the Council on December
xo, it was understood in Europe and the United States that
the situation would be maintained in its general character
while the Lytton Commission was pursuing its inquiry, and
that if Japan did not withdraw, she would at least not make
any important advance.
But in the days immediately following the acceptance of
the resolution, Japan began to regroup her forces and to
send reinforcements . Her objective was seen to be Chinchow
' Lytton Report, 8 .
'Ibid
.' 77 .
1 Ibid.; cf. Map No . 8 .
194 1he acceptance of
the resolution, Japan began to regroup her forces and to
send reinforcements . Her objective was seen to be Chinchow
' Lytton Report, 8 .
'Ibid
.' 77 .
1 Ibid.; cf. Map No . 8 .
194 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---resolution, Japan began to regroup her forces and to
send reinforcements . Her objective was seen to be Chinchow
' Lytton Report, 8 .
'Ibid
.' 77 .
1 Ibid.; cf. Map No . 8 .
194 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

on the Peiping-Mukden Railway . The
seizure
of
Chin-
chow would compel Marshal Chang Hsueh-liang's army to
retire behind the Great Wall, leaving all the railways of
Southern Manchuria in Japanese occupation. The attack on
Chinchow was delivered on December 23, and the place was
occupied on January 3 ." That achieved, the Japanese army
turned its attention to the North with a view to subduing the
Chinese armies around Harbin .
It was under the impress of these events that the American
government on January 7 addressed identic notes to China
and Japan announcing what has come to be called the Stim-
son doctrine. The occasion of this declaration of policy was
the fact that "with the recent military operations about Chin-
chow, the last remaining administrative authority of the
government of the Chinese Republic in South Manchuria, as
it existed prior to September 18, 1931, has been destroyed ."
2 . The Stimson Doctrine
The note then went on to say that :
p
The American government continues confident that the work of
the neutral commission recently authorized by the Council of the
League of Nations will facilitate an ultimate solution of the diffi-
culties now existing between China and Japan . But in view of the
resent situation and of its own rights and obligations therein,
the American government deems it to be its duty to notify both the
Imperial Japanese government and the government of the Chinese
Republic that it cannot admit the legality of any situation de facto
nor does it intend to recognize any treaty or agreement entered into
between those governments, or agents thereof, which may impair
the treaty rights of the United States or its citizens in China, includ-
ing those which relate to the sovereignty, the independence, . or the
territorial and administrative integrity of the Republic of China, or
to the international policy relative- to China, commonly known as
the open-door policy ; and that it does not intend to recognize any
situation, treaty, or agreement which may be brought about by means
contrary to the covenants and obligations of the Pact of Paris of
I Lytton Report, 77-78 .
{ 1951t does not intend to recognize any
situation, treaty, or agreement which may be brought about by means
contrary to the covenants and obligations of the Pact of Paris of
I Lytton Report, 77-78 .
{ 1951

--- PAGE BREAK ---recognize any
situation, treaty, or agreement which may be brought about by means
contrary to the covenants and obligations of the Pact of Paris of
I Lytton Report, 77-78 .
{ 1951

--- PAGE BREAK ---

August 27, 1928, to which Treaty both China and Japan, as well as
the United States, are parties .°
In a press interview on January 8, ,Secretary Stimson
explained the American position as follows :
In the first place, we have not desired to question Japan's legiti-
mate treaty rights in Manchuria. We do not intend to interfere with
them in the slightest degree.
In the second place, we have not desired to intrude ourselves into
any settlement which Japan may make of the present unhappy diffi-
culties except that :
i. Nothing in that settlement must impair our rights or our citi-
zens' rights in China, such as _ the condition of an open-door policy
and the Nine-Power Treaty which embodies the open-door policy ;
2 . That settlement should not be achieved by violation of the
methods agreed upon in the Kellogg Pact .
That is the substance of the position we have taken up .7
The note to China and Japan was communicated to the
powers signatory to the Nine-Power Treaty . On January i i
the British government issued a communique 8 saying that in
view of assurances that had been given by the Japanese Prime
Minister as to the Open Door in Manchuria, no formal note
would be addressed to the Japanese government, although
the Japanese Ambassador in London had been requested to
obtain confirmation of the Japanese position . Great Britain,
in short, declined at this time to associate itself with the
Stimson doctrine of non-recognition for any treaty or ar-
rangement brought about by means contrary to the covenants
and obligations of the Pact of Paris . The Dutch government
followed suit. So, too, did the French and Italian govern-
ments. Therefore, the United States alone stood formally
committed at this time to a refusal to recognize the conse-
quences of a violation of the Pact of Paris .
The Japanese government replied on January 16 .1 After
'Department of State Press Release, January 7, 1932 .
v New York Times, January 8, 1932 .
'Times (London), January 11, 1932 .
'Text in Department of State Press Release, January x6, 1932 .
( 1961fter
'Department of State Press Release, January 7, 1932 .
v New York Times, January 8, 1932 .
'Times (London), January 11, 1932 .
'Text in Department of State Press Release, January x6, 1932 .
( 1961

--- PAGE BREAK ---State Press Release, January 7, 1932 .
v New York Times, January 8, 1932 .
'Times (London), January 11, 1932 .
'Text in Department of State Press Release, January x6, 1932 .
( 1961

--- PAGE BREAK ---

affirming its adherence to the policy of the Open Door, after
disclaiming any "intention of adopting improper means," it
insisted that the Chinese authorities in Manchuria had either
fled or resigned and that "it was their own behavior which
was calculated to destroy the working of the apparatus of
government." Reasoning from this premise, the Japanese
government declared that the Chinese people were
not
"destitute of the power of self-determination," and intimated
what in fact followed : that Manchuria would by an act of
"self-determination" be detached from China and set up as
a quasi-independent state . This objective was not definitely
announced. But the purpose was revealed .
Thus, in January, 1932, the issue was joined : the United
States, on the one hand, stood committed not to recognize,
and Japan, on the other hand, was moving to establish, a
separate Manchurian state . On this issue the other Western
powers remained, for the time being, noncommittal . They
proceeded, however, in accordance with the resolution of
December zo, to the selection of the Commission of Inquiry.
The membership10 of this commission was finally approved
by the Council on January 14, and a week later the commis-
sion elected Lord Lytton chairman . The position in mid-
January of 1932 was, then, as follows : Japan had revealed
her intention of establishing an independent Manchurian
state. The United States had declared its intention of not
recognizing this state . The other signatories to the Nine-
Power Treaty had not determined their policy . An agency
of the League of Nations, including an American member
but not an American representative, was in existence author-
ized to proceed to the Far East and report "on any circum-
stance which, affecting international relations, threatens to
disturb peace between China and Japan, or the good under-
standing between them upon which peace depends."
10 The Earl of Lytton of Great Britain, Chairman ; Count Aldrovandi-Mare
scotti of Italy; General Henri Claudel of France ; Major . General Frank Ross
McCoy of the United States ; Dr. Heinrich Schnee of Germany.
t 1971ton of Great Britain, Chairman ; Count Aldrovandi-Mare
scotti of Italy; General Henri Claudel of France ; Major . General Frank Ross
McCoy of the United States ; Dr. Heinrich Schnee of Germany.
t 1971

--- PAGE BREAK ---, Chairman ; Count Aldrovandi-Mare
scotti of Italy; General Henri Claudel of France ; Major . General Frank Ross
McCoy of the United States ; Dr. Heinrich Schnee of Germany.
t 1971

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3. Far Eastern Affairs during the Winter of 1932
The diplomacy of the West was confronted almost imme-
.
diately with sensational developments in the Far East . Be-
tween the middle of January and the beginning of March,
two series of events took place . In the Northern theater, that
is to say, in Manchuria, Japan proceeded to consummate the
plan for a separate, Manchuria ; in the Southern, fighting
broke out between the Chinese
and Japanese around
Shanghai and in the Yangtse Valley as far as Nanking .
While Japan moved forward in Manchuria, the effort to stop
the fighting at Shanghai occupied the attention of the West-
ern powers . But in the end it also stiffened the Western re-
sistance to Japan and brought a much larger measure of
support for the Stimson doctrine .
The conflict at Shanghai was incidental to the much
greater conflict for the possession of Manchuria.
In the
perspective of American foreign policy it is important chiefly
because of its effect upon European opinion . As the League
of Nations became involved in an effort to stop the Japanese
advance around Shanghai, the smaller nations of the League
showed increasing determination to uphold the peace system
in the Far East . They began to exert pressure upon the great
powers of the League, upon Great Britain and France, to
align themselves with the United States .
The events we are about to describe fall within the first
three months of 1932 . The memorable dates are the fol-
lowing :
January 7. The Stimson doctrine announced .
January i6. Japan foreshadows "Manchukuo."
January 28 . Japanese attack on Chapei (Shanghai) .
February 18. "Declaration of Independence" by "Manchukuo ."
March 11. The Assembly of the League declares it is "incumbent"
upon members of the League not to "recognize any situation,
treaty, or arrangement brought about by means contrary" to the
covenants of the Pact of Paris .
March 12 . "Manchukuo" formally seeks recognition by other gov-
[198}e not to "recognize any situation,
treaty, or arrangement brought about by means contrary" to the
covenants of the Pact of Paris .
March 12 . "Manchukuo" formally seeks recognition by other gov-
[198}

--- PAGE BREAK ---any situation,
treaty, or arrangement brought about by means contrary" to the
covenants of the Pact of Paris .
March 12 . "Manchukuo" formally seeks recognition by other gov-
[198}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ernments, but the request is ignored by all the powers except
Japan.
It is necessary to follow the course of events at Shanghai,
in Manchuria, and at Geneva. They were, as we have already
indicated, interlocking, but for the convenience of this nar-
rative we shall outline first the story of Shanghai, then of
"Manchukuo," and finally of the Western diplomacy which
these events called forth .
4. The Affair at Shanghai"'
A. The Anti-Japanese Boycott
The outbreak of disturbances in China proper was a direct
result of the resentment engendered among the Chinese
during the preceding months by the events in Manchuria . An
anti-Japanese boycott had been inaugurated in June, 1931,
as a result of trouble between Chinese and Koreans, but the
movement became especially effective in September, after the
launching of the Japanese military campaign in Manchuria ."
It was not restricted to a ban on the purchase of Japanese
goods. Under the effective direction of the anti-Japanese As-
sociation for the Defense of the Country, it was extended so
as to prevent the transportation of Japanese goods, the use
of Japanese currency; the patronizing of Japanese banks and
shipping, the sale of food to Japanese, and work by Chinese
-for Japanese employers 18
The results of the boycott were soon evident in the con-
'The official story of this affair up to February 20 is to be found
in the
Report of the Consular Committee appointed by the League. After February
20 the story is told in part in Chapter V of the Lytton Report . We have sum-
marized it in this section for the convenience of the general reader .
"Boycotts against foreigners, and especially against the Japanese, have not
been uncommon in China . Such movements occurred in
x908, 1915, 1919,
1923, and 1925 . The boycott of 1925 was directed primarily against the
British .
1° Many details of discrimination to which their nationals
were subjected
were reported by the Japanese delegation to the League of Nations. See
League of Nations Publications, Official Nos. A . (Extr .) 6. 1932. VII ;
C.678. M.285 . 1931. VII ; C.695 . M .3oo . 193x . VII.
[ 1991ported by the Japanese delegation to the League of Nations. See
League of Nations Publications, Official Nos. A . (Extr .) 6. 1932. VII ;
C.678. M.285 . 1931. VII ; C.695 . M .3oo . 193x . VII.
[ 1991

--- PAGE BREAK ---se delegation to the League of Nations. See
League of Nations Publications, Official Nos. A . (Extr .) 6. 1932. VII ;
C.678. M.285 . 1931. VII ; C.695 . M .3oo . 193x . VII.
[ 1991

--- PAGE BREAK ---

traction of Japanese €oreign trade . Next to the United States,
China is the largest buyer of Japanese goods . While it is
difficult to separate the effects of the boycott from those of
the world, depression, it is significant that although the total
exports of Japan in 1931 were in value 22 per cent less than
in 1930, Japanese exports to China in 1931 declined 40 per
cent14 As the boycott became more and more effective, the
bad feeling between the Chinese and Japanese increased, es-
pecially in Shanghai, the chief industrial city of China and
the center of trade with Japan .
B. Outbreaks of Violence
The Japanese resentment over such a policy was greatly in-
tensified on January 9, 1932, when the Min Kuo Daily News
(Min Kuo Jih Pao) , the official organ of the Kuomintang,
or Chinese national party, published an account of an at-
tack on the Emperor of Japan by a Korean and expressed
regret that another carriage than the Emperor's had been
damaged. This caused bitter indignation in the Japanese
colony in Shanghai .15 The Japanese Consul General in
Shanghai, Mr. Kuramatsu Murai, protested to the local au-
thorities and demanded an apology. This finally was tendered
on January 21 .
Meantime, on January 18, a mob of Chinese in Chapei at-
tacked a party of five Japanese Buddhists, including two
priests, as they were passing a towel factory. Chapei is a
'* It is possible that Great Britain's abandonment of the gold stand-
ard in September, 1931, may have given British goods an advantage over
Japanese in the markets of China during the last quarter of
1931 .
Japan's abandonment of the gold standard in December,
1931, obviously
counteracted any advantage that British goods had previously enjoyed, and
it is highly significant that in January,
1932, Japanese exports to China were
68 per cent less in value than in the corresponding month of x931 . In South
China, where the boycott was most effective, trade with Japan had approached
the vanishing point, Japanese imports being 94 per cent less than in January,
1931. China, Monthly Trade Reports,
January, February, March, 1932 (com-
piled
by the
United
States
Department of
Commerce) ;
Commerce
Reports, December 7, 28, 1931 ; January 25, 1932 .
"League of Nations Publication, Official No. A. (Extr.) 4. 1932 . VII .
1200 }32 (com-
piled
by the
United
States
Department of
Commerce) ;
Commerce
Reports, December 7, 28, 1931 ; January 25, 1932 .
"League of Nations Publication, Official No. A. (Extr.) 4. 1932 . VII .
1200 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---e
United
States
Department of
Commerce) ;
Commerce
Reports, December 7, 28, 1931 ; January 25, 1932 .
"League of Nations Publication, Official No. A. (Extr.) 4. 1932 . VII .
1200 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---

suburb of Shanghai lying outside the International Settle-
ment. Three of the Japanese were seriously injured, and one
died later from his wounds . On the loth about fifty members
of the Japanese Youth Protection Society retaliated by setting
fire to the factory . On the same day a mass meeting of
Japanese residents in Shanghai adopted a resolution urging
the Japanese government to send additional forces to Shang-
hai to protect its nationals .
Three days later the Japanese Consul General called upon
the Mayor of Shanghai, General Wu Te-chen, and demanded
an, apology for the attack on the Japanese, punishment of
the assailants, suppression of anti-Japanese propaganda, and
especially the dissolution of the anti-Japanese societies . These
demands were supported by Admiral Koichi Shiozawa, in
command of the naval forces on the Yangtse River, who on
the same day issued a statement that if the Chinese authorities
refused to comply, he might find it necessary to take such
action as would be needed to defend the lives and property
of Japanese subjects.
C. The Japanese Ultimatum
On January 23 the Japanese Consul at Nanking presented
a demand to the Chinese Foreign Office for redress because
of the insulting remarks about the Emperor in the Min Kuo
Daily News . At the same time the Japanese government sent
a cruiser and several destroyers with marines to reinforce
those already at Shanghai, but the United States Consul Gen-
eral at Shanghai, Mr. Edwin S . Cunningham, notified
' the
Department of State at Washington that Admiral Shiozawa
had agreed not to resort to any operations within the Inter-
national Settlement without first consulting the Settlement
authorities .
As General Wu delayed his reply to the Japanese demands,
additional naval forces were dispatched to Shanghai, and on
January 27 Admiral Shiozawa delivered a 22-hour ultimatum
to the Mayor. On the following day General Wu notified
[ 202 Je Japanese demands,
additional naval forces were dispatched to Shanghai, and on
January 27 Admiral Shiozawa delivered a 22-hour ultimatum
to the Mayor. On the following day General Wu notified
[ 202 J

--- PAGE BREAK ---additional naval forces were dispatched to Shanghai, and on
January 27 Admiral Shiozawa delivered a 22-hour ultimatum
to the Mayor. On the following day General Wu notified
[ 202 J

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Consul General Murai that he had acceded to all the Japa-
nese demands, and Mr. Murai informed him and also the
foreign consuls at Shanghai that
the reply was satisfactory
and that no immediate further action would be taken . In
conformity with this agreement, the headquarters of the boy-
cott associations were closed, and their offices were sealed by
the Chinese police 19
But here, as previously in Manchuria," it soon became
evident that the Japanese military leaders paid little or no
attention to the commitments by the civil authorities . Some
hours before the Mayor gave his answer to the Japanese
demands, the Municipal Council of the International Settle-
ment decided to proclaim a state of emergency beginning at
4 P.M. This imposed upon the commanders of the ,various
forces in the Settlement, including the Japanese, the duty of
protecting the outside boundaries of . their respective sectors .
For a few hours, Admiral Shiozawa limited his forces to
the assigned sector, but at ii P.M . he announced that he
would dispatch troops into Chapei, giving as his reason that
Japanese nationals resided there in large numbers and needed
his protection. He also expressed the hope that the Chinese
would withdraw all troops stationed in that area and remove
all "hostile defenses ."
Chapei was occupied by Chinese troopss from the Nine-
teenth Route Army . Their commander did not comply with
the Japanese request to withdraw, and could hardly have
done so in the brief time allowed by Admiral Shiozawa . For
the Japanese began their advance on Chapei shortly before
midnight. Moreover, the Japanese leaders failed to keep their
promise to consult with the Settlement authorities before
engaging in this operation, and they also used the Settlement
as a base from which to launch their movement .
The events which led to the outbreak of hostilities are still
"First Report of the Shanghai Committee to the League -of Nations,
February 6, 1932 .
"See The United States in World Affairs,
1931, 246-272 .
{ 203 3hich led to the outbreak of hostilities are still
"First Report of the Shanghai Committee to the League -of Nations,
February 6, 1932 .
"See The United States in World Affairs,
1931, 246-272 .
{ 203 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---reak of hostilities are still
"First Report of the Shanghai Committee to the League -of Nations,
February 6, 1932 .
"See The United States in World Affairs,
1931, 246-272 .
{ 203 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in dispute. The Japanese asserted that their marines were
fired upon first by Chinese snipers in civilian clothing and
then by regulars. The Chinese maintained that the Japanese
began the fighting by directing machine-gun fire against the
Chinese troops, who, had refused to retire as the Japanese
advanced. In any event, both sides were soon engaged in
general fighting, which culminated early the following morn-
ing in the bombing of Chapei by Japanese airplanes . There
was much loss of life 'among the civilian population .
The advance of the Japanese was opposed by detachments
from the Nineteenth Route Army, which offered such strong
resistance that the invaders, after severe fighting in
the
streets, were forced to withdraw and dig themselves in be-
hind the Woosung Railway. Fighting, looting, and sniping
continued in the Chapei area for more than a month with
heavy loss of life and destruction of property . The Japanese,
apparently, had expected the same policy of non-resistance
here that they had encountered in Manchuria, and were
greatly surprised and disturbed at the effective fighting power
of the Chinese soldiery .
The Japanese naval forces on the Yangtse River launched
an attack also on the Woosung forts at the mouth of the
Whangpoo River defending the water approach to Shanghai.
Here again they met with stubborn resistance . If the navy
had hoped to duplicate the feat of the army in Manchuria by
making an easy conquest, it signally failed in its purpose . On
February 9 Admiral Shiozawa was relieved by Admiral
Nomura, and heavy reinforcements were sent from Japan .
On March x General Shirokawa arrived and took over the
supreme command . The army thus displaced the navy, which
had evidently lost face in Tokyo after its early reverses . Un-
der the pressure of the steadily increasing Japanese forces,
the Chinese finally retreated north of Shanghai for a sufficient
distance to enable the Japanese to assert that they had
achieved their purpose. By this time the Japanese forces had
1 2043ese forces,
the Chinese finally retreated north of Shanghai for a sufficient
distance to enable the Japanese to assert that they had
achieved their purpose. By this time the Japanese forces had
1 2043

--- PAGE BREAK ---

increased from the original 2,000 marines and sailors to an
army of more than 70,000 men.
It is estimated that during the month of conflict the
Japanese lost approximately 3,000 in killed and wounded and
the Chinese 20,000 .
D. The Attitude o f the Powers
At the outbreak of hostilities, there were in the Interna-
tional Settlement about
1,200 United States marines and
2,300 British troops. On January 28 the United States Navy
Department ordered four destroyers to proceed from Manila
to Shanghai. Three days later the cruiser Houston and more
destroyers, as well as the Thirty-first Infantry, consisting of
more than i,ooo men, and boo additional marines, were also
sent from Manila to the danger zone . It was announced in
Washington that Great Britain and France were cooperating
with the American government by sending additional ships
and troops .i 8
Even before the fighting began, the American government
made representations to Japan that there should be no mili-
tary operations in the International Settlement by Japanese
troops unless the municipal forces of the Settlement proved
clearly inadequate to protect life
and property. Great
Britain, after a consultation between Secretary Stimson and
Sir Ronald Lindsay, the British Ambassador, took similar
action. These two governments then informally notified the
French and Italian governments of their course, with the
implication that similar representations by them to Japan
might be desirable. France promptly complied with this sug-
gestion 19
Repeated efforts were made by the American and British
Consuls General during the fighting around Shanghai to
bring the hostilities to an end . On January 29 they succeeded
"New York Herald Tribune, January 30, 1932 .
"New York Times, January 30, 1932 .
[ 205 Js General during the fighting around Shanghai to
bring the hostilities to an end . On January 29 they succeeded
"New York Herald Tribune, January 30, 1932 .
"New York Times, January 30, 1932 .
[ 205 J

--- PAGE BREAK ---fighting around Shanghai to
bring the hostilities to an end . On January 29 they succeeded
"New York Herald Tribune, January 30, 1932 .
"New York Times, January 30, 1932 .
[ 205 J

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in arranging a ,truce, but this was soon broken . On the 31st
they obtained the consent of the Japanese Consul Gen-
eral, in the presence of Admiral Shiozawa, Mayor Wu, and
the local commander of the Chinese troops, to forward to
the Tokyo government a suggestion that the Japanese troops
should be withdrawn from the Chapei area . On February 2,
with the concurrence of the French and Italian representa-
tives, the American and British Consuls General submitted
five proposals to the disputants :
i. Cessation of all acts of violence on both sides forthwith on the
following terms :
2 . No further mobilization or preparation whatever for further
hostilities between the two nations.
3. Withdrawal of both Japanese and Chinese combatants from all
points of mutual contact in the Shanghai area .
4. Protection of the International Settlement by the establishment
of neutral zones to divide the combatants ; these zones to be policed
by neutrals ; the arrangements to be set up by the consular authorities .
5. Upon acceptance of these conditions, prompt advances to be
made in negotiations to settle all outstanding controversies between
the two nations in the spirit of the Pact of Paris and the resolution
of the League of Nations of December 9, without prior demand or
reservation and with the aid of neutral observers or participants
.20
On the following day, while these proposals were under
consideration, Japanese planes again dropped incendiary
bombs in the Chapei district. China .accepted the peace pro-
posals, but Japan definitely rejected clauses 2 and 5, and on
the same day (February 4) an army division of ri,ooo men
was ordered to relieve the marines in Shanghai . On Febru-
ary 5 the Japanese renewed their offensive on a large scale
.
E. The Case before the League
The attack on Shanghai was brought to the attention of
the League Council on January 29 by the Chinese delegate,
Dr. W. W . Yen, who invoked Articles X and XV of the
foLeague of Nations, Official Journal, March, 1932. 395 .
[2o6)ought to the attention of
the League Council on January 29 by the Chinese delegate,
Dr. W. W . Yen, who invoked Articles X and XV of the
foLeague of Nations, Official Journal, March, 1932. 395 .
[2o6)

--- PAGE BREAK ---on of
the League Council on January 29 by the Chinese delegate,
Dr. W. W . Yen, who invoked Articles X and XV of the
foLeague of Nations, Official Journal, March, 1932. 395 .
[2o6)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Covenant 2 1 In order to obtain accurate information from
the scene of hostilities, it was decided that members of the
Council, other than parties to the dispute, who had official
representatives at Shanghai should constitute a Committee
of Inquiry to report on the causes and development of the
trouble. The consular officers of six nations made up this
committee. The American government was informally re-
quested to designate its consul general at Shanghai as a
member. Secretary Stimson replied that the Department of
State could not appoint an official on a committee which
would be acting under one of the provisions of the League
Covenant, but that it would instruct a representative to co-
operate with the committee in studying and reporting the
facts. 8
Article X stipulates that members of the League shall un-
dertake to respect and preserve against external aggression
the territorial integrity and political independence of
all
members of the League, and the Council is enjoined to advise
the members of the course to be pursued in the event of any
such aggression . Article XV stipulates that if a dispute arises
between members of the League which is likely to produce a
rupture of peaceful relations and is not submitted to arbitra-
tion or adjudication, the Council shall undertake to bring
about a settlement. This article also provides that either party
to a dispute may, within fourteen days after its submission,
demand that it be referred to the Assembly .
On February 12 Dr. Yen took advantage of this provision
and asked that the dispute be referred to a . special session
of the Assembly, inasmuch as the Council had failed to effect
a settlement . His purpose seems to have been to spur the
Council to action before the Assembly met . The request was
referred to a committee of jurists, who reported a week later
s This was in addition to Article XI, which China had already invoked
in September, 1931, in connection with the Manchurian affair . League of
Nations Publication, Official No . A. (Extr.) 4. 1932. VII .
°Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, and Spain .
"Department of State Press Release, January 31, 1932 ..
t 207 1air . League of
Nations Publication, Official No . A. (Extr.) 4. 1932. VII .
°Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, and Spain .
"Department of State Press Release, January 31, 1932 ..
t 207 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---ons Publication, Official No . A. (Extr.) 4. 1932. VII .
°Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, and Spain .
"Department of State Press Release, January 31, 1932 ..
t 207 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that it had been submitted in the proper mannet and that the
Council should comply 24
Since most members of the League were already repre-
sented at Geneva by their delegates to the Disarmament
Conference, the convoking of the Assembly was not a difficult
matter, and a special session was called for March 3 . Pend-
ing this meeting, the Council resorted to further efforts to
terminate the dispute. On February i6, with the Chinese and
Japanese delegates not participating, it drafted a strong note
to the Tokyo government. In this note it reminded Japan of
her covenants under the Nine-Power Treaty and the Pact of
Paris. It cited the willingness of China to accept the Council's
proposals for a peaceful settlement and contrasted this with
the refusal of Japan to cooperate . It also appealed
"to
Japan's high sense of honor to recognize the obligations of
her special position and of the confidence which the nations
have placed in her as a partner in the organization and
maintenance of peace ." 2b
The slight impression which this note made on the Jap-
anese military authorities is indicated by their action two
days later . On the 28th they sent an ultimatum to General
Tsai Ting-kai of the Nineteenth Route Army and to Mayor
Wu of Shanghai, demanding
nding that the Chinese evacuate their
first-line trenches by 7 A.M. on February 20 and permanently
evacuate an area of 400 square kilometers around Shanghai
by 5 P.M. of the same day. On the 19th the League Council
appealed to Japan to extend, the time limit so as to facilitate
a settlement, and on the same day it convoked an extraor-
dinary session of the League Assembly . In defending the
course of Japan at this meeting, Mr . Sato, the Japanese
representative of the Council, departed from the customary
role of the Japanese spokesmen who had depicted China as
the "attacking party" and Japan as acting wholly on the de-
"Monthly Summary of the League of Nations, XII, 23 -27, 41-44, January,
February, 1932 .
' lbid., 44-43 .
[ 2081n who had depicted China as
the "attacking party" and Japan as acting wholly on the de-
"Monthly Summary of the League of Nations, XII, 23 -27, 41-44, January,
February, 1932 .
' lbid., 44-43 .
[ 2081

--- PAGE BREAK ---hina as
the "attacking party" and Japan as acting wholly on the de-
"Monthly Summary of the League of Nations, XII, 23 -27, 41-44, January,
February, 1932 .
' lbid., 44-43 .
[ 2081

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fensive. Mr. Sato boldly stated that his country was acting
"under the same imperious necessity" which in the past had
prompted other powers to resort to extreme measures in
China."
On the loth, when the Chinese did not comply with the
ultimatum, the Japanese renewed their attack on the entire
front from Shanghai to Woosung.
On February 23 the Japanese government replied to the
note of the League Council . The answer was evasive . It pro-
fessed inability to understand why the note had been sent to
Japan when China was the real aggressor . It denied a viola-
tion of Article X of the Covenant, since Japan entertained
no territorial or political ambitions in China . It affirmed its
determination to abide by the Nine-Power Treaty but de-
clared that it could not discuss the terms of this agreement
with "powers other than those who were parties to that
agreement and in the absence of some who were parties ." As
a final argument it raised the point that China did not consti-
tute an "organized people" and could not be treated as
such?'
The only practical suggestion in the Japanese reply was, a
proposal for the establishment of a safety zone around
Shanghai to protect the Japanese nationals against Chinese
attacks. On February 27 Mr . Sato elaborated this proposal at
a meeting of the Council and suggested that the neutral zone
be occupied by military forces of the great powers .
The League Council made no direct reply to the Japanese
note of February 23, but it endeavored to bring about a cessa-
tion of hostilities before the meeting of the Assembly. On
February 28, new negotiations for an armistice were opened
at Shanghai aboard the British flagship
Kent
between
Chinese and Japanese representatives in the presence of the
British naval commander. The Japanese insisted that the
Chinese forces should be withdrawn at least twenty kilo-
"Monthly Summary of the League of Nations, XII, 48 .
"Ibid., 45-46 .
1 209]ence of the
British naval commander. The Japanese insisted that the
Chinese forces should be withdrawn at least twenty kilo-
"Monthly Summary of the League of Nations, XII, 48 .
"Ibid., 45-46 .
1 209]

--- PAGE BREAK ---naval commander. The Japanese insisted that the
Chinese forces should be withdrawn at least twenty kilo-
"Monthly Summary of the League of Nations, XII, 48 .
"Ibid., 45-46 .
1 209]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

meters
(twelve and a half miles) from Shanghai. The
Chinese at first refused to consent unless the Japanese would
agree to evacuate their occupied area by a definite date .
The fighting continued until March 3, when large rein-
forcements enabled the Japanese to launch a combined sea
and land attack, with a flanking movement which forced the
Chinese to abandon their last defense line some ten miles
west of Shanghai and conduct a strategic retreat for twenty
miles. On March 3 the Japanese also captured the Woosung
forts. With the Chinese army now beyond the neutral zone
originally specified by Japan, the Japanese could claim to
have attained their objective, and hostilities were suspended .
On the same day the League Assembly met to consider the
situation, at Shanghai.
5 . The Independence of "Manchukuo"
Contemporaneously with the fighting around Shanghai,
the project of a separate Manchurian state was rapidly ad-
vanced. In the larger view this was much the more important
development, but at the time it was obscured by the smoke
of battle at Shanghai. Public opinion was diverted. But re-
sponsible officials and students of Far Eastern affairs con-
tinued to keep their attention fixed upon Manchuria, where
the. real test of the efficacy of the post-war peace machinery
was certain to be made .
The story of the formation of the new Manchurian state,
called "Manchukuo," is told in detail in the sixth chapter
of the Lytton Report. We shall treat it here only in outline.
The attack on Mukden took place on September 18, 1931,
and as a result the government of the city and of the province
of Liaoning was completely disorganized . By September 24
the Japanese military authorities had persuaded a former
Chinese official and eight other Chinese to form a "Commit-
tee for the Maintenance of Peace and Order ." The Japanese
press acclaimed this as the beginning of a separatist move-
ment, though it was denied almost immediately by the
12101ese to form a "Commit-
tee for the Maintenance of Peace and Order ." The Japanese
press acclaimed this as the beginning of a separatist move-
ment, though it was denied almost immediately by the
12101

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chinese official. Nevertheless, during October new organs
of government were established and on November 7 the
Liaoning provincial government formally proclaimed the
severance of its relations with the central government
of
China at Nanking. On November 2o the name of the prov-
ince was changed to Feng-tien zs Separate governments were
The shaded lines indicate approximate territorial limits of "Manchukuo
when recognized by Japan as an independent state . Jehol was also claimed by
"Manchukuo" but was not in its actual control . Hsingan is a newly estab-
lished Mongol province of -Manchukuo." (Map reproduced from
Foreign
Affairs, XI, 316, January, x933 .)
also established in the two other provinces of Kirin and Hei-
lungkiang, and a few indecisive steps were taken toward the
creation of a new government in the province of Jehol .
By the new year these separate provincial governments
had been sufficiently organized, and the next phase, that of
'° This had been its name before its union with Nationalist China in
1928 . Cf. Lytton Report, 9o.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ovincial governments
had been sufficiently organized, and the next phase, that of
'° This had been its name before its union with Nationalist China in
1928 . Cf. Lytton Report, 9o.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

combining them into a new state, was begun. The proclama-
tion calling for a great popular movement to create an inde-
pendent state of Manchuria and Mongolia was issued from
Mukden on January -7 under date of January i . The arrange-
ments were agreed on at a conference at Mukden on Febru-
ary 16-17, and on February 18 there followed a Declaration
of Independence . Meetings were organized in the region to
give popular support, and within ten days an All-Man-
churian Convention was held at Mukden to set up the new
state and to designate the former Emperor Hsuan Tung as
Provisional President under his personal and republican name
of Mr. Henry Pu-yi: On March 4, after some hesitation, Mr .
Pu-yi accepted, and on March 9 he was inaugurated as the
Regent of "Manchukuo" in the new capital of Changchun .
On March 12 notice of the establishment of "Manchukuo
was sent to the foreign powers and they were requested to
grant it recognition .
6 . The Course o f Western Diplomacy
While the new state was being established, there had also
been developments in the West which resulted in a distinct
hardening of the opposition to the recognition of "Man-
chukuo." There were -at least three diplomatic moves which
must be noted .
A . The American Fleet in the Pacific
The first of these was the concentration of virtually the
whole American navy in the Pacific during February,
1932 .
The program called, first, for a joint army and navy exercise
off Hawaii during February, with the naval battle force par-
ticipating. After this maneuver the battle force steamed east-
ward and attempted to "capture" a foothold on the Pacific
coast of the United States. It was opposed in this movement
by the naval scouting force, which left its station in the At-
lantic on February 23, passed through the Panama Canal,
and took its defensive position off the west coast on March
12121n this movement
by the naval scouting force, which left its station in the At-
lantic on February 23, passed through the Panama Canal,
and took its defensive position off the west coast on March
12121

--- PAGE BREAK ---he naval scouting force, which left its station in the At-
lantic on February 23, passed through the Panama Canal,
and took its defensive position off the west coast on March
12121

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8. There it awaited the battle force approaching with a con-
voy o€ troopships and sought to prevent the attainment of
its objective .
These maneuvers were followed by fleet concentration and
tactical exercises during April and May. The Navy Depart-
ment later decided to retain the scouting force in the Pacific
until after the 1933 concentration, scheduled to be held off
the west coast during February and March .
It was, of course, officially denied that these ship
movements had any diplomatic significance. The Navy De-
partment declared that its purpose was "to continue the
development of coordination and cooperation between the
army and the navy and to train the two services in the joint
operations involved in the attack of a defended area and in
the joint operations involved in the defense of such an area ."
Officially, the plans for the annual maneuvers in these
waters had been laid two years before . Nevertheless, by the
end of February the effective naval strength of the United
States was stationed in the Pacific and its presence was not
overlooked in the diplomatic negotiations of the period .
B. The Restatement o f the Stimson Doctrine
The second event was the publication of a more elaborate
statement of the American policy . It was contained in a let-
ter, dated February 24, addressed by Secretary Stimson to
the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Rela-
tions, Mr . Borah?s In this letter the Secretary of State not
only confirmed the adherence of the United States to the
Nine-Power Treaty and the Pact of Paris, but made this sig-
nificant, declaration :
It must be remembered also that this Treaty was one of several
treaties and agreements entered into at the Washington Conference
by the various powers concerned, all o f which were interrelated and
interdependent . {Italics are the authors' .]
.
. . The willingness
'Department of State Press Release, February 24, 1932 .
12131e
by the various powers concerned, all o f which were interrelated and
interdependent . {Italics are the authors' .]
.
. . The willingness
'Department of State Press Release, February 24, 1932 .
12131

--- PAGE BREAK ---ers concerned, all o f which were interrelated and
interdependent . {Italics are the authors' .]
.
. . The willingness
'Department of State Press Release, February 24, 1932 .
12131

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the American government to surrender its then commanding
lead in battleship construction and to leave its positions at Guam
and in the Philippines without further fortification was predicated
upon, among other things, the self-denying covenants contained
in the Nine-Power Treaty, which assured the nations of the world
not only of equal opportunity for their eastern trade but also against
the military aggrandizement of any other power at the expense of
China. One cannot discuss the possibility of modifying or abrogat-
ing those provisions of the Nine-Power Treaty without considering
at the same time the other promises upon which they were really
dependent.
This document, it was understood, was addressed not only
to Japan, but almost equally to Great Britain and also to all
the nations then represented at Geneva in the World Dis-
armament Conference . It was in effect notice that if the treaty
structure of the Far East was not maintained, the progress
made during the previous decade in the limitation of navies
might be undone .
This emphatic reiteration of American official opposition
to the overthrow of the treaty structure was accompanied by
the appearance of a considerable body of unofficial opinion
in favor of the adoption of a still more positive program with
regard to the enforcement of the treaties. The attack on
Shanghai served to renew the interest of Congress in pro-
posals for an arms embargo or an economic boycott against
Japan. As a result of the earlier developments in Manchuria,
there was pending before the Committee on Foreign Affairs
in the House a bill introduced by Representative Hull of
Illinois empowering the President to put an embargo on
goods to nations violating the Pact of Paris . In the Senate,
Mr. Dill of Washington introduced a resolution authorizing
the President to prohibit the shipment of arms to either of
the disputants in the Far East . But on intimations from the
Department of State that the discussion of these measures at
that time might complicate an already delicate situation, the
House Committee decided to take no action on bills of this
[ 2141ns from the
Department of State that the discussion of these measures at
that time might complicate an already delicate situation, the
House Committee decided to take no action on bills of this
[ 2141

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt of State that the discussion of these measures at
that time might complicate an already delicate situation, the
House Committee decided to take no action on bills of this
[ 2141

--- PAGE BREAK ---

nature until the Administration indicated its willingness to
have them considered.'*
This situation did not restrain the expression of private
opinions. A committee headed by President A . Lawrence
Lowell of Harvard University and Mr. Newton D. Baker,
who had been Secretary of War in the Wilson Cabinet, and
including over 150 members of college faculties, issued a
statement favoring in principle an economic boycott as a
means of promoting respect for international agreements and
of obtaining a settlement of the Sino-Japanese dispute . An-
other committee, appointed in September, 1931, by the Twen-
tieth Century Fund, with President Nicholas Murray Butler
of Columbia University as Chairman, and having among its
members Mr . Alanson B. Houghton, former Ambassador to
Germany and Great Britain, and Mr. Silas H. Strawn, Presi-
dent of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States, sub-
mitted a report in March recommending that the government
call a conference of the powers signatory to the Pact of Paris
for the purpose of adopting a supplementary protocol pro-
viding a method for determining measures of non-intercourse
as a means of preventing a threatened violation of the pact,
or, in the event of its violation, as a means of applying cor-
rective measures and restoring the status quo ante.81 There
were other equally sincere friends of peace, however, who
strenuously opposed economic sanctions as likely to aggra-
vate the dispute and lead to war .
Similar proposals were brought forward by groups of pri-
vate citizens in Great Britain. But in all the nations, the
United States included, official opinion was resolutely op=
posed to the employment of sanctions,
C. The Action o f the League Assembly
On March 3, in accordance with the request made on
February I2 by the Chinese delegate, Dr . Yen, the Assembly
10New York Herald Tribune,
January 30 . 1932 .
°Text and Final Report of the Committee on Economic Sanctions of the
Twentieth Century Fund .
12x5)ry I2 by the Chinese delegate, Dr . Yen, the Assembly
10New York Herald Tribune,
January 30 . 1932 .
°Text and Final Report of the Committee on Economic Sanctions of the
Twentieth Century Fund .
12x5)

--- PAGE BREAK ---delegate, Dr . Yen, the Assembly
10New York Herald Tribune,
January 30 . 1932 .
°Text and Final Report of the Committee on Economic Sanctions of the
Twentieth Century Fund .
12x5)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the League of Nations met in special session . At this time
the hostilities around Shanghai were nearly over, as the
Japanese had forced the retirement of the Chinese army be-
yond the zone which they sought to occupy, but an actual
armistice had not yet been achieved. In Manchuria military
activities for the occupation of the northern regions were
under way, and in the area already in control of the Japanese
army the organization of "Manchukuo" was being ener-
getically pushed. The United States had concentrated its
whole fleet in the Pacific and had served notice that it re-
garded the Far Eastern treaties, the Pact of Paris, and the
treaties limiting navies as interrelated . The attitude of the
British and French governments toward Manchukuo was still
undefined, but among the smaller nations of Europe senti-
ment, based primarily on a recognition of their interest in the
preservation of the post-war system of peace, had grown to
noteworthy proportions .
Fifty nations were represented in the
. Assembly. The
United States, though officially unrepresented, had a delega-
tion in Geneva at the time attending the Disarmament Con-
ference. Through members of this delegation, the United
States was in continual though unofficial contact with the
leading members of the Assembly .
The first business before the Assembly was to attempt to
terminate the fighting around Shanghai ." The Japanese were
prepared to negotiate on this point but insisted that the
Manchurian phase of the Sino-Japanese dispute be not con-
sidered. On March 4 the Assembly, including Japan, voted
a resolution calling upon Japan and China to take immediate
steps for the cessation of hostilities, and upon the other
powers "which have special interests in the Shanghai settle-
ments" to inform the Assembly "of the manner in which the
invitation set out in the previous paragraph is executed ."
Three days later, discussion was resumed in the Assembly
and it then transpired that the smaller nations were deter-
"League of Nations,
Official Journal,
Special Supplement No . iox .
1216jecuted ."
Three days later, discussion was resumed in the Assembly
and it then transpired that the smaller nations were deter-
"League of Nations,
Official Journal,
Special Supplement No . iox .
1216j

--- PAGE BREAK ---later, discussion was resumed in the Assembly
and it then transpired that the smaller nations were deter-
"League of Nations,
Official Journal,
Special Supplement No . iox .
1216j

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mined upon affirmative action to uphold the peace treaties .
In thi phase there took place an alignment between the
great
wers and the small powers of the League . The As-
sembly was acting, for the first time in its history, in accord-
ance v~ith the procedure of Article XV of the Covenant .
Unless l Japan made concessions which it was clearly impossi-
ble for her to make, the logic of this procedure led by suc-
cessive, and inevitable steps to a formal pronouncement that
Japan bad violated the Covenant and then to the necessity
of applying the economic sanctions under Article XVI as
Since the burden and risks of the economic sanctions would
fall on' the great powers, they were opposed to taking any of
the steps which led to Article XVI . The smaller nations, on
the other hand, faced with no risk of their own, but greatly
concerned about the integrity and efficacy of the League, were
insistent that the League must not flinch at the test to which
Japan's action had put it. Between March 4 and March i i
there vas intensive negotiation at Geneva in search of
a
formula which would at once satisfy the demands of the
small powers for a moral vindication of the peace machinery
without subjecting the great powers to the ordeal of applying
sanctions .
The problem was solved by the resolution adopted on
March l i i by the vote of forty-five delegations, the Japanese
and Chinese abstaining. This resolution had two important
elements . In the first part, it stated that the Assembly
Proclaims the binding nature of the principles and provisions
referred', to above {namely, that the Covenant was entirely applicable
to the present dispute and that the Pact of Paris was harmoniotis
"Article XVI stipulates that if any member of the League should resort
to war in disregard of the Covenant, it shall be deemed to . have committed
an act of war against all other members of the League, "which hereby
undertake immediately to subject it to the severance of all trade or financial
relations the prohibition of all intercourse between their nationals and the
nationals, of the Covenant-breaking State, and the prevention of all financial,
commercial, or personal intercourse between the nationals of the Covenant-
breaking) State and the nationals of any other State, whether a member of
the League or not."
( 2171ention of all financial,
commercial, or personal intercourse between the nationals of the Covenant-
breaking) State and the nationals of any other State, whether a member of
the League or not."
( 2171

--- PAGE BREAK ---ial,
commercial, or personal intercourse between the nationals of the Covenant-
breaking) State and the nationals of any other State, whether a member of
the League or not."
( 2171

--- PAGE BREAK ---

with the Covenant] and declares that it is incumbent upon the
members of the League of Nations not to recognize any situation,
treaty, or arrangement which may be brought about by means con-
trary to the Covenant of the League of Nations or to the Pact of
Paris.
The language of this part of the resolution is the same as
the language of the notes addressed by Secretary Stimson to
the Chinese and Japanese governments on January 7. It thus
constituted an adoption of the Stimson doctrine by the As-
sembly and was in effect an order to the Lytton Commission,
then in the Far East, to report on whether the situation,
treaties, and arrangements being made in Manchuria had in
fact been brought about by means contrary to the Covenant
and the Pact of Paris. It meant that if the commission re-
ported that a violation had occurred, the members of the
League were morally bound not to recognize "Manchukuo ."
But the Assembly did not stop there . It went on to estab-
lish a Committee of Nineteen consisting of the Presidentt of
the Assembly, the members of the Council not parties to the
dispute, and six members of the Assembly to be elected by
secret ballot, and instructed this committee to work under
the supervision of the Assembly on the whole Sino-Japanese
dispute. The significance of this action lay in the fact that
the Assembly had refused to leave the matter to the Council,
where the influence of the great powers was dominant . The
Committee of Nineteen was an organ of the small powers
created by them to defend the integrity of the Covenant
.
The United States immediately stated its approval of the
position taken by the Assembly, in a statement by Secretary
Stimson, on March 12, which read as follows :
The nations of the League at Geneva have united in a common
attitude and purpose toward the perilous disturbances in the Far
East. The action of the Assembly expresses the purpose for peace
which is found both in the Pact of Paris and the Covenant of the
League of Nations . In this expression all the nations of the world
can speak with the same voice. This action will go far toward
developing into terms of international law the principles of order
1 218 lue of Nations . In this expression all the nations of the world
can speak with the same voice. This action will go far toward
developing into terms of international law the principles of order
1 218 l

--- PAGE BREAK ---his expression all the nations of the world
can speak with the same voice. This action will go far toward
developing into terms of international law the principles of order
1 218 l

--- PAGE BREAK ---

end justice which underlie those treaties ; and the Government of
the Uai~ed States has been glad to cooperate earnestly in this effort .8 4
The, approval at Washington was reaffirmed on March 12
in a fo~nal communication by the United States Minister to
Switzerland, Mr . Hugh R . Wilson, acknowledging receipt
of the Assembly resolution from the Secretary-General.
7. The Evacuation o f Shanghai
While the Western nations were defining their position at
Geneva, negotiations for an armistice were proceeding at
Shanghai .
The', Chinese Vice-Foreign Minister, Mr . Quo Tai-chi, and
the Japanese Minister to China, Mr. Mamoru Shigemitsu,
-met with Sir Miles Lampson, the British Minister, Mr. Nel-
son Johnson, the American Minister, and the French and
Italian', Ministers. They reached an agreement
that the
Japanese troops should withdraw and that the Chinese troops
should' not reoccupy the evacuated territory. The Japanese
military leaders accepted this agreement on March, 14 . A
truce was to be signed on the 23rd . But at the last moment
the Chinese raised objections, mainly on the ground that the
establishment of a neutral zone around Shanghai would be
an infringement of Chinese political integrity. After much
discussion and recrimination on both sides, the whole prob-
lem was finally referred to the Committee of Nineteen at
Geneva. This committee maintained dose communication
with the representatives of the powers in Shanghai, and at
various meetings considered their reports and the proposed
terms of a resolution for evacuation .
Throughout the proceedings, the Japanese sought to pre-
vent resort by the Assembly to any action under Article XV .
For this might imply compulsion in the settlement of the
dispute,. The Chinese wished to have the committee fix some
date for the withdrawal of the Japanese forces from Chinese
territory, and they were supported by some of the smaller
"Department of State Press Release, March
12, 1932.
12191e the committee fix some
date for the withdrawal of the Japanese forces from Chinese
territory, and they were supported by some of the smaller
"Department of State Press Release, March
12, 1932.
12191

--- PAGE BREAK ---some
date for the withdrawal of the Japanese forces from Chinese
territory, and they were supported by some of the smaller
"Department of State Press Release, March
12, 1932.
12191

--- PAGE BREAK ---

nations. The larger powers, however, upon whom would fall
the duty of enforcing such a stipulation, wished to avoid any
measure that would involve a direct challenge to Japan . They
were probably mindful of the failure of the League Council
to make good its insistence some months previously that
Japan evacuate Manchuria by a fixed date .35 As a compro-
mise, it was proposed to give the armistice commission at
Shanghai authority to recommend a date for the evacuation .
This was accepted by the Chinese . But the Japanese rejected
it, insisting that they be allowed to withdraw at their own
discretion and that they would-not recognize the right of the
League to deal with the dispute under Article XV of the
Covenant .
The British Minister at Shanghai then offered a new com-
promise proposal to which the Japanese and Chinese finally
gave their consent. This provided for the eventual with-
drawal of the Japanese troops from Chinese territory into the
International Settlement . But it did not fix a 'date . Instead, it
authorized the armistice commission to call attention to any
neglect in carrying out the terms of the armistice. The diplo-
matic representatives at Shanghai thus reserved the right to
bring pressure to bear on Japan if the terms of the agreement
were not complied with within a reasonable time .
It now remained for the Committee of Nineteen at Geneva
to consider whether this agreement was in harmony with the
Assembly resolutions of March 4 and ii. On April 28 the
committee decided that the articles conformed to the spirit
of these resolutions, and drafted a new resolution approving
the agreement for resubmission to the Assembly. The agree-
ment stipulated that the Chinese troops should remain in
their present positions pending the restoration of normal
conditions, while the Japanese should withdraw within the
International Settlement in two stages . The first of these was
to begin before May 9 and to end by June 6, and a joint
"Cf. The United States in World Affairs,
5935, 2¢o-262 .
12201thdraw within the
International Settlement in two stages . The first of these was
to begin before May 9 and to end by June 6, and a joint
"Cf. The United States in World Affairs,
5935, 2¢o-262 .
12201

--- PAGE BREAK ---ternational Settlement in two stages . The first of these was
to begin before May 9 and to end by June 6, and a joint
"Cf. The United States in World Affairs,
5935, 2¢o-262 .
12201

--- PAGE BREAK ---

commission was to decide when the time was ripe for the
second stage of evacuation .
Another meeting of the Assembly was called for April 30
to consider this proposal, but onApril 29 the outlook for a
settlement was suddenly clouded- by the attempt of a Korean
to assassinate the leading Japanese officials at Shanghai .
While the Japanese there were celebrating the Emperor's
birthday, a bomb was thrown into the reviewing stand, and
General Shirokawa, the Japanese Commander-in-Chief, Mr .
Shigemitsu, the Japanese Minister to China, Mr. Murai, the
Japanese Consul General, General Uyeda,
and Admiral
Nomura were among those seriously injured . Inasmuch as the
perpetrator of this outrage was a Japanese subject and had
committed the crime "in an area wholly under Japanese con-
trol, the incident fortunately brought no new complications
with China .
The Assembly duly convened on the 3oth . Dr. Yen, the
Chinese delegate, who had been insistent upon the naming
of a definite date for the Japanese evacuation, called the
agreement unfair and unjust but admitted that it was at least
a practical solution . Mr. Nagaoka, the Japanese representa-
tive, announced that his government would
accept the
armistice terms and carry them out faithfully, but that Japan
would abstain from voting on the resolution inasmuch as she
did not recognize the right of the Assembly to act under
Article XV of the Covenant ."
With both disputants agreeing to the armistice, there re-
mained only the formulation of its details and the supervision
of their execution. This work was to be done by the "par-
ticipating friendly powers" at Shanghai rather
than at
Geneva. When the agreement was ready for signing, the
" The Japanese abstention may be regarded as a step toward
a peaceable
solution, inasmuch as such measures must pass the Assembly unanimously
.
A negative vote by Japan would have created further complications and
greatly confused the issue. Under the Assembly's rules, when a country
abstains from voting, it is regarded as constructively absent, and if there
are no dissenting votes, the action is deemed unanimous
.
221 1nfused the issue. Under the Assembly's rules, when a country
abstains from voting, it is regarded as constructively absent, and if there
are no dissenting votes, the action is deemed unanimous
.
221 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---der the Assembly's rules, when a country
abstains from voting, it is regarded as constructively absent, and if there
are no dissenting votes, the action is deemed unanimous
.
221 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

document had to be carried to the Fu-ming Hospital in
Shanghai for three of the signatures . Mr. Shigemitsu and
General Uyeda were there as victims of the Korean bomb,
and Mr. Quo Tai-chi, the Chinese Vice-Foreign Minister,
was having his injuries treated after having been assaulted
by Chinese students who were displeased with the compro-
mise.*? While the armistice was being signed, armed guards
stood watch over Mr. Quo's rooms to prevent another at-
tack. The scenes at the hospital bore eloquent testimony to
the tense feeling in the Far East .
The execution of the armistice was placed under the su-
pervision of a joint commission of twelve, consisting of a,
civil and a military representative of China, Japan, the United
States, Great Britain, France, and Italy. The United States
Consul General at Shanghai, Mr. Edwin S. Cunningham,
was designated as chairman of the commission . On May i r
the Japanese government announced its decision to withdraw
all its troops within a month . On May 3 r, before the expira-
tion of this term, the last of the expeditionary force sailed
for Japan, leaving behind only a small detachment of ma-
rines, similar in character to those of other foreign powers
within the Settlement .
8. The Interval before the Lytton Report
With the evacuation of the Shanghai region, there was a
pause in the action of Western diplomacy while the Lyt-
ton Commissioners, pursued their inquiries . They had ar-
rived in Tokyo on February 29, 1932-, in Shanghai on March
14, in Nanking and other places in the Yangtse Valley on
April i, in Peiping on April 9, and in Manchuria on April
20 .88 They remained in Manchuria for five weeks. They re-
turned to Peiping on June 5, to Tokyo on July 4, and then
It was the provision of the armistice restricting the movement of the
Chinese troops in Chinese territory that was the main source of the resent-
ment aroused among the Chinese nationalists. They regarded this as an
infringement of their national sovereignty .
A preliminary report was dispatched to Geneva on April 29 .
222 1urce of the resent-
ment aroused among the Chinese nationalists. They regarded this as an
infringement of their national sovereignty .
A preliminary report was dispatched to Geneva on April 29 .
222 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---ment aroused among the Chinese nationalists. They regarded this as an
infringement of their national sovereignty .
A preliminary report was dispatched to Geneva on April 29 .
222 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

again to Peiping . There they drafted their final report, com-
pleting it on September 4. It was dispatched to Geneva and
there published on October 2 .
During this period fighting continued in Manchuria be-
tween the Japanese army and various irregular
Chinese
forces. In China proper there was disunion, and civil war
continued. Only two events call for special attention in this
history. The first was a speech by Secretary Stimson on
August 8, and 'the second was the Japanese recognition of
"Manchukuo" on September 15 .
In the relative quiet prevailing in the diplomacy of the
Far East, Secretary Stimson took occasion to address the
Council on Foreign Relations in New York ."' His speech was
timed so as to precede the formal opening of the Presidential
campaign. It was intended as a statement of American policy
which would not only reaffirm the American stand in regard
to Manchuria but would draw from it a wider conclusion
applicable to the problem of security then before the Dis-
armament Conference.
The essential point of the speech was the declaration that
the Pact of Paris had altered international law, had changed
the whole doctrine of neutrality, since war had "become il-
legal throughout practically the entire world,"
and that
consultation was inherent in the pact. In so far as the action
of one Administration has power to bind its successors by
precedents and declarations, the Hoover Administration,
speaking through Mr. Stimson, was attempting to show how
the United States, without adhering to the Covenant of the
League, could integrate its own policy with the collective
peace machinery of the rest of the world .
In this sense it was received and widely approved in
Europe. But in Tokyo the speech was greatly resented because
in making his argument Mr . Stimson assumed by implication
that Japan was an aggressor nation which had violated the
"The authoritative text of this speech has been printed as a Special Sup-
plement to VoL Xl, No. x of Foreign Affairs (October, r932) .
[ 223 3hat Japan was an aggressor nation which had violated the
"The authoritative text of this speech has been printed as a Special Sup-
plement to VoL Xl, No. x of Foreign Affairs (October, r932) .
[ 223 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---ressor nation which had violated the
"The authoritative text of this speech has been printed as a Special Sup-
plement to VoL Xl, No. x of Foreign Affairs (October, r932) .
[ 223 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

peace treaties. There was, consequently, much perturbation
in Japan. Some two weeks later the Consulate General of
Japan in New York issued the full English text of an ad-
dress to the Imperial Diet in Tokyo delivered by Count
Yasuya Uchida, the Japanese Foreign Minister. This speech
contained an unequivocal justification of the whole course of
Japanese policy in Manchuria, a denial that the Nine-Power
Treaty had been violated, and an argument for Japanese
recognition of "Manchukuo ."
On September 15, while the Lytton Report was in transit
from Peiping to Geneva, the Japanese government recog-
nized "Manchukuo" and concluded an alliance with
it.'
The purpose of this action was understood to be a desire to
confront the League of Nations with an accomplished fact
when it undertook to consider the Lytton Report. The United
States took no action . The Chinese government protested to
the League. At the session of September 24, the President
of the Council, Mr . Eamon de Valera, spoke as follows :
Before even the publication of that [Lytton] report, Japan has,
not only by recognizing, but also by signing a treaty with what is
known as the Manchukuo government, taken steps which cannot
but be regarded as calculated to prejudice the settlement of the dis-
pute. For almost a year the Council in its collective capacity,
and
the individual governments which compose it, have scrupulously
refrained from uttering any word of judgment on the merits of this
grave dispute, on the ground that a commission had been set up to
investigate the dispute in all its bearings, and that until the com-
mission has reported and its report has been considered by the
organs of the League, the whole question is still to be regarded
as sub judice .41
Having uttered this rebuke, the Council then agreed to the
request of the Japanese government that discussion of the
Lytton Report be postponed until the week of November
I4-21 .
f0 See Appendix VII (b) .
n League of Nations Official Journal. Minutes of, the Sixty-eighth Session
of the Council, 1931 .
1 224 }of the
Lytton Report be postponed until the week of November
I4-21 .
f0 See Appendix VII (b) .
n League of Nations Official Journal. Minutes of, the Sixty-eighth Session
of the Council, 1931 .
1 224 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---be postponed until the week of November
I4-21 .
f0 See Appendix VII (b) .
n League of Nations Official Journal. Minutes of, the Sixty-eighth Session
of the Council, 1931 .
1 224 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---

On October 2 the text of the Lytton Report was made
public.
9. The Lytton Report
The Lytton Report was recognized at once throughout the
Western World as an expert, a conscientious, and a thorough
examination of the whole problem . The full text is available,
admirable summaries of it have been published by the League
of Nations, by the Foreign Policy Association and by the
American Council of the Institute of Pacific Relations, and
it would therefore be a work of supererogation for us to
make another digest of it here . For the convenience of the
reader, we are reprinting as an appendix the digest of the
conclusions of the Lytton Commission made by Dr . Raymond
Leslie Buell for the Foreign Policy Association . 2
We note here simply that the commission found that in
the original attack upon Mukden on September i8, 1931,
"the military operations of the Japanese troops during this
night
.
.
. cannot be regarded as measures of legitimate self-
defense
; that as to "Manchukuo" it found that "the present
regime cannot be considered to have been called into exist-
ence by a genuine and spontaneous independence move-
ment," on the part of the population, and that the Japanese
were in control of the "Manchukuo" government . It found
further that "the maintenance and recognition of the present
regime in Manchuria would be
.
.
. unsatisfactory" and
would not be "compatible with the fundamental principle
of existing international obligations, nor with the good un-
derstanding between the two countries upon which peace in
the Far East depends." On the other hand, it found also that
"a mere restoration of the status quo ante would be no solu-
tion."
It proposed, therefore, the creation of an autonomous
Manchuria within the Chinese Republic, a recognition of
the rights and interests of Japan in Manchuria in a new
"Cf. Appendix VII (a) .
1 225 )."
It proposed, therefore, the creation of an autonomous
Manchuria within the Chinese Republic, a recognition of
the rights and interests of Japan in Manchuria in a new
"Cf. Appendix VII (a) .
1 225 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

treaty restating those rights, the negotiation of a new Sino-
Japanese commercial treaty, and finally "temporary interna-
tional cooperation in the internal reconstruction of China, as
suggested by the late Dr. Sun Yat-Sen ."
The commission concluded with "considerations and sug-
gestions to the Council" for carrying out its conclusions .
The session of the Council to consider the report met on
November
211 . As no conclusions were reached within the
period treated in this volume, we conclude our account at
this point. At the end of November the League had before it
the report of the commission it had created in December of
the previous year, and it was faced with the necessity of
acting upon the findings of that commission .
In the Western world the outcome of that action was held
to be a crucial test of the post-war treaties for the mainte-
nance of peace. More than twelve months had passed since
the treaties were put to this test . In that period the occupa-
tion of Manchuria had been extended, there had been open
warfare around Shanghai, and the Japanese plan for a Man-
churia separated from China and dependent upon Japan had
been consummated. It remained to be seen whether the situa-
tion in the Far East could be made to conform to the spirit,
if not to the letter, of the general treaties of peace .
1 226 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---consummated. It remained to be seen whether the situa-
tion in the Far East could be made to conform to the spirit,
if not to the letter, of the general treaties of peace .
1 226 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER TWELVE
REDUCTION AND LIMITATION OF ARMAMENTS
ALTHOUGH no agreements were arrived at which actually
affected armaments during the year, there were interesting
and important developments resulting from the active nego-
tiations. The United States was an active participant in the
Conference for the Reduction and Limitation of Armaments
held at Geneva, and in the course of the year significant
changes occurred in its policy . It is not our purpose to at-
tempt to write a complete history of the intricate proposals
and counter-proposals offered by all the nations represented
at the conference . We shall confine ourselves to a short ac-
count of the evolution of American policy in response to the
emergent realities of the world situation.
The conduct of the American government can best be un-
derstood by recognizing a certain duality in the original
premises of its policy during the whole post-war period.
Successive Administrations had maintained the thesis that
the reduction of armaments was the surest guaranty of
political security, and in their efforts to persuade the Euro-
pean powers to limit and reduce they consistently preached
this doctrine. On the other hand, these same Administrations
had acted upon the opposite thesis in those specific cases,
most particularly with regard to the balance of naval power
in the Pacific, where a vital American interest was at stake .
There, the United States had insisted upon the organization
of political security as the prelude to the limitation and re-
duction of armaments, and had signed the Washington
Naval Treaty of 1922 only after the Anglo-Japanese Alliance
1 2271

--- PAGE BREAK ---f political security as the prelude to the limitation and re-
duction of armaments, and had signed the Washington
Naval Treaty of 1922 only after the Anglo-Japanese Alliance
1 2271

--- PAGE BREAK ---

had been abrogated, after the Nine-Power Treaty, promising
the integrity of China and the Open Door, had been agreed
to, and after a consultative pact for the region of the Pacific
had been established . But with respect to Europe, lacking a
vital interest either in the balance of naval power in the
Mediterranean and in the English Channel or in the balance
of land armaments on the new frontiers of the Continent,
the United States government continued well into 1932 offi-
cially to disclaim a belief that the settlement of political
questions necessarily preceded the reduction of armaments .
This duality in policy was sharply illustrated during the
year. The evolution of American policy turned upon the
effort of the Administration to resolve its inherent contradic-
tions. For under the educational pressure of the negotiations
at Geneva, it gradually became plainer and plainer to the
President and to Secretary Stimson that no actual, substan-
tial reduction of armaments was possible except as the con-
sequence of political agreements . In reaching this conclusion,
the Administration believed itself to be in advance of the
opinion of the American people as expressed by Congress,
and for various reasons the President did not consider it
wise or prudent to call the attention of the voters to the fact
that American policy was changing . At moments, which we
shall note later, declarations were made by official spokesmen
which signified the gradual change of policy, but these decla-
rations were made in language which would arouse little
public interest in the United States, though they would per-
mit American representatives abroad to use them in private
diplomatic negotiation .
Thus the American policy was really conducted on two
planes. On the upper and more conspicuous plane, the Ad-
ministration on three successive occasions, on February 9,
April ii, and June 22, presented proposals, which were in-
creasingly far-reaching, for the limitation and reduction of
armaments. On the less conspicuous but more important
plane, the Administration made successive advances, increas-
e 228 ), which were in-
creasingly far-reaching, for the limitation and reduction of
armaments. On the less conspicuous but more important
plane, the Administration made successive advances, increas-
e 228 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---asingly far-reaching, for the limitation and reduction of
armaments. On the less conspicuous but more important
plane, the Administration made successive advances, increas-
e 228 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ingly explicit and specific, toward participating in the or-
ganization of political security . The American procedure at
this level consisted in using the implications of the Stimson
doctrine in
. the Far East to illustrate, emphasize, and define
a policy of collaboration in the maintenance of peace . This
general policy was formally endorsed in the platforms of
both political parties ; it was reiterated and elaborated in the
President's speech of acceptance and in Secretary Stimson's
address of August 8 before the Council on Foreign Rela-
tions; it was generalized and emphasized further by the ap-
plication of the Stimson doctrine to the dispute between
Paraguay and Bolivia over the Chaco .
In the light of these considerations, the history of the Dis-
armament Conference may now be considered in outline. We
shall find that the first phase of the conference-from its as-
sembling on February 2 to its adjournment on July 23-was
devoted to a demonstration of how impossible it was to re-
duce armaments by the mere discussion of armaments . We
shall find that this demonstration brought about a second
phase, largely private, for the time being inconclusive, but
nevertheless informing to the negotiators, which began when
Secretary Stimson visited Geneva in the spring, and lasted
throughout the autumn of x932 . In this period the United
States government actively examined those questions which
prevented agreement, and attempted within prudent limits to
advance solutions. No agreements were attained within the
time covered by this book, but in official circles at least it
was felt that great progress had been made in exploring the
problem of disarmament .
i. The American Proposals
The Conference for the Reduction and Limitation of
Armaments convened in Geneva on February
2, 1932. The
United States was represented by a delegation consisting of
Mr. Hugh Gibson, Mr . Norman H . Davis, Senator Claude
229 Jduction and Limitation of
Armaments convened in Geneva on February
2, 1932. The
United States was represented by a delegation consisting of
Mr. Hugh Gibson, Mr . Norman H . Davis, Senator Claude
229 J

--- PAGE BREAK ---on of
Armaments convened in Geneva on February
2, 1932. The
United States was represented by a delegation consisting of
Mr. Hugh Gibson, Mr . Norman H . Davis, Senator Claude
229 J

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. Swanson, and Dr. Mary E. Woolley, with Mr. Hugh R.
Wilson as alternate.
The first few weeks were devoted to the presentation of
plans by the various delegations . Two of these plans may be
noted here. M. Tardieu, speaking for France, offered the
conference a project for the organization of security by means
of an international army.' His purpose, it may be presumed,
was to emphasize before world opinion the conviction held
by France and by her allies, the Succession States of Central
and Eastern Europe, that disarmament was dependent upon
the establishment of collective resistance to warlike aggres-
sion. Mr. Gibson, speaking for the United States, presented
a nine-point program for the limitation of certain types of
weapons and the abolition of others 2 In the American pro-
posal no concession whatever was made to the theory that
armaments and politics are related .
Following the presentation of the general plans, it be-
came necessary to organize the unwieldy conference
for
closer examination and discussion of the many questions that
were before it. The divergence of view represented by the
French and American proposals was reflected in the maneu-
vering incident to organization . A steering committee called
the Bureau of the conference, a General Commission com-
prising the first delegates of all states represented, and a
number of technical committees to deal with navies, armies,
air forces, and budgetary matters, were agreed upon . Issues
were raised in regard to the choice of presiding officers for
these bodies.
The President of the conference as a whole had been
chosen the year before . At that time the states of the world
had already divided into two large groups representing dif-
ferent theories of disarmament : the Latin group, led by
France, which insisted that security should precede disarma-
ment, and the other states, led by the English-speaking na-
League of Nations Publication, Official No . Conf. D. 56.
• Cf. Appendix VIII
(a) .
230 1ich insisted that security should precede disarma-
ment, and the other states, led by the English-speaking na-
League of Nations Publication, Official No . Conf. D. 56.
• Cf. Appendix VIII
(a) .
230 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---curity should precede disarma-
ment, and the other states, led by the English-speaking na-
League of Nations Publication, Official No . Conf. D. 56.
• Cf. Appendix VIII
(a) .
230 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tions, which maintained that disarmament was not only a
form of security in itself, but should precede any further
attempt to organize security . A President had to be chosen
who wouldd satisfy both groups . Mr. Benes, Foreign Minister
of Czechoslovakia, had often been mentioned. But he had
been opposed because his government was considered to be
too definitely committed to the "security" school . Finally,
after much argument, Mr. Arthur Henderson, then Foreign
Secretary of Great Britain, had been chosen by the Council.
When the conference met, the Cabinet in which Mr. Hen-
derson was Foreign Secretary had fallen, but he continued as
President of the conference . Mr. Politis of Greece and Mr .
Benes" of Czechoslovakia had been elected vice-president and
rapporteur respectively .
These two statesmen belonged to the "security" school .
The French bloc attempted to make one of them Chairman
of the Bureau and the General Commission, leaving Mr .
Henderson in charge principally of the plenary sessions of
the conference. At this point the American delegation took
the initiative and supported a motion that Mr . Henderson
preside over, both the General Commission and the Bureau .
This move was made in such a manner that it carried the
majority of delegates, and Mr. Henderson was accordingly
placed in charge of these important committees .
A move was then made by the "security
states to consti-
tute a Political Commission of the conference which, like
the General Commission, would represent every state in at-
tendance. The Political Commission was supposedly created
to deal with the question of security, and an attempt was
made to obtain a Chairman for the commission who might
be favorable to this idea . But by assuming the initiative
again, Mr. Gibson, in agreeing to the establishment of the
Political Commission, moved that Mr . Henderson, as Chair-
man of the conference, should preside over this body also .
The motion was carried. Thus the working organs of the
{ 23 1 1ablishment of the
Political Commission, moved that Mr . Henderson, as Chair-
man of the conference, should preside over this body also .
The motion was carried. Thus the working organs of the
{ 23 1 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---litical Commission, moved that Mr . Henderson, as Chair-
man of the conference, should preside over this body also .
The motion was carried. Thus the working organs of the
{ 23 1 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

conference were presumably under the control of nations
desiring disarmament without political compensations .
While the American delegation was defending its official
thesis at Geneva, the Department of State made a move in
the Far Eastern affair which showed that where vital Ameri-
can interests were affected, 'the United States did in fact
recognize the interdependence of armaments and political
policy. On February 24, as we have already noted in the pre-
ceding chapter, Secretary Stimson addressed a letter to Sena-
tor Borah pointing out that the Washington Naval Treaty
and the Nine-Power Treaty were "interrelated and interde-
pendent," for, said Mr. Stimson, "the willingness of the
American government to surrender its then commanding lead
in battleship construction and to leave its positions at Guam
and in the Philippines without further fortification
was
predicated upon, among other things, the self-denying cove-
nants contained in the Nine-Power Treaty .
.
. ." The Ad-
ministration was not, however, prepared then to recognize
that the armaments of France and her allies were predicated
upon the desire to maintain the covenants which established
the existing frontiers of Europe .
Nevertheless, after some weeks of debate, the United States
delegation, on March 16, did take the position that the con-
ference, as Mr . Gibson put it, ought to come to "grips with
the great political questions, great questions of principle, and
to dispose of them ." Accordingly, he proposed that after the
Easter recess either the General Commission or the Political
Commission will "sit continuously until such time as suffi-
cient progress has been made in respect of decisions on ques-
tions of principle to allow the special commissions fruitfully
to pursue their labors ."' This recommendation appeared to
express the views of all the delegations and was adopted
unanimously.
When the conference resumed on April ii, it began with
journal of the Conference for the Reduction and Limitation of Arma-
ments, 302 . Referred to hereafter as journal.
232d was adopted
unanimously.
When the conference resumed on April ii, it began with
journal of the Conference for the Reduction and Limitation of Arma-
ments, 302 . Referred to hereafter as journal.
232

--- PAGE BREAK ---ously.
When the conference resumed on April ii, it began with
journal of the Conference for the Reduction and Limitation of Arma-
ments, 302 . Referred to hereafter as journal.
232

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a general discussion of the principles raised by Article I of
the draft convention,4 it having been previously decided that
the conference would deal with proposals which fell within
the , framework of the draft convention . Article I of this in-
strument stated that "the High Contracting Parties agree to
limit and, so far as possible, to reduce their respective arma-
ments as provided in the present convention ." The purpose
was to discuss the major questions of principle in connection
with this article .
In the course of this discussion, Mr . Gibson on April i i
laid before the conference a proposal to abolish peculiarly
aggressive weapons, including tanks, heavy mobile guns,
and gases .' In his speech on February 9, he had advocated
the restriction of these weapons, but now he proposed to
abolish them .
The American delegation thus attempted to deal at one
stroke with security and disarmament . Mr. Gibson argued
that the demand for security arose from fear on the part of a
government and its people as to their ability successfully to
withstand invasion. Were not those nations which maintained
the largest armaments the very nations which were most ap-
prehensive about their security? The solution, he thought,
was to remove the fear of aggression . Technical progress in
armaments had made offensive power superior to defensive .
The invention of tanks, of heavy mobile artillery, and of
poison gases had been the chief cause. There could be no
hope of achievement by the Disarmament Conference until
these peculiarly aggressive weapons were abolished and a
feeling of security was restored by making the defense as
superior to the offense as it had formerly been .
This American proposal for "qualitative disarmament" was
an attempt to meet the demand for security without making
' The
draft convention had been elaborated by a Preparatory Commis-
sion in sessions extending from May
13, 1926, to December 9, 193o . The
government of the United States was officially represented on this com-
mission . Cf. The United States in World Affairs,
193r,
Chapter XIII.
'Cf
. Appendix VIII
(b) .
[ 233to December 9, 193o . The
government of the United States was officially represented on this com-
mission . Cf. The United States in World Affairs,
193r,
Chapter XIII.
'Cf
. Appendix VIII
(b) .
[ 233

--- PAGE BREAK ---. The
government of the United States was officially represented on this com-
mission . Cf. The United States in World Affairs,
193r,
Chapter XIII.
'Cf
. Appendix VIII
(b) .
[ 233

--- PAGE BREAK ---

political commitments. Its purpose was to satisfy the sup-
posed psychological premise of the French thesis while ad-
hering rigidly to the American thesis . It occupied the atten-
tion of the conference, at least of the experts and subordinate
officials, for some weeks. In the course of the debate on the
principle, the German delegation took the opportunity of
reminding the conference that the abolition of aggressive
arms had been decided upon in the Treaty of Versailles and
had been applied to Germany with considerable success. The
conference needed only to look at the weapons which had
been denied to Germany in order to know which weapons
were admitted to be aggressive . Naturally, the German sug-
gestion was altogether too naive for the other powers, and it
was treated as a gesture. However, after much discussion a
"formula" was proposed by Sir John Simon on April 22 . It
said that :
Without prejudice to other proposals which fall to be discussed
under later heads of, the agenda, the Conference declares its approval
of the principle of qualitative disarmament-that is, the selection of
certain classes or descriptions of weapons with a view to prohibiting
by international convention their possession or use by any state.6
Having decided the question in principle, it was then neces-
sary to apply the principle . For this purpose the General
Commission of the conference decided that the whole range
of land, sea, and air armaments "should be examined by the
competent special commissions with a view to selecting those
weapons whose character is the most specifically offensive,
or those most efficacious against national defense, or those
most threatening to civilians ."7 In this way it was attempted
to give practical effect to the original American proposal
that the means of attack should be weakened and the means
of defense strengthened .
Some weeks of effort were devoted by the technical com-
° Journal, 429.
"Ibid., 432.
{ 2341iginal American proposal
that the means of attack should be weakened and the means
of defense strengthened .
Some weeks of effort were devoted by the technical com-
° Journal, 429.
"Ibid., 432.
{ 2341

--- PAGE BREAK ---osal
that the means of attack should be weakened and the means
of defense strengthened .
Some weeks of effort were devoted by the technical com-
° Journal, 429.
"Ibid., 432.
{ 2341

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mittees in trying to decide which naval, land, and air weapons
could be classified as aggressive or particularly efficacious in
overcoming the defense. They were unable to decide . Every
conceivable type of weapon was eulogized by some delegation
as being in all respects defensive. Thus, for example, Great
Britain and the United States considered the battleship and
the cruiser more distinctively defensive than aggressive, while
the submarine was in their opinion one of the "cruel assassins
of the sea." France and some of the smaller powers, on the
contrary, considered the large battleship aggressive, while
the submarine, which had been denied to Germany because
it was aggressive, they held to be a purely defensive weapon
which could not be dispensed with in any program of na-
tional defense. In the Land Commission, weeks were spent in
determining whether heavy artillery was offensive when the
caliber was 107, or 140, or r9o, or 210, or 24o millimeters.
In the Air Commission, the attempt was made to distinguish
between aggressive and defensive air weapons according to
horsepower, unladen weight, wing spread, and range of
mobility .
The British appeared as advocates of the smaller tanks, of
which they had a large number . The United States experts
undertook to argue in the hearing of the Japanese that air-
plane carriers were not offensive . It does no injustice to this
phase of the conference to say that each power sought to
describe its own weapons as defensive and to stigmatize as
offensive the weapons it feared .
A complete deadlock on this line ensued . The General
Commission received reports from its various technical com-
mittees, which left the conference and public opinion in a
state of confusion ." There was a reason for this inaction .
After the defeat of the Tardieu Government in the May elec-
tions in France, there was an interval of about six weeks
before the Herriot Government took office. During this time
"See Conf. D. 121 (Naval Report), D. 122 (Air), D. 123 (Land) .
[235}he May elec-
tions in France, there was an interval of about six weeks
before the Herriot Government took office. During this time
"See Conf. D. 121 (Naval Report), D. 122 (Air), D. 123 (Land) .
[235}

--- PAGE BREAK ---n France, there was an interval of about six weeks
before the Herriot Government took office. During this time
"See Conf. D. 121 (Naval Report), D. 122 (Air), D. 123 (Land) .
[235}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the powers at Geneva could reach no decisions on principle
and occupied themselves with fruitless technical studies .
It is not possible to say precisely when the Administration
came to perceive that no progress could be made simply by
proposing reduction, whether qualitative or quantitative .
Presumably at the time of Secretary Stimson's visit to Geneva
in April, the Administration began to realize that the road
to reduction of armaments could be opened only by reducing
the political tension between France and Germany, between
France and Italy, and between Japan and the United States .
This tension reflected the instability of the new European
frontiers and the conflicting ambitions of Japan, China, and
Russia in the Far East . It was when the futility of proposing
mere disarmament had been demonstrated in the spring that
serious private conversations were begun dealing with the
actualities of Continental politics and of American relations
to them. These conversations were continued until midsum-
mer, were resumed in September, and persisted in through-
out the autumn. In their history, if the facts were all known
and could be told, would be found whatever progress was
made during the year in the direction of the eventual limita-
tion and reduction of armaments .
But before attempting to record what little is known of
this phase, it is necessary to note the final and most ambi-
tious American proposal to reduce armaments without polit-
ical equivalents. This proposal, known as the Hoover Plan,
was launched without previous notice on June 22 . The formal
conference had not been active for some weeks . The fact
was that the responsible statesmen of the great powers were
occupied either with the Lausanne conference or with private
conversations concerning the basic questions of the Geneva
conference . During the pause in the public activity on dis-
armament, many of the delegates from the smaller states,
who were, of course, excluded from the private conversa-
tions, became restive at the secrecy and, the delay . On June 2I,
a deputation from the smaller powers waited on Mr. Hen-
[ 2361maller states,
who were, of course, excluded from the private conversa-
tions, became restive at the secrecy and, the delay . On June 2I,
a deputation from the smaller powers waited on Mr. Hen-
[ 2361

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere, of course, excluded from the private conversa-
tions, became restive at the secrecy and, the delay . On June 2I,
a deputation from the smaller powers waited on Mr. Hen-
[ 2361

--- PAGE BREAK ---

derson, asking him when the General Commission would
meet .. Mr. Henderson explained that in view of the private
conversations then in progress, the General Commission
would probably not meet until July i .
On the afternoon of the same day, however, Ambassador
Gibson called upon Mr . Henderson, urging him to convene
the General Commission as speedily as possible . Mr. Gibson
stated that on the following day the President of the United
States would put before the American public a new and
sweeping disarmament proposal, and that it was desired to
lay this same proposal before the Disarmament Conference
.
Accordingly, to the astonishment of everyone in Geneva, a
meeting of the General Commission was immediately called
for the afternoon of the next day. When the delegates met,
only three or four of them knew what was the purpose of
the meeting or what were the reasons why Mr . Henderson
had so suddenly changed the program announced the day
before .
The procedure adopted did not appeal to the professional
diplomatists, and most particularly to the French, who saw
an uncomfortable analogy with the procedure adopted in
launching the Hoover moratorium. However, the intention
was clearly to make an appeal over the heads of governments
to public opinion, and the Hoover Plan, did have a better
reception among the peoples than among the statesmen .
The plan' called for a reduction of one-third in the
strength of all land armies over and above the so-called
police component . The police component, said Presideni
Hoover should be calculated from the army allowed to Ger-
many under the Treaty of Versailles ; that is to say, it should
be ioo,ooo troops for 65,000,000 people, or one soldier for
650 inhabitants . The plan suggested, but did not define,
"necessary corrections for powers having colonial posses-
sions." The formula, if adopted, would have required drastic
° Cf. Appendix VIII (c) .
[ 237 Jtants . The plan suggested, but did not define,
"necessary corrections for powers having colonial posses-
sions." The formula, if adopted, would have required drastic
° Cf. Appendix VIII (c) .
[ 237 J

--- PAGE BREAK ---gested, but did not define,
"necessary corrections for powers having colonial posses-
sions." The formula, if adopted, would have required drastic
° Cf. Appendix VIII (c) .
[ 237 J

--- PAGE BREAK ---

reduction of the French army and of the armies of all of
France's allies . Mr. Hoover proposed also to abolish all
tanks, all large mobile guns, all instruments of chemical
warfare, and all bombing planes, to reduce by one-third the
number and tonnage of battleships fixed in the treaties, to re-
duce the treaty tonnage of aircraft, carriers, cruisers,
and
destroyers by one-fourth, to reduce the treaty tonnage of
submarines by one-third, and to prohibit more than 35,000
tons of submarines .
Three important delegations immediately approved the
Hoover Plan. The other great powers held back . When
finally a resolution was adopted embodying as much of the
Hoover Plan as the hesitant powers would agree to, all the
powers that had originally approved, declined to vote for it ."
The Italian delegation was the first great power to give un-
qualified approval. In a statement made by the Foreign
Minister, Signor Grandi, Italy accepted "entirely and in all
its parts the disarmament plan just submitted to the General
Commission by the American delegation ." He continued,
saying: "`This acceptance is complete and unconditional, that
is to say, we accept these measures not only in principle but
also as to their practical consequences ." But one month later,
when the general resolution, growing out of the Hoover Plan
was adopted, Italy abstained from voting."
Mr. Litvinoff also welcomed the proposals of the Ameri-
can delegation, since they proceeded to some extent along the
lines of the Soviet proposals which had previously been re-
jected. The Soviet delegation, he said, "was prepared to go
any length in the direction of disarmament . It would agree
to complete disarmament, partial disarmament, qualitative
disarmament, quantitative disarmament, moral disarmament,
or any other form which meant substantial disarmament."12
On July 21, however, the Soviet delegation felt obliged to
"IOU-at, 931-964.
u Ibid.
"Ibid ., 770-71 .
[ 238 1disarmament, moral disarmament,
or any other form which meant substantial disarmament."12
On July 21, however, the Soviet delegation felt obliged to
"IOU-at, 931-964.
u Ibid.
"Ibid ., 770-71 .
[ 238 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---isarmament,
or any other form which meant substantial disarmament."12
On July 21, however, the Soviet delegation felt obliged to
"IOU-at, 931-964.
u Ibid.
"Ibid ., 770-71 .
[ 238 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

vote against what was left of the Hoover Plan in the con-
ference resolution .18
The German delegation expressed the belief that the pro-
posals would give a fresh stimulus to the conference and
facilitate its work. It also noted that the substantial reduc-
tions called for would help solve the problem of equality .14
On July 21, Germany, too, felt obliged to vote against the
resulting resolution.
Sir John Simon, speaking for Great Britain, described the
Hoover Plan as "deeply interesting and profoundly impor-
tant." The British delegation, he said, would in, some respects
have gone further, as, for example, by abolishing submarines
and by reducing the size of the capital ship ." Later, how-
ever, it became clear that Great Britain did not wish to abol-
ish all tanks, as proposed in the Hoover Plan, nor did it
wish to reduce the number of warships . But on July 21 Great
Britain was able to vote with the United States in favor of
the conference resolution .
M. Paul-Boncour, speaking for France, expressed interest
and sympathy with the clear, simple, and direct proposals of
President Hoover . He was obliged, however, to remind the
conference that France continued to believe that the reduc-
tion of armaments was bound up with the organization of
international security. He was also obliged to ask his Ameri-
can colleagues what sanctions they were prepared to offer in
case nations used their forces, not for national defense, but
for aggression as welL 18 On July 21 France and the United
States were able to vote in favor of the same resolution .
Speaking for Japan, Mr . Matsudaira gave a clear intima-
tion that the naval ratios of the London Naval Treaty were
unsatisfactory to his country, and that before extending that
treaty beyond 1936, as proposed by Mr . Hoover, there was
i° Journal, 931-964.
'Ibid
., 771 .
"Ibid., 769.
Ibid
., 769-70 .
[ 2391ty were
unsatisfactory to his country, and that before extending that
treaty beyond 1936, as proposed by Mr . Hoover, there was
i° Journal, 931-964.
'Ibid
., 771 .
"Ibid., 769.
Ibid
., 769-70 .
[ 2391

--- PAGE BREAK ---ry to his country, and that before extending that
treaty beyond 1936, as proposed by Mr . Hoover, there was
i° Journal, 931-964.
'Ibid
., 771 .
"Ibid., 769.
Ibid
., 769-70 .
[ 2391

--- PAGE BREAK ---

need
for another exchange of views among the powers
directly interested .'' On July 21 Japan was also able to vote
for the resolution .
It is necessary, therefore, to seek an explanation for the
fact that the countries which had most warmly supported the
Hoover Plan on the day it was proposed were obliged to
abstain from voting or to vote against the conference resolu-
tion, whereas the countries which were originally doubtful
or actually hostile were able finally to vote with the United
States .
2 . A Month of Secret Negotiation
It was immediately evident that however acceptable the
Hoover Plan might be to Italy, Germany, and Russia, it
would not be agreed to in its original form by France and
Great Britain. The plan did, after all, provide for a reduc-
tion of armaments which would radically have altered the
military and naval balance of power in Europe. The enthusi-
asm of Italy, Germany, and Russia was quite in accordance
with the objective of their foreign policies . They were dis-
contented with the constitution of Europe established
at
Versailles, and a proposal which reduced the relative strength
of France and her allies was obviously to their advantage
.
The reception accorded the Hoover Plan was for this rea-
son somewhat embarrassing, and those charged with the
conduct of American foreign policy were confronted at once
with a grave decision. Had they continued to agitate for the
adoption of the integral plan, the United States would unin-
tentionally have become the leader of the revisionist bloc in
Europe. It would have been acclaimed by nationalist opinion
in all the countries dissatisfied with the status quo and by
pacifist opinion in other countries . But it would have been
forced to align itself definitely against France and her allies,
and it would have gravely disturbed the improved relations
between France and Great Britain upon which depended the
"Journal, 771-
( 240 1ced to align itself definitely against France and her allies,
and it would have gravely disturbed the improved relations
between France and Great Britain upon which depended the
"Journal, 771-
( 240 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---definitely against France and her allies,
and it would have gravely disturbed the improved relations
between France and Great Britain upon which depended the
"Journal, 771-
( 240 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

solution of the reparation question at Lausanne . It would
have sacrificed all chance of agreement on a multitude of
questions and would have made no advance whatever toward
actual disarmament. The American government, which by
this time was in close touch with the realities of European
politics, chose to avoid a rupture of negotiations with France
and to make whatever compromises were necessary in regard
to its own plan . To this end, it entered into private conver-
sations with France and Great Britain, in which Italy also
participated later .
These conversations lasted about a month-from June 22
to July 22 . Naturally the other powers represented at the
conference grew restive, and on July
7 and 8 the General
Commission was convened in order to enable some of the
smaller states represented in the conference to express them-
selves concerning the Hoover Plan . Thirty delegations took
part in this discussion .18 Opinion in favor of general accept-
ance of the American scheme was overwhelming. Some
delegates called it the most important contribution made to
the conference ; some compared it to Wilson's contribution
to the Covenant and Kellogg's contribution to the Pact of
Paris. While acceptance was almost universal among these
states, the Belgians and the Swiss pointed out that the plan
had omitted all mention of private manufacture of and trade
in arms, and of an ultimate international control through a
Permanent Disarmament Commission . On both these points,
however, the American position had previously been made
clear. It was generally understood that the plan, while not
rigid and all-inclusive, did not deliberately avoid these two
points, which were, under proper conditions, acceptable to
the American government .
After this remarkable demonstration, the private and ex-
clusive negotiations were again resumed among the three
powers. From July 8 to July 20, few in Geneva knew what
was being discussed . The excluded delegations, the press, the
U journal,
827-45-
[ 241 1lusive negotiations were again resumed among the three
powers. From July 8 to July 20, few in Geneva knew what
was being discussed . The excluded delegations, the press, the
U journal,
827-45-
[ 241 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---were again resumed among the three
powers. From July 8 to July 20, few in Geneva knew what
was being discussed . The excluded delegations, the press, the
U journal,
827-45-
[ 241 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

private international organizations protested and demanded
that the conference be resumed, that negotiations take place
in public. It was strongly urged that these private conversa-
tions were alienating a whole section of the conference, that
they were suppressing the publicity which might force the
British and French delegations to a more thorough accept-
ance of the Hoover Plan . The American delegation, however,
believed it was pursuing the wiser course in attempting to
win acceptance of the Hoover Plan by the two countries
which must accept it if it was to be put into effect . The
American delegation felt that no agreement was possible
without France and Great Britain . But the decision to work
out a compromise with these two powers alienated the sup-
port of Italy, Germany, and Russia . The two last-named
were scarcely consulted during the month of private negotia-
tions, and they rapidly became annoyed and suspicious .
The Germans concluded that insufficient consideration was
being given to their very special problems, though they ad-
mitted that the Hoover proposals in regard to the number of
effectives and the total abolition of certain weapons would,
in practice, have given very large recognition to the German
claim of "equality" in armaments . It was during this period
that the German delegation reached the decisions which led
later to the complete deadlock in the conference on the issue
of equality of status.
Italy also joined the opposition. Signor Grandi was re-
moved from office, chiefly, it is believed, because of his fail-
ure to stand by the Hoover proposals, which Italy had un-
qualifiedly endorsed . He was replaced at the conference by
General Balbo . On July 21 the new delegate flew from Rome
to Geneva and proceeded to tell the General Commission
that the resolution drafted in secret by the Americans, Brit-
ish, and French was "entirely inadequate when compared
with the wishes and hopes of the world
.
. ." and that "a
mere declaration of goodwill by the assembled powers in
general terms would make no impression on the world,
242rely inadequate when compared
with the wishes and hopes of the world
.
. ." and that "a
mere declaration of goodwill by the assembled powers in
general terms would make no impression on the world,
242

--- PAGE BREAK ---compared
with the wishes and hopes of the world
.
. ." and that "a
mere declaration of goodwill by the assembled powers in
general terms would make no impression on the world,
242

--- PAGE BREAK ---

which was seeking and expecting definite results ." The naval
section of the resolution merely indicated a mode of pro-
cedure, he said, and did not even lay down positive principles
for reduction. Italy would, therefore, abstain from voting.
The Soviet delegate, Mr . Litvinoff, also stated that the reso-
lution would "bring bitter disappointment to all those per-
sons and organizations who had been pinning all their hopes
of peace upon the conference ." He moved two amendments,
both of which would have reinstated in the resolution certain
proposals made by President Hoover. The Dutch and Swed-
ish delegations also proposed amendments restoring planks
of the Hoover Plan in the resolution. The American delega-
tion joined with the British and French in voting against
these amendments .19
Mr. Gibson explained that the consultations during the
past weeks had convinced him that the text of the resolution
as it stood represented the maximum of agreement which
could be reached at the moment . He went on to say that the
resolution was the result of a complicated series of inter-
related concessions which, if disturbed now, would open the
door, with most unfortunate results, to the reconsideration
of a whole series of questions. He explained also that since
no state represented in the conference was bound by a ma-
jority vote, it was necessary to proceed by consolidating that
measure of accord which could then be reached .
It was somewhat awkward, no doubt, and there was an
element of irony in the predicament of the American dele-
gation, which found itself voting against the adoption of the
plan it had offered to the world thirty days before . But the
alternative, which would have been to stand with the revi-
sionist bloc led by Russia and Germany, would have made
the United States a partisan in the deepest and most danger-
ous alignment in European politics . When the true position
was realized by responsible American officials in Washington
and Geneva, they saw that the real choice was either to assist
1° Journal, 931-38 .
[ 243 )t in European politics . When the true position
was realized by responsible American officials in Washington
and Geneva, they saw that the real choice was either to assist
1° Journal, 931-38 .
[ 243 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---cs . When the true position
was realized by responsible American officials in Washington
and Geneva, they saw that the real choice was either to assist
1° Journal, 931-38 .
[ 243 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

an agitation which pointed to the disorderly overthrow of
the existing European system or to participate in the or-
ganization of a system of security under which political
grievances might be gradually and peaceably settled and
armaments voluntarily reduced .
The decision to compromise with France would, if con-
tinuity in American foreign policy can be assumed, mark the
final recognition in official circles that mere disarmament as
such is an impossibility and that for disarmament there must
be a political equivalent. It was no coincidence that on
August 8, about a fortnight after the adjournment of the
Disarmament Conference, Secretary Stimson, in a. speech
before the Council on Foreign Relations, pointed out, first,
that the obligations of neutrality had been altered by the
Pact of Paris, and, second, that the United States would
consult with other powers when aggression was threatened ."
From the American point of view, this was the real con-
clusion to the first part of the World Disarmament Confer-
ence. The United States no longer professed to believe that
armaments could be reduced without political agreements,
and, as its contribution to such agreements, it declared its
desire to participate in collective efforts to maintain
the
peace. To what extent this change of view was understood
and approved by Congress and the American public is an-
other question. It is one that cannot be answered as these
pages are written, for owing to the elections no particular
attention was paid to the proceedings at Geneva by the peo-
ple at large . It should, however, be noted that the platforms
of both political parties declared in favor of consultation
and that no important voices were raised in objection.
In this development of American policy and in the renewal
of good relations between Great Britain and France in the
Accord of Confidence made at Lausanne, 21 are to be found
'D Cf. Chapter XI .
n Cf. Chapter VIII .
[ 244 }American policy and in the renewal
of good relations between Great Britain and France in the
Accord of Confidence made at Lausanne, 21 are to be found
'D Cf. Chapter XI .
n Cf. Chapter VIII .
[ 244 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---in the renewal
of good relations between Great Britain and France in the
Accord of Confidence made at Lausanne, 21 are to be found
'D Cf. Chapter XI .
n Cf. Chapter VIII .
[ 244 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the chief results of the first phase of the World Disarmament
Conference.
3. The Resolution of July 23
The actual form of words adopted in the resolution
largely drafted by Great Britain, France, and the United
States is of relatively small importance compared with the
weighty diplomatic decisions which have been noted above .
The resolution was important not because of what it said
but because it marked the continuing collaboration of Great
Britain, France, and the United States, the three strongest
powers in the world .
The actual resolution22 merely recorded the general inten-
tions of the conference and made a general promise as to
the kind of convention which would eventually be agreed
on. Except for a recommendation that the truce in armament
construction agreed on in September, 1931, should be ex-
tended for four months from November 1, 1932, the resolu-
tion did not specifically affect existing armaments.
The preamble welcomed heartily "the initiative taken by
the President of the United States in formulating concrete
proposals for a substantial reduction of armaments by the
prohibition of certain methods of warfare, by the abolition
of certain material, and by reductions bearing in magnitude
and amounting for certain armaments to the proportion of
one-third." The resolution stated that, guided by the princi-
ples underlying President Hoover's declaration, (1) a sub-
stantial reduction of world armaments should be effected,
applying alike to land, naval, and air arms, and that (2) a
primary objective should be reduction of the means of attack .
The conference, therefore, accepted the principle of reduc-
tion instead of the mere limitation of world armaments ; it
recognized the interdependence of
armaments ; and, by
advising a weakening of means of attack, subscribed to the
" Cf. Appendix VIII (d) .
12451instead of the mere limitation of world armaments ; it
recognized the interdependence of
armaments ; and, by
advising a weakening of means of attack, subscribed to the
" Cf. Appendix VIII (d) .
12451

--- PAGE BREAK ---limitation of world armaments ; it
recognized the interdependence of
armaments ; and, by
advising a weakening of means of attack, subscribed to the
" Cf. Appendix VIII (d) .
12451

--- PAGE BREAK ---

principle of qualitative disarmament as advocated by the
American delegation on April ii .
The second part of the resolution, which recorded the
specific conclusions arrived at in the first phase of the con-
ference, also reflected several proposals previously made by
the American delegation . Thus, it was agreed that the final
convention would absolutely bar air attacks on civilian popu-
lations ; that the caliber of heavy land artillery would be
limited ;23 that chemical, bacteriological, and incendiary war-
fare would be prohibited .
The third part of the resolution dealt with the next phase
of the conference. A strict limitation and real reduction of
effectives based upon an examination of the Hoover pro-
posals were promised. With respect to President Hoover's
precise proposals concerning naval armaments, the resolu-
tion merely invited the powers which were parties to the
Washington and London Naval Treaties to confer "as to
possible further measures of naval reduction ."
It was understood, however, that the translation of these
principles into specific agreements to reduce armaments de-
pended upon long and intricate political negotiations about
all the chief questions at issue among the leading powers of
Europe, America, and Asia .
4. The Withdrawal o f Germany
The immediate consequence of the July resolution was
the withdrawal of Germany from the conference. The rea-
sons were explained in a memorandum submitted to the
French Ambassador at Berlin on August 29 24 They were,
principally, that it was not clear whether the resolution ap-
plied to Germany equally with all other nations, or whether
Germany was still to have the special status fixed by the
Versailles Treaty. The Germans asked for a specific promise
9° One hundred fifty-five millimeters was understood to be the maximum
proposed by the American delegation .
"New York Times, September 7, 1932 .
[ 2461reaty. The Germans asked for a specific promise
9° One hundred fifty-five millimeters was understood to be the maximum
proposed by the American delegation .
"New York Times, September 7, 1932 .
[ 2461

--- PAGE BREAK ---sked for a specific promise
9° One hundred fifty-five millimeters was understood to be the maximum
proposed by the American delegation .
"New York Times, September 7, 1932 .
[ 2461

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that the Disarmament Convention would replace Part V of
the Versailles Treaty, putting German armaments
as to
"legal form" and "the duration of the treaty obligation" on
the same juridical basis as those of other nations . As to the
actual amount of armament allowed, the memorandum de-
clared that for the term of the first convention (presumably
ten years) Germany would be satisfied with a certain in .
equality in fact. But until equality in form was promised,
Germany would not participate further in the Disarmament
Conference .
With the German thesis responsible American officials
were openly in agreement . Both Secretary Stimson and Mr.
Norman H. Davis, in their statements to the House Com-
mittee on Foreign Affairs on January 6, 1932, had specifically
indicated that the German nation could not exist in a state
of comparative disarmament while surrounded by a group
of heavily armed nations . This would lead to a condition of
instability in Europe and in the world, said Secretary Stim-
son, in regard to which "energetic steps ought to be taken
to try to carry out the original plan [of Allied disarmament)
so far as it can be done." Mr. Davis had stated that "Ger-
many cannot be kept indefinitely waiting under an implied
moral obligation without maintaining a constant atmosphere
of nervousness and instability which is today affecting the
credit and financial structure of the world."2a
The American proposal, made by Mr . Gibson on April 11
for qualitative disarmament, or the abolition of weapons of
a peculiarly aggressive nature, was doubtless
intended . in
part to move the conference in the direction of satisfying
Germany as to equality . Later, when the American plan re-
garding the reduction of military effectives was put forward,
the German levels of armed forces were specifically cited by
the American delegates as an example upon which computa-
tion might be based .
I Hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representa-
tives, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, on H. J . Res . z63 .
[ 247 1example upon which computa-
tion might be based .
I Hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representa-
tives, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, on H. J . Res . z63 .
[ 247 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---computa-
tion might be based .
I Hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representa-
tives, Seventy-second Congress, First Session, on H. J . Res . z63 .
[ 247 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

While these points appeared to be fully appreciated by
the German delegates, they continued to demand that what-
ever practical differences in armed strength might continue
to exist after the first World Disarmament Conference, it
was necessary for other states to recognize that the same
method should be applied to all countries alike. They argued
that Germany could not be bound both by Part V of the
Treaty of Versailles and by the prospective disarmament
convention, and that it was impossible to apply "two sets of
weights and measures" to the states participating in the
conference.
No. general opposition to this thesis was ever offered by
the American delegation. On the contrary, it .seemed to be
regarded by them, as by many others, with evident sympathy .
The real difficulty lay in the conviction of France that a bet-
ter system of security would have to be set up before it was
safe to abolish so important a part of the Versailles system .
The French delegates did not dispute the equity of the Ger-
man claim, and it was generally admitted that French public
opinion was prepared to grant it. What the French objected
to was another revision of the Versailles system, having just
conceded the virtual end of reparations, without tangible
progress toward a new system to take its place . In view of
the revival of militarist and bureaucratic power within Ger-
many, the French view was sympathetically regarded in
British and American official circles .
The withdrawal of Germany from the Geneva conference
at a time when the old military leaders dominated her policy
aroused the fear that Germany would shortly denounce
Part V of the Treaty of Versailles and proceed to rearm .
However, though such a policy remained a live alternative,
the German government realized that this was too serious
a move to be undertaken without at least attempting first to
reach an agreement with France . In her memorandum to the
French Ambassador at Berlin on August 29, Germany had
proposed to deal with the question of equality of armaments
{ 248 1attempting first to
reach an agreement with France . In her memorandum to the
French Ambassador at Berlin on August 29, Germany had
proposed to deal with the question of equality of armaments
{ 248 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---reach an agreement with France . In her memorandum to the
French Ambassador at Berlin on August 29, Germany had
proposed to deal with the question of equality of armaments
{ 248 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

through direct conversations . Apparently it was her inten-
tion to talk with France privately and confidentially .
The French government refused to do this and promptly
published the memorandum" and its own reply . 27 It insisted
that any change in German armaments was a matter of con-
cern to the League of Nations, since this came within the
jurisdiction of the Council of the League ; that the problems
involved were being worked out through the Geneva Dis-
armament Conference, and, finally, that all the powers sig.
t atory to the Treaty of Versailles were interested . The
French reply also suggested that restricted negotiations might
do injury to the rights of the United States, arguing that the
benefits of the military clauses of the Treaty of Versailles
were assured through the treaty of peace signed between
the United States and Germany . In short, the French were
determined to keep the United States an active participant
in the negotiations.
President Hoover did not relish the idea of becoming too
closely involved in the controversy between France and Ger-
many. He promptly issued a statement emphasizing that the
United States- was interested in reducing the armaments of
the world step by step, but that it was not a party to the
Versailles Treaty and the limitation it imposed on German
,arms, and that this was a European question . The President
did, however, avow that there was one phase of the matter
which did concern the United States, namely, Germany's
continued participation in making a success of the Geneva
conference.
5. Efforts to Placate Germany
American activity, which had been more or less suspended
since the July recess, was resumed at the end of September
when Mr. Norman H . Davis returned to Europe. His arrival
in London more or less coincided with a proposal by the
"New York Times, September
7, 1932 .
"Ibid., September 13, 1932 .
[ 2491of September
when Mr. Norman H . Davis returned to Europe. His arrival
in London more or less coincided with a proposal by the
"New York Times, September
7, 1932 .
"Ibid., September 13, 1932 .
[ 2491

--- PAGE BREAK ---r. Norman H . Davis returned to Europe. His arrival
in London more or less coincided with a proposal by the
"New York Times, September
7, 1932 .
"Ibid., September 13, 1932 .
[ 2491

--- PAGE BREAK ---

British Prime Minister, Mr. MacDonald, that representatives
of Great Britain, France, Italy, and Germany, together with
an American observer, should meet in London to consider
the problem raised by the correspondence between France
and Germany . This correspondence had, in the meantime,
been supplemented by a strong note from Sir John Simon
to the German government pointing out how unfortunate it
was that this grave political issue had been raised by Ger-
many at a moment when all efforts should be directed toward
restoring commercial prosperity by better cooperation be-
tween the governments . 8
The British note had been read with enthusiasm in France .
But the Prime Minister's subsequent suggestion of a Five-
Power Conference in London to consider the German claim
met with a cool reception. The French did not wish to talk
in London ; they were apprehensive about attending a meet-
ing at which their allies, Poland and Czechoslovakia, would
not be present . Their answer was in effect a refusal to go to
London. But they held out the hope that within the frame-
work of the Disarmament Conference a meeting might be
held in Geneva. This suggestion was unacceptable to the
Germans. They had left the Disarmament Conference, and
they said that they did not propose to reenter it by the back
door. Before the negotiations could be carried further, Ger-
many was engaged in another election and the question had
to be dropped until November.
This episode put the Government of M . Herriot in a
quandary. It had become quite obvious from their statements
that the British were prepared to go a long way toward
granting Germany's demands for a change in the military
provisions of the Treaty of Versailles, however much they
might be opposed to the tactics that Germany was using in
order to obtain this objective. It was equally clear that the
Italian government was sympathetic with the German point
of view. M. Herriot, on the other hand, was politically in no
"New York Times, September x9, 1932 .
[ 250 1tive. It was equally clear that the
Italian government was sympathetic with the German point
of view. M. Herriot, on the other hand, was politically in no
"New York Times, September x9, 1932 .
[ 250 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---clear that the
Italian government was sympathetic with the German point
of view. M. Herriot, on the other hand, was politically in no
"New York Times, September x9, 1932 .
[ 250 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

position to make any substantial concessions to Germany
with respect to armaments . His personal irritation at their
demands was only too apparent . In French eyes Germany
was in the hands of a band of militarists who were disposed
to use every concession to make new demands . M. Herriot
quite naturally felt that he had made a large concession to
Germany in agreeing at Lausanne to the practical cancella-
tion of reparations . What, he asked, had been the result?
Germany had waited hardly longer than a month before in-
sisting that the military chapter of the Treaty of Versailles
should be canceled along with the reparations chapter .
French public opinion was inflamed against Germany. At
the same time M. Herriot saw the prospect that France
might be isolated if both Great Britain and Italy sided with
Germany. To meet this situation, he decided that the safest
course to pursue was to produce a French disarmament plan.
His purpose was to set forth in detail the French thesis re-
garding security and to link with it certain concessions to
Germany regarding her armaments . This plan was presented
to the Disarmament Conference on November I4?a It marks
an important step in French policy . It included the proposal
that the armies of Continental Europe should be reduced to
a uniform general type, that of a national short-service army
with limited effectives. It proposed that these armies should
not possess powerful mobile artillery and tanks adapted to
attack on permanent fortifications.
In these respects and in certain others, the plan involved
changes in the Treaty of Versailles and substantial reductions
in the armies of Europe. The realization of the plan was,
however, made dependent upon conditions which, even when
viewed optimistically, presented many serious obstacles . The
proposal to create an international force, which had been
offered by the Tardieu Government in February, was re-
peated with some modifications . In addition, the plan called
for treaties of mutual assistance among the states of Conti-
Conf
. Conf. D. 146.
[251]red by the Tardieu Government in February, was re-
peated with some modifications . In addition, the plan called
for treaties of mutual assistance among the states of Conti-
Conf
. Conf. D. 146.
[251]

--- PAGE BREAK ---overnment in February, was re-
peated with some modifications . In addition, the plan called
for treaties of mutual assistance among the states of Conti-
Conf
. Conf. D. 146.
[251]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

nental Europe and for an agreement that the Council of the
League should by a majority vote decide when the contin-
gents forming a part of the international force should be
used to assist a state that was the victim of an aggression .
This phase of the French Plan did not directly concern the
United States . The French had in mind an arrangement
which in effect would supplant Article XVI of the Covenant
of the League. But England and the United States were not
forgotten by those responsible for drafting the French Plan .
England was called upon to define its position under Article
XVI. Under Chapter I of the plan, all the powers in the con-
ference, including the United States, were called upon to
take part in implementing the Pact of Paris. The authors of
the French Plan had endeavored to analyze the principles of
Secretary Stimson's speech of August 8 and to codify what
they considered to be possible deductions from that speech .
Chapter I of the French Plan containing these ideas deserves
to be quoted in full because it embodied the maximum
French hopes as to the eventual American contribution to
its program for security .
All the Powers taking part in the work of the Conference shall be
called upon to establish in an effective manner the following princi-
ples, which are generally recognized to be a necessary consequence of
the Pact for the Renunciation of War :
(a) Any war undertaken in breach of the Paris Pact is a matter of
interest to all the Powers and shall be regarded as a breach of the
obligations assumed towards each one of them ;
(b) In the event of a breach or threat of breach of the Paris Pact,
the said Powers shall concert together as promptly as possible with a
view to appealing to public opinion and agreeing upon the steps to
be taken ;
(c) In application of the Pact of Paris outlawing war, any breach
of that Pact shall involve the prohibition of direct or indirect eco-
nomic or financial relations with the aggressor country . The Powers
shall undertake to adopt the necessary measures to make that prohibi-
tion immediately effective ;
(d) The said Powers shall declare their determination not to recog-
[252)ressor country . The Powers
shall undertake to adopt the necessary measures to make that prohibi-
tion immediately effective ;
(d) The said Powers shall declare their determination not to recog-
[252)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Powers
shall undertake to adopt the necessary measures to make that prohibi-
tion immediately effective ;
(d) The said Powers shall declare their determination not to recog-
[252)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

nize any de facto situation} brought about in consequence of the vio-
lation of an international indertaking .30
Many of these provisions of the French Plan went sub-
stantially beyond the intended meaning of Secretary Stim
sons speeches. Furthermore, they endeavored to formulate
rigidly ideas which wire still undergoing development and
to spell out implications which in the American view could
only be worked out by a process of trial and error . The
administration in Washington felt that any attempt to codify
the Stimson doctrine in a treaty which the Senate would have
to pass upon as a precise formula would fail. The American
attitude was empirical and cautious. The French, on the
other hand, felt that formulae were of little value unless they
were embodied in a treaty with all possible future contin-
gencies adequately covered . Such a treaty was hardly con-
ceivable to the Americans, and even England, it appeared,
was reluctant to add to her burden of responsibility under
the Covenant and the',Locarno treaties .
For these reasons, and also because of the inherent diffi-
culty of working out the organization of Continental Europe
which France had proposed, the outlook for the French Plan
was not bright. The assumption was that it would be debated
at Geneva in 1933 and would be presented by France as the
condition of any substantial concession to Germany. Thus
there was a long road to travel toward a settlement of the
Franco-German controversy over armaments . Nevertheless,
France had recognized in principle that Germany could not
forever be bound by the military clauses of Versailles .
While these public' proposals were being discussed, there
were private conversations looking to the holding of the
Five-Power Conference which Mr. MacDonald had sug-
gested. Mr. Norman H. Davis, after conducting discussions
in London, Paris, and'', Rome, found a general willingness to
consider, through private conversations among a limited
number of powers, the basic problems of the Disarmament
'° Cord. D. 146-
'[ 253 1in London, Paris, and'', Rome, found a general willingness to
consider, through private conversations among a limited
number of powers, the basic problems of the Disarmament
'° Cord. D. 146-
'[ 253 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd'', Rome, found a general willingness to
consider, through private conversations among a limited
number of powers, the basic problems of the Disarmament
'° Cord. D. 146-
'[ 253 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Conference . These conversations, it was agreed, were to be
directed not only to dealing with the question of Germany's
return to the conference, but to issues with which the United
States was more immediately concerned, namely, with the
actual reduction of armaments . The laborious process of try-
ing to persuade the fifty-odd nations represented at Geneva
to agree on the simplest formulae, had at times reduced the
conference to a mere debating society. It was felt that if re-
sults were to be achieved, the principal military powers of
the world had to take the lead . For their veto could kill any
measure of disarmament and their agreement would tend to
bring the other powers together .
Germany, though formally withdrawn from the confer-
ence, found it possible . to
tions. German representatives had to be in Geneva anyway
to attend the sessions of the League dealing with the Man-
churian question.n
6. The Five-Power Conversations (December 2-rr, 1932)
Late in November, during the preliminary negotiations
leading up to the agreement by the principal powers to hold
conversations in Geneva regarding disarmament and the re-
turn of Germany to the Disarmament Conference, Mr . Davis
had suggested to M. Herriot and M. Paul-Boncour and then
to Mr. MacDonald and Sir John Simon that a short-term
convention should be adopted at once. It would run for
three years, say until January 1, 1936, and it would thus
coincide with the term of the Washington and London
Naval Treaties. The object of the convention would be to
register the maximum agreement on the limitation and re-
duction of armaments possible at that time without fore-
closing greater reductions which might subsequently be
feasible . The Americans, in making this proposal, desired,
° Our account of the Manchurian question stops on Nov . 21, with the
presentation of the Lytton Report, and therefore does not cover the sessions
referred to above.
[ 2541king this proposal, desired,
° Our account of the Manchurian question stops on Nov . 21, with the
presentation of the Lytton Report, and therefore does not cover the sessions
referred to above.
[ 2541

--- PAGE BREAK ---desired,
° Our account of the Manchurian question stops on Nov . 21, with the
presentation of the Lytton Report, and therefore does not cover the sessions
referred to above.
[ 2541

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.first, to show the world that the powers could agree on
something and, second, to provide a breathing-spell during
which the French views on security and the German con-
ception-of arms equality might be reconciled .
The conversations82 began at Geneva on Friday, December
2, and were concluded with the signature of a five-power
declaration on December 11 . The Chairman was Mr. Mac-
Donald. The Americans proposed that an agreement be
reached on certain measures of immediate reduction and limi-
tation and on the general principles to be embodied in a
general disarmament treaty which would be signed and rati-
fied before January
1, _ 1937. In this convention Germany
would receive the formal assurance that the powers would
solve the problem of equality of rights before that date
.
The French then stated that the Herriot Cabinet had come
to the decision that "France agrees that the principle of
equality of rights be accorded to Germany and other states
disarmed by treaty, within a general system which shall
provide for the security of France and of all other states ."
This was a notable advance over the position of the Tardieu
Cabinet. For that Cabinet had been prepared only to include
the Versailles provisions in regard to Germany in the final
disarmament treaty. The Herriot Cabinet was willing to con-
cede real equality attained by reduction, provided principles
of security were adopted .
The question was whether Germany would accept a prom-
ise of equality of rights to be worked out in this period . The
essence of the German claim for equality was
(1) that Ger-
man armaments should be limited for the same period by
the same treaty that limited the armaments of other nations,
The principal representatives were. for Great Britain, Mr . J. Ramsay
MacDonald, Sir John Simon and the Hon. Alexander Cadogan; for France,
M . Edo ,-ard Herriot, M . Joseph Paul-Boncour and M . Rene Massigli; for
Germany, Baron Konstantin von Neurath, Baron Ernst von Weiszaecker,
Herr Hans Frohwein and Herr Hans Hermann Voelckers ; for Italy, Signor
Augusto Rosso and Baron Pompeo Aloisi ; for the United States, Mr .
Norman H. Davis, Mr. Hugh R. Wilson and Mr . Allen Dulles.
[ 2551Hans Frohwein and Herr Hans Hermann Voelckers ; for Italy, Signor
Augusto Rosso and Baron Pompeo Aloisi ; for the United States, Mr .
Norman H. Davis, Mr. Hugh R. Wilson and Mr . Allen Dulles.
[ 2551

--- PAGE BREAK ---err Hans Hermann Voelckers ; for Italy, Signor
Augusto Rosso and Baron Pompeo Aloisi ; for the United States, Mr .
Norman H. Davis, Mr. Hugh R. Wilson and Mr . Allen Dulles.
[ 2551

--- PAGE BREAK ---

thus abolishing the legal form of Part V of the Versailles
Treaty; and (2)
that the principle of equality of status
should be given immediate practical effect on the qualitative
side with respect to war material, replacements, and military
organization.
This was more than the French or the British were pre-
pared to concede, since it meant in effect that Germany would
begin to rearm. The French insisted particularly that the
Germans be contented with a recognition of the principle
of equality, as that was what they had demanded as the price
of their return to the conference . The Germans insisted that
they must know what the Herriot formula meant . The French
retorted that they would recognize the principle but that the
conference must decide how it was to be applied, and that
the decisions must be coupled with a detailed application of
the French principle of security. Finally, after much negotia-
tion, a formula was proposed reading as follows :
The governments of the United Kingdom, France, and Italy have
declared that one of the principles that should guide the Conference
on Disarmament should be the grant to Germany, and to the other
powers disarmed by treaty, of equality o f rights in a system which
would promise security for all nations, and that the principle should
find itself embodied in the convention containing the conclusions of
the Disarmament Conference.
This declaration implies that the respective limitation of arma-
ments of all states should be included in the proposed Disarmament
Convention . It is clearly understood that the methods o f application
of such equality o f rights will be discussed by the Conference $a'
The formula was accepted, and Germany agreed to return
to the conference .
7. Conversations on Naval Questions
Contemporaneously with the negotiations described above,
discussions were carried on during the autumn dealing with
the further limitation and reduction of navies . These con-
a Italics are the authors' . Cf. Appendix VIII (e) .
{ 2561ions described above,
discussions were carried on during the autumn dealing with
the further limitation and reduction of navies . These con-
a Italics are the authors' . Cf. Appendix VIII (e) .
{ 2561

--- PAGE BREAK ---

versations had two main objectives: to bring France and Italy
under the London Naval Treaty, and to work out a basis on
which Great Britain and the United States could reduce their
navies by something like the one-third called for in the
Hoover Plan. It soon transpired that the possibilities of
agreement between Great Britain and the United States de-
pended upon the limitation of French and Italian cruiser and
submarine strength and upon Japanese naval plans.
As the conversations were private and informal and as
no conclusions were reached, it is not possible for us to de-
scribe them here . It is, however, known that they reached a
point where the British and the Americans presented a
memorandum to the French and the Italians which, if ac-
cepted, would have completed the London Naval Treaty .
Before the document could be presented formally to the
French government, the Herriot Cabinet was overthrown
in the French Chamber on the question of payment of the
war debts to the United States . Nevertheless, it appeared
that material progress had been made toward a naval agree-
ment among Great Britain, the United States, France, and
Italy. On the other hand, the attitude of Japan in the Far
East ; and her demands for material improvement in her rela-
tive naval position, indicated that substantial reduction of
naval armaments was not yet in sight.
12571

--- PAGE BREAK ---pan in the Far
East ; and her demands for material improvement in her rela-
tive naval position, indicated that substantial reduction of
naval armaments was not yet in sight.
12571

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EPILOGUE
THE reader who has followed this history of the United
States in world affairs during 1932 will see that up to the
end of the year none of the great issues, with the exception
of German reparations, had definitely been settled . The
world-wide depression was running its course unchecked by
any common action of the nations . There was, however, the
promise of a World Economic Conference in 1933, and to
that conference the great international economic problems
relating to tariffs and currencies were to be submitted . The
problem of the war debts had not been settled. There was,
however, some promise that the problem would be reviewed
.
In South America the collective effort to preserve the peace
had not preserved it. In the Far East the question whether
Japan would agree to a peaceable settlement with China was
undetermined. The problem of armaments had been ex-
plored, some agreement in principle had been reached, the
conference had survived, but no actual limitation or reduc-
tion was instituted .
In the United States the national elections had resulted in
the defeat of the party which had administered American
affairs throughout the post-war era . Following its defeat,
there was an interregnum during which the outgoing and
incoming Administrations were equally powerless to make
decisions. The unsettled problems discussed in these pages
were left as the heritage of the new Administration
.
How far there was to be continuity in American policy,
and in what respects there was to be innovation, were ques-
tions for the future .
COUNCIL House
New York City,
January 3, 193-2-
E.2581

--- PAGE BREAK ---re was to be continuity in American policy,
and in what respects there was to be innovation, were ques-
tions for the future .
COUNCIL House
New York City,
January 3, 193-2-
E.2581

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SET .FCTEP BIBLIOGRAPHY
Few books dealing with the events treated in this volume have yet been
written. Consequently this bibliography
is limited_ to (a) works- which
supply the background for an understanding of deveopments
in the foreign
relations of the United States during 1932 and
(b) source materials deal-
ing with recent events, which students of current history
or international
relations will find especially useful. There has been no effort to make the
list all-inclusive.
The titles which follow are intended to supplement those
appearing in
the volume of this series for 293x . In a few cases books in that list which
are equally useful for a study of the events of
1932 have been included
again for the benefit of those who may not have access to the preceding
volume .
ECONOMIC BACKGROUND
COLE, G. D. H. A Guide through World Chaos . New York, Knopf, 1932,
570 P •
One of the best general surveys and analyses
of the present world
crisis.
DENNIS, LAWRENCE. Is Capitalism Doomed? New York, Harper,
1932,
328 p.
A criticism of current political and financial policies and of the bank-
ers' notion of international finance .
INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE
OF INTELLECTUAL COOPERATION.
The, State
and
Economic Life with Special Reference to International
Economic
and Political Relations. Paris, Author, 1932, 185 P.
The record of the first international study conference on this subject,
held at Milan on May 23-27, 1932.
LEAGUE OF NATIONS . The Course and Phases of the World Economic
Depression . Report Presented to the Assembly by the Financial Section
and Economic Intelligence Service . Geneva,
x931. (A.22.1931.II.A.)
.
Statistical Yearbook . Annual since 2926 .
Figures as submitted to the League by individual governments .
. World Economic Survey,
1931-32 .
(1932 .II.A.18 .)-
The data, which have been collected by the -League Economic Intelli-
gence Service, cover x932 and the first six months of 1932 .
MILLS, FREDERICK C. Economic Tendencies in the United States ; Aspects
of Pre-War and Post-War Changes . New York, National Bureau of
Economic Research, 1932, 639 P .
NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL CONFERENCE BOARD . A Picture of World Economic
Conditions at the Beginning of 1932 . New York, Author, 1932, 286 p .
[259)York, National Bureau of
Economic Research, 1932, 639 P .
NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL CONFERENCE BOARD . A Picture of World Economic
Conditions at the Beginning of 1932 . New York, Author, 1932, 286 p .
[259)

--- PAGE BREAK ---u of
Economic Research, 1932, 639 P .
NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL CONFERENCE BOARD . A Picture of World Economic
Conditions at the Beginning of 1932 . New York, Author, 1932, 286 p .
[259)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The latest volume of the series begun in 2928 and including semi-
annual volumes for 11929 and 2930 and one volume for 2932 .
SALTER, SIR ARTHUR. Recovery, the Second Effort . New York, Century,
2932 . 353 P •
Shows the fictitious recovery of the world after the war and offers
concrete suggestions for overcoming the present crisis .
SOMARY, FELIX. Changes in the Structure of World Economics since the
War. London, King, 2932, 222 p.
A European banker reviews the outstanding economic problems
.
STAMP, SIR JosIAH. The Financial Aftermath of War. New York, Scribner,
2932. 249 p.
The fundamentals of inflation, reparations, debts, and the gold standard .
TARIFFS AND FOREIGN TRADE
CHALMERS, HENRY. Current Trends in Foreign Tariffs and Commercial
Policies : Review of 293x . Washington, Government Printing Office, 1932 .
(Department of Commerce, Trade Information Bulletin, No . 790.)
CLARx, EvANS, ed. Boycotts and Peace. New York, Harper, 11932, 401 P .
This report of a committee set up by the Twentieth Century Fund
contains the results of the committee's investigation of the practicability
of boycotts as sanctions in international crises .
GREAT BRITAIN . IMPORT DUTIES ADVISORY COMMITTEE . Import Duties.
Recommendations
. .
. London, H. M. Stationery Office, 2932, 26 p .
Cmd. 4066 .
HODGSON, R. A. An Introduction to International Trade and Tariffs . Lon-
don, Pitman, 1932, 207 p.
A conventional text .
IMPERIAL
ECONOMIC CONFERENCE,
OTTAWA. Report of the Conference .
Ottawa, King's Printer, 2932, 2 V.
Contains proceedings of the conference together with texts of the
trade agreements concluded . A summary of the proceedings and the
texts of the agreements has been published by H. M. Stationery Office,
London, as Cmd . 4274
LEAGUE OF NATIONS. Memorandum on International Trade and Balances
of Payments. Annual since 2923 .
First issues give comparative figures from 2920 to date of publication ;
later ones include figures for three years only .
ROYAL INSTITUTE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS. British Tariff Policy, 2932 .
London, Author, 2932, 55 P .
Report on measures taken by the British Government to promote ex-
ports and protect the home market .
TAUSSIG, F.. W. Tariff History of the United States . New York, Putnam,
8th ed, 11932, 536 p .
This edition of a standard work, first published in 2888, carries the
story through the ,Tariff Act of 2930 .
U. S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE . Balance of International Payments of
the United States . Washington, Government Printing Office. Annual
since 11922 .
. Commerce Yearbook . Washington, Government Printing Office.
Annual.
Vol. 2 gives data of United States trade with foreign countries,
{260)ashington, Government Printing Office. Annual
since 11922 .
. Commerce Yearbook . Washington, Government Printing Office.
Annual.
Vol. 2 gives data of United States trade with foreign countries,
{260)

--- PAGE BREAK ---t Printing Office. Annual
since 11922 .
. Commerce Yearbook . Washington, Government Printing Office.
Annual.
Vol. 2 gives data of United States trade with foreign countries,
{260)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

U.
S .
HOUSE .
COMMITTEE OR WAYS AND
MEANS.
Hearings
on . .
.
Equalization
of
Tariff Duties by
Compensating for Depreciation of
Foreign Currencies, May 12-18, 1932 . Washington, Government Printing
Office, 1932, 437 p.
U. S. TARIFF COMMISSION. Regulation of Tariffs in Foreign Countries by
Administrative Action. Washington, Government Printing Office, 1932,
33 P
Summary of regulations given alphabetically by country .
FOREIGN LOANS
DULLES, ELEANOR LANSING. The Bank for International Settlements at
Work. New York, Macmillan, 1932, 643 P .
An account of the functioning of the Bank during its first two years .
GERMAN PUBLIC DEBTORS' CREDIT AGREEMENT OF 1932 . Berlin, Reichs-
bank, 1932, 30 p.
Terms on which German short-term foreign indebtedness was extended.
HUNGARIAN STANDSTILL AGREEMENT OF JUNE 1932 . 1932, 7 P.
The text of the agreement between certain American banks and their
Hungarian debtors to prolong the life of short-term commercial credits.
KuczmNsxI, ROBERT R. Bankers' Profits from German Loans. Washington,
Brookings Institution, 1932, 228 p .
A study of the profits accruing to the bankers who brought out German
loans in the United States .
LEAGUE OF NATIONS. FINANCIAL COMMITTEE. Report to the Council on
the Work of the 49th Session of the Committee . (C.328.M.x99.1932.II.A .)
Deals largely with the financial and credit problems
of Austria, Hun-
gary, Bulgaria, and Greece.
NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL CONFERENCE BOARD . The International Financial
Position of the United States. New York, Author, 1929, 276 p.
Traces the change of the United States from a debtor to a creditor
nation.
STODDARD, LoTxaop. Europe and Our Money. New York, Macmillan, 1932,
266 p.
An attack on the uncritical investment of American money in Europe.
U. S. DEPARTMENT
OF
COMMERCE. American Underwriting of Foreign
Securities in 1931 . Washington, Government Printing Office, 1932. 17 P .
(Trade Information Bulletin, No. 802 .)
.
Handbook on American Underwriting of Foreign Securities .
Washington, Government Printing Office, 1930. (Trade Promotion Series,
No. 104.)
A New Estimate of American Investments Abroad . Washington,
Government Printing Office, 1931 . (Trade Information Bulletin, No . 767 .)
U . S. SENATE . COMMITTEE ON FINANCE . Hearings
. .
. to Investigate the
Sale, Flotation, and Allocation
. .
. of Foreign Bonds or Securities in the
United States, December
18,
x931-February
10,
1932. Washington,
Government Printing Office, 1931-1932, 4 parts .
WAR DEBTS
GERMAN STILLHALTUNG AGREEMENT, 1931 ; German Credit Agreement of
1932 ; Report of the Foreign Creditors' Standstill Committee, 1932.
[26x}n,
Government Printing Office, 1931-1932, 4 parts .
WAR DEBTS
GERMAN STILLHALTUNG AGREEMENT, 1931 ; German Credit Agreement of
1932 ; Report of the Foreign Creditors' Standstill Committee, 1932.
[26x}

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng Office, 1931-1932, 4 parts .
WAR DEBTS
GERMAN STILLHALTUNG AGREEMENT, 1931 ; German Credit Agreement of
1932 ; Report of the Foreign Creditors' Standstill Committee, 1932.
[26x}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GREAT BETrAIN. FOREIGN OFFICE. Itinal Act of the Lausanne Conference,
Lausanne, July 9,
1932. London, H . M. Stationery Office,
1932, 16 p.
Cmd. 4126 .
 . Further Documents Relating to the Settlement Reached at the
Lausanne Conference, Lausanne, June l6-July 9, 1932 . London, H . M.
Stationery Office, 1932, 6 p. Cmd. 4129.
THE LAUSANNE AGREEMENT. New York, Carnegie Endowment for Inter-
national Peace, 1932, 43 p. (International Conciliation, September 1932,
No. 282 .)
Contains statement of Nicholas Murray Butler ; radio address of Wil.
ham E . Borah ; texts of the final act of the Lausanne Conference and of
other pertinent documents .
LLOYD GEORGE, DAVID . The Truth about Reparations and War Debts. New
York, Doubleday,
193;', 15o p.
The British statesman's revised opinion of these vital questions.
LONDON. CONFERENCE OF INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF EXPERTS, Au.
gust 11 and 13, 1931 . Report on Suspension of Certain Intergovernmental
Debts Falling Due in the Course of the Year Ending June
30, 1932,
together with Protocols and Declarations . London, H., M.; Stationery
Office, 1931 . 44 P. Cmd. 3947 .
MOULTON, H. G., and PAsvorsKY, LEO. War Debts and World Pros-
perity. Washington, Brookings Institution,
1932, 498 p .
A detailed examination of both the Interallied war debts and repara-
tions up to and including the Lausanne agreement . Much statistical
material .
REPORT OF THE SPECIAL
ADVISORY COMMITTEE CONVENED UNDER THE
AGREEMENT WITH GERMANY CONCLUDED AT THE HAGUE ON JANUARY
20, 1930, BASLE, DECEMBER 23, 1931 . London, H. M. Stationery Office,
1932, 40 p. Cmd.
3995 .
Known as the Young Plan Advisory Committee .
TUCKER, T. G., and others. We Have Paid Enough. London, Simpkins,
1932, 129 P.
The title indicates the view of war debts taken by the authors .
YOUNG AND OTTLEY . Facts concerning War Debts as of September
1, 1932 .
New York, Author, 1932, 103 P .
The war-debt story, particularly its effect on the United States end its
trade, told in charts,
GOLD
CAMEL, GUSTAV.
The Crisis in the World's Monetary System . Oxford,
Clarendon Press, 1932, 102 p.
The interaction of war debts, reparations, gold distribution, prices, and
tariffs .
GREGORY, T. E. The Gold Standard and Its Future .. New York, Dutton,
1932, 115 P .
A discussion of the situation resulting from the breakdown of the
gold-standard mechanism and of steps toward its reestablishment.
LEAGUE
OF NATIONS .. Interim Report of the Gold Delegation of the
Financial Committee, September
8, 1930. (C.375.M.161 .193o .II.)
 . Second Interim Report of the Gold Delegation. (C.75.M.31 .1931 .
262 1UE
OF NATIONS .. Interim Report of the Gold Delegation of the
Financial Committee, September
8, 1930. (C.375.M.161 .193o .II.)
 . Second Interim Report of the Gold Delegation. (C.75.M.31 .1931 .
262 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---erim Report of the Gold Delegation of the
Financial Committee, September
8, 1930. (C.375.M.161 .193o .II.)
 . Second Interim Report of the Gold Delegation. (C.75.M.31 .1931 .
262 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Report (Final) of the Gold
Delegation.
(C.So2.M.243 .r932.
ILA.)
• Functioning of the Gold Standard . (C.647.M.261 .1931 .II .A.)
L
•
egislation on Gold. 1930. (C.373.M.159.1930 .II.)
Selected Documents on
the Distribution of Gold Submitted to
the Gold Delegation. (C.102.M.38.1g3x .II.A .)
. Selected Documents Submitted to the Gold Delegation
of the
Financial Committee. (C.374.M.%6 o.x93o .IL )
ROYAL INSTITUTE of INTERNATIONAL APFAtas . The International Gold
Problem. London, Author, 1931, 240 P.
A record of the discussions of a study group of the Institute .
WRICHT, QUINCY, ed. Gold and Monetary Stabilization. Chicago, University
of Chicago Press, 1932 . 174 P.
Lectures at the Norman Wait Harris Institute, 2932, by Jacob Viner,
H. P. Willis, L. D. Edie, and others.
LATIN AMERICA
DIFFIE, B. W. and J. W. Porto Rico: A Broken Pledge. New York, Van-
guard, 1931, 287 P.
Political, social, and economic conditions in the island after thirty
years of American rule .
FETTER, FRANx W. Monetary Inflation in Chile. Princeton, Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1931, 226 p.
Though essentially a financial study, the political background is also
given .
MILLSPAUGH, ARTHUR C. Haiti under American Control . Boston, World
Peace Foundation, 1931, 266 p . -
The Haiti situation from 1915 to r93o, by the former financial adviser-
general of Haiti ..
NORJsANO, J. F . The Struggle for South America, Boston, Houghton, 2931,
294 P .
South America's place in the world.
NORTON, HENRY KITTRIWGE. The Coming of South America. New York,
Day, x932, 300 p.
A survey at first hand of recent events and problems .
RIPPY, J. F. The Capitalists and Colombia . New York, Vanguard, 1931,
288 p.
A study of foreign interests and activities in Colombia
.
Historical Evolution of Hispanic America. New York, Crofts,
1932. 597 P•
ROBERTSON, WILLIAM SPENCE . History of the Latin American Nations .
New York, Appleton, 2nd ed ., 1932, 821 P.
The revised edition of a standard text .
THOMPSON, WALLACE. Greater America. New York, Dutton, 1932, 275 p .
The author places special stress on economic aspects of Latin American
problems.
U. S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE .
Financial Developments in Latin
America during 1931 . Washington, Government Printing Office, 1932,
51 p. (Trade Information Bulletin, No . 810 .)
WRIGHT, PHILIP G . The Cuban Situation and Our Treaty Relations. Wash-
ington, Brookings Institution, 1931, 207 p .
1263 1ernment Printing Office, 1932,
51 p. (Trade Information Bulletin, No . 810 .)
WRIGHT, PHILIP G . The Cuban Situation and Our Treaty Relations. Wash-
ington, Brookings Institution, 1931, 207 p .
1263 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---ice, 1932,
51 p. (Trade Information Bulletin, No . 810 .)
WRIGHT, PHILIP G . The Cuban Situation and Our Treaty Relations. Wash-
ington, Brookings Institution, 1931, 207 p .
1263 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A review
of the American intervention and the subsequent treaties,
with special reference to their effects on Cuba's economic life.
MANCHURIA
CLARK, GROVER. Economic Rivalries in China. New Haven, Yale University
Press, 1932, 132 P .
A concise account of the shifts and changes in Chinese economic
life.
CONDLIFFE, J . B. China Today : Economic. Boston, World Peace Founda-
tion, 1932, 224 p .
A documented study of Chinese agriculture,
industry, finance, and
trade.
ETHERTON, PERCY THOMAS, and TILTMAN, HUBERr HESSELL . Manchuria,
the Cockpit of Asia. New York, Stokes, 1932, 337 P .
A concise exposition of the political and economic rivalries
in Man-
churia, stressing the needs and claims of Japan .
GENEVA RESEARCH
INFORMATION COMMITTEE . The League and Man-
churia . Geneva, Author, 1931-32 4 parts. (October, November, Decem-
ber 1931, May 1932
A day-by-day analysis of events and of League action in dealing with
them from the outbreak of the trouble to April
30, 1932 .
INSTITUTE of PACIFIC RELATIONS. Problems of the Pacific, 1931. Chicago,
University of-Chicago Press, 1932 . 548 P .
Proceedings of the Fourth Conference, held at Hangchow and Shanghai,
October 21-November 2, 1931 .
KAWAKAMI, KIYOSHI KARL . Japan Speaks on the Sino-Japanese Crisis. New
York, Macmillan,
1932, 200 p .
A strong presentation of the Japanese case, written by an
able news-
paperman .
Koo; V . K. WELLINGTON . Memoranda Presented to the Lytton Commis-
sion. New York, Chinese Cultural Society,
1932, 2 v.
The official text of all memoranda presented
to the Commission, by
the Chinese Assessor, for its information and guidance .
LATrIMoRE, OWEN. Manchuria : Cradle of Conflict. New York, Macmillan,
1932, 327 P.
This volume, dealing at length with the fundamental factors in the
conflict, is based upon Chinese sources as well as upon material in
Western languages and upon personal observations made during a re-
cent stay of many months in Manchuria .
LEAGUE OF NATIONS. Appeal from the Chinese Government in Virtue of
Article 15 of the Covenant ; Explanatory Note
Communicated by the
Japanese Government. (A. {Extra 6 . 2932 . VII.)
Statement Communicated by the Chinese Delegation .
(A. [Extr .] 1 . 1932 . VII .)
Observations of the Japanese Government on the Re-
port of the Commission of Enquiry. (C.775.M.366.1932 .VII .)
Report by the Secretary-General on the Action Taken
by the League on the Sino-Japanese Dispute . (A. [Extr.] 4. 1932. VII .)
Report of the Commission of Enquiry. (C.663.M.32o.
1932. VII.)
The official report of the Lytton Commission
is accompanied by a
[264}League on the Sino-Japanese Dispute . (A. [Extr.] 4. 1932. VII .)
Report of the Commission of Enquiry. (C.663.M.32o.
1932. VII.)
The official report of the Lytton Commission
is accompanied by a
[264}

--- PAGE BREAK ---Japanese Dispute . (A. [Extr.] 4. 1932. VII .)
Report of the Commission of Enquiry. (C.663.M.32o.
1932. VII.)
The official report of the Lytton Commission
is accompanied by a
[264}

--- PAGE BREAK ---

good selection of : maps. The U . S. Department of State has issued a
verbatim reprint of the report itself, omitting the annexes and maps .
Supplementary Documents to the Report of the Com-
mission of Enquiry. (C.663.M.32o.x932 .VII.Annexes.)
Contains Preliminary Report of the Commission, Appendix, and Special
Studies by the experts of the Commission .
. Minutes of the 65th Session of the Council .
(Official Journal,
December x931 .)
 . Minutes of the 66th Session of the Council. (Official Journal,
March 1932, parts I and 111, and May 1932 .)
. Records of the Special Session of the Assembly Convened
in
Virtue of Article
15 of the Covenant at the Request of the Chinese
Government. (Official Journal, Special Supplement, Nos .
rot
and 102 .)
 . Reports of the Committee of Enquiry Set Up at Shanghai under
Article 15, Paragraph x, of the Covenant. (A. [Extr.)
3. 1932. VII .)
MANCHUKUO. DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS.
Proclamations, State-
ments and Communications
of the Manchukuo Government. Hsinking,
Author, 1932, 22 p .
Official texts . Includes a diagrammatic chart of the government or-
ganization of Manchukuo .
MENG CHIN. China Speaks on the Conflict between China and Japan . New
York, Macmillan, 1932, 211 P .
The Chinese case presented by the Associate Director of the China
Institute in America . This volume should be read with
that by
Kawakami.
MoULTON, HAROLD G. Japan : An Economic and Financial Appraisal
. .
.
with the Collaboration of Jumichi Ko . Washington, Brookings Institution,
193x, 645 :P.
ORCHARD, JOHN E. Japan's Economic Position : The Progress of Industrial-
ization. New York, Whittlesey House, 1930,
520 p.
Valuable for an understanding of the part played by Manchuria
in
modern Japanese economy .
SoKozsicy, GEORGE E . The Tinder Box of Asia. New York, Doubleday,
1932, 376 p.
This story of the Manchurian conflict,
by a man long resident in
China, supplies a concise' statement of Japanese,
Russian, and Amer-
ican interests in Manchuria. Contains a useful bibliography .
STIMsoN, HENRY L. The Pact of Paris : Three Years of Development. New
York, Foreign Affairs, Special Supplement to Vol. XI, No. 1, 9 p.
The text of the address by the Secretary of State before
the Council
on Foreign Relations, August 8, 1932 . Also published as Publication
No. 357 of the U. S. Department of State .
U. S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE . Text of Letter from the Secretary
of State
.
. to the Honorable William E. Borah. Washington, Government
Printing Office, 1932. 7 P.
Sets forth the policy of the government toward the present
Sino-Jap-
anese dispute .
WARE, EDITH ELLEN. Business and Politics in the Far East. New Haven,
Yale University Press, x932, 250 p .
A study of certain fundamental factors in the problems of China,
Japan, and Manchuria.
[ 265 ]WARE, EDITH ELLEN. Business and Politics in the Far East. New Haven,
Yale University Press, x932, 250 p .
A study of certain fundamental factors in the problems of China,
Japan, and Manchuria.
[ 265 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---usiness and Politics in the Far East. New Haven,
Yale University Press, x932, 250 p .
A study of certain fundamental factors in the problems of China,
Japan, and Manchuria.
[ 265 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

YOUNG, C. WALTER.
The International Relations of Manchuria. Chicago,
University of Chicago Press, 1929, 307 P.
A useful r€sum€ of the history of the last forty years
.
. Japan's Jurisdiction and International Legal Position in Man-
churia . Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, I93I, 3 v.
An authoritative discussion of the legal questions involved in Sino .
Japanese relations.
DISARMAMENT
BERnAHL, CLARENCE A. Disarmament and Equality. Geneva, Geneva R&
search Center, April 1932, 16 p. (Geneva Special Studies, V. 3, No. 4.)
This examination of the claim for equality in rights is intended to
present this problem .in disarmament in contrast to the study of
"Sanctions and Security," by P. B . Potter.
DECLARATION OF BR;nsm DISARMAMENT POLICY. London, H. M. Stationery
Office,
1932, 8 p . Grid. 4122 .
DISARMAMENT:
Articles by Viscount Cecil of Chelwood and Norman H
.
Davis- and texts of official documents . New York, Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace, 1932. 74 p- (International Conciliation, Decem-
ber 1932, No. 285 .)
The accomplishments of the General Disarmament Conference from
its opening to its adjournment on July 23 . 1932, by two of its leaders .
ENGELY, GrovANNL The Politics of Naval Disarmament. London, Williams
and Norgate,
1932, 301 p .
General study of the . disarmament question as it touches sea power .
LEAGUE OP NATIONS. Armaments Year-Book. Annual since 1924,
Contains general and statistical information .
Statistical Year-Book of the Trade in Arms and Ammunition .
Annual since
1924 .
Exports and imports for fifty-nine countries and forty-nine colonies,
according to class of goods, by countries of destination and origin,
and balance for the trade .
Documents of the Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament
Conference, Series I-X . 1926- 31-
Series I-VI, VIII, and X contain the minutes of the six sessions of
the Preparatory Commission. Series V, VI, VII, and IX contain the
minutes of the four sessions of the Committee on Arbitration and
Security.
Series XI. (C.428.M.178.1931.IX.)
Part I : Index containing a detailed analysis of the Documents of the
Preparatory Commission (Series I-X, Reports of Sub-Commissions A
and B, and Reports of the Committee of Experts on Budgetary Ques-
tions, given below) .
Part II. Index of the Documents of the Committee on Arbitration and
Security .
Draft Disarmament Convention, Geneva, December
9, 1930 .
(C .687 .M .28o .1930 .IX.)
Also published in U . S . Department of State Publication No . 192 (Con-
ference Series No . 7)
and International Conciliation, December 1931 .
Report of the Committee of Experts on Budgetary Questions .
(C.182.M .69 .1931 .IX .)artment of State Publication No . 192 (Con-
ference Series No . 7)
and International Conciliation, December 1931 .
Report of the Committee of Experts on Budgetary Questions .
(C.182.M .69 .1931 .IX .)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LEAGUE OF NATIONS . CONFERENCE FOR THE REDUCTION AND LIMITATION
OF ARMAMENTS, 1932. Journal, February 2-August 6, 1932,
116 issues .
Verbatim Record (Revised) of the Plenary Meetings, February
2-24 and July 23 . 1932 . . (Conf. D
./P
: V .r.-r8 .)
. Survey of
Proposals Made by Various Delegations during the
General Discussion. (Conf. D . 99 .)
. Ant COMMISSION .
Collection of Replies to the Questionnaires
concerning the Organisation of National Civilian Forces
. (Cnnf. D./C.A.8.)
 . Addendum. (Conf . D ./C.A .8.Addendum.)
Objective Study on the Internationalisation of Civil Aviation.
(Conf. D./C.A.9 .)
GENERAL COMMISSION . Declaration by Mr. Gibson at the Meet-
ing Of June 22,
1932. Statement of
.
. . President Hoover. (Conf. D.
126.)
.-
NAVAL COMMISSION . Report to the General Commission. (Coaf.
D. 121 .)
MYERs, DENYs PETER.,World Disarmament . Boston, World Peace Founda-
tion, 1932, 370 P.
Historical survey with a discussion of the relation of disarmament
to arbitration and security. Texts of pertinent documents and statistical
material .
POTTER, P1rsAM B. Sanctions and Security : An Analysis of the French
and American Views . Geneva, Geneva Research Center, February 1932,
21 p. (Geneva Special Studies, V.
3, No .
2 .)
WHEELER-BENNEIT, JOHN WHEELER .
Disarmament and Security since
Locarno. New York, Macmillan, 1932, 383 P .
An excellent background study.
[ 267 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---a Special Studies, V.
3, No .
2 .)
WHEELER-BENNEIT, JOHN WHEELER .
Disarmament and Security since
Locarno. New York, Macmillan, 1932, 383 P .
An excellent background study.
[ 267 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDICES
I. (a) Vote in the Senate and House of Representatives on the
Ratification of the Hoover Moratorium.
(b) Various Estimates of German Payments on Reparation
Account.
(c) Payments Due the United States Postponed in
1931-32
under the Hoover Moratorium, and Payments Falling Due in
the Fiscal Year 1932-33.
(d) Excerpts from the Agreement with Germany Negotiated
at Lausanne, June 16-July 9, 1932 .
II. (a) External Debts of Latin American Countries .
(b) Cumulative Capital Movement between
the United
States and Other Countries, 1922-193 1 -
(c) Policy of the Department of State Concerning Foreign
Loans .
(d) A Note on Germany's Private Debts .
III. (a) Countries
Suspending the Gold
or Gold Exchange
Standard and Adopting Exchange Control .
(b) Import Quotas in Operation in Continental Europe
.
(c) A Note on the Conference at Stresa .
(d) Foreign Trade-Quantity Index .
(e) Trade of Great Britain with Foreign Countries and with
Other Parts of the British Empire.
(f) Balance of International Payments of the United States,
1922-31 .
IV. Passages from Republican and Democratic Platforms Dealing
with Foreign Policy and the Tariff .
1928-31 .
(e) Significant Business Indices, United States,
1929-31 .
(f) Trend of Dividend Payments and Railway Earnings,
United States, 1930-32 .
[ 268 )
V. (a) Indices of Production in Important Countries .
(b)
(c)
(d)
Commodity Prices in Important Countries.
Unemployment in Important Countries .
Yield and Value of Staple Crops, United
States,

--- PAGE BREAK ---es of Production in Important Countries .
(b)
(c)
(d)
Commodity Prices in Important Countries.
Unemployment in Important Countries .
Yield and Value of Staple Crops, United
States,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VI. Note of the Nineteen American Governments to Bolivia and
Paraguay, August 3, 1932, Invoking the Stimson Doctrine
.
VII. (a) The Findings of the Lytton Commission .
(b) Text of the Treaty between Japan and "Manchukuo ."
VIII. (a) Arms Limitation: The First American Proposal .
(b) Arms Limitation : The Second American Proposal .
(c) Arms Limitation : President Hoover's Proposal .
(d) Resolution Adopted by the Conference for the Reduc-
tion and Limitation of Armaments at Geneva, July 23. 1932 .
(e) The Five-Power Declaration of December
11, 1932 .
IX. Chronology of Important Events Affecting American Foreign
Relations, 1932 .
1269)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX I
(a) VOTE IN THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTA .
TIVES ON THE RATIFICATION OF THE HOOVER
MORATORIUM
t 270 )
House, Dec. i8, I93I
Senate, Dec. 2.2., i 43I
Members Voting
Members Voting
State
Alabama
Yea
3
Nay
7
Yea
2.
Nay
Arizona
I
2.
Arkansas
3
4
California
Colorado
Connecticut
II
I
5
I
I
I
2.
I
Delaware
I
2
Florida
2.
2
2
Georgia
5
7
2.
Idaho
2.
2
Illinois
22
2.
2
Indiana
6
7
2
Iowa
10
2.
Kansas
7
2.
Kentucky
4
7
I
Louisiana
6
I
Maine
4
2.
Maryland
6
2 .
Massachusetts
16
2
Michigan
Minnesota
Ig
9
I
I
Mississippi
2.
6
I
Missouri
6
Io
2.
Montana
I
I
2.
Nebraska
4
2 .
I
Nevada
New Hampshire . .
.
NewJersey
I
I
II
I
2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---6
2 .
Massachusetts
16
2
Michigan
Minnesota
Ig
9
I
I
Mississippi
2.
6
I
Missouri
6
Io
2.
Montana
I
I
2.
Nebraska
4
2 .
I
Nevada
New Hampshire . .
.
NewJersey
I
I
II
I
2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

State .
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina . . . .
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania . . . .
Rhode Island
South Carolina. . . .
South Dakota . .
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
House, Dec .
1831
Senate, Dec . 22, 193
Members Voting ;
Members Voting
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
I
2
2
42-
7
3
19
3
31
3
3
2.
4
4
2.
2
5
4
6,
I0
I
3
7
I
2.
2
I
2.
2
2
Recapitulation
Vote in the House : For the moratorium, 318 ; against, zoo.
Vote in the Senate: For the moratorium,
69; against,
12.
(b) VARIOUS ESTIMATES OF GERMAN PAYMENTS ON
REPARATION ACCOUNT
(In millions of reichsmarks)
Before
Dawes and
These wide variations in the estimates are due mainly to differ-
ent methods of valuing the properties transferred and to the Qmis-
sion from the lower estimates of such items as the costs of military
occupation, which do not constitute reparations proper .
[ 271 ]
Sept ., 1924 Young Plans
Total
Reparation Commission
10,027
11,096
2.1,123
Institute of Economics
26,000
11,096
37,096
German Government
56,577
11,o96
67,673

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns proper .
[ 271 ]
Sept ., 1924 Young Plans
Total
Reparation Commission
10,027
11,096
2.1,123
Institute of Economics
26,000
11,096
37,096
German Government
56,577
11,o96
67,673

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(c) PAYMENTS DUE THE UNITED STATES POSTPONED
IN 1931-32 UNDER THE HOOVER MORATORIUM, AND
PAYMENTS FALLING DUE IN THE FISCAL YEAR
193 2-33
z. Payments from Countries Formerly
Receiving German Reparations
(d) EXCERPTS FROM THE AGREEMENT WITH GERMANY
NEGOTIATED AT LAUSANNE, JUNE i6-JULY 9, 1932
Declaration
The powers signatory of the present agreement have assembled at
Lausanne to deal' with one of the problems resulting from the war,
with the firm intention of helping to create a new order, permitting
the establishment and development of confidence between
the na-
tions in a mutual spirit of reconciliation, collaboration and justice
.
272 1
Payments
Postponed
Payments
Due in
1931-31
1932-33
Belgium
7,950,000
8,450,000
France
50,000,000
60,000,000
Great Britain 159,52-0,000
171 ,500,000
Greece
1,109,080
1 ,149,300
Italy
14,706,12-5
14,790,875
Poland
7,486,835
7,987,047-
Rumania
800,000
1,000,000
Yugoslavia
250,000
275,000
z. Payments from Other Debtor Coun-
tries
Austria
287,556
2.87,556
Czechoslovakia
3,000,000.
3,000,000
Estonia
600,372
640,692.
Finland
312-,2-95
334,82-7
Hungary
69,342
68,989
Latvia
z50,6S3
267,813
Lithuania
2.14,545
224477
Total 246,566,803
2.69,976,571
Germany, Army Costs
6,000,000
6,000,000
Grand Total 252,566,803
2-75,976,571

--- PAGE BREAK ---ngary
69,342
68,989
Latvia
z50,6S3
267,813
Lithuania
2.14,545
224477
Total 246,566,803
2.69,976,571
Germany, Army Costs
6,000,000
6,000,000
Grand Total 252,566,803
2-75,976,571

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They do not claim that the task- accomplished at Lausanne, which
will completely put an
.end to reparations, can alone assure that peace
which all the nations desire. But they hope that an . achievement of
such significance and so arduously attained will be understood and
appreciated by all the pacific elements in Europe and the world, and
that it will be followed by fresh achievements .
These further successes will be more readily won if the . nations
will rally to this new effort in the cause of real peace, which can
only be complete if it is applied both in the economic and in the
political sphere and rejects all possibility of resort to arms or to
violence.
The signatory powers will make every effort to resolve the prob-
lems which exist at thee present moment or may . arise subsequently
in the spirit which has inspired the present agreement .
Article r
The German government shall deliver to the Bank for Interna-
tional Settlements German government 5 per cent. redeemable bonds,
to the amount of three milliard reichsmarks gold of the present
standard of weight and fineness, to be negotiated under the fol-
lowing arrangements :-
(i) The Bank for International Settlements shall hold the bonds
as trustee.
(2)
The bonds shall not be negotiated by the Bank for Inter-
national Settlements before the expiry of three years from the sig-
nature of the present agreement . Fifteen years after the date of the
said signature the bonds which the Bank for International Settle-
ments has not been able to negotiate shall be canceled .
(3) After the above period of three years the Bank for Inter-
national Settlements shall negotiate the bonds by means of public
issues on the markets as and when possible, in such amounts as it
thinks fit, provided that no issue shall be made at a rate below go
per cent.
The German government shall have the right at any time to
redeem at par, in whole or in part, the bonds not yet issued by the
Bank for International Settlements. In determining the terms of
issue of the bonds, the Bank for International Settlements shall take
into account the desirability of giving to the German government the
right to redeem the bonds after a reasonable period .
(4) The bonds shall carry interest at 5 per cent. and sinking fund
{ 273 1ke
into account the desirability of giving to the German government the
right to redeem the bonds after a reasonable period .
(4) The bonds shall carry interest at 5 per cent. and sinking fund
{ 273 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---desirability of giving to the German government the
right to redeem the bonds after a reasonable period .
(4) The bonds shall carry interest at 5 per cent. and sinking fund
{ 273 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

at i per cent. a s from the date on which they are negotiated. They
shall be free of all German taxes, present and future .
(5) The proceeds of the bonds, as and when issued, shall be
placed to a special account, the allocation of which shall be settled
by a further agreement in due course between the governments,
other than Germany, signatory to the present agreement .
(6) If any foreign loan is issued by the German government, or
with its guarantee, at any time after the coming into force of the
present agreement, the German government shall offer to apply up
to the equivalent of one-third of the net cash proceeds of the loan
raised to the purchase of bonds held by the Bank for International
Settlements . The purchase price shall be such that the net yield on
the bonds so purchased would be the "same as the net yield of the
loan so raised . This paragraph does not refer to loans for a period of
not more thann twelve months.
(7) If, after five years from the signature of the present agree-
ment, the Bank for International Settlements considers that the
credit of the German government is restored, but the quotations of
its loans remain none the less below the minimum price of issue
fixed under paragraph (3) above, the minimum price may be varied
by a decision of the Board of the Bank for International Settlements,
which decision shall require a two-thirds majority .
Further, at the request of the German government, the rate of
interest may be reduced below 5 per cent. if issues can be made
at par.
(8) The Bank for International Settlements shall have power to
settle all questions as to the currency and denomination of bonds
issued, and also all questions as to charges and costs of issue, which
it shall have the right to deductfrom the proceeds of the issue.
In considering any questions relating to the issue of bonds, the
Board of the Bank for International Settlements shall take the advice
of the President of the Reichsbank, but decisions may be made by
a majority vote.
Article 2
On its coming into force the present agreement will put to an end
and be substituted for the reparation regime provided for in the
agreement with Germany, signed at The Hague on the loth January,
1930, and the agreements signed at London on the 11th August,
1931, and at Berlin on the 6th June, 1932 ; the obligations resulting
from the present agreement will completely replace the former
f 27411930, and the agreements signed at London on the 11th August,
1931, and at Berlin on the 6th June, 1932 ; the obligations resulting
from the present agreement will completely replace the former
f 2741

--- PAGE BREAK ---ents signed at London on the 11th August,
1931, and at Berlin on the 6th June, 1932 ; the obligations resulting
from the present agreement will completely replace the former
f 2741

--- PAGE BREAK ---

obligations of Germany comprised in the annuities of the "New
Plan."1
Articles 3, 4,, g, 6
{Enumerate in detail the sections of previous agreements
which are abrogated and the sections which are to remaia
in force, the latter being chiefly those providing for the
establishment of the Bank for International Settlements) .
Article 7
The signatory governments declare that nothing in the present
agreement diminishes or varies or shall be deemed to diminish or
vary the rights of the bondholders of the German External Loan,
1924, or of the' German Government International 51/2 per cent.
Loan, 1930.
Any necessary adaptation of the machinery relating to the manner
in which the obligations of the German government, with respect to
the German External Loan, 1924, and with respect to the German
Government International 51/2 per cent. Loan, 1930, will be dis-
charged will be subject to mutual arrangement between the German
government, on the one hand, and the Bank for International . Set-
tlements, Fiscal Agent of the Trustees of the German External Loan,
1924, and Trustee of the German Government International 51/2
per cent. Loan, 1930, on the other hand .
Article 8
The present agreement will, on its coming into force, be notified
by the government of the French Republic to the Bank for Inter-
national Settlements with a view to the application by the bank of
the provisions which affect it; the said government will also inform
the bank, for the purposes of its statutes, that the "New Plan" is no
longer in effect.
Article 9
Any disputes, whether between the governments signatory of the
present agreement, or between one or more of those governments
and the Bank for International Settlements, as to the interpretation
or application of this agreement shall be referred to the Arbitration
Tribunal set up under Article 15 of The Hague Agreement with
More generally known as the Young Plan.
[ 275 3to the interpretation
or application of this agreement shall be referred to the Arbitration
Tribunal set up under Article 15 of The Hague Agreement with
More generally known as the Young Plan.
[ 275 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Germany. The relevant provisions of that Article and of Annex XII
of the said agreement will for this purpose be applicable .
Articles ro and ri
[Prescribe the routine for the ratification of the agree-
ment] .
Source : Final Act of the Lausanne Conference
(Cmd. 4126) .
[ 276 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX II
(a) EXTERNAL DEBTS OF LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES
[ 277 1
a The amounts when reported in national currencies are converted
into dollars
at the par of exchange, inasmuch as the external debts are usually payable in gold
and the exchange depreciation does not reduce the sums payable.
b The Brazilian foreign debt is reported in pounds, dollars and francs.
Sources :
Latin
American
Financial Developments
during
1937 (U .
S.
Department of Commerce, Trade Information Bulletin No. 8ro) ; Revenues,
Expenditures and Public Debts of the
Latin American Countries,
1931
(Pan-American Union, Finance Series No . 3) .
Country
Argentina
Amount
(in national
currency)
995,95 1 ,000
Amount
(computed in
dollars'
422,781,199
Bolivia
172,982,274
63, 138,530
Brazil
b
520,29x,028
Chile 3,685,289,980
448,499,790
Colombia
83,474,962
81,246,180
Costa Rica
74,406,094
x8,601,523
Cuba
6o,344,000
60,344,000
Dominican Republic . .
x6,592,500
16,592,500
Ecuador
x14,836,982
22,967,396
El Salvador
34,713,900
x7,35 6,950
Guatemala
11,763,046
x 1,763,046
Haiti
71,645,808
14,329,161
Honduras
8,523,876
4,261 ,938
Mexico
946,958,898
472,0S9,010
Nicaragua
2,5 80,996
1,58o,996
Panama
15,646, 500
15,646,500
Paraguay
3,540,775
3,416 ,139
Peru
359,509,003
100,662,520
Uruguay . .
.
. . . .
142,867,484
147,753,551

--- PAGE BREAK ---72,0S9,010
Nicaragua
2,5 80,996
1,58o,996
Panama
15,646, 500
15,646,500
Paraguay
3,540,775
3,416 ,139
Peru
359,509,003
100,662,520
Uruguay . .
.
. . . .
142,867,484
147,753,551

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(b) CUMULATIVE CAPITAL MOVEMENT BE -1 WEEN THE
UNITED STATES AND OTHER COUNTRIES
1922-I931
(In millions of dollars)
Long-Term Investments
Short-Term Loans
Outflow .
Source: The Balance of International Payments of the United States
in
1931 (U. S. Department of Commerce, Trade Information Bulletin No. 803)-
(c) POLICY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE
CONCERNING FOREIGN LOANS
The Department's Official Statement of January 7, 1932
The Department of State has not passed on the security or the
merits of foreign loans . The sole aim of the department has been
in the interest of the citizens of the United States in connection
with its foreign relations.
These ideas have been repeatedly communicated to the public and
the public has been made to understand that the department's action
carried no implication as to government approval of loans. In fact,
it may be said that no foreign loan has ever been made which pur-
ported to have the approval of the American government
as to the
intrinsic value of the loan .
The arrangement in accordance with which banks or other insti-
tutions publicly offering foreign securities for sale inform the
American government of contemplated issues in advance of sale
arose after the war, when the American capital market assumed
leading importance as a source of financial aid and reconstruction .
t 278 )
U . S. A .
Abroad
Foreign in Net Capital
Net
Inflow
Total Net
Outflow
U. S. A .
Outflow
1922 . .
75 6
3
753
375
378
1923 .
.
966
2-43
723
378
345
1924 .
. 1,710
2-54
1,456
594
862.
1925 .
. 2,463
447
2,o16
533
1,483
1926 . . 3, 1 50
594
2.556
897.
1,664
197-7 . . 4,003
752.
3251
892.
2,359
1928 . . 5,198
1,2.29
3,969
666
3,303
192.9 . . 5,963
1675
4,288
679
3,609
1930 . . 6,308
1,72.5
4.5 83
194
4,389
1931 . .
6,143
1,778
4,365
571a
4,936897.
1,664
197-7 . . 4,003
752.
3251
892.
2,359
1928 . . 5,198
1,2.29
3,969
666
3,303
192.9 . . 5,963
1675
4,288
679
3,609
1930 . . 6,308
1,72.5
4.5 83
194
4,389
1931 . .
6,143
1,778
4,365
571a
4,936

--- PAGE BREAK ---. 4,003
752.
3251
892.
2,359
1928 . . 5,198
1,2.29
3,969
666
3,303
192.9 . . 5,963
1675
4,288
679
3,609
1930 . . 6,308
1,72.5
4.5 83
194
4,389
1931 . .
6,143
1,778
4,365
571a
4,936

--- PAGE BREAK ---

President Harding early in his administration expressed informally
to American bankers the desire of the government to be informed .
In order to clarify the government's purposes and to establish uni-
formity of procedure, the Department of State on March 3,
1922,
issued
the public
announcement attached' requesting that com-
munications regarding loans which the bankers proposed to issue
should be in writing and addressed to the Secretary of State The
procedure of consultation between various interested branches of the
government has varied slightly from time to time, as well as the
range of lending activity of which the department has wished to
take notice, and the phrases employed in replying to the bankers.
But the principles expounded in this first public notice have re-
mained fully in force, and continue to represent accurately the
basis,the purposes and the limitations of department practice .
On the whole, the department does not ask that it be notified of
purchases of foreign securities without intention of public sale, nor
of issues of stock or listing of stock of foreign enterprises on Ameri=
can stock exchanges . Similarly, security issues of American enter-
prises, the proceeds of which are employed to acquire or operate
properties abroad, have generally not been referred to it for notice.
The practice of notifying the department of contemplated issues of
securities for foreign private industrial enterprises has, on the whole,
been less, strictly observed and construed than that of notification
of government security issues.
The practice was first established with the idea of safeguarding
essential American interests that might be affected by the process
of foreign investment ; it has been-maintained as an informal, com-
paratively light and flexible check against the possibility that con-
templated loan issues might run counter to some governmental policy
or aim.
At
every
opportunity the department has made clear to the
bankers and interested public that this practice of advance notifica-
tion to the department and the absence of objection and comment
by the department must in no way be considered or portrayed as
approval of the loan. The department has never assumed responsi-
bility for the wisdom or worth of the loans of which it was in-
formed. Its responses avoid all judgment of the matters of business
risk involved and in no way represent measurement of the merit
of any foreign loan as a business proposition either for the bankers
or investors. In various instances the department, without assuming
i This announcement is not reprinted here, as its content is fully indicated
above.
[ 2791siness proposition either for the bankers
or investors. In various instances the department, without assuming
i This announcement is not reprinted here, as its content is fully indicated
above.
[ 2791

--- PAGE BREAK ---ither for the bankers
or investors. In various instances the department, without assuming
i This announcement is not reprinted here, as its content is fully indicated
above.
[ 2791

--- PAGE BREAK ---

authority or taking responsibility, has pointed out to banking groups
features of contemplated loan arrangements which seemed obscure
or unsound, or has called their attention to some feature of the
;financial or economic position of the borrowing country or enterprise
that might be overlooked, but all this was done merely as informa-
tion and without assumption of responsibility.
This attitude has perhaps been best stated in the report of the
Secretary of the Treasury of 1926 :
The question of the soundness of a particular loan is not one upon which
the federal government should pass, but it is the banker floating the loan
in this country who must decide this question in the first instance, and
it is the investor using
his
savings to acquire the security who, must
finally decide whether or not the risk is to be accepted .
Furthermore, the department has guarded against the possible
employment by banking houses of the exchange of communications
between them and the department in such a way as to assist in the
sale of securities. It instructed all institutions that announcements
offering foreign loans for sale should not state that they are con-
tingent upon an expression from the Department of State regarding
them, and that prospectuses and contracts should contain no refer-
ence to the attitude of the department.
Furthermore, as was stated in the report made by the Secretary of
State in response to Senate Resolution No. 293 (see Senate Docu-
ment No. 187, 71st Congress, 2d Session), in its replies the Depart-
ment of State has often been the spokesman of considerations ad-
vanced by other executive departments of this government. For
example, the Department of State carried out the policy recom-
mended by the World War Foreign Debt Commission of objections
to loans to nations which had not funded their national indebtedness
to the United States .
In ordinary practice the form of words employed by the Depart-
ment of State in acknowledging the advance notice of contemplated
loan issues has been, with immaterial variation, as follows :
In the light of the information before it, the Department of State offers
no objection to the flotation of this issue in the American market.
Or, in the very infrequent instances where some reason led the de-
partment to the contrary judgment, the department, usually after
explaining the reason therefor, employed in general merely the
negative of this form :
You will, therefore, appreciate that this department
is not in a position
to indicate that it perceives no objection to the financing to which you
refer.
[ 280 ]ral merely the
negative of this form :
You will, therefore, appreciate that this department
is not in a position
to indicate that it perceives no objection to the financing to which you
refer.
[ 280 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ive of this form :
You will, therefore, appreciate that this department
is not in a position
to indicate that it perceives no objection to the financing to which you
refer.
[ 280 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This form of reply was, after a first brief period, regularly sup-
plemented by the further paragraph :
You of course appreciate that, as pointed out in the department's an-
nouncement of March 3, 1922, the Department of State does not pass upon
the merits of foreign loans as business propositions nor assume any re-
sponsibility in connection with such transactions, also that no reference
to the attitude of this government
should be made in any prospectus or
otherwise.
Beginning August, 1929, it was decided to expedite the procedure
of consultation with other departments of this government, and to
simplify the forms used. Replies to bankers' letters were reduced
merely to a brief paragraph of acknowledgment, followed by the
sentence :
In reply you are informed that the Department is not interested in the
proposed financing .
In the case of Germany, where the German financial authorities
endeavored to guard and control borrowing by public authorities,
and set up for this purpose an advisory board, which, however, un-
der the German constitution, could not be given mandatory powers,
the department took cognizance of this situation and also of certain
other special considerations, and its replies to the bankers called
attention to various special features of the German situation .
The
replies therefore took on a somewhat more extended form, pre-
serving, however, the notice to the effect that the department did
not pass upon the merits of loans as business propositions nor assume
any responsibility in connection with them . A somewhat similar
policy was observed with respect to Austrian loans for a limited
time.
Source : Department of State Press Release, January 7, 1932 .
(d) A NOTE ON GERMANY'S PRIVATE DEBTS
In August,
1932, the German Bureau of Statistics issued a re-
vised estimate of Germany's foreign indebtedness . The total figure
as of February 29 was put at 26,000
million reichsmarks (about
6,330 million dollars), of which 6,ooo million reichsmarks repre-
sented direct investments by foreigners in German real estate, shares,
etc. The remaining 20,000 million reichsmarks were distributed as
follows :
[281)ars), of which 6,ooo million reichsmarks repre-
sented direct investments by foreigners in German real estate, shares,
etc. The remaining 20,000 million reichsmarks were distributed as
follows :
[281)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Inclusive of deposits of the Bank for International Settlements in Germany
and of the credit granted to the Reichsbank by the foreign central banks under
-
the auspices of the Bank for International Settlements .
.
As the table shows, the interest of the United States in private
loans to Germany was more than twice that of any other nation
and more than three times that of any other nation except the
Netherlands. The amount invested by American citizens in these
private loans (about 1,999 million dollars) was considerably mote
than our entire war loan to Italy, more than half our loans to France
both before and after the Armistice, and nearly half that portion of
our loan to Great Britain which remained unpaid when Congress
reconvened in December, 1932 .
282 1
FoxUION INDBIITBDNBss op GERMAN?, FBBRnART 29, 1932
(In millions of reichsmarks)
Percentage
Creditor
Countries
Short-Term
Long-Term
Total
of Total
United States . .
3,2.27
5,165
8,392
40.7
Netherlands . . . .
x,66x
1,9 14
3575
17.3
Switzerland . .
. .
x,615
x,146
2,761
13 .4
Great Britain . .
x,286
x,129
2,415
11 .7
France
474
482
956
4.6
Sweden
x36
167
303
1 .5
Belgium
119
8o
199
1.0
Czechoslovakia
1S7
18
175
.9
Italy
73
74
147
.7
Other countriesa
1,405
295
x,700
8.2.
Total 10,153
10,470
20,623
100.0

--- PAGE BREAK ---482
956
4.6
Sweden
x36
167
303
1 .5
Belgium
119
8o
199
1.0
Czechoslovakia
1S7
18
175
.9
Italy
73
74
147
.7
Other countriesa
1,405
295
x,700
8.2.
Total 10,153
10,470
20,623
100.0

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX III
(a) COUNTRIES SUSPENDING THE GOLD OR GOLD
EXCHANGE STANDARD AND ADOPTING EXCHANGE
CONTROL
E 2$3 1
Gold or Gold Exchange
Exchange Control
Country
Standard Suspended
Established
Argentina
December 16, 192.9
October 13 . 1931
Australia
December, 192.9
None
Austria"
October 9, 1931
October 9, 1831
Bolivia
September 2.3, 1931
1931
Brazil
October 17, 1930
November 22., 1930
Bulgaria"
October 15, 1931
October 15, 1931
Canada
October 19, 1931
None
Chile
April 2.o, 19332.
July 30, 1931
Colombia
December 4, 1931
September 2._4, 1931
Costa Rica
January, 1932
January 16, 1932
Czechoslovakia" . . .
.
October 3, 193 1
October 3, 1932.
Denmark
September 2.9, 1931
October 1.8, 1931
Ecuador
February 8, 1932.
May z, 1932.
Egypt
September 2.1, 1931
c
Estonia
October 2.4, 1931
October 2.4, 1931
Finland
October 12, 1931
b
Germany"
July 13, 193 1
July 13, 1931
Greece April 2.7, 1932
September 2.8, 1931
Hungary"
July 1 7, 1931
July 17, 193 1
India
September 2.1, 1931
a
Irish Free State
September 2.1, 1931
a
Japan
December 13, 1931
July 1, 1932
Latvia"
October 8, 1931
October 8, 1931
Mexico
July 25, 193 1
None
New Zealand
August, 1914
b
Nicaragua"
November 13, 1931
November 13, 1931
Norway
September 2.9, 1931
Unofficial
Paraguay
a
June 2.9, 1932.
Persia
March, 1930

--- PAGE BREAK ---ly 25, 193 1
None
New Zealand
August, 1914
b
Nicaragua"
November 13, 1931
November 13, 1931
Norway
September 2.9, 1931
Unofficial
Paraguay
a
June 2.9, 1932.
Persia
March, 1930

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Not officially but practically off gold or gold exchange standard because of
currency or exchange regulations .
`In effect only temporarily.
Currency maintained on a sterling-exchange basis and fluctuates with the
British pound .
d Currency pegged to Argentine peso .
No date assignable .
Source: Foreign Financial News, October 12, 1932 (U . S. Department
of Commerce, Special Circular No. 379) .
(b) IMPORT QUOTAS IN OPERATION IN CONTINENTAL
EUROPE
As o f October 1, 1932
Austria:
Many important items : Tires, furniture, shoes, lard, apples, flour,
fabrics, etc. Based on percentage of imports in previous years ;
not allotted by countries .
Belgium :
Leather shoes, allotted by countries. Automobiles with monthly
allotments to importers equal to their imports in corresponding
month of 1931 .
Czechoslovakia :
Automobiles, x,ooo annually, by treaty with France . Movie films.
Motor fuel must contain at least
20 per cent of domestic
alcohol .
{ 2841
Gold or Gold Exchange
Exchange Control
Country
Standard Suspended
Established
Peru
May 15, 1932
None
Portugal
January 1, 193?
October 2.1, 192.2.
Rhodesia, N . & S . . .
October 12, 1931
None
Rumania°
May 18, 1932
May 18, 1932
Russia
August 9, 1914
a
Salvador
October 7, 1931
None
Siam
May 1
, 1932.
Spain
,
Sweden
September 29, 1931
Unofficial
Turkey
December, 192.9
United Kingdom .
.
.
September 21, 1931
b
Uruguay
August, 1914
May 2.9, 1931
Venezuela
e
Unofficial
Yugoslavia°
October 7, 1931
October 7, 1931

--- PAGE BREAK ---nofficial
Turkey
December, 192.9
United Kingdom .
.
.
September 21, 1931
b
Uruguay
August, 1914
May 2.9, 1931
Venezuela
e
Unofficial
Yugoslavia°
October 7, 1931
October 7, 1931

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Denmark :
Wines and spirits .
Finland
Imports of rye, rye flour and rolled oats limited to certain per-
centages of domestic articles milled or purchased .
France:
Quotas on about one-third of import schedule-mostly allotted
quarterly by countries on basis of previous imports. Wheat
imports limited to 3 per cent of amount milled . Imported
gasoline must have proportion of domestic alcohol added .
Germany :
Movie films . Quotas proposed, principally, for agricultural prod-
ucts. Imported wheat limited to 3 per cent of amount milled .
Ten per cent of domestic alcohol must be purchased for all
gasoline imported.
Greece:
Import quotas, not allotted by countries, on practically all goods,
divided among importers on basis of their average imports in
last three years .
Italy :
Certain French and Spanish goods. Imported wheat must be mixed
with percentage domestic wheat . Imported gasoline must be
mixed with proportion of domestic alcohol, to use annual, fixed
amount of alcohol .
Latvia :
Considerable list of goods still under quota . List recently greatly
curtailed.
Netherlands :
Certain textile products, shoes, bicycles, tires, ceramics, beef and
veal subject to quotas, allotted by countries on basis of previous
imports. Wheat flour must be mixed with 25 per cent domestic
flour ; margarine with 25 per cent domestic butter .
Norway :
Imported margarine must have a small percentage of domestic
butter added .
[ 285

--- PAGE BREAK ---st be mixed with 25 per cent domestic
flour ; margarine with 25 per cent domestic butter .
Norway :
Imported margarine must have a small percentage of domestic
butter added .
[ 285

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Poland:
Quotas allotted by countries affect number of products, including
apples, sausage casings, sewing machines, electrical apparatus,
knit goods, trimmings, etc.
Portugal :
Specified amounts of wheat and flour admitted when harvest is
insufficient. Special proportions of domestic coal must be used
in industries and by railways . Quotas authorized- but not yet
applied .
Spain :
Specified amounts of wheat admitted from time to time . Various
quotas authorized in. answer to others' quotas and exchange
restrictions-not yet applied .
Sweden :
Imported wheat or rye, and their products must be mixed with
like domestic article in specified proportions .
Switzerland
Import quotas on one-sixth of tariff items, affecting large part of
total import trade. Allotted to principal supplying countries
in accordance with normal imports, and with emphasis upon
individual trade balances, but amounts not made public . When
quotas filled, some goods dutiable at higher rates ; others pro-
hibited.
Turkey :
Import quotas on about two-thirds of tariff items in an effort to
reduce imports and equalize trade balances . Not allotted by
countries-filled in order of arrival of goods . Imports not un-
der quota prohibited. Quotas . for 4th quarter 1932 considerably
enlarged.
Yugoslavia :
Motion picture imports limited to i,ooo meters for every
70
peters locally produced . Alternative is high fee used to stimu-
late domestic industry.
Source: Division of Foreign Tariffs, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Com-
merce, U. S. Department of Commerce .
[286)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Alternative is high fee used to stimu-
late domestic industry.
Source: Division of Foreign Tariffs, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Com-
merce, U. S. Department of Commerce .
[286)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(c) A NOTE ON THE CONFERENCE AT STRESA
One of the decisions reached
'at Lausanne in - July was that a
special conference should be summoned to consider the economic
and financial problems of Central and Eastern Europe and to formu-
late a program of reconstruction . This conference was in-session at
Stresa, Italy, from September 5 to September 20, with eighty dele-
gates from fifteen nations in attendance.' It was charged with the
duty of submitting to the Commission of Inquiry for European
Union at its next session proposed measures for
(1)
overcoming
existing transfer difficulties and eventually eliminating the systems
of exchange control, and
(2) reviving the trade of these countries
and meeting their problems due to the low price of their agricultural
products .
It was understood at the beginning of the conference that in view
of the most-favored-nation clauses- in so many commercial treaties
the rights of "third countries" should remain reserved in any trade
agreements which might be recommended . It was here that the con-
ference touched upon the interests of the United States . Moreover,
as American investments in Central and Eastern Europe amounted to
nearly boo million dollars, or about 50 per cent more than the com-
bined investments of Great Britain and France, the proceedings at
Stresa were obviously of considerable importance to the United
States, notwithstanding the absence of American representatives
from the conference .
The deliberations proceeded more smoothly than did those at the
conference which met in London for a similar purpose in April . 2
The French delegation abandoned the Tardieu plan which had been
offered at London and which had been vigorously opposed by Ger-
many and Italy. Almost from the beginning there was active co-
operation between the French and the Germans, although the
Italians again were disposed to hold aloof .
The recommendations adopted at the close of the conference,
stressing the necessity of balancing the budgets and removing the
restrictions on trade, were theoretically sound, but apparently they
failed to provide a practicable method for overcoming the concrete
obstacles in the way of their execution. The program called for the
granting of special facilities for the export of grain from the
'The countries represented were Austria, Belgium, the United Kingdom,
Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Nether-
lands, Poland, Rumania, Switzerland and Yugoslavia .
' Cf. Chapter II.
[ 287 1ted were Austria, Belgium, the United Kingdom,
Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Nether-
lands, Poland, Rumania, Switzerland and Yugoslavia .
' Cf. Chapter II.
[ 287 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---lgium, the United Kingdom,
Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Nether-
lands, Poland, Rumania, Switzerland and Yugoslavia .
' Cf. Chapter II.
[ 287 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Danubian countries in amounts equal to the average of the preceding
three years . A fund of 75 million Swiss francs (14 .5 million dol-
lars) was to be raised for the "revalorization" of grain prices. The
Danubian states in return for this assistance were to accord trade
preferences to the states contributing to this fund, but it was stipu-
lated that these advantages should not injure the interests of other
states enjoying most-favored-nation treatment.8
The British delegates pointed out that their government did not
impose quotas or heavy import duties on cereals and therefore could
not grant preferences to the Danubian countries, and that conse-
quently they were compelled to make reservations with regard to its
participation in proposals involving guarantees or financial contribu-
tions. The outcome showed that countries like Germany, Italy,
France and Czechoslovakia, which barred agricultural commodities
by quotas and other methods, were seeking to rehabilitate the Dan-
ubian countries by artificial methods of price-pegging rather than by
the simpler but politically more difficult method of giving freer
markets to Danubian products . The delegates from Central and
Eastern Europe had entered the conference in the hope that the
more fortunate European nations would help them along the way
to recovery, but they found their would-be benefactors unwilling to
grapple with the realities of the problem .
(d) FOREIGN TRADE-QUANTITY INDEX
(1929 = 100)
The data in this table for different countries are not strictly com-
parable, but they give a rough indication of the trend of the volume
of foreign trade in each of the four leading commercial nations .
They are useful in supplementing the statistics of value, which
show the effects of changing prices .
Sources :
The figures in this table for the United States are adapted
from those in Trade
Information Bulletin No . 8o8 of the United States
Department of Commerce. The figures for the other countries were obtained
'Report by the Stresa Conference for the Economic Restoration
of Central
and Eastern Europe. League of Nations Publications, Official No . C. 666.
M . 321. 1932 . VII .
.[ 288
Great Britain
Exports Imports
United States
Exports Imports
Germany
France
Exports Imports Exports Imports
292.8 . . . .
99
95
99
88
88
104
99
87
292.9 . . . .
zoo
zoo
loo
100
100
zoo
zoo
zoo
1930 . . . .
82.
98
88
84
97
90
89
107
x931 . . . .
86
zoo
65
76
88
76
83
zo6rance
Exports Imports Exports Imports
292.8 . . . .
99
95
99
88
88
104
99
87
292.9 . . . .
zoo
zoo
loo
100
100
zoo
zoo
zoo
1930 . . . .
82.
98
88
84
97
90
89
107
x931 . . . .
86
zoo
65
76
88
76
83
zo6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

from the World Economic Survey,
1931-1932,
311-312, and recalculated
with 1929 as the base year. An index of the quantum of world trade,
appearing in the same work, p . 134, and also recalculated with
1929 as
loo, shows world trade at 92 for 1930 and at 67 (preliminary figure) for
1931 .
(e) TRADE OF GREAT BRITAIN WITH FOREIGN
COUNTRIES AND WITH OTHER PARTS
OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE
(In thousands of pounds)
IMPORTS
Source : Statistical Abstract for the British Empire .
£ 289 )
Year
Total
EXPORTS
To
Per
To
Rest of
Empire
Per
Cent of
Total
Foreign
Countries
Cent of
Total
192.5 . . .
773,381
438,2.67
56.6
335, 114
43 .4
1926 . . .
653,047
336,196
51 .5
316,851
48.5
1927 . . .
709,081
382,431
54.0
32.6,650
46.0
1928 . . .
723579
395 911
54.7
327,668
45 .3
1929 . . .
729,349
404,898
55 .5
324,45 1
44 .5
1930 . . .
570,755
322,410
56 .5
248,345
43 .5
1931
. . .
389,163
2.18,557
56.2
170,606
43 .8
Year
Total
From
Foreign
Countries
Per
Cent of
Total
From
Rest of
Empire
Per
Cent of
Total
1925 . .,
1,320,7 1 5
891,579
67.5
429,136
32 .5
1,926 . .
.
1,241,361
865,205
69.6
376,136
30.4
1927 . .
.
1,218,341
851,680
70.0
366,661
30 .0
1928 . . .
1, 195,598
832,013
69.5
363,585
30 .5
1929 . . .
1,220,765
861,923
70.6
358,842.
29.4
1930 . . .
1,043,975
739,945
70.8
304,030
29.2
1931 . . .
862,174
6145 11
71.2
247,663
2.8.8

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
1, 195,598
832,013
69.5
363,585
30 .5
1929 . . .
1,220,765
861,923
70.6
358,842.
29.4
1930 . . .
1,043,975
739,945
70.8
304,030
29.2
1931 . . .
862,174
6145 11
71.2
247,663
2.8.8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(f) BALANCES OF INTERNATIONAL PAYMENTS OF THE UNITED STATES,
1922-1931
(In millions of dollars ; plus and minus signs indicate respectively inflow and outflow of funds)
Class of transactions (gross or net)
1922
192.3
1924
192.5
x926
x92.7
x928
292.9
x930
x932
COMMODITIES (ADJUSTED)
Exports
4,111
4,368
4 . 834
5,177
5,044
5.092
5,333
5,447
4,095
2.,62.3
Imports
3,419
4,162.
3,952.
4,544
4.766
4,508
4468
4,799
3,2.94
2., 154
Balance of trade (adjusted) +702
+2.06
+882.
+633
+2.78
+583
+865
+648
+8ox
0+369
MISCELLANEOUS INVISIBLE ITEMS
Freight : Ocean, Great Lakes, and railway
-83
-64
-84
-95
-66
-32.
-66
-96
- 72-
(net)
-79
r
Expenditures by American tourists :
Canada and Mexican frontier -IOo
-1 3 1
-1S9
-285
-20I
-131
-193
-334
-32.2
a-283
`j
Overseas, including West Indies -345
-323
-374
-400
-422
-465
-532
-534
-489
6_2.87
O J Expenditures by foreign tourists in United
States +87
+104
+107
+117.
+148
+263
+163
+183
+157
+112.
Ocean-borne passenger traffic° +53
+6o
+53
+63
+69
+89
+44
+47 -
+49
Interest on American private funds abroad
+594
+635
+689
+740
+800
+896
+979
+9x6
+674
(long and short term) +555
Interest on foreign funds in United States
(long and short term) -144
-,8o
-192.
-2.29
-2.68
-2.81
-359
-4 14
-300
-12.6
War-debt receipts (principal) +3 2-
+92.
+2.3
+2.6
+35
+46
+50
+62
+77
+2.1
War-debt receipts (interest) +12.6
+167
+16o
+I6o
+x6o
+16o
+157
+145
+164
+91
Other governmental transactions (net) -46
-66
-53
-61
-49
-29
-57
-92.
-81
-98
Immigrant remittances (net) -255
-229
-2.29
-2.35
-2.18
-206
-1x8
-22.3
-266
-163
Charitable and missionary contributions S
-70
-55
-50
-46
-49
-51
-49
-49
-39
Other items (net)' +46
+57
+68
+74
+74
+74
+24
+2.5
+51
+57
Total, commodity and miscellaneous (net) +557
+2.08
+802
+513
+205
+588
+658
+377
+713
6-
1 -2.57ions S
-70
-55
-50
-46
-49
-51
-49
-49
-39
Other items (net)' +46
+57
+68
+74
+74
+74
+24
+2.5
+51
+57
Total, commodity and miscellaneous (net) +557
+2.08
+802
+513
+205
+588
+658
+377
+713
6-
1 -2.57

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a For purpose of comparison with estimates of previous years the miscellaneous short-term credits are carried in this table as "adjust-
ments for differences in year-end lag ."
a A net figure ; it includes no payments to American passenger vessels .
Largely a deduction from American tourist expenditures overseas
.
d Includes insurance, motion-picture royalties, cable charges, Canadian electric power, press subscriptions, patents and copyrights, and
advertising.
Source : U. S. Department of Commerce, Trade Information Bulletin No. 803.
NEW PRIVATE LOANS, INVESTMENTS,
AND DEPOSITS
Net increase in American long-term invest-
ments abroad (par value) -857
-258
-869
-872.
-8o8
-972
-1317
-791
- 411
+x54
Deduct bond discounts and underwriters'
+48
+125
+119
+121
+119
+122
+26
+66
+xx
commissions on above +101
Net cash payments for above -756
-21o
-744
-753
-687
-853
-1195
-765
-345
+x65
Net increase in long-term investments in
United States for foreigners +3
+240
+11
+x93
+147 .
+158
+477
+446
+50
+53
Change in net debt of American banks to
-61
-226
foreigners +375
+3
+216
+359
+13
-485
-765
N
Net private capital movement (long and
-378
+33
-517
-621
-I8x
-695
-944
-306
-780
-547
short term)
M
L1
OTHER BALANCING ITEMS
-2.34
-295
-216
+102-
-72
+154
+272
-12.0
-276
+176
Gold shipped or earmarked (net)
Shipments of American paper money (net) . .
+40
+50
-20
-30
+2.0
-10
Add for net discrepancy due to inaccurate
figures, omissions, etc
+15
+4
-49
+36
+48
-47
+14
+49
+323
+124

--- PAGE BREAK ---t)
Shipments of American paper money (net) . .
+40
+50
-20
-30
+2.0
-10
Add for net discrepancy due to inaccurate
figures, omissions, etc
+15
+4
-49
+36
+48
-47
+14
+49
+323
+124

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX IV
PASSAGES FROM REPUBLICAN AND DEMOCRATIC
PLATFORMS DEALING WITH FOREIGN POLICY AND
THE TARIFF
REPUBLICAN PLATFORM, ADOPTED JUNE
15, 1932
International Conference
We favor the participation by the United States in an interna-
tional conference to consider matters relating to monetary questions,
including the position of silver, exchange problems, and commodity
prices, and possible cooperative action concerning them
.
Tariff and the Marketing Act
The party pledges itself to make such revision of tariff schedules
as economic changes require to maintain the parity of protection to
agriculture with other industry.
The American farmer is entitled not only to tariff schedules on
his products but to protection from substitutes therefor .
The Tarifff
The Republican party has always been the stanch supporter of the
American system of a protective tariff. It believes that the home
market, built up under that policy, the greatest and richest market
in the world, belongs first to American agriculture, industry and
labor. No pretext can justify the surrender of that market to such
competition as would destroy our farms, mines and factories and
lower the standard of living which we have established for our
workers .
Because many foreign countries have recently abandoned the gold
standard, as a result of which the costs of many commodities pro-
duced in such countries have, at least for the time being, fallen
materially in terms of American currency, adequate tariff protection
is today particularly essential to the welfare of the American people .
The Tariff Commission should promptly investigate individual
(2921

--- PAGE BREAK ---ican currency, adequate tariff protection
is today particularly essential to the welfare of the American people .
The Tariff Commission should promptly investigate individual
(2921

--- PAGE BREAK ---

commodities so affected by currency depreciation and report to the
President any increase in duties found necessary to equalize domes-
tic with foreign costs of production .
To fix the duties on some thousands of commodities, subject to
highly complex conditions, is necessarily a difficult technical task .
It is unavoidable that some of the rates established by legislation
should, even at the time of their enactment, be too low or too high .
Moreover, a subsequent change in costs or other conditions may
render obsolete a rate that was before appropriate . The Republican
party has, therefore, long supported the policy of a flexible tariff,
giving power to the President, after investigation by an impartial
commission and in accordance with prescribed principles, to modify
the rates named by the Congress.
We commend the President's veto of the measure, sponsored by
Democratic Congressmen, which would have transferred from the
President to the Congress the authority to put into effect the findings
of the Tariff Commission . Approval of the measure would have
returned tariff making to politics and destroyed the progress made
during ten years of effort to lift it out of log-rolling methods . We
pledge the Republican party to a policy which will retain the gains
made and enlarge the present scope of greater progress .
We favor the extension of the general Republican principle of
tariff protection to our natural resource industries, including the
products of our farms, forests, mines and oil wells, with compensa-
tory duties on the manufactured and refined products thereof.
Foreign Affairs
Our relations with foreign nations have been carried on by Presi-
dent Hoover with consistency and firmness, but with mutual
understanding and peace with all nations. The world has been over-
whelmed with economic strain which has provoked extreme nation-
alism in every quarter, has overturned many governments, stirred
the springs of suspicion and distrust and tried the spirit of inter-
national cooperation, but we have held to our own course steadily
and successfully.
The party will continue to maintain its attitude of protecting our
national interests and policies wherever threatened but at the same
time promoting common understanding of the varying needs and
aspirations of other nations and going forward in harmony with
other peoples without alliances or foreign partnerships .
The facilitation of world intercourse, the freeing of commerce
from unnecessary impediments, the settlement of international diffi-
2931with
other peoples without alliances or foreign partnerships .
The facilitation of world intercourse, the freeing of commerce
from unnecessary impediments, the settlement of international diffi-
2931

--- PAGE BREAK ---without alliances or foreign partnerships .
The facilitation of world intercourse, the freeing of commerce
from unnecessary impediments, the settlement of international diffi-
2931

--- PAGE BREAK ---

culties by conciliation and the methods of law and the elimination
of war as a resort of national policy have been and will be our party
program.
Friendship and Commerce
We believe in and look forward to the steady enlargement of the
principles of equality of treatment between nations great and small,
the concession of sovereignty and self-administration to every nation
which is capable of carrying on stable government and conducting
sound orderly relationships with other peoples, and the cultivation
of trade and intercourse on the basis of uniformity of opportunity
of all nations.
In pursuance of these principles, which have steadily gained favor
in the world, the Administration has asked no special favors in
commerce, has protested discriminations whenever they arose, and
has steadily cemented this procedure by reciprocal treaties guarantee-
ing equality for trade and residence .
The historic American plan known as the most-favored-nation
principle has been our guiding program, and we believe that policy
to be the only one consistent with a full development of interna-
tional trade, the only one suitable for a country having as wide and
diverse a commerce as America, and the one most appropriate for
us in view of the great variety of our industrial, agricultural and
mineral products and the traditions of our people.
Any other plan involves bargains and partnerships with foreign
nations, and as a permanent policy is unsuited to America's position
.
Latin America
The policy of the Administration has proved to our neighbors of
Latin America that we have no imperialistic ambitions, but that we
wish only to promote the welfare and common interest of the inde-
pendent nations in the Western hemisphere.
We have aided Nicaragua in the solution of its troubles and our
marines are remaining in that country, in greatly reduced numbers,
at the request of the Nicaraguan government only to supervise the
coming election . After that they will all be returned to the United
States .
In Haiti, in accord with the recommendations of the Forbes com-
mission, appointed by the President, the various services of super-
vision are being rapidly withdrawn, and only those will be retained
which are mandatory under the treaties .
Throughout Latin America the policy of the government of the
{ 294]ious services of super-
vision are being rapidly withdrawn, and only those will be retained
which are mandatory under the treaties .
Throughout Latin America the policy of the government of the
{ 294]

--- PAGE BREAK ---er-
vision are being rapidly withdrawn, and only those will be retained
which are mandatory under the treaties .
Throughout Latin America the policy of the government of the
{ 294]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

United States has been and
will, under Republican leadership, con-
tinue to be one of frank and friendly understanding .
World Court,
The acceptance by America of membership in the World Court
has been approved by three successive Republican Presidents and we
commend this attitude of supporting in this form the settlement of
international disputes by the rule of law . America should join
its
influence and gain a voice in this institution, which would offer us
a safer, more judicial and expeditious instrument for the constantly
recurring questions between us and other nations than is now avail-
able by arbitration .
Reduction o f Armament
Conscious that the limitation of armament will
contribute to
security against war, and that the financial
burdens of military
preparation have been shamefully increased throughout the world,
the Administration under President Hoover has made steady efforts
and marked progress in the direction of proportional reduction
of
arms by agreement with other nations .
Upon his initiative a treaty between the chief naval powers
at
London in 1930, following the path marked by the Washington
Conference of 1922, established a limitation of all types of fighting
ships on a proportionate basis as between the three great
naval
powers. For the first time, a general limitation of a most
costly
branch of armament was successfully accomplished .
In the Geneva Disarmament Conference, now in progress, America
is an active participant and a representative delegation of our citi-
zens is laboring for progress in a cause to which this country has
been an earnest contributor. This policy will be pursued .
Meanwhile, maintenance of our navy on the basis of parity with
any nation is a fundamental policy to which the Republican party
is committed. While, in the interest of necessary government re-
trenchment, humanity and relief of the taxpayer, we shall continue
to exert our full influence upon the nations of the world in the cause
of reduction of arms, we do not propose to reduce our navy defense
below that of any other nation.
National Defense
Armaments are relative and, therefore, flexible and subject to
change as necessity demands . We believe that in time of war every
material resource in the nation should bear its proportionate share
{ 295 1ents are relative and, therefore, flexible and subject to
change as necessity demands . We believe that in time of war every
material resource in the nation should bear its proportionate share
{ 295 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---d, therefore, flexible and subject to
change as necessity demands . We believe that in time of war every
material resource in the nation should bear its proportionate share
{ 295 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the burdens occasioned by the public need and that it is a duty of
government to perfect plans in time of peace whereby this objective
may be attained in war.
We support the essential principles of the national
defense act
as amended in 1920 and by the air corps act of 1926, and believe
that the army of the United States has, through successive reduc-
tions accomplished in the last twelve years, reached an irreducible
minimum consistent with the self-reliance, self-respect and security
of this country.
Immigration
The restriction of immigration is a Republican policy. Our party
formulated and enacted into law the quota system, which for the
first time has made possible an adequate control of foreign immigra-
tion.
St. Lawrence Seaway
The Republican party stands committed to the development
of
the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence seaway . Under the direction of Presi-
dent Hoover negotiation of a treaty with Canada for this develop-
ment is now at a favorable point . Recognizing the inestimable bene-
fits which will accrue to the nation from placing the ports of
the
Great Lakes on an ocean base, the party reaffirms allegiance to this
great project . and pledges its best efforts to secure its
early com-
pletion .
DEMOCRATIC PLATFORM, ADOPTED JUNE 30,
1932
We Advocate :
A competitive tariff for revenue, with a fact-finding Tariff Com-
mission free from executive interference,
reciprocal tariff agree-
ments with other nations, and an international economic conference
designed to restore international trade and facilitate exchange .
National Defense
A navy and an army adequate for national defense, based on a
survey of all facts affecting the existing establishments
that the
people in time of peace may not be burdened by an expenditure fast
approaching $1,ooo,ooo,ooo annually .
Foreign Policy
A firm foreign policy including : Peace with all the world and the
settlement of international disputes by arbitration ; no interference
{ 2961ast
approaching $1,ooo,ooo,ooo annually .
Foreign Policy
A firm foreign policy including : Peace with all the world and the
settlement of international disputes by arbitration ; no interference
{ 2961

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in the internal affairs of other nations ; the sanctity of treaties, and
the-maintenance of good faith and of good will in financial obliga-
tions ; adherence to the World Court with the pending reservations
;
the Pact of Paris, abolishing war as an instrument of national policy,
to be made effective by provisions for consultation and conference
in case of threatened violation of treaties ; international agreement
for reduction of armaments ; and cooperation with nations of the
Western Hemisphere to maintain the spirit of the Monroe Doctrine
.
We oppose cancellation of the debts owing to the United States by
foreign nations .
The Philippines
Independence for the Philippines ; ultimate statehood for Puerto
Rico ; the employment of American citizens in the operation of the
Panama Canal.
We Condemn :
The usurpation of power by the State Department in assuming
to pass upon foreign securities offered by international bankers, as
a result of which billions of dollars in questionable bonds have
been sold to the public upon the implied approval of the Federal
Government .
The Hawley-Smoot tariff law, the prohibitive rates of which have
resulted in retaliatory action by more than forty countries, created
international economic hostilities, destroyed international trade,
driven our factories into foreign countries, robbed the American
farmer of his foreign markets and increased his cost of production .
[ 297 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---lities, destroyed international trade,
driven our factories into foreign countries, robbed the American
farmer of his foreign markets and increased his cost of production .
[ 297 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX V
(a) INDICES OF PRODUCTION IN IMPORTANT
COUNTRIES,
19 29-1932
(Average fbr 1928 = ioo)
Source : Commerce Reports, published
Source : League of Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics.
(b) COMMODITY PRICES IN IMPORTANT COUNTRIES
(Average for 192.6 = zoo)
{ 298 }
by U. S. Department of Commerce.
Years
1932.-Months
1929
x930
1931
Jan .
Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July
France 109
110
98
83
79
77
75
74
73
72.
Germany 101
84
69
55
58
56
54
58
55
52.
Great Britain . . . . 1o6
98
89
-
-
9o
-
-
89
-
Poland loo
82.
69
52.
52.
53
55
55
54
54
Sweden x01
97
86
89
88
92.
8o
82.
74
69
Japan III
106
xos
96
100
108
104
107
104
107
Canada 112.
95
8o
73
75
71
68
77
68
63
United States . . . . x07
87
73
65
62.
60
57
54
53
52.
Month
United
United
Ger-
Aus-
Argen-
1932
States Kingdom France
many
Japan
tralia
tina
Jan
67 .3
71 .5
76 .4
74 .4
66.x
77.2.
58 .7
Feb
66 .3
71 .1
77 .6
74 . 3
66.1
79.1
6o.8
Mar
66 .o
70 .7
77 .2.
74 .3
64.6
78 .6
63 .1
Apr
65 .5
69 .1
76.4
73 .2.
62. .3
78 .1
60.4
May
64 .4
68,0
76.2.
71 .3
6x .o
76.9
58.6
June
63 .9
66 .2.
74.0
71 .6
58 . 5
75 .9
58.3
July
64 .5
66 .z
74 .8
71 .3
59.1
76.3
59.2.
Aug
65 .2.
67 .7
71 .3
71 .0
61.1
77.3
61 .1
Sept
65 .3
68 .9
71 .8
70 .8
66.8
78 .7
62.7
Oct
64 .4
68 .1
71 .6
70 .1
67.7
76.7
59.0
Nov
63 .9
68 .2.
77 .0
69 . 9
-
-
55 . 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---2.
Aug
65 .2.
67 .7
71 .3
71 .0
61.1
77.3
61 .1
Sept
65 .3
68 .9
71 .8
70 .8
66.8
78 .7
62.7
Oct
64 .4
68 .1
71 .6
70 .1
67.7
76.7
59.0
Nov
63 .9
68 .2.
77 .0
69 . 9
-
-
55 . 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(c) UNEMPLOYMENT IN IMPORTANT COUNTRIES
(Number unemployed, ooo omitted)
Source : League of Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics .
(d) YIELD AND VALUE OF STAPLE CROPS, UNITED-
STATES,
X928--31
Source :
Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1932 .
(e) SIGNIFICANT BUSINESS INDICES, UNITED STATES,
1929-31
(Average for 1923-25 = X00)1
4 Preliminary.
' All monthly items, except factory payrolls, are adjusted for seasonal
variation.
Source:
Federal Reserve Bulletin
(monthly publication of the Federal
Reserve Board) .
E 2991
Years
1932-Months
'29 '30 '31 Ja . Fb . Mr. Ap. My . Je. Jl . Au. Sp. Oc .
Industrial production . . 119 96
81
72.
69
67
63
6o
59
58
60
66
664
Manufactures 1x9 96
8o
71
68
65
61
58
58
57
59
66
654
Minerals 1x5
99
84
77
78
84
79
67
63
64
65
70
74
Bldg. contracts awarded 117 92.
63
31
2.7
2.6
2.7
2.6
2.7
27
30
30
29
Freight carloadings
.r
xo6 92.
75
64
62
6 1
59
54
52
51
51
54
57
Factory employment . . lox 88
74
68
68
66
64
62.
6o
58
59
6o
61
Factory payrolls so8 87
66
52
54
52.
49
46
43
40
40
42
44
Years
1932.-Months
192-9
1930
1931 Jan. Feb . Mar .
Apr. May June July Aug.
France
so
15
83
2-79
337
347
341
3-
295
296
298
Germany . .
. 1,478 3,267 4,577 6,o42. 6,12.8 6,034 5,739 5,5 8 3 5,47 6 5,392 5,224
Grt. Britain .
965 1,514 2.,173 2,354 2,318 2,233 2,2o5 2,184 2,358 2.,185 2,216
Poland
124
241
279
33 8
350
360
340
307
2.64
2x8
191
Sweden
32
47
66
93
94
99
80
76
77
76
79
Japan
291
368
425
486
485
474
482.
482
482 -
--
Canada
15
35
78
83
79
77
78
76
73
70
66
United States
97
(Employment Index 1926 = zoo)
58
55
83
71
65
66
65
62.
60
Cotton
Bales Value
Wheat
Bu. Value
Corn
Bu. Value
Oats
Rye
Bu.
Value Bu. Value
1928 . . . .
14.5
1,302
926
908
2,715
2,025
1,318
531
38
32.
192.9 . . . .
14.8
1,218
813
841
2,535
1,963
1,118
476
35
30
1930 . . . .
13 .9
659
" 858
5 1 5
2,060
"349
1,278
403
45
17
1931 . .. . 17 .1
491
892
396
2. .557
920
1,1x2
2.56
33
135
1,318
531
38
32.
192.9 . . . .
14.8
1,218
813
841
2,535
1,963
1,118
476
35
30
1930 . . . .
13 .9
659
" 858
5 1 5
2,060
"349
1,278
403
45
17
1931 . .. . 17 .1
491
892
396
2. .557
920
1,1x2
2.56
33
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(f) TREND OF DIVIDEND PAYMENTS AND RAILWAY
EARNINGS, UNITED STATES,
1930-32
DIVIDEND PAYMENTS
(In millions of dollars)
Source: Journal of Commerce (New York) .
RAILWAY NET OPERATING INCOME
(In millions of dollars)
Change
from
Source: Survey of Current Business.
[ 300 1
Change
from
1930
193 1
1930
1932.
1930
Jan 55,474
3 8 ,849
-30%
311,714
-79%
Feb 59,452-
2.7,2-64
- 54
22,043
-63
Mar
61,074
45,906
-15
32-,2.89
-47
Apr
62.,2-72-
39,074
-37
2-0 ,62-4
-67
May . .
. . 69,3174
41,2.64
-40
11 ,951
-83
June 68,883
50,163
-2-7
12-,653
-8z
July
82-,750
56,535
-3 2-
11,597
-86
Aug
95,604
55 ,859
- 42-
2-8,368
-70
Sept
04,078
55,3 19
- 47
49,647
-52.
Oct 1 :12.,2 51
64,2.02.
-43
63,839
-43
Change
from
Change
from
1930
03 1
1930
1931
1930
Jan 570
511
-- 8.6%
403
-1131%
Feb 309
185
- 7-7
196
-36.5
Mar 344
309
_I0.1
2-15
-37-5
Apr 32.5
311
- 4.3
21-7
-2 7-1
May 308
228
-26.0
225
-2.6.9
June 319
346
+ 5 .2.
2-45
-2-5-5
July 373
386
+ 3 .4
2-55
-31.6
Aug x97
241
+2-2.-3
144
-2-6.9
Sept 2.2.8
2-33
+ 2-3
115
- 45- 2-
Oct 320
2-82.
-11 .9
167
-47-9
Noy 2.77
2-44
_I1.0
131
- 52--7

--- PAGE BREAK ---+ 5 .2.
2-45
-2-5-5
July 373
386
+ 3 .4
2-55
-31.6
Aug x97
241
+2-2.-3
144
-2-6.9
Sept 2.2.8
2-33
+ 2-3
115
- 45- 2-
Oct 320
2-82.
-11 .9
167
-47-9
Noy 2.77
2-44
_I1.0
131
- 52--7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX V I
NOTE OF THE NINETEEN AMERICAN GOVERNMENTS TO
BOLIVIA AND PARAGUAY, AUGUST 3,
1932, INVOK-
ING THE STIMSON DOCTRINE
The representatives of all the American republics, meeting in
Washington, the seat of the Neutral Commission, having been duly
authorized by their respective governments, have the honor to make
the following declaration to the governments of Bolivia and
Paraguay :
"Respect for law is a tradition among the American nations, who
are opposed to force and renounce it both for the solution of their
controversies and as an instrument of national policy in their re-
ciprocal relations. They have long been the proponents of the doc-
trine that the arrangement of all disputes and conflicts of whatever
nature or origin that may arise between them can only be sought
by peaceful means. The history of the American nations shows that
all their boundary and territorial controversies have been arranged
by such means. Therefore, the nations of America declare that the
Chaco dispute is susceptible of a peaceful solution, and they earnestly
request Bolivia and Paraguay to submit immediately the solution of
this controversy to an arrangement by arbitration or by such other
peaceful means as may be acceptable to both .
"As regards the responsibilities which may arise from the various
encounters which have occurred from June
15 to date, they con-
sider that the countries in conflict should present to the Neutral
Commission all the documentation which they may consider per-
tinent, and which will be examined by it . They do not doubt that
the country which this investigation shows to be the aggressor will
desire to give satisfaction to the one attacked, thus eliminating all
misunderstanding between them.
"They furthermore invite the governments of Bolivia and Para-
guay to make a solemn declaration to the effect that they
will stop
the movements of troops in the disputed territory, which should
dear up the atmosphere and make easy the road to the solution of
1301)ay to make a solemn declaration to the effect that they
will stop
the movements of troops in the disputed territory, which should
dear up the atmosphere and make easy the road to the solution of
1301)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

,good understanding which America hopes for in the name of the
permanent interests of all the countries of this hemisphere .
"The American nations further declare that they will not recog-
nize any territorial arrangement of this controversy which has not
been obtained by peaceful means nor the validity of territorial ac-
quisitions which may be obtained through occupation or conquest
by force of arms ."
FRANCIS WHITE
For the Secretary of State of the United States
FABIo LozANo T.
Minister of Colombia
Jose RICHLING
Charge d'Affaires of Uruguay
JosE T . BARON
Charge d'Affaires of Cuba
P. HERRERA DE HUERTA
Charge d'Affaires of Mexico
M . DE FREYRE Y S .
Ambassador of Peru
R. DE LIMA E SILVA
Ambassador of Brazil
FELIPE A. ESPIL
Ambassador of Argentina
MIGUEL CRUCHAGA
Ambassador of Chile
ADRIAN RECINOS
Minister of Guatemala
PEDRO M . ARCAYA
Minister of Venezuela
DANTES BELLEGARDE
Minister of Haiti
ROBERTO DESPRADEL
Minister of the Dominican Republic
CELEO DtLVILA
Minister of Honduras
[302)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GONZALO ZALDUMBIDE
Minister of Ecuador
HORATio F. ALFARO
Minister of Panama
Luis M . DEBAYLE
Charge d'Affaires of Nicaragua
MANUEL GONZALEZ-ZELEDON
Charge d'Affaires of Costa Rica
ROBERTO D. MELENDEZ
Special Representative of the Republic of El Salvador
in the Board of Directors of the Pan American Union
Source: Department of State Press Release, August 3. 1932 .
(3031

--- PAGE BREAK ---MELENDEZ
Special Representative of the Republic of El Salvador
in the Board of Directors of the Pan American Union
Source: Department of State Press Release, August 3. 1932 .
(3031

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX VII
(a) THE FINDINGS OF THE LYTTON COMMISSION"
The Commission's Recommendations
The final part of the Lytton report offers recommendations for a
solution of the Manchurian difficulty
designed both to safeguard
legitimate Japanese interests and to protect the interests of China .
The Commission does not favor the restoration of the
status quo
ante, since this would be "to leave out of account the realities of
the situation ." It equally opposes the maintenance and recognition
of Manchukuo for the foregoing reasons . What the Commission
does recommend is the establishment of an autonomous government
for Manchuria, subject to China's sovereignty, to be established by
"direct negotiation" between Japan and China .2
The Commission suggests that the League Council invite the
governments of China and Japan to discuss a solution of their
dispute on the lines indicated in the Lytton report. Should this in-
vitation be accepted, the next step would be the summoning of an
Advisory Conference, consisting of representatives of the Chinese
and Japanese governments and of two delegations representing the
local population-to be selected in a manner to be prescribed re-
spectively by the Chinese and Japanese governments. With the agree-
ment of the parties, the assistance of neutral observers might be
secured. If the conference were unable to agree on any particular
point, it would submit the point of difference to the Council, which
would attempt to secure an agreement . The results of the discus-
sions of the Advisory Conference should be embodied in four
separate instruments :
x. A Declaration by the government of China constituting a
special administration for the Three Eastern Provinces, in the
terms recommended by the Advisory Conference ;
1 Reprinted, with permission, from "International Action on the Lytton
Report," by Raymond Leslie Buell in Foreign Policy Report;, Nov. 9. 1932,
Vol. VIII, No . 18 .
' Lytton Report,
127.
X3041ence ;
1 Reprinted, with permission, from "International Action on the Lytton
Report," by Raymond Leslie Buell in Foreign Policy Report;, Nov. 9. 1932,
Vol. VIII, No . 18 .
' Lytton Report,
127.
X3041

--- PAGE BREAK ---with permission, from "International Action on the Lytton
Report," by Raymond Leslie Buell in Foreign Policy Report;, Nov. 9. 1932,
Vol. VIII, No . 18 .
' Lytton Report,
127.
X3041

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 . A Sino-Japanese Treaty dealing with Japanese interests in
Manchuria ;
3.A Sino-Japanese Treaty of Conciliation and Arbitration, Non-
Aggression and Mutual Assistance ;
4. A Sino-Japanese Commercial Treaty.$
An Autonomous Manchuria
The Commission recommends that the Advisory Conference ne-
gotiate the establishment of an autonomous government of Man-
churia, which, while remaining under the sovereignty of China,
would embody many of the features of the "state" of Manchukuo .
This regime would rest upon a declaration issued by the Chinese
government and transmitted by it to the League of Nations and the
signatories of the Nine-Power Treaty, which would have "the bind-
ing character of an international engagement ." 4 It is suggested that
in this declaration the Central Government of China reserve the
control of general foreign relations, as well as that of the customs,
post office, and the salt gabelle in Manchuria, the proceeds to be
divided by agreement between the Central and provincial govern-
ments. It should also retain the power of appointment, at least in
the first instance, of the Chief Executive of Manchuria .
All other powers should be vested in the autonomous government
of Manchuria. Some system might be devised to secure an expression
of local opinion regarding the administration and to safeguard the
interests of the White Russians and other minorities . The autono-
mous government should be aided by a number of foreign advisers,
"of whom a substantial proportion should be Japanese .°a The chief
executive of Manchuria should appoint two foreigners of different
nationalities, from a panel submitted by the League Council, to
exercise supervision over the constabulary and over fiscal . adminis-
tration. The chief executive should also appoint an adviser to the
Central Bank of Manchuria from a panel submitted by the board of
directors of the Bank for International Settlements . Provision is
made for at least two judicial advisers, one of whom should be
Japanese, and possibly for a railway adviser . The Commission em-
phasizes that the employment of foreign advisers who, during the
period of the organization of the new regime, must exercise excep-
tionally 'wide powers, merely represents a form of international co-
operation.
' Lytton Report, 133 . It is recommended that the broad outlines of a settle-
ment be agreed to by the parties before the conference begins .
' Ibid., 134.
'ibid
., 134 .international co-
operation.
' Lytton Report, 133 . It is recommended that the broad outlines of a settle-
ment be agreed to by the parties before the conference begins .
' Ibid., 134.
'ibid
., 134 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---peration.
' Lytton Report, 133 . It is recommended that the broad outlines of a settle-
ment be agreed to by the parties before the conference begins .
' Ibid., 134.
'ibid
., 134 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They must be selected in a manner acceptable to the Chinese Government
and one which is consistent with the sovereignty of China . When appointed,
they must regard themselves as the servants of the Government employing
them.
.
. . The goal to be kept in view throughout the period of transition
is the creation of a civil service composed of Chinese, who will ultimately
make the employment of foreigners unnecessary'
Perhaps the most interesting feature of this proposed autonomous
regime is the suggestion for the organization
of a special gen-
darmerie with the collaboration of
foreign instructors,
"which
would be the only armed force within the Three Eastern Provinces .
.
.
. Its organisation, when completed, should be followed by the
retirement from this territory of all other armed forces, including
any special bodies of police or railway guards, whether Chinese or
Japanese."
Having established an autonomous regime in Manchuria, the two
parties should define the interests of Japan in this area . The aims of
the Sino-Japanese treaty concluded for this purpose should be
"the
free participation of Japan in the economic development of Man-
churia, which would not carry with it a right to control the country
either economically or politically ; the continuance in the Province
of Jehol of such rights as Japan now enjoys there ; an extension to
the whole of Manchuria of the right to settle and lease land, coupled
with some modification of the principle of extraterritoriality ; an
agreement regarding the operation of the railways ." 8
The Commission realizes that China would not consent to the
extension of the right of settlement if Japan continued to maintain
the right of extraterritoriality . The Commission also recognizes that
the application of extraterritoriality to the Koreans is bound to offer
many occasions for friction. In the opinion of the Commission, "the
most satisfactory solution of the problem is to make the administra-
tion of these Provinces so efficient that extraterritorial status will no
longer be desired . "s With this object the report recommends the
appointment of at least two foreign advisers to
the Manchurian
courts. The opinion of these advisers might be made public in all
cases involving foreigners which the courts adjudicated . Moreover,
either the Chinese or Japanese government could bring complaints
in the name of its nationals before an arbitral tribunal . Any exten-
sion of the rights of settlement to the Japanese should apply to the
nationals of other powers, under the most-favored-nation clause .
•Lytton Report, 135 .
'Ibid., 134.
 ibid., 135 .
'Ibid., 136.en-
sion of the rights of settlement to the Japanese should apply to the
nationals of other powers, under the most-favored-nation clause .
•Lytton Report, 135 .
'Ibid., 134.
 ibid., 135 .
'Ibid., 136.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ts of settlement to the Japanese should apply to the
nationals of other powers, under the most-favored-nation clause .
•Lytton Report, 135 .
'Ibid., 134.
 ibid., 135 .
'Ibid., 136.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

To terminate railway rivalry, the Commission
- suggests, as one
possibility, a working agreement between 'the Chinese and Japanese
railway administrations, under a joint Sino-Japanese Railway Com-
mission, with at least one foreign adviser . A second, more thorough,
remedy would be the amalgamation of Chinese and Japanese rail-
way interests--a plan which could be evolved along lines similar
to those already followed by Japan in Manchuria during the last
few months . Such an arrangement would make the South Manchuria
Railway a purely commercial enterprise . A special municipal admin-
istration in the railway area should, however, be established in
order to safeguard the vested interests of the South Manchuria Rail-
way. By means of such a Sino-Japanese treaty many conflicts and
misunderstandings arising over the respective rights of China and
Japan would be settled. In the Commission's view, "China might
then find no difficulty in recognizing all the definite grants made to
Japan by such treaties and agreements
as those of 1915, unless
abrogated or modified by the new treaty ."10 This apparently implies
that Japan should continue to maintain its leasehold at Dairen . Al-
though the economic interests of Japan in Manchuria should thus
be given a treaty basis, the Commission insists that the Open Door
should be maintained .
The third treaty would provide pacific procedure to assist in the
solution of disputes between China and Japan . For this purpose a
board of conciliation and an arbitral tribunal should be established.
The latter "would deal with any disputes between the Chinese and
Japanese governments regarding the interpretation of the Declara-
tion or of the new treaties, and with such other categories of disputes
as might be specified in the treaty .
.
.
."a1 Finally, the treaty should
contain provisions in regard to non-aggression and mutual assistance .
For this purpose the parties should agree that
Manchuria should gradually become a demilitarized area, [and that) after
the organisation
of
the gendarmerie had been effected, any violation of
the demilitarized territory by either of the parties or by a third party would
constitute an act of aggression entitling the other party, or both parties
in the case of a third-party attack, to take whatever measures might be
deemed advisable to defend the demilitarized territory, without prejudice to
the right of the Council of the League to take action under the Covenant v
The Commission suggests that if the Soviet government wishes to
10 Lytton Report, 137-
"Ibid., 137-138 .
"Ibid., 137--138-
[ 307 3ight of the Council of the League to take action under the Covenant v
The Commission suggests that if the Soviet government wishes to
10 Lytton Report, 137-
"Ibid., 137-138 .
"Ibid., 137--138-
[ 307 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the League to take action under the Covenant v
The Commission suggests that if the Soviet government wishes to
10 Lytton Report, 137-
"Ibid., 137-138 .
"Ibid., 137--138-
[ 307 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

participate in these non-aggression provisions it should be free to
do so .13
Under the Commission's proposal for a non-aggression agree-
ment, Japan would be free to resist Soviet aggression in Manchuria ;
if the Soviets violated the territory, Japan could use force in legiti-
mate defense and could also invoke the aid of the League . At the
same time, such an agreement would assure China that Japan would
not abuse the doctrine of legitimate defense, nor employ strategic
arguments to justify the establishment of a veiled protectorate over
Manchuria.
The fourth treaty would be a commercial agreement designed to
encourage Japanese trade with China as a whole . "This treaty should
also contain an undertaking by the Chinese government to take all
measures within its power to forbid and repress organized boycott
movements against Japanese trade, without prejudice to the indi-
vidual rights of Chinese consumers ."14
(b) TEXT OF THE TREATY BE'1'WBEN JAPAN AND
'MANCHUKUO," SEPTEMBER 15, 1932
Whereas Japan has recognized the fact that Manchukuo, in ac-
cordance with the free will of its inhabitants, has organized and
established itself as an independent State ; and
Whereas Manchukuo has declared its intention of abiding by all
international engagements entered into by China in so far as they
are applicable to Manchukuo ;
Now the Governments of Japan and Manchukuo have, for the
purpose of establishing a perpetual relationship of good neighbor-
hood between Japan and Manchukuo, each respecting the territorial
rights of the other, and also in order to secure the peace of the Far
East, agreed as follows :
r. Manchukuo shall confirm and respect, in so far as no agree-
ment to the contrary shall be made between Japan and Manchukuo
in the future, all rights and interests possessed by Japan or her sub-
jects within the territory of Manchukuo by virtue of Sino-Japanese
treaties, agreements or other arrangements or of Sino-Japanese con-
tracts, private as well as public ;
2 . Japan and Manchukuo, recognizing that any threat to the terri-
"Although stating that it had not been able to obtain direct information
as to the views of the Soviet government,
the Commission declared that
"it is clear that any solution of the problem of Manchuria
which ignored
the important interests of the U .S .S.R. would risk a future breach of the
peace and would not be permanent ." (Lytton Report, 129-130 .)
"Ibid., 138 .
[ 308 )the problem of Manchuria
which ignored
the important interests of the U .S .S.R. would risk a future breach of the
peace and would not be permanent ." (Lytton Report, 129-130 .)
"Ibid., 138 .
[ 308 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tort' or to the peace and order of either of the High Contracting
Parties constitutes at the same time a threat to the safety and exist-
ence of the other, agree to cooperate in the maintenance of
their
national security ; it being understood that such Japanese forces as
may be necessary for this purpose shall be stationed in Manchukuo .
Source :
League of Nations Publications, Official No . C.775.M.366.193a .
VII.
(3091

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat such Japanese forces as
may be necessary for this purpose shall be stationed in Manchukuo .
Source :
League of Nations Publications, Official No . C.775.M.366.193a .
VII.
(3091

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX VIII
(a) ARMS LIMITATION : THE FIRST AMERICAN PROPOSAL
Statement of Ambassador Gibson to the Conference for the
Reduction and Limitation of Armaments at Geneva, February 9 , 1932
i. The American government advocates consideration of the draft
convention as containing the outlines for a convenient basis for
discussion, while expressing its entire willingness to give full con
.
sideration to any supplementary proposals calculated to advance the
end we all seek .
2 . We suggest the possibility of prolonging the existing naval
agreements concluded at Washington and London, and we advocate
completing the latter as soon as possible by the adherence of France
and Italy.
3. We advocate proportional reduction from the figures laid down
in the Washington and London agreements on naval tonnage as
soon as all parties to the Washington agreement have entered this
framework.
4. We advocate, as we long have done, the total abolition of sub-
marines .
5. We will join in formulating the most effective measures to
protect civilian populations against aerial bombing .
6. We advocate the total abolition of lethal gases and bacterio-
logical warfare.
7. We advocate, as I have already stated, the computation of the
number of armed forces on the basis of the effectives necessary for
the maintenance of internal order plus some suitable contingent for
defense. The former are obviously impossible of reduction ; the
latter is a question of relativity.
8. We agree in advocating special restrictions for tanks and heavy
mobile guns ; in other words, for those arms of a peculiarly offensive
character.
9. We are prepared to consider a limitation of expenditure on
material as a complementary method to direct limitation, feeling
[310 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---hose arms of a peculiarly offensive
character.
9. We are prepared to consider a limitation of expenditure on
material as a complementary method to direct limitation, feeling
[310 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that it may prove useful to prevent a qualitative race, if and when
the quantitative limitation has been effected .
Source : Department of State Press Release, February
9, 1932 ; League of
Nations, Conference Documents, I, 139.
(b) ARMS LIMITATION : THE SECOND AMERICAN
PROPOSAL
Resolution Submitted by Ambassador Gibson at the Conference for
the Reduction and Limitation of Armaments, April it, 1932
Whereas all states of the world are animated with the same
legitimate concern for the defense of their territory and peoples
;
Whereas many states now feel that they exist under the menace
of aggression from their neighbors ;
Whereas that fear of aggression is primarily caused and intensi-
fied by the existence of weapons which can break down national
defenses such as fortifications-in other words, which give superior-
ity to attack over defense ;
Whereas the establishment of a constant superiority of defense
over attack would promote in the peoples of all states a feeling of
security ;
The General Commission believes that the abolition of aggressive
weapons would constitute a first and essential requisite, not only fcc
the reduction of armaments, but for the establishment of security ;
and resolves :
x . (a) That the following weapons are of a peculiarly aggressive
value against land defenses-tanks, heavy mobile guns and gases-
and as such should be abolished ; and
(b) To request the Land Commission to draw up and submit to
the General Commission a plan for scrapping tanks and mobile
guns exceeding 155 millimetres in caliber and for the abolition of
the use of gases in war .
2 .
(a) That an undertaking by the states not to avail themselves
of the aforementioned weapons in the event of war is equally essen-
tial ; and
(b) To request the Political Commission to draw up and submit
to the General Commission texts for these purposes .
Source : Department of State Press Release, April
11, 1932 . Journal of the
Conference for the Reduction and Limitation of Armaments, April 12, 1932,
P. 342 .ral Commission texts for these purposes .
Source : Department of State Press Release, April
11, 1932 . Journal of the
Conference for the Reduction and Limitation of Armaments, April 12, 1932,
P. 342 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---for these purposes .
Source : Department of State Press Release, April
11, 1932 . Journal of the
Conference for the Reduction and Limitation of Armaments, April 12, 1932,
P. 342 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(c) ARMS LIMITATION : PRESIDENT HOOVER'S PROPOSAL
Instructions by President Hoover to the American Delegation to the
Conference for the Limitation and Reduction o f Armaments, Read by
Ambassador Gibson before the General Commission, June
22,
1932
The delegations at the World Conference on Disarmament at
Geneva are engaged in discussions as to methods by which a more
comprehensive effort can be made toward disarmament .
. The following is the substance of instructions which have been
given by the President to the American Delegation for guidance in
the discussions which are now occupying them .
The time has come when we should cut through the brush and
adopt some broad and definite method of reducing the overwhelming
burden of armament which now lies upon the toilers of the world .
This would be the most important world step that could be taken
to expedite economic recovery. We must make headway against the
mutual fear and friction arising out of war armament which kill
human confidence throughout the world . We can still remain prac-
tical in maintaining an adequate self-defense among all nations ;
we can add to the assurances of peace and yet save the people of the
world from ten to fifteen billions of wasted dollars during the next
ten years .
I propose that the following principles should be our guide :
First: The Kellogg-Briand Pact, to which we are all signatories,
can only mean that the nations of the world have agreed that they
will use their arms solely for defense .
Second : This reduction should be carried out not only by broad
general cuts in armaments but by increasing the comparative power
of defense through decreases in the power of the attack .
Third: The armaments of the world have grown up in general
mutual relation to each other. And, speaking generally, such rela-
tivity should be preserved in making reductions .
Fourth : The reductions must be real and positive. They must
effect economic relief.
Fifth: There are three problems to deal with-land forces, air
forces and naval forces . They are all interconnected . No part of the
proposals which I make can be disassociated one from the other .
Based on these principles, I propose that the arms of the world
should be reduced by nearly one-third.
Land Forces
In order to reduce the offensive character of all land forces as
distinguished from their defensive character, I propose the adoption
t3I2)the world
should be reduced by nearly one-third.
Land Forces
In order to reduce the offensive character of all land forces as
distinguished from their defensive character, I propose the adoption
t3I2)

--- PAGE BREAK ---reduced by nearly one-third.
Land Forces
In order to reduce the offensive character of all land forces as
distinguished from their defensive character, I propose the adoption
t3I2)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the presentation already made it the Geneva Conference for the
abolition of, all tanks, all chemical warfare and all large mobile
guns. This would not prevent the establishment or increase of fixed
fortifications of any character for the defense of frontiers and sea-
coasts. It would give an increased relative strength to such defenses
as compared with the attack .
I propose furthermore that there should be a reduction of one-
third in strength of all land armies over and above the so-called
police component .
The land armaments of many nations are considered to have two
functions. One is the maintenance of internal order in connection
with the regular police forces of the country . The strength required
for this purpose has been called the "police component ." The other
function is defense against foreign attack. The additional strength
required for this purpose has been called the "defense component ."
While it is not suggested that these different components should be
separated, it is necessary to consider this contention as to functions
in proposing a practical plan of reduction in land forces . Under the
Treaty of Versailles and the other peace treaties, the armies of
Germany, Austria, Hungary and Bulgaria were reduced to a size
deemed appropriate for the maintenance of internal order, Germany
being assigned xoo,ooo troops for a population of approxirtlately
65,000,000 people. I propose that we should accept for all nations
a basic police component of soldiers proportionate to the average
which was thus allowed Germany and these other states. This
formula, with necessary corrections for powers having colonial
possessions, should be sufficient to provide for the maintenance of
internal order by the nations of the world . Having analyzed these
two components in this fashion, I propose as stated above that there
should be a reduction of one-third in the strength of all land armies
over and above the police component .
Air Forces
All bombing planes to be abolished . This will do away with the
military possession of types of planes capable of attacks upon civil
populations and should be coupled with the total prohibition of all
bombardment from the air.
Naval Forces
I propose that the treaty number and tonnage of battleships shall
be reduced by one-third ; that the treaty tonnage of aircraft carriers,
cruisers and destroyers shall be reduced by one-fourth ; that the
[313 1that the treaty number and tonnage of battleships shall
be reduced by one-third ; that the treaty tonnage of aircraft carriers,
cruisers and destroyers shall be reduced by one-fourth ; that the
[313 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---er and tonnage of battleships shall
be reduced by one-third ; that the treaty tonnage of aircraft carriers,
cruisers and destroyers shall be reduced by one-fourth ; that the
[313 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

treaty tonnage of submarines shall be reduced by one-third, and that
no nation shall retain a submarine tonnage greater than 35,000.
The relative strength of naval arms in battleships and aircraft
carriers, as between the five leading naval powers, was fixed by the
Treaty of Washington . The relative strength in cruisers, destroyers
and submarines was fixed, as between the United States, Great
Britain and Japan, by the Treaty of London. For the purposes of
this proposal, it is suggested that the French and Italian strength
in
cruisers and destroyers be calculated as though they had joined in
the Treaty of London on a basis approximating the so-called accord
of March 1, 1931 . There are various technical considerations con-
nected with these naval discussions which will be presented by the
delegation.
General
The effect of this plan would be to bring an enormous saving in
cost of new construction and replacement of naval vessels . It would
also save large amounts in the operating expense in all nations of
land, sea and air forces. It would greatly reduce offensive strength
compared to defensive strength in all nations .
These proposals are simple and direct. They call upon all nations
to contribute something. The contribution here proposed will be
relative and mutual. I know of nothing that would give more hope
for humanity to-day than the acceptance of such a program with such
minor changes as might be necessary . It is folly for the world to go
breaking its back over military expenditure, and the United States
is willing to take its share of responsibility by making definite pro-
posals that will relieve the world .
Sources : White House Press Release, June 22, 1932 ; League of Nations
Publication, Official No . Conf. D. 126 .
(d) RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL COMMIS-
SION OF THE CONFERENCE FOR THE REDUCTION AND
LIMITATION OF ARMAMENTS AT GENEVA, JULY 23, 1932
I
The Conference for the Reduction and Limitation of Armaments,
Profoundly convinced that the time has come when all nations of
the world must adopt substantial and comprehensive measures of
disarmament in order to consolidate the peace of the world, to
hasten the resumption of economic activity, and to lighten the
financial burdens which now weigh upon the peoples of the world ;
(3141of
disarmament in order to consolidate the peace of the world, to
hasten the resumption of economic activity, and to lighten the
financial burdens which now weigh upon the peoples of the world ;
(3141

--- PAGE BREAK ---der to consolidate the peace of the world, to
hasten the resumption of economic activity, and to lighten the
financial burdens which now weigh upon the peoples of the world ;
(3141

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Desirous of avoiding a competition in the power of armaments
which would be both ruinous to the peoples and threatening to
their national defense ;
Recalling, its resolutions of April r9th, loth and 22nd, 1932 ;
Firmly determined to achieve a first decisive step involving a
substantial reduction of armaments, on the basis of Article . 8 of the
Covenant of the League of Nations, and as a natural consequence
of the obligations resulting from the Briand-Kellogg Pact ;
Welcoming heartily the initiative taken by the President of the
United States of America in formulating concrete proposals for a
substantial reduction of armaments by the prohibition of certain
methods of warfare, by the abolition of certain material, and by
reductions varying in magnitude and amounting for certain arma-
ments to the proportion of one-third ;
Bearing in mind also the draft convention of the Preparatory
Commission, the statements and proposals made to the conference
by a number •of delegations, and the reports and resolutions of the
various commissions of the conference :
Decides forthwith and unanimously, guided by the general prin-
ciples underlying President Hoover's declaration :
x. That a substantial reduction of world armaments shall be ef-
fected to be applied by a general convention
like to land, naval
and air armaments ;
2 . That a primary objective shall be to reduce the means of
attack.
II . Conclusions of the First Phase o f the Conference
The conference, noting that agreement has now been reached on
a certain number of important points, decides, without prejudice to
more far-reaching agreements hereafter, to record forthwith the
following concrete measures of disarmament, which should form
part of the general convention to be concluded . The conference also
decides to establish certain principles as the basis for further reduc-
tions of armaments, and to determine the procedure necessary for
the active prosecution of its work .
i. Air Forces
The conference, deeply impressed with the danger overhanging
civilization from bombardment from the air in the event of future
conflict, and determined to take all practicable measures to provide
against this danger, records at this stage of its work the following
conclusions :
t 3=5 3
ant from the air in the event of future
conflict, and determined to take all practicable measures to provide
against this danger, records at this stage of its work the following
conclusions :
t 3=5 3
a

--- PAGE BREAK ---he event of future
conflict, and determined to take all practicable measures to provide
against this danger, records at this stage of its work the following
conclusions :
t 3=5 3
a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

z. Air attack against the civilian population shall be absolutely
prohibited ;
2 . The High Contracting Parties shall agree as between themselves
that all bombardment from the air shall be abolished, subject to
agreement with regard to measures to be adopted for the purpose
of rendering effective the observance of this rule . These measures
should include the following :
(a) There shall be effected a limitation by number and a restric-
tion by characteristics of military aircraft
;
(b) Civil aircraft shall be submitted to regulation and full pub-
licity. Further, civil aircraft not conforming to the specified limita-
tions shall be subjected to an international regime (except for cer-
tain regions where such a regime is not suitable) such as to prevent
effectively the misuse of such civil aircraft.
2 . Land Armaments
(a) Land Artillery.
i. All heavy land artillery of calibers between any maximum limit
as determined in the succeeding paragraph and a lower limit to be
defined shall be limited in number .
2 . The limitation of caliber of land artillery shall be fixed by the
convention.
Subject to an effective method being established to prevent the
rapid transformation of guns on fixed mountings into mobile guns,
different maxima for the caliber of land guns may be fixed as
follows :
(a) A maximum limit for the caliber of coastal guns, which
shall not be less than the maximum caliber of naval guns
;
(b) A maximum limit for the caliber of guns in permanent
frontier or fortress defensive systems ;
(c) A maximum limit for the caliber of mobile land guns (other
than guns employed for coastal defense.)
(b) Tanks .
P
The maximum unit tonnage of tanks shall be limited.
3. Chemical, Bacteriological and Incendiary Warfare
Chemical, bacteriological and incendiary warfare shall be pro-
hibited under the conditions unanimously recommended by the
Special Committee .
[ 31 6 jChemical, Bacteriological and Incendiary Warfare
Chemical, bacteriological and incendiary warfare shall be pro-
hibited under the conditions unanimously recommended by the
Special Committee .
[ 31 6 j

--- PAGE BREAK ---gical and Incendiary Warfare
Chemical, bacteriological and incendiary warfare shall be pro-
hibited under the conditions unanimously recommended by the
Special Committee .
[ 31 6 j

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 . Supervision
There shall be set up a Permanent Disarmament Commission with
the constitution, rights and duties generally as outlined in Part VI
of the draft convention submitted by the Preparatory Commission
for the Disarmament Conference, with such extension of its powers
as may be deemed by the conference necessary to enable the con-
vention to be effectively applied .
III. Preparation of the Second Phase o f the Conference
The conference requests the Bureau to continue its work during
the period of adjournment of the General Commission, with a view
to framing, with the collaboration (if necessary) of a drafting
committee, draft texts concerning the questions on which agreement
has already been reached . Such texts will be communicated to all
delegations as soon as they are drafted, and will then be submitted
to the commission .
Points which call for detailed examination will be examined by
the Bureau or by the appropriate committees, with the assistance of
the governments concerned, in order that definite conclusions may be
reached as soon as the General Commission meets again.
The questions which will form the subject of such examination
are the following :
i. Ef fectives
A strict limitation and a real reduction of effectives shall be
brought about.
For this purpose, the conference invites the Bureau to examine,
with the collaboration of such delegations as it considers necessary,
the proposal of President Hoover relating to effectives . These studies
should take into consideration, in the case of each country, the
actual conditions of defense and the number and character of its
forces.
2 . Limitation of National Defense Expenditure
(a) The conference shall decide on the resumption of its
labors,
taking into account the special conditions of each state, what system
of limitation and publicity of expenditure on national defence will
provide the peoples with the best guarantee of an alleviation of
their financial burdens, and will prevent the measures of qualitative
and quantitative disarmament to be inserted in the convention from
being neutralized by increases or improvements in authorized
armaments.
0171al burdens, and will prevent the measures of qualitative
and quantitative disarmament to be inserted in the convention from
being neutralized by increases or improvements in authorized
armaments.
0171

--- PAGE BREAK ---prevent the measures of qualitative
and quantitative disarmament to be inserted in the convention from
being neutralized by increases or improvements in authorized
armaments.
0171

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(b) With a view to the decisions to be taken under this head, the
conference requests the Committee on National Defense Expendi-
ture and its Technical Committee to continue and complete the
work entrusted to its organs, and to submit their report as soon as
possible. The conference requests its Bureau to draw up, on the
basis of this report, a plan accomplishing the purpose aimed at and
taking into consideration the special conditions of the various states
.
3. Trade in and Manufacture of Arms
The Bureau will set up a special committee to submit proposals
to the conference, immediately on the resumption of its work, in
regard to the regulations to be applied to the trade in and private
and state manufacture' of arms and implements of war
.
4. Naval Armaments
As regards the proposals made by President Hoover and other
related proposals concerning naval armaments, the conference in-
vites the powers parties to the Naval Treaties of Washington and
London, which have already produced important results, to confer
together and to report to the General Commission, if possible be-
fore the resumption of its work, as to the further measures of naval
reduction which might' be feasible as a part of the general pro-
gram of disarmament.
The conference further invites the naval powers other than the
powers parties to the above treaties to make arrangements for de-
termining the degree of naval limitation they are prepared to accept
in view of the Washington and London Treaties and the general
program of disarmament envisaged in the present resolution
.
The Bureau will be kept informed of the progress of these nego-
tiations, which it will be its duty to coordinate within the frame-
work of the general convention in preparation for the comprehen-
sive decisions of the General Commission .
5. Violations
Rules of international law shall be formulated in connection with
the provisions relating to the prohibition of the use of chemical,
bacteriological and incendiary weapons and bombing from the air,
and shall be supplemented by special measures dealing with in-
fringement of these provisions .
6. Future Work of the Conference : Procedure
Pending the resumption of the meetings of the General Com-
mission, the Bureau will keep the delegations informed of the
progress of the work..
( 3 18 ).
6. Future Work of the Conference : Procedure
Pending the resumption of the meetings of the General Com-
mission, the Bureau will keep the delegations informed of the
progress of the work..
( 3 18 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Conference : Procedure
Pending the resumption of the meetings of the General Com-
mission, the Bureau will keep the delegations informed of the
progress of the work..
( 3 18 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It will be for the Bureau to fix' the date of the next meeting of
the General Commission with one month's notice . The meeting of
the General Commission shall take place not later than four months
after the resumption of the work of the Bureau, which will meet
during the week beginning September 19th, 1932 .
IV. General Provisions
The present resolution in no way prejudges the attitude
of the
conference towards any more comprehensive measures of disarm-
ament or towards the political proposals submitted by various dele-
gations.
V. Armaments Truce
In order to ensure that, pending the resumption of the meetings
of the General Commission and during the second phase of its
work, no steps shall be initiated by any power which might prej-
udice the preparation of the General Disarmament Convention, the
conference decides to recommend to the governments to renew for
a period of four months from November xst, 1932, the truce pro-
vided for by the resolution of the Assembly of the League of Na-
tions of September 29th, 1931 .
Source: League of Nations Publication, Official No . Conf. D.
136 .
(e) TEXT OF THE FIVE-POWER DECLARATION OF
DECEMBER
11, 1932, CONCERNING LIMITATION OF
ARMAMENTS
x. The Governments of the United Kingdom, France and Italy
have declared that one of the principles that should guide the Con-
ference on Disarmament should be the grant to Germany, and to the
other powers disarmed by treaty of equality of rights in a system
which would provide security for all nations, and that this principle
should find itself embodied in the convention containing the con-
clusions of the Disarmament Conference .
This declaration implies that the respective limitations of the
armaments of all states should be included in the proposed dis-
armament :convention. It is clearly understood that the methods of
application of such equality of rights will be discussed by the
conference .
2 . On the basis of this declaration Germany has signified its
willingness to resume its place at the Disarmament Conference .
3. The Governments, of the United Kingdom, France, Germany
and Italy are ready to join in a solemn reaffirmation to be made by
t 3 191s
willingness to resume its place at the Disarmament Conference .
3. The Governments, of the United Kingdom, France, Germany
and Italy are ready to join in a solemn reaffirmation to be made by
t 3 191

--- PAGE BREAK ---

all European states that they will not in any circumstances attempt
to resolve any present or future differences between the signatories
by resort to force. This shall be done without prejudice to fuller
discussions on the question of security .
4. The five Governments of the United States, the United King-
dom, France, Italy and Germany declare that they are resolved to co-
operate in the conference with the other states there represented,
seeking without delay to work out a convention which shall effect a
substantial reduction and a limitation of armaments with provision
for future revision with a view to further reduction .
Source: Department of State Press' Release, December
r2, 193 2 .
E 320 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---duction and a limitation of armaments with provision
for future revision with a view to further reduction .
Source: Department of State Press' Release, December
r2, 193 2 .
E 320 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX IX
CHRONOLOGY OF IMPORTANT EVENTS AFFECTING
AMERICAN FOREIGN RELATIONS,- 1932
ARMS LIMITATION
December, 1931.
30. Mr. Hugh Gibson, Mr. Norman H. Davis, Senator Claude A. Swan-
son, and Dr. Mary E. Woolley appointed by President Hoover as United
States delegates to the Conference
for the Reduction and Limitation
of
Armaments ; Mr. Hugh R. Wilson appointed as alternate delegate .
February, 1932 :
2 . The conference opens in Geneva .
5. Premier Tardieu proposes a world police force under League command.
9. Mr. Gibson, on behalf of the United States, presents
a nine-point
program.
5-x3. Other proposals for the reduction of armaments introduced by the
delegates of various countries .
25. British plan for carrying on the discussions within the framework
of the draft convention is approved . Russian plan for complete disarmament
is rejected.
March, 1932 .
x6. Conference adjourns until April xx .
April, 1932 :
ix. Mr. Gibson presents new plea for the ban of offensive asmsl
12 . Premier Tardieu again offers French plan
for armed forces under
League control.
22 . Compromise plan on qualitative disarmament, presented
by Sir John
Simon, is adopted .
27 . British government announces that if no agreement on naval reduc-
tion is reached, it may be compelled to resort to
the escape clause of the
London Naval Treaty .
May, 1932 :
3. France advocates the revision of the London Naval Treaty . Senator
Swanson, United States delegate, opposes this move.
June, 1932 .
21 . Premier Herriot, after conference with
American delegates, rejects
the American plan for limitation of military electives .
[321)

--- PAGE BREAK ---tes delegate, opposes this move.
June, 1932 .
21 . Premier Herriot, after conference with
American delegates, rejects
the American plan for limitation of military electives .
[321)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22. President Hoover proposes arms cut of one-third ; this plan is ex-
plained in detail by the American delegate on the following day . Italy accepts
the plan ; other nations request changes .
23 . Security pact insisted upon by France is opposed by President Hoover .
July, 1932 .
7. British plan, similar to American proposal, for the reduction of all
armaments by one-third, is introduced in the House of Commons, but pro-
posal excludes naval armament.
20 . Resolution supported by the great powers, and advocating the reduc-
tion of air, sea, and land forces, is submitted to the conference .
22 . Count Nadolny, German delegate, presents Germany's request for
arms equality and declares that Germany will reject the resolution and not
return in
1933 if her demands are not accepted.
23 . Forty-one delegates vote for the resolution, eight abstain from voting,
and two (Germany and Russia) vote against it. Conference then adjourns
for six months after extending arms truce to January
29, 1933 .
26. General von Schleicher, German Minister of Defense, threatens to
reorganize the army in spite of treaty restrictions unless other nations disarm
to the German level.
27.
Premier Herriot protests to German Ambassador against von
Schleicher's statement .
August, 1932 :
29, In note to French government, Germany requests revision of arms
limitation clause in Treaty of Versailles and asks for arms equality with
other nations.
September, 1932 :
x. French government announces- that it intends to act in accord with
Great Britain in drafting reply to Germany's demand for arms equality,
7. Premier Herriot rejects direct Franco-German negotiations and suggests
discussions before the Disarmament Conference.
zo. Prime Minister MacDonald suggests four-power conference to discuss
Germany's demand for arms equality . France again objects to direct dis-
cussions .
15. German government 'notifies the President of the Disarmament Con,
ference that Germany will not participate further unless she is granted arms
equality.
x8. British government joins the French in opposing Germany's plea to
,
rearm.
20 . President Hoover urges Germany to remain in the conference, but
considers her plea for arms equality a purely European question .
23 .
German government declines to reverse its decision, saying that
Hoover plan for arms reduction is not a sufficient guarantee of German
security.
October, 1932
1. Hoover plan for arms reduction is adopted as basis for discussions by
Committee on Effectives .
4. Great Britain proposes conference of leading powers, including United
322 ]ecurity.
October, 1932
1. Hoover plan for arms reduction is adopted as basis for discussions by
Committee on Effectives .
4. Great Britain proposes conference of leading powers, including United
322 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---32
1. Hoover plan for arms reduction is adopted as basis for discussions by
Committee on Effectives .
4. Great Britain proposes conference of leading powers, including United
322 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

States observer, in London to consider German demands . Germany refuses
to participate' unless her demand for arms equality is basis of conference.
14 . Germany objects to Geneva as meeting place for conference proposed
by Great Britain .
21 . Secretary Stimson instructs Mr. Hugh R. Wilson to accept the pro-
posal for -a four months' extension of the arms truce expiring on November
1, 1932.
November, :932 :
7 . Disarmament Conference Bureau agrees upon the establishment of a
permanent commission, consisting of one representative from each of the
signatories to the disarmament treaty, to supervise the execution of the
agreement.
,
14. New French plan for arms reduction is published .
14. France and Italy- resume naval talks broken off in April,
1931,
17. Sir John Simon presents Great Britain's new plan for arms reduction . -
25 . After pending difficulties have been smoothed out, Germany declares
willingness to attend five-power conference at Geneva to discuss her demand
for arms equality .
29. Premier Herriot agrees to attend five-power conference at Geneva to
discuss arms reduction.
December, x932 :
2. Delegates of the five powers-France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy,
and the United States-begin conference at Geneva .
11 . Five-power declaration signed 1
DOMESTIC RECONSTRUCTION
ANTI-BOARDING CAMPAIGN
February, :932 :
3. President Hoover makes appeal to country to cease the hoarding of
currency and to join in a campaign against the depression .
5. Colonel Frank Knox appointed to conduct the anti-hoarding campaign .
19 .
The Treasury announces the issuance of special one-year maturity
certificates, known as "baby bonds," to combat hoarding .
March, z932 .-
6 . - President Hoover, Secretary Mills, and General Dawes open campaign
for the sale of "baby bonds" by addresses over the radio .
ECONOMY BILL
February, 1932 :
r9 . House of Representatives appoints special Economy Committee to find
ways for curtailing expenditures.
April, Z932 .-
25 . Economy bill introduced in House of Representatives from Economy
Committee.
'For text, see Appendix VIII (e) .
[ 3231al Economy Committee to find
ways for curtailing expenditures.
April, Z932 .-
25 . Economy bill introduced in House of Representatives from Economy
Committee.
'For text, see Appendix VIII (e) .
[ 3231

--- PAGE BREAK ---

May, 1932 :
3. Economy bill as amended by the House provides savings of only 30
millions instead of expected 263 millions .
June, :932 :
8. Senate passes an economy bill with . savings estimated at from 1134 to
x56 millions .
30. Compromise economy bill signed by the President .
GLASS-STEAGALL BILL
Pebruary, 1932 :
x r. Glass-Steagall banking bill introduced in both Houses
.
13. Bill is reported from Senate and House committees with a few
amendments.
z5. Bill passes House with only 115 votes in opposition .
z9. Bill passes Senate without a roll call
.
26. Bill as amended in conference is unanimously approved by both
Houses.
27. Bill is signed by the President.
GOLDSBOROUGH BILL
April, 1932 :
231 .
Goldsborough bill to restore and maintain the purchasing power of
the dollar is introduced in the House of Representatives .
May, 1932 :
2 . Bill is brought up id the House under suspension of the
rules and
passes by a vote of 289 to 6o .
June, :932 :
x. Senator Glass offers new measure as a substitute for Goldsborough bill .
BONUS BILL
January, 1932 :
14 . Bill is introduced in the House of Representatives and referred to the
Ways and Means Committee .
May, 1932 :
7 . Bill is returned, with an unfavorable report by a vote of z5 to zo,
from the Ways and Means Committee .
June, :932 :
115 . Bill is passed in the House by a vote of
211
to
1176.
x6 . Senate Finance Committee makes adverse report on the bill by a vote
of 14 to
2 .
117 . Bill is defeated in the Senate by a vote of 62 to z8.
RECONSTRUCTION FINANCE CORPORATION
-January, 1932 .•
4. Message from the President proposing the establishment of the Recon-
struction Finance Corporation .
{ 324 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---te of 62 to z8.
RECONSTRUCTION FINANCE CORPORATION
-January, 1932 .•
4. Message from the President proposing the establishment of the Recon-
struction Finance Corporation .
{ 324 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9 .
Bill to establish the Reconstruction Finance Corporation Introduced
in the House.
15. Bill passed in the House with amendments .
x8 . Measure passed in the Senate with amendments .
22 . Bill is signed by the President, who appoints General Charles G .
Dawes, former Ambassador to Great Britain, as President of the Recon-
struction Finance Corporation and Mr . Eugene Meyer, Governor of the
Federal Reserve Board, as Chairman .
TAX BILL
March, x932 :
7. Bill is introduced in the House of Representatives ; includes a sales tax
of 2 % per cent on the sales value of all manufactured goods, and an excise
tax on oil .
1 3. Revolt among a group of fifty insurgent Democratic members in the
House over sales tax section of the tax bill .
r8 . Coalition of insurgent Democrats and Republicans routs regular party
leaders and by a vote of 153 to 87 raises income tax in tax bill to practically
war-time levels.
24. Sales tax is rejected in the House by a vote of 223 to 153 .
26. A new coalition in the House votes duty of io cents a hundred
pounds on coal and coke in the tax bill .
29 . Speaker Garner appeals to the House to put aside partisanship and to
balance the budget .
April, :932 :
x. House of Representatives passes the tax bill, eliminating the sales tax,
by a vote of 327 to 64 .
May, :932 :
9 . Revised tax bill is laid before the Senate .
23. Senate coalition votes duties on lumber and copper.
31. President Hoover appears before the Senate and urges speed in
passing the tax bill to balance the budget .
June,
:932 :
I . Tax bill is passed in the Senate by a vote of 72 to II .
GARNER AND WAGNER RELIEF BILLS
May, :932 :
1 12 . President Hoover asks Democratic and Republican leaders in the
Senate to consider a three-point program for the relief of unemployment.
25 . Bill is introduced by Senator Wagner embodying some of the pro-
posals made by the President for relief of unemployment .
26-28. Caucus of Democratic members of the House approves Garner
relief bill, which is introduced in the House on the 27th and reintroduced
in a revised form on the 28th .
June, 1932 :
7. House passes Garner bill by a vote of 216 to x82 .
23. Wagner bill is passed by the Senate.
[ 325 )introduced in the House on the 27th and reintroduced
in a revised form on the 28th .
June, 1932 :
7. House passes Garner bill by a vote of 216 to x82 .
23. Wagner bill is passed by the Senate.
[ 325 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

July, 1932 :
7. Relief bill representing compromise of Garner and Wagner bills passes
the House.
9. Relief bill passes the Senate .
rr . President Hoover vetoes the relief bill .
3E6 . Congress passes a compromise relief bill which is approved by the
President.
EUROPEAN POLITICS
AUSTRIA
January, 1932 :
27-29. Cabinet resigns because of friction over Disarmament Conference ;
Chancellor Buresch forms a new Cabinet .
April, 193
:
24. Elections result in gains by the National Socialists (Nazis) in Vienna
and the provinces .
July, 1932 .
28 . Government announces that it will adhere to consultative pact ini-
tiated by France and Great Britain at Lausanne on July 13 .
FRANCE
January, 1932 :
12 . Laval Cabinet resigns.
13. At President Doumer's request, M. Laval forms new Cabinet, accept-
ing again for himself the office of Premier.
February, 1932 :
16 . Laval Cabinet forced out after defeat in the Senate on electoral re-
form bill .
20 . M. Tardieu forms new Cabinet after M . Painlev6 fails to do so ;
assumes offices of Premier and Minister of Foreign Affairs.
March, 1932 :
7. Aristide Briand, former Foreign Minister, dies,
May, 1932 :
r. First balloting for members of Chamber of Deputies shows a swing to
the Left.
6. President Doumer assassinated .
8. Second ballot for Chamber. Tardieu Government defeated .
xo. Albert F . Lebrun elected President . M. Tardieu and Cabinet tender
resignations, but agree to remain at their posts until the new Chamber
meets.
June, x932 :
3. M. Herriot announces new Cabinet.
7. M. Herriot outlines program on war debts and disarmament and wins
large majority on vote of confidence .
[ 3261

--- PAGE BREAK ---Chamber
meets.
June, x932 :
3. M. Herriot announces new Cabinet.
7. M. Herriot outlines program on war debts and disarmament and wins
large majority on vote of confidence .
[ 3261

--- PAGE BREAK ---

July, 1932 .
13. An Accord
of
Confidence, establishing a new
entente with Great
Britain, is signed ; other nations are invited to join .
October, 1932 :
16 . Senatorial elections show no important changes
;
Premier Herriot is
assured a majority .
GERMANY
March, 1932 .
13. President von Hindenburg fails by narrow margin to obtain majority
in national election. Adolph Hitler his nearest rival .
April, 1932 :
ro: Second German election ; President von Hindenburg
reelected by a
plurality of nearly 6 million votes in a total poll of over
36 millions.
24. Elections- in Prussia, Bavaria, Hamburg, Anhalt, and Wuertemberg
for members of Diets . Hitler s supporters win a plurality
of seats in all
states except Bavaria ; in Prussian Diet, win :62 seats out of total of 422.
May, 19327
i9. Prussian Government resigns .
30. President von Hindenburg forces resignation of Bruening Cabinet .
June, 1932 :
x. Colonel Franz von Papen appointed Chancellor and forms new Cabinet .
4 . President von Hindenburg dissolves Reichstag. New election set for
July 3r .
xg. President von -Hindenburg signs decree lifting ban
on storm troops.
Iul9, 1932 .
20 . President von Hindenburg decrees state of emergency in
Berlin and
Brandenburg and appoints federal commissioner fox Prussia .
21 . Prussian Ministers forced to resign,
26. President von Hindenburg declares state of emergency
in Berlin and
Brandenburg at an end .
31 . Election gives Nazis 37 per cent of Reichstag seats, against 21 per cent
for Social Democrats, rs per cent for Centrists, r4 per cent for Communists,
and 13 per cent fox minor parties.
August, 1932 :
3o. Reichstag assembles, and after electing, its officers adjourns
until Sep-
tember 12.
President von Hindenburg grants power to the Chancellor to
dissolve the Reichstag .
September, 1932 :
12 . Chancellor von Papen presents decree of dissolution as Reichstag meets,
and opposition parties disregard it. President von Hindenburg supports the
Chancellor, and Reichstag is not allowed to meet again . Election of a new
Reichstag set for November 6.
{ 327 1hstag meets,
and opposition parties disregard it. President von Hindenburg supports the
Chancellor, and Reichstag is not allowed to meet again . Election of a new
Reichstag set for November 6.
{ 327 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---osition parties disregard it. President von Hindenburg supports the
Chancellor, and Reichstag is not allowed to meet again . Election of a new
Reichstag set for November 6.
{ 327 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

November, 1932 :
6. Reichstag election shows cut in Hitler's vote and gain for Communists .
17. Chancellor von Papen and his Cabinet resign.
21-23 . Hitler declines the Chancellorship on President von Hindenburg's
terms and submits counter-proposals.
December, 1932 .'
2 . General von Schleicher appointed Chancellor.
3 . With two exceptions, General
von Schleicher appoints all members
of
von Papen Ministry to his own Cabinet.
GREAT BRITAIN
Iuly,
1932 :
13 . Signs Accord of Confidence with France, establishing new entente ;
other nations invited to join in the pact .
ITALY
April, 1932 :
9. Fascist Grand Council session closes after, adoption of three resolutions
covering the international economic situation and disarmament.
JulY,
193,2 :
20 . Foreign Minister Grandi resigns as Premier Mussolini reorganizes his
Cabinet.
21 . Premier Mussolini
assumes
offices
of Foreign
and Corporation
Ministries .
EUROPEAN RECONSTRUCTION
December, 1931 :
17. Franco-German economic
conference in Berlin
decides to establish
cartels in various industries.
March, z932 .-
3. German government offers
preferential treatment to Austria provided
most-favored-nation clause is suspended .
3. French Ambassador submits outline of French plan to German govern-
ment covering relief measures for Danubian countries.
12 . Premier Tardieu and Sir John Simon announce accord on Danubian
project.
16 . German government rejects Tardieu plan for Danubian federation and
offers new suggestions.
26. Prime Minister MacDonald invites Premier Tardieu and Foreign,Min-
isters of Italy and Germany to confer on Danubian questions .
April, 1932 :
4. France and Great Britain
issue statement on
three-point agreement
regarding Danubian union and financial aid to Danubian countries .
6-S. Four-power conference meets in London, but adjourns without reach-
ing any agreement for Danubian relief .
16-20.
Conference summoned by the International Chamber of Commerce .
328]n countries .
6-S. Four-power conference meets in London, but adjourns without reach-
ing any agreement for Danubian relief .
16-20.
Conference summoned by the International Chamber of Commerce .
328]

--- PAGE BREAK ---our-power conference meets in London, but adjourns without reach-
ing any agreement for Danubian relief .
16-20.
Conference summoned by the International Chamber of Commerce .
328]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to discuss relief measures for Danubian states,-is held at Innsbruck, Austria.
but fails to 'formulate a definite program .
May, 1932 :
x3-x5 . Conference between Little Entente nations to. discuss economic co-
operation with Central European states meets
in Belgrade,
and
declares
itself in favor of the French plan for a five-power Danubian union
.
30. League's mixed committee, to study relief measures for Danubian
countries, meets in Paris .
June, 1932 :
II . Germany and Italy, announce opposition to the formation of a Danu-
bian bloc.
September, 1932 :
; . Delegates of fifteen countries meet at Stresa to discuss financial and
economic reconstruction of the Danubian states .
I9. Economic rehabilitation plan adopted at Stresa conference provides for
grain preferences, bilateral treaties, and a general contribution fund .
FAR EASTERN AFFAIRS
December, 1931 :
ro. League Council, meeting in Paris, adopts peace resolution, also ap-
proved by the United States, and decides to appoint a Commission of Inquiry
to investigate conditions in Manchuria. Japanese and Chinese accept the
resolution with reservations.
z 3 . Japanese attack Chinchow in drive into Southern Manchuria .
18-24. United States Ambassador Forbes makes repeated representations
against movement on Chinchow. Premier Inukai replies that purpose is to
suppress bandits.
27 . Ambassador Forbes requests that Japan maintain the "open door"
policy and charges discrimination against foreigners
.
January, 1932 :
3, Chinchow .occupied by Japanese ; Chinese troops withdraw behind Great
Wallwithout fighting.
g. League Council submits names of members of Inquiry Commission to
Japanese and Chinese governments for approval .
7. Secretary Stimson sends identic notes to Chinese and Japanese govern-
ments declaring that the United States will not recognize any situation,
treaty, or agreement effected by means contrary to the covenants of the
Pact of Paris. (This becomes known as the Stimson doctrine .)
8. Japanese government, after receipt of Stimson note, denies that it
intends to violate treaties .
ii . Chinese and Japanese governments accept personnel of League Inquiry
Commission.
13. Chinese government's reply to the United States' note regarding Man-
churia stresses China's willingness to cooperate with the United States in
upholding treaty rights .
x8. Chinese mob assaults Japanese priests in native part of Shanghai ; one
priest is killed .
t 329 1uria stresses China's willingness to cooperate with the United States in
upholding treaty rights .
x8. Chinese mob assaults Japanese priests in native part of Shanghai ; one
priest is killed .
t 329 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---20.

Serious clashes in Shanghai between Japanese residents and Chinese
agitators in retaliation for Chinese assault on Japanese priests .

21 .

Japanese government demands immediate cessation of Chinese boycott
against Japanese goods.

21 .

Earl of Lytton appointed Chairman of Manchurian Inquiry Commis-
sion (referred to hereafter as the Lytton Commission) .

22 .

Rear Admiral Shiozawa and Japanese Consul General Murai' in Shang-
ltai demand immediate suspension of anti-Japanese organizations in Inter-
national Settlement and native city of Shanghai on threat of naval demon-
strations.

Foreign consuls protest, against threats .

26.

Martial law declared in Shanghai.

League Council appeals to both
China and Japan to avoid clash .

27 .

Mayor of Shanghai receives 22-hour ultimatum from Japanese Consul
General requesting acceptance of all Japanese demands .

28.

Japanese attack Chapei (suburb of Shanghai)
.

28 .

League Council decides to invoke Article X of the Covenant, remind-
ing China and Japan of their obligations .

'28 .

United States Navy Department orders four destroyers to proceed from
Manila to Shanghai .

29.

Attack on Shanghai is brought to attention of League Council by the
Chinese delegate, Dr.

W.

W.

Yen, who invokes Articles X and XV of the
League Covenant.

Council appoints committee of consuls at Shanghai to
report on the situation and asks the United States to choose a member .

Japan
threatens to withdraw from League .

February, 1932 :
1 .

Secretary Stimson advises League that United States representative will
cooperate with Shanghai committee, but not as a member of the committee .

x.

British and United States Ambassadors protest against use of Inter-
national Settlement as basis -of operations .

2 .

United States, Great Britain, France, and Italy submit five-point peace
proposal to both China and Japan ; this move is also supported by Germany .

3.

China accepts the five-point peace proposal, but Japan rejects two of
the points.--- PAGE BREAK ---

3. China accepts the five-point peace proposal, but Japan rejects two of
the points. Bombardment of Woosung forts begun by Japanese warships . British cruiser Bet-wick and United States cruiser Houston arrive at Shanghai. 4. Seven American-destroyers and a transport with an infantry regiment
arrive at Shanghai to protect American interests . 5 . Japanese renew offensive in Manchuria on a large scale and occupy
Harbin. 1r . Cotton mill in International Settlement quartering American troops is
bombed by Japanese airplanes . American consul protests to Japanese consul . 12. China requests that Shanghai dispute be referred to a special session
of the Assembly to consider the dispute under Article XV of the Covenant. x6. League drafts note to Japan reminding her of her obligations under
Article X of the Covenant . 17 . General Uyeda issues ultimatum to Chinese commander to withdraw
about 12 12 miles from International Settlement within twenty-four hours . x8 . Chinese government rejects Japanese ultimatum . 18. Northeastern Administrative Committee declares "Ankuo" (Man-
churia) an independent state . 18. League committee of jurists reports unfavorably on Japanese objec-
tion to convocation of special Assembly .,
(330 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---ittee declares "Ankuo" (Man-
churia) an independent state . 18. League committee of jurists reports unfavorably on Japanese objec-
tion to convocation of special Assembly .,
(330 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23. Japan replies: to League note of February x6, asserting that owing to
chaotic conditions in China -it cannot be considered at present as an or-
ganized state.
24. United States policy in the Far -East is outlined ih a letter from
Secretary Stimson to Senator Borah .
28 . New negotiations
for an armistice between the disputants opened
at Shanghai aboard the British flagship Kent.
29. Council proposes truce and round-table conference at Shanghai (with
full cooperation of the United States) . Chinese and Japanese delegates accept
the plan, subject to approval by their governments .
March, 1932 :
x. Chinese routed by Japanese in fiercest battle near Shanghai since the
outbreak of hostilities.
x. New Manchurian state formally proclaims its independence and changes
name from "Ankuo" to "Manchukuo ."
2 . British government expresses opinion (in opposition to the United
States) that it will not oppose the formation of the new independent Man-
churian state.
2 . Chinese retreat from all strategic points around Shanghai . Woosung
forts occupied by Japanese .
3. Japan suspends hostilities in Shanghai area as military objective has
been accomplished.
3. League Assembly meets in special session to consider the Sino-Japanese
dispute.
4. League Assembly votes unanimously a three-point peace proposal calling
for the cessation of hostilities, the withdrawal of Japanese troops, and
peace negotiations.
9. Henry Pu-yi, former boy emperor, inaugurated as Regent of "Manchu-
kuo" ; proclaims independence and the severance of all ties with China
.
9. Japan declares willingness to negotiate for peace under terms of
League Assembly resolution of March 4. Terms are submitted to Chinese
Nationalist government by Sir Miles Lampson .
xo. Chinese government declares willingness to start peace negotiations on
basis of League resolution, but demands that Japanese troops withdraw first .
ii . League Assembly adopts the Stimson doctrine declaring that it will
not recognize any situation, treaty, or arrangement brought about by means
contrary to the covenants of the Pact of Paris .
12 . Secretary Stimson announces approval by the United States of the
position taken by the League Assembly on the Far Eastern dispute .
12 . "Manchukuo" seeks recognition by other governments ; request is
ignored by all the powers except Japan .
14. Provisional armistice agreed upon at Shanghai between China and
Japan in the presence of diplomatic representatives of Great Britain, France,
Italy, and the United States .
x9. "Manchukuo" government notifies Chinese Nationalist government
of complete severance of all relations ; also notifies League that China no
longer represents Manchuria .
21 . Final armistice terms call for the gradual withdrawal of Japanese
troops while Chinese remain in present positions ; execution of terms to be
supervised by a neutral commission .
£ 33'
Ichuria .
21 . Final armistice terms call for the gradual withdrawal of Japanese
troops while Chinese remain in present positions ; execution of terms to be
supervised by a neutral commission .
£ 33'
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---armistice terms call for the gradual withdrawal of Japanese
troops while Chinese remain in present positions ; execution of terms to be
supervised by a neutral commission .
£ 33'
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

April, 1932 .
14. Japan declares that it will not participate in meeting of League Com-
mittee of Nineteen to consider Shanghai status.
x6. League Committee of Nineteen suggests that China accept the ruling
of neutrals as to time of
withdrawal of Japanese troops from Shanghai
area.
20. Chinese government accepts League Committee's resolution . Japanese
government demands safeguard
against new boycott before
evacuation of
troops.
28. Committee of Nineteen drafts resolution for resubmission
to the As-
sembly covering the withdrawal of Japanese troops .
29. Bomb thrown by a Korean at Shanghai wounds
leading Japanese
officials . Peace negotiations postponed as a result of the bombing.
30. League Assembly,
in extraordinary
session, with Japan
abstaining,
approves resolution covering the evacuation of Japanese troops from Shang-
hai area under supervision of a mixed commission.
May, 1932 :
5. Representatives of China .and Japan sign armistice .
9. E . S. Cunningham,
United States Consul
General at Shanghai, ap-
pointed Chairman of Joint Commission to assist in the arrangement for the
evacuation of Japanese troops .
15. Premier Inukai of Japan assassinated by militarists in his home.
22. Viscount Makoto
Saito, appointed by
the Emperor as nonpartisan
Premier ; forms new national Cabinet on the 25th.
June, :932 :
30. American, British, and French Ambassadors
at Tokyo instructed to
make representations to Japanese` Foreign Office to bar seizure of Chinese
customs offices by "Manchukuo" government.
July, 1932 :
x. League Assembly defers
further action on the Sino-Japanese conflict
until receipt of the Lytton Commission report. Thirty-first Infantry Regiment,
United States Army, leaves Shanghai for Manila.
22 . Chinese government
orders mobilization
to defend Jehol and pro-
tests to League and Japanese
government against
Japanese invasion
of
Inner Mongolia .
23. Chinese government announces postal blockade against "Manchukuo"
and refuses relations with the new government.
29. Chinese government declares an embargo on goods from Manchuria
as a reprisal for the seizure of the customs offices by the "Manchukuo"
government.
August, X932 :
8. Speech delivered by Secretary
Stimson before the Council on Foreign
Relations in New York interprets American policy in the Far East.
x9. Japan warns Mayor Wu of Shanghai to check revival of anti-Japanese
boycotts.
[ 332 )cretary
Stimson before the Council on Foreign
Relations in New York interprets American policy in the Far East.
x9. Japan warns Mayor Wu of Shanghai to check revival of anti-Japanese
boycotts.
[ 332 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---re the Council on Foreign
Relations in New York interprets American policy in the Far East.
x9. Japan warns Mayor Wu of Shanghai to check revival of anti-Japanese
boycotts.
[ 332 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

September, x932 :
15. Japan recognizes "Manchukuo" as an independent government
and
negotiates treaty of alliance .
z5. Chinese government protests to League of Nations and to signatories
to Nine-Power Treaty against Japan's recognition of "Manchukuo ."
October, x932 :
2 . Lytton Report made public in Geneva .
4. Japanese Cabinet rejects
peace proposals outlined
in Lytton Report
and again affirms that it will not change its Manchurian policy .
15 . Boycott activities against Japan are intensified . in Peiping.
November, 1932 :
20. Chinese government accepts
the findings of the Lytton Commission.
21. League Council begins the consideration of the Lytton Report .
28. League Council decides
to transmit Lytton Report
and minutes of
its session to Assembly.
December, 1932 .-
6. League Assembly meets to consider Lytton Report .
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE
December, 1931 :
ii. Bankers' conference meets in Berlin to consider extension of German
short-term credits under "standstill" agreement .
13 . Japan suspends the gold standard.
23. French Parliament votes that losses by Bank of France due to Great
Britain's abandonment
of the gold standard be assumed
in part by the
government .
23. Hungary declares moratorium on foreign debts .
January, 1932 :
5. Austrian government notifies creditors of inability to continue amorti-
zation payments .
ii . President Ortiz Rubio of
Mexico announces that through an agree-
ment reached with International Bankers' Committee foreign debt moratorium
has been extended to January
1, 1934.
15. Bank of England grants further extension
of its loan of loo million
schillings to National Bank of Austria,
23. Bankers' conference
extends the Getman
"standstill" agreement
to
February 28, 1933 .
February, 1932 :
x. Bank of England pays Federal Reserve Bank of New York balance of
x25-million-dollar credit granted in August, 1931, to support the pound.'
3. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Bank of England, . Bank of France,
and Bank for International Settlements extend for one month the loo-million-
dollar credit to the German Reichsbank .
8. Ecuador abandons gold-exchange standard.
29. The credit to the German
Reichsbank is again renewed,
but with
provision for a io per cent amortization .
{ 333 )llar credit to the German Reichsbank .
8. Ecuador abandons gold-exchange standard.
29. The credit to the German
Reichsbank is again renewed,
but with
provision for a io per cent amortization .
{ 333 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---erman Reichsbank .
8. Ecuador abandons gold-exchange standard.
29. The credit to the German
Reichsbank is again renewed,
but with
provision for a io per cent amortization .
{ 333 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

March, 1932 :
x . Brazil plans to pay scrip for interest on external
loans.
14. El Salvador declares general moratorium.
x6. Mexican government declares silver money only legal tender .
April, 193.2 :
x. League of Nations Finance Committee recommends loan to Austria .
r. German government decrees
that unfunded long-term and short-term
credits not included
in "standstill"
agreement fire to be treated as if
included.
4. British Treasury makes
final payment to American banks en
200-
million-dollar credit granted in August, r93r .
ax. Bank for International Settlements announces that it will renew for
three months credits
to the national
banks of Austria,
Hungary, and
Yugoslavia.
xg . Bulgaria declares partial moratorium,
xg. Greece declares partial moratorium .
20. Chile suspends gold-exchange standard .
27. Greece suspends gold-exchange standard .
May, 1932 :
ii. Siam suspends gold standard.
x3. Austrian government informs League of Nations that it must declare
a transfer moratorium unless League provides further relief measures .
15 . Peru suspends gold-exchange
standard .
27. Austrian government postpones decision on transfer moratorium until
after meeting of League committee appointed to study relief measures
for
Danubian states.
June, 1932 :
9. Central Bank of Chile taken over by new government, which plans to
seize all deposits of foreign currencies .
20 . League Financial Committee urges governments
of Great Britain,
France, Italy, and Germany to make, a loan of 300,000,000 schillings (about
42 million dollars) to Austria.
23 . Austria declares partial
transfer moratorium.
July, 1932 :
x. British government establishes exchange equalization fund .
xs. Austria extends scope of transfer moratorium.
29 . Following protests from the United States, Great Britain, France, Italy,
and Spain, Chilean government repeals decree declaring all foreign deposits
in Chilean banks state property .
September, 1932 :
3. Costa Rica enacts
three-year moratorium on British and American
bonds.
October, 1932 .
x3. Bolivia authorizes one-year moratorium on private debts.
3z. Yugoslavia defers service on certain external bonds.
[334)enacts
three-year moratorium on British and American
bonds.
October, 1932 .
x3. Bolivia authorizes one-year moratorium on private debts.
3z. Yugoslavia defers service on certain external bonds.
[334)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

November, 1932 :
t4. International credit of 9o million dollars to the German Reichsbank
extended for another three months .
25. Colombia authorizes moratorium on private debts .
LATIN AMERICA
ARGENTINA
February, 1932 .
20. .President Justo, after inauguration, lifts state of siege
in force since
outbreak of revolution.
March, 1932 :
29. President Justo advises Congress that all financial decrees of the late
provisional government will be valid in the future unless changed by con-
stitutional measures.
September, 1932 :
28 . Chamber of Deputies votes
to rejoin League of Nations but with-
holds recognition of Monroe doctrine .
BOLIVIA
June, 1932 :
x5. Bolivian forces capture Paraguayan
fort in the Chaco ; hostilities
thus begun continue throughout the year .
July, 1932 .
21 . Renewal of Chaco dispute brought to the attention of League of Na-
tions by Bolivia complaining of Paraguayan aggression .
27 . Counter-charge to Bolivian complaint submitted
to League by Para-
x932 :
r. Paraguay protests to League of Nations, accusing Bolivia of having
violated Articles X and XI of the League Covenant .
3. Nineteen nations belonging to the Pan-American Union send identic
notes to Bolivia and Paraguay
invoking
the Stimson doctrine in the
Americas .
September, z932 .-
22 . Neutral Commission, representing five American governments, pro-
poses to send delegation of disinterested military officers to the Chaco to
supervise maintenance of a truce.
27. League Council appoints a committee to study the developments in
the Chaco dispute .
guay-August,
October, 1932 :
3. League Council sends telegram to the Neutral Commission
supporting
its plans for a truce in the Chaco district .
[ 335 .)

--- PAGE BREAK ---nts in
the Chaco dispute .
guay-August,
October, 1932 :
3. League Council sends telegram to the Neutral Commission
supporting
its plans for a truce in the Chaco district .
[ 335 .)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

November, Z932 .-
25. League Council cables to Bolivia, Paraguay, and neutrals, urging an
early truce and settlement of the dispute over the Chaco .
BRAZIL
July, 1932 :
.
zo. Government reports outbreak of revolt in the state of Sio Paulo.
September, 1932 :
29. Rebels ask for truce owing to shortage of food supplies, Truce ar-
ranged with federal government to discuss peace terms .
October, 1932 .
3. End of civil war in Brazil with surrender of rebels in state of Sin
Paulo.
CHILE
April, Z932 .-
7. Cabinet resigns, following run on Central Bank of Chile ; Sefior Victor
Robles forms new Coalition Cabinet .
8. Martial law declared in Chile to prevent spread of disturbances ; new
Cabinet sworn in .
June, 1932 :
4. Military junta set up by Colonel Grove and Sefior Carlos Davila after
the overthrow of the constitutional r€gime.
8. Mexico recognizes new regime.
17. Revolt of army and navy results in the ousting of Colonel Grove and
'his associates and the reinstatement of Sefior Davila at the head of the new
junta.
July, x932 :
8. New Cabinet formed with Sefior Davila as Provisional President .
15-3o. New Government recognized by Peru, China, Mexico, Argentina,
Cuba, and Germany.
August, X932 .-
13 . Martial law declared throughout the country .
September, 1932 .
13 . Provisional President Davila is ousted by a group of army and navy
officers and General Bartolome Blanche appointed his successor . Date of
general elections set for October 30.
October, 1932 :
z. Provisional President Blanche resigns .
2 . Abraham H. Oyanedel assumes office as Provisional President ; revolt
continues .
21 . Recognition extended by the United States and Great Britain , to the
Oyanedel Government .
30. Former President Arturo Alessandri elected President .
336 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---revolt
continues .
21 . Recognition extended by the United States and Great Britain , to the
Oyanedel Government .
30. Former President Arturo Alessandri elected President .
336 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

COLOMBIA
September, 1932 :
1 . Seizure by Peru of Colombian settlement of Leticia on the upper Ama-
zon River.
30. Peru proposes arbitration to Colombia over the Leticia incident .
October, 7932 :
1 . Colombia rejects arbitration offer .
13. Colombia again refuses arbitration offer on the ground that such
arbitration would not be in accordance with treaty of
1922 .
23. Peru again proposes arbitration to Colombia over Leticia incident .
COSTA RICA
November, 1932 :
9. President Ricardo Jimenez announces intention of his government to
denounce five-power treaty of
1923
between Central American countries
before January 1, 1933.
December, 1932:
24. Government formally denounces five-power treaty .
HAM
September, 1932 .
3. The United States and Haiti sign treaty providing for the withdrawal
of marines by 1933.
Treaty rejected by Haitian National Assembly on
September 19 .
PARAGUAY (See BOLIVIA
PERU (See COLOMBIA)
TARIFFS
UNITED STATES
January, :932 :
9. House of Representatives, by a vote of 214 to 182, passes a bill pro-
viding for an international conference on tariffs and for other changes in
tariff policy.
March, :932 .
3o. Resolution adopted by American Chamber of Commerce in Paris urg-
ing United States government to take action to obtain relief for American
exporters from losses sustained through French quotas .
April, 1932 :
1 . Senate passes bill for tariff conference by a vote of 42 to 30.
12 . Reed resolution adopted in the Senate for investigation of the effect
on foreign trade of the depreciation in value of foreign currencies .
3o. Tariff bill as amended by conference committee goes to the President
May, 1932 :
11 . Bill is vetoed by President Hoover .
(3371

--- PAGE BREAK ---e depreciation in value of foreign currencies .
3o. Tariff bill as amended by conference committee goes to the President
May, 1932 :
11 . Bill is vetoed by President Hoover .
(3371

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GREAT BRITAIN
January, 1932 :
22 . Cabinet waives precedent of unanimity rather than break
up in dis-
agreement over new tariff measure .
February, 1932 :
3. New tariff measure given precedence in House of Commons to assure
an early passage.
4 . Tariff bill calls for duties of ro per cent on all imports
not already
dutiable or on the free list . Only one-quarter of American goods will be
duty-free under new tariff .
9. House of Commons passes tariff bill by a vote of 452 to 76 .
April, 1932 :
2r . General tariff increases from 10 to 20 per cent on manufactured goods,
total duties of 25 and 30 per cent on semi-luxury and luxury articles, and
33% per cent increases on steel are to be effective as of April 26 for a
minimum period of three months .
September, 1932 :
2 . Announcement made of imposition of additional ad valorem duties on a
limited list of articles from non-Empire countries .
28 . Viscount Snowden, Sir H . Samuel, and Sir A . Sinclair resign owing
to differences over tariff questions after ratification of the agreements
reached
at the Ottawa conference .
October, 1932 :
2r. British Treasury order provides for the continuation of 33 1/3 per cent
duties on steel and iron for a further period of two years ; United States
Department of Commerce is notified of this decision .
OTTAWA CONFERENCE AND AGREEMENTS
July, 1932 :
231 . Opening of Imperial Economic Conference at Ottawa .
23 . Dominions unite in demand for a larger share of Great Britain's trade
.
25 . Canadian government demands suspension of trade with Russia .
August, 1932 :
.u . Committee on Promotion of Trade within the British Empire recom-
mends the gradual adoption of uniform "Empire content ."
20 .
Twelve separate
agreements signed at
conclusion of Ottawa
con-
ference.
October, 1932 :
12 . Agreements between Great Britain and Canada, giving preference to
British products, go into effect pending ratification by Parliaments .
14 .
New Zealand Parliament
approves Ottawa trade
agreement with
Great Britain.
November, 1932 :
3. Ottawa agreement between Great Britain and Canada is approved by a
vote of 416 to 68 in the British House of Commons.
[ 338ment
approves Ottawa trade
agreement with
Great Britain.
November, 1932 :
3. Ottawa agreement between Great Britain and Canada is approved by a
vote of 416 to 68 in the British House of Commons.
[ 338

--- PAGE BREAK ---trade
agreement with
Great Britain.
November, 1932 :
3. Ottawa agreement between Great Britain and Canada is approved by a
vote of 416 to 68 in the British House of Commons.
[ 338

--- PAGE BREAK ---

x6. Ottawa agreement approved by Australian House of Representatives .
22 . Canadian House of Commons approves agreements negotiated by
the Dominion at Ottawa.
TARIFFS IN OTHER COUNTRIES
January, 193.2:
19. Germany decrees new tariffs on imports from countries with depreciated
currencies .
28 . Ambassador Edge protests to France on behalf of the United States
against French commodity quotas on imports from the United States .
February, 1932 :
x6. Austrian government notifies Great Britain, France, Italy, and Ger-
many that she must impose quotas on imports .
March, 1912 :
2 . American Chamber of Commerce in Paris protests against new French
import quotas.
29. French Senate passes bill raising import duties on manufactured goods
.
31 . Announcement made in France of new quotas effective April x to
June 30 ; affect chiefly American imports .
April, 1932 :
xx . Chancellor Karl Buresch of Austria announces intention of his govern-
ment to negotiate separate preferential tariffs with individual states .
June, 1932 :
x. Ambassador Edge and Premier Tardieu sign agreement covering most-
favored-nation treatment on imports from the United States .
September, 1932 :
22 . French government is willing to grant de facto but not de jure most-
favored-nation treatment to the United States .
October, 1932 :
x. In effort to change high protective policy, Argentine Chamber of
Deputies appoints Committee of Nine to study possible reforms
in customs
laws.
WAR DEBTS AND REPARATIONS
December, 1931 :
7. Young Plan Advisory Committee meets at Basle to discuss reparations .
xo. In a special message to Congress, President Hoover urges ratification
of the moratorium and revival of the World War Foreign Debt Commission .
14 . Representative Collier introduces a joint resolution authorizing post-
ponement of the amounts payable to the United States from foreign govern-
ments during the fiscal year x932 and their repayment over a lo-year period
beginning July x, 1933 .
x7 . The House Committee on Ways and Means amends the moratorium
resolution by declaring against cancellation or reduction of war debts .
x8,. Moratorium resolution, as amended, passes the House by a vote of
3x8 to xoo.
[ 339 1Ways and Means amends the moratorium
resolution by declaring against cancellation or reduction of war debts .
x8,. Moratorium resolution, as amended, passes the House by a vote of
3x8 to xoo.
[ 339 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---ds the moratorium
resolution by declaring against cancellation or reduction of war debts .
x8,. Moratorium resolution, as amended, passes the House by a vote of
3x8 to xoo.
[ 339 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

r9. Moratorium resolution reported favorably to Senate by Finance Coax
mittee.
22 . Moratorium resolution passed in the Senate by a vote of 69 to
12 .
23. President Hoover signs the moratorium resolution .
23 . Advisory Committee at Basle reports that Germany is unable to
resume conditional reparation payments at expiration of moratorium ; urges
immediate adjustment.
3o. Germany's creditors are invited by Great Britain to meet at Lausanne
on January z8 to discuss reparations .
January, 1932 :
9. Chancellor Bruening declares that Germany can no longer pay repara-
tions.
so. British government announces that reparation conference at Lausanne
has been postponed to January 25 .
ii . Report of Young Plan Advisory Committee approved by World Bank
Board in Basle.
z9. Chancellor Bruening advises British Ambassador that Germany will not
accept extension of moratorium but will demand definite adjustment of
reparations question before July z .
20 . Because of a deadlock in advance negotiations, Lausanne conference
is postponed a second time and no new date is set for meeting .
Pebruary, x932 :
z3 . British Foreign Office announces that postponed reparation confer-
ence will be held at Lausanne in June .
May, 1932 .
z2. British government postpones decision on debts due the United States
until after Lausanne conference .
June, 1932 :
7. French government rejects British proposal for complete cancellation
of reparations.
8. Prime Minister MacDonald and Sir John Simon are invited by Premier
Herriot to visit Paris and discuss program for the Lausanne conference .
x6. Lausanne reparations conference opens, Prime Minister MacDonald
presiding.
17. Great Britain, France, Italy, Belgium, and Japan agree to suspend
payments of intergovernmental debts during the life of the conference .
21 . Premier Herriot proposes a moratorium for several years, which is to
be terminated by the payment of a lump sum by Germany .
22 .
German delegation at Lausanne conference proposes five-year eco-
nomic pact in exchange for the cancellation of reparations .
25 .
Secretary Stimson denies report that the United States and Great
Britain signed a "gentlemen's agreement" on arms limitation and the can-
cellation of war debts .
30 . Greece notifies United States government that she will postpone pay-
ment on debt, as permitted by her agreement
.
July, 1932 :
4. Foreign Minister Grandi, the Italian delegate at Lausanne, suggests all-
round cancellation of war debts by European governments .
[340 }ment on debt, as permitted by her agreement
.
July, 1932 :
4. Foreign Minister Grandi, the Italian delegate at Lausanne, suggests all-
round cancellation of war debts by European governments .
[340 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---rmitted by her agreement
.
July, 1932 :
4. Foreign Minister Grandi, the Italian delegate at Lausanne, suggests all-
round cancellation of war debts by European governments .
[340 }

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8. Reparation agreement reached at Lausanne conference. Germany will
give bonds in the amount of 3,000,000,000 gold reichsmarks, negotiable after
three years, as final settlement. World economic conference is also decided
upon,
9. Reports are current of "gentlemen's agreement," making ratification of
reparation settlement depend on new arrangement between Germany's
creditors and the United States .
ii. Neville Chamberlain, Chancellor of the Exchequer, declares in the
House of Commons that representatives of the United States were consulted
during the conference. This statement is later retracted or explained away.
ix. Secretary Stimson says that no member of the Department of State
participated in the Lausanne conference .
12 . Prime' Minister MacDonald, in statement to the House of Commons,
declares that no debt pledge was given by the United States .
x3. France and Great Britain sign an Accord of Confidence .
14. British government denies that new Anglo-French accord represents
a "united front" against the United States . France and Great Britain publish
the official text of the "gentlemen's agreement."
14. Premier Herriot declares that he was misquoted in his statement that
France and Great Britain were united for debt talks .
14 . In a letter to Senator Borah, President Hoover denies that the United
States was consulted on the Lausanne agreements and warns Europe against
offering a "united front to the United States .
August, 1932 :
xx. Prime Minister MacDonald and Premier Herriot reach full and
friendly understanding after discussion of matters concerning the Lausanne
conference.
September, 1932 :
13 . Estonia, Latvia, and Poland notify the United States that they will
postpone for two years payment on their debts, as permitted by their agree .
ments.
November, 1932 :
xo. Greece defaults on payment due the United States . Hungary serves
notice that she will not be able to meet the payment due on December x5 .
ro. The United States receives notes from Great Britain and France ask .
ing for a revision of the war debts and suspension of payments due Decem .
ber 15 .
14 .
President-elect Roosevelt accepts President Hoover's invitation to
discuss the debt situation .
xg . Belgium asks for the suspension of payment due December x, .
22 . Czechoslovakia and Poland ask for revision of their debt agreements
and suspension of payments due December xg.
22 . Informal debt conference between President Hoover and President-
elect Roosevelt.
23 . Text of Hoover and Roosevelt statements on war debt conference
is published.
23-z6. Department of State advises debtor nations that their requests for
the revision of war debts depend upon action of Congress.
t34')and Roosevelt statements on war debt conference
is published.
23-z6. Department of State advises debtor nations that their requests for
the revision of war debts depend upon action of Congress.
t34')

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28. Latvia asks for revision of her debt agreement and suspension of
payment due December 15 .
December, 7932 :
x . Second British note on the debt situation conveys warning that Decem-
ber 15 payment, if not suspended, will imperil Lausanne agreement and
trade with the United States .
2. Second note from French government emphasizes the necessity of a
readjustment after the suspension of German reparation payments .
13 . French Chamber of Deputies, by a vote of 402 to 187, refuses to
authorize payment on American debt due December 15, and Herriot Cabinet
resigns .
15. Five debtors of the United States defer payments, and six make the
payments due.
[ 342

--- PAGE BREAK ---uses to
authorize payment on American debt due December 15, and Herriot Cabinet
resigns .
15. Five debtors of the United States defer payments, and six make the
payments due.
[ 342

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Accord
of
Confidence,
reached
at
Lausanne
between
Great
Britain
and France, 148, 153, 244, 327,
328, 340
Agriculture, decline in farm income,
6 ; decline in crop values, 43 ;
yield and value of United States
crops, 299
Aldrovandi-Marescotti, Count, Italian
member of Lytton Commission,
197n
Alessandri, Arturo, elected President
of Chile, 56 ; 336
Aloisi, Baron Pompeo, Italian repre-
sentative at Geneva, 255n
American Federation of Labor, zoo
Araujo, Arturo, deposed
as
Presi-
dent of El Salvador, S7
Argentina, 335, 339 ; American in-
vestments in, 51-52 ; flow of capi-
tal from creditor nations to, 7o-
7x ; dispute with Chile, 6o ; dis-
pute with Uruguay, 6o ; adopts
exchange control, 79, 283 ; foreign
trade in x930-31, 83 ; external
debt, 277 ; suspends gold pay-
ments, 283 ; prices in, 298
Armaments, limitation of, Disarma-
ment
Conference
convenes
at
Geneva, 229 ; American policy,
227-228 ; American proposals, 229-
239,
310
ff.,
321 ;
qualitative
disarmament accepted
in
princi-
ple,
233-234 ;
contrasting French
and English views on, 235 ; con-
ference deadlocked, 235 ; Hoover
plan, 237, 322 ; reasons for its ac-
ceptance by
Italy, Germany and
Russia, 238-239 ; American dele-
gation avoids entanglements with
European revisionist bloc, 240-
244 ; resolution of July 23, 245,
INDEX
{ 343 1
314,
322 ;
Germany withdraws
from conference, 246, 322 ; later
negotiations, 248-249 ; efforts to
placate Germany,
249-254 ;
five-
power
conversations,
254-256 ;
five-power declaration of Decem-
ber
11, 1932, 319 ; Germany de-
mands arms equality, 246 ; de-
mand referred to League, 249 ; dis-
cussions of naval questions, 256 ;
personnel of United States dele-
gation at Disarmament Confer-
ence, 229-230, 321
Australia, flow of capital to, 70-71 ;
foreign trade in 1930-31, 83 ; at
Ottawa
Conference,
90,
94n ;
agreement with Great Britain, 95 ;
on "Empire content," zoo ; sus-
pends gold payments, 283 ; adopts
exchange control, 283 ; produc-
tion index in, 298
Austria, appeals to powers for as-
sistance, 28 ; declares partial mora-
torium, 79, 334 ; adopts exchange
control, 79, 283 ; adopts import
quotas,
81,
284 ; adopts import
licenses, 82 ; value of exports and
imports in 1930-31,
83 ;
short-
term debt, 107-109 ; payments due
United States in 1930-3x and
1932-33, 272
Austro-German Customs Union, 28
Baker, Newton D ., on revision of
war debts,
182,
183 ;
advocates
economic sanctions in Sino.-Japa-
nese dispute, 215
Balbo, General Italo, at Disarma-
ment Conference, 242
Baldwin, Stanley, at Ottawa Confer-
ence, 90, 92, 94
Bank for International Settlements,ates
economic sanctions in Sino.-Japa-
nese dispute, 215
Balbo, General Italo, at Disarma-
ment Conference, 242
Baldwin, Stanley, at Ottawa Confer-
ence, 90, 92, 94
Bank for International Settlements,

--- PAGE BREAK ------ PAGE BREAK ---

334; appoints committee to inves-
tigate Germany's capacity to pay
reparations, 17 ; extends loan to
Reichsbank, 26, 333
Bank of England, extends loan to
Reichsbank, 26, 333
Bank of France, 333 ; extends loan to
Reichsbank, 26, 27, 333
Bankruptcies, 7, 41
Beaverbrook, Lord, 91
Belgium, exports and imports in
1930-31, 84 ; signs treaty for re-
duction of tariffs, 102 ; withdraws
gold from United States,
117 ;
signs agreement to postpone inter-
governmental debts during Lau-
sanne conference, 142n, 340 ; asks
for suspension of payment on war
debt,
170,
341 ; defers December
15 payment, x74 ; payments due
United States 1931-32 and 1932-
33, 271 ; adopts import quotas,
28}
Benesv,
Eduard, Czechoslovakian
Foreign Minister, on Danubian
customs union, 28 ; rapporleur
at
Disarmament Conference, 231
Bennett, Richard B ., Canadian Prime
Minister, at Ottawa conference,
91, 92
Berwick,
British cruiser, arrives in
Shanghai, 330
Blanche, General Bartolome, 336 ;
Provisional President of Chile, 56
Bolivia, 334, 335 ; American capital
invested in, 51-52 ; defaults, 8o ;
external debt, 277 ; suspends gold
payments,
283 ;
establishes ex-
change control, 283
See also Chaco dispute
Bonds, foreign, decline in value, 9
issues in United States from
1927-1932, 78
See also Foreign loans
Bonus bill, 324 ; returned with un-
favorable report from Ways and
Means Committee, 126 ; passed by
House, 126 ; defeated in Senate,
126-127
Borah, Senator William E., on war
debts, 185, 341 ; on Far Eastern
policy, 213, 231, 232
;13441
Boycott, anti-Japanese, 199-200, 330,
332 ; economic sanctions urged in
United States, 214, 215
Brazil,
334 ;
American investments
in, 51-52 ; civil war, 53, 336 ;
adopts exchange control, 79, 283 ;
defaults, 8o ; foreign trade in
1930-31, 83 ; external debt, 277 ;
suspends gold payments, 283
Briand,
Aristide,
former
French
Premier, illness, 21 ; death, 326
Bruening, Heinrich, German Chan-
cellor, 340 ; statement on repara-
tions, 20, 21 ; forced to resign, 13~
Budget, United States, 325 ; efforts
to balance, 122
Buell, Raymond Leslie, on Lytton
Commission, 225
Bulgaria, 334 ; adopts exchange con-
trol, 79, 283
Buresch, Karl, Austrian Chancellor,
28, 326, 339
Butler, Nicholas Murray, on Sino-
Japanese dispute, 215
Cadogan, Alexander, British reps
sentative at Geneva, 25Sn
Canada, 338 ; flow of capital from
creditor nations to, 70-71 ; adopts
import surtaxes, 82 ; value of im-
ports and exports in 1930-31, 83 ;
Imperial Economic Conference at
Ottawa, 90.96 ; tariff relations be-
tween United States and Do-
minion, 97 ; affected by American
tariffs, 98 ; direct American invest-
ments and branch factories in, 98 ;
suspends gold payments, 283 ; in-
dex of production, 298 ; estimated
number of unemployed in, 299
Car-loadings, decline of, 38
Chaco dispute, between Bolivia and
Peru, 229, 334, 333 ; work of
Commission of Inquiry (Neutral
Commission), 65 ; case before the
League, 66 ; efforts of Pan-Ameri-
can group and League Council to
effect peaceful settlement, 66 ;
Pan-American group invokes Stim-
son doctrine, 66 ; text of Pan-
American note invoking Stimson
doctrine, 3016 ; efforts of Pan-Ameri-
can group and League Council to
effect peaceful settlement, 66 ;
Pan-American group invokes Stim-
son doctrine, 66 ; text of Pan-
American note invoking Stimson
doctrine, 301

--- PAGE BREAK ---Chamberlain, Neville, British Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer, 4o, 341 ;
on tariffs; 89; on "Gentlemen's
Agreement,"
145,
147 ;
on war
debts, 173
Chang Hsueh-liang, Marshal, 194,
195
Chapei, suburb of Shanghai .

See
Manchuria
Chile,
334,
336 ;
American invest-
ments
in,
51-52 ;
revolutions in,
54.56 ; , new elections, 56 ; recogni-
tion of new government,
57 ;
adopts exchange control, 79, 283 ;
defaults, 8o ; value of exports and
imports in
1930-31,
83 ; external
debt,
277 ;
suspends gold pay-
ments, 283
Chinchow, attacked and occupied by
Japanese, 195, 329
Claudel, General Henri, French
member of Lytton Commission,
197n
Collier, Representative James W .,
339
Colombia, 335, 337 ; American capi-
tal invested in, 51-52 ; dispute with
Peru over seizure of Leticia, 61 ;
Peru
proposes arbitration,
61 ;
offer rejected by,
61-62 ;
adopts
exchange control, 79, 283 ; mora-
toria, 8o ;
value of exports and
imports in 1930-31, 83 ;
external
debt,
277 ;
suspends gold pay-
ments, 283
Congress, seventy-second, changes
in membership of, x ; loses con-
tact with Administration in long
interval between sessions,
2-3 ;
ratifies moratorium but declares
against cancellation or reduction
of war debts, r2 ; development of
foreign policies initiated in 1931
blocked by temper of, 13 ; efforts
to revise tariff, 29 ff.

; rejects pleas
for embargoes against military ag-
gressors, 214
Costa Rica,
334, 337 ; political dis-
turbances in,
52
;
denounces five-
power agreement between Central
American
governments,
59-60 ;
external debt, 277 ; suspends gold
345 )
Payments.

283 ; adopts exclszsgs
control, 283
Crisp, Representative Charles R., on
sales tax, 116
Cross, Representative 0.

H., quoted,
9
Cuba, American investments in, 51-
52 ; political disturbances,
52 ; ex-
ternal debt, 277
Cunningham .--- PAGE BREAK ---

283 ; adopts exclszsgs
control, 283
Crisp, Representative Charles R., on
sales tax, 116
Cross, Representative 0. H., quoted,
9
Cuba, American investments in, 51-
52 ; political disturbances,
52 ; ex-
ternal debt, 277
Cunningham . Edwin
S.,
United
States Consul General at Shanghai,
202, 222, 332
Czechoslovakia, adopts
exchange
control,
79, 283 ;
adopts import
quotas,
8r, 284 ;
adopts import
licenses, 82 ; value of exports and
imports in
1930-31, 83 ;
note to
United States asking for suspen-
sion of December
15
payment,
170, 341 ;
makes December
15
payment,
174 ;
payments due
United States, 1931-32 and 1932-
33, 272
Danubian States, 328, 329 ; plans for
relief of,
29 ;
London conference
for relief of, 29 ;
note on Stress,
conference, 287-288
Davila, Carlos,
336 ; heads military
junta in Chile, 55 ; forced out of
junta and reinstated after army
and navy revolt, S3 ; deposed, 56
Davis, Norman H ., United States
representative
at
Disarmament
Conference, 229, 249, 253, 254 ;
statement on Germany's with-
drawal from conference, 247
Dawes, Charles G., President Re-
construction Finance Corporation,
325
Democratic Party, platform state-
ments dealing with foreign
rela-
tions, 296-297
Denmark, adopts exchange control,
79, 283 ; value of imports and ex-
ports in 1930-31, 83 ;
suspends
gold payments,
283 ;
adopts im-
port quotas, 285
Dies, Representative Martin, quoted,
9
Dill, Senator Clarence C ., advocates
economic sanctions, 214

--- PAGE BREAK ---Disarmament .

See Armaments, lim:
itation of
Dominican Republic, external debt,
278
Doumer, Paul, President of France,
assassinated, 136, 326
Duesterberg, Theodor, candidate for
German Presidency, 133
Dulles, Allen, American representa-
tive at five-power conversations in
Geneva on armaments and
Ger-
many's withdrawal- from Confer-
ence, 25Sn
Economist
(London), quoted, 96
Economy bill,'121, 323, 324 ; econ-
omy committee appointed to study
means of curtailing expenses,
121
Ecuador, 333 ; revolution in, 52 ; ex-
ternal debt, 278 ; suspends gold
payments, 283 ; adopts exchange
control, 283
Edge, Walter Evans, United States
Ambassador to France,
339 ; on
French tariffs, 81
Egypt, suspends gold payments, 283
El Salvador .

See Salvador
Embargoes, sought against Russian
products at Ottawa conference,
93 ; urged in Congress against
military aggressors,
231 4
Eslick, Representative Edward E .,
quoted, io
Estonia, adopts exchange control, 79,
28~ ; asks for postponement of
December x5 payment, 169, 341 ;
defaults on December 15 pay-
ment, 174 ; payments due United
States in 1931-32 and 1932 - 33,
272 ; suspends gold payments, 283
Europe Nouvelle, quoted, 136
Exchange control, countries adopt-
ing, 283-284
Federal Reserve Banks, extension of
loan to Reichsbank, 26,
333;
in-
crease in note circulation, 1xo ;
central banking policy,
118-1x9 ;
authority to make loans extended,
130-131
Finland, adopts exchange control,
1346 1
79n, 283 ; makes payment on war
debt, 174 ; payments due United
States in 1931,32 and 1932-33,
272 ;
suspends
gold
payments,
283 ; adopts import quotas, 285
Flandin, Pierre Etienne, French Min-
ister of Finance, statement on
reparations, 21
Forbes, W.See Armaments, lim:
itation of
Dominican Republic, external debt,
278
Doumer, Paul, President of France,
assassinated, 136, 326
Duesterberg, Theodor, candidate for
German Presidency, 133
Dulles, Allen, American representa-
tive at five-power conversations in
Geneva on armaments and
Ger-
many's withdrawal- from Confer-
ence, 25Sn
Economist
(London), quoted, 96
Economy bill,'121, 323, 324 ; econ-
omy committee appointed to study
means of curtailing expenses,
121
Ecuador, 333 ; revolution in, 52 ; ex-
ternal debt, 278 ; suspends gold
payments, 283 ; adopts exchange
control, 283
Edge, Walter Evans, United States
Ambassador to France,
339 ; on
French tariffs, 81
Egypt, suspends gold payments, 283
El Salvador .

See Salvador
Embargoes, sought against Russian
products at Ottawa conference,
93 ; urged in Congress against
military aggressors,
231 4
Eslick, Representative Edward E .,
quoted, io
Estonia, adopts exchange control, 79,
28~ ; asks for postponement of
December x5 payment, 169, 341 ;
defaults on December 15 pay-
ment, 174 ; payments due United
States in 1931-32 and 1932 - 33,
272 ; suspends gold payments, 283
Europe Nouvelle, quoted, 136
Exchange control, countries adopt-
ing, 283-284
Federal Reserve Banks, extension of
loan to Reichsbank, 26,
333;
in-
crease in note circulation, 1xo ;
central banking policy,
118-1x9 ;
authority to make loans extended,
130-131
Finland, adopts exchange control,
1346 1
79n, 283 ; makes payment on war
debt, 174 ; payments due United
States in 1931,32 and 1932-33,
272 ;
suspends
gold
payments,
283 ; adopts import quotas, 285
Flandin, Pierre Etienne, French Min-
ister of Finance, statement on
reparations, 21
Forbes, W.

Cameron, United States
Ambassador to Japan, 329
Foreign loans, international flow of
capital in post-war period, 70-71 ;
United States as creditor nation,
72 ; weakness
in
post-war lend-
ing, 73-74 ; investigation of sale
of foreign securities in the United
States, 75 ; check to lending after
1927,
78 ;
State
Department's
policy on, 278
Foreign Policy Association, 225
Foreign trade, decline of, 43-45, 70 ;
countries adopting import quotas,
licenses and surtaxes, 8x, 82, 284-
286 ; imports and exports of fif-
teen debtor nations in 1930-31,
83 ; imports and exports of seven
creditor nations in 1930-31, 84 ;
quantity index of, 288
France,
exports
and
imports
in
1930-31, 84 ; adopts import quotas,
81,
285 ; repatriates credits from
United States, 117 ; swing to the
Left in 1932 elections, x3S ff .--- PAGE BREAK ---

See Salvador
Embargoes, sought against Russian
products at Ottawa conference,
93 ; urged in Congress against
military aggressors,
231 4
Eslick, Representative Edward E .,
quoted, io
Estonia, adopts exchange control, 79,
28~ ; asks for postponement of
December x5 payment, 169, 341 ;
defaults on December 15 pay-
ment, 174 ; payments due United
States in 1931-32 and 1932 - 33,
272 ; suspends gold payments, 283
Europe Nouvelle, quoted, 136
Exchange control, countries adopt-
ing, 283-284
Federal Reserve Banks, extension of
loan to Reichsbank, 26,
333;
in-
crease in note circulation, 1xo ;
central banking policy,
118-1x9 ;
authority to make loans extended,
130-131
Finland, adopts exchange control,
1346 1
79n, 283 ; makes payment on war
debt, 174 ; payments due United
States in 1931,32 and 1932-33,
272 ;
suspends
gold
payments,
283 ; adopts import quotas, 285
Flandin, Pierre Etienne, French Min-
ister of Finance, statement on
reparations, 21
Forbes, W. Cameron, United States
Ambassador to Japan, 329
Foreign loans, international flow of
capital in post-war period, 70-71 ;
United States as creditor nation,
72 ; weakness
in
post-war lend-
ing, 73-74 ; investigation of sale
of foreign securities in the United
States, 75 ; check to lending after
1927,
78 ;
State
Department's
policy on, 278
Foreign Policy Association, 225
Foreign trade, decline of, 43-45, 70 ;
countries adopting import quotas,
licenses and surtaxes, 8x, 82, 284-
286 ; imports and exports of fif-
teen debtor nations in 1930-31,
83 ; imports and exports of seven
creditor nations in 1930-31, 84 ;
quantity index of, 288
France,
exports
and
imports
in
1930-31, 84 ; adopts import quotas,
81,
285 ; repatriates credits from
United States, 117 ; swing to the
Left in 1932 elections, x3S ff . ; at
Lausanne, 142n ; asks for suspen-
sion of December 15 payment to
United States and revision of debt
agreement, 170, 176, 341 ; Cham-
ber of Deputies votes to defer
December
15
payment,
forcing
resignation ' of Herriot Cabinet,
174,
342 ; defers December 15
payment, 174 ; refers note from
Germany on
arms
equality to
League, 246, 249 ; quantity index
of foreign trade, 288 ; production
index, 298 ; commodity price in-
dex, 298 ; number of unemployed,
298
Frohwein, Hans, German representa-
tive at Geneva, 255nty to
League, 246, 249 ; quantity index
of foreign trade, 288 ; production
index, 298 ; commodity price in-
dex, 298 ; number of unemployed,
298
Frohwein, Hans, German representa-
tive at Geneva, 255n

--- PAGE BREAK ---Garner bill.

See Garner, John Nance
Garner, John Nance, Speaker of
House
of
Representatives, 229,
128, 129, 130, 325
"Gentlemen's Agreement ." See Lau-
sanne Conference
Germany, second "standstill"
agree-
ment, 24 ff,, 109, 334; flow
of
capital to, 70-7x ; adopts exchange
control, 79, 283 ; adopts import
quotas, 81,, 285 ; adopts import
surtaxes, 82 ; short-term indebted-
ness, 107-109 ; swing to the Right
in Presidential elections, 133-134 ;
elections in German states, 134 ;
asks for postponement
of
pay-
ments to United States,
-z69 ; esti-
mates of total reparation pay-
ments, 272 ; private indebtedness,
282 ; foreign trade quantity index,
288 ; production index, 298 ; com-
modity price index, 298 ; number
of unemployed, 299
See
also
Reparations, Lausanne
Conference, and Armaments, lim-
itation of
Gibson, Hugh, United States
Confer-
ence,
at Disarmament Confer-
ence, appointed, 229, 321 ; pre-
sents American program, 230 ; on
"qualitative" disarmament, 233 ;
Hoover plan, 237
Glass, Senator Carter, offers substi-
tute for Goldsborough bill, 125,
324
Glass-Steagall Act, xxo, 119, 324
Glover,
Representative
D.

D .,
quoted, xo
Gold, substitution of gold-bullion
for gold-coinage standard, 1o5 ;
"free
gold,
1i1 ;
withdrawals
from the United States,
117 ; re
turn flow to the United States,
x56 ; countries suspending gold
standard or gold exchange stand-
ard, 283-284
Goldsborough bill, 123, 324
Goldsborough,
Representative
T.

Alan, 33n
Grandi, Dino, Italian Foreign Minis-
ter, at Lausanne, 143, 340 ; at
[ 347 )
Disarmament
Conference, -238,
242 ; resignation, 242, 328
Great Britain, 328, 334, 338, 340,
341, 342 ; adopts exchange restric-
tions, 79, 284 ; exports and im-
ports in 1930-31, 84 ; abandons
free trade, 88-89 ; evolution of
protective system, 89-90 .; at Ot-
tawa Conference, 94, 95 ; short-
term indebtedness, 107-109 ; at
Lausanne, 142n ; asks for suspen-
sion of December x5 payment due
the United States and revision of
debt agreement, 170 ff.--- PAGE BREAK ---

D .,
quoted, xo
Gold, substitution of gold-bullion
for gold-coinage standard, 1o5 ;
"free
gold,
1i1 ;
withdrawals
from the United States,
117 ; re
turn flow to the United States,
x56 ; countries suspending gold
standard or gold exchange stand-
ard, 283-284
Goldsborough bill, 123, 324
Goldsborough,
Representative
T. Alan, 33n
Grandi, Dino, Italian Foreign Minis-
ter, at Lausanne, 143, 340 ; at
[ 347 )
Disarmament
Conference, -238,
242 ; resignation, 242, 328
Great Britain, 328, 334, 338, 340,
341, 342 ; adopts exchange restric-
tions, 79, 284 ; exports and im-
ports in 1930-31, 84 ; abandons
free trade, 88-89 ; evolution of
protective system, 89-90 .; at Ot-
tawa Conference, 94, 95 ; short-
term indebtedness, 107-109 ; at
Lausanne, 142n ; asks for suspen-
sion of December x5 payment due
the United States and revision of
debt agreement, 170 ff. ;
makes
December
x5 payment, 174 ; Pay-
ments due United States in 1g31-
32 and x932-33,
271 ; trade with
foreign countries and other parts
of Empire, 289 ; suspends gold
payments, 284 ; foreign trade in-
dex, 288 ; commodity price index,
298 ; number of unemployed, 299
Greece, 334, 341 ; adopts exchange
control, 79, 283 ; adopts import
quotas, 81, 285 ; asks for postpone-
ment of debt payment, x68 ; de-
faults on non-postponable loan,
169-170 ; payments due United
States in 1931-32 and 1932-33,
272 ; suspends gold payments, 283
Grove, Colonel Marmaduque, 336 ;
leader of coup d'etat in Chile, 55 ;
exiled, 55 ; in national election, 56
Guatemala, external debt, 278
Haiti, 337 ; external debt, 278
Harbin, occupied by Japanese, 330
Harrison, Senator Pat, introduces
new tariff bill, 31 ; quoted on war
debts, 183
Havas News Agency, 146
Hawley, Representative Willis C.,
33n
Henderson, Arthur, former British
Foreign Secretary, appointed Presi-
dent of Disarmament Conference,
231 ;
at
Geneva
Disarmament
Conference, 231, 236-237
Herriot, Edouard, 326, 340, . 341 ;
Premier, 137 ; discusses repara-
tions prior to Lausanne Confer-pointed Presi-
dent of Disarmament Conference,
231 ;
at
Geneva
Disarmament
Conference, 231, 236-237
Herriot, Edouard, 326, 340, . 341 ;
Premier, 137 ; discusses repara-
tions prior to Lausanne Confer-

--- PAGE BREAK ---creditor nations to, 70-71 ; adopts
exchange control, 79, 283 ; short-
term indebtedness, 107-109 ; asks
United States to postpone Decem-
ber 15 payment, 170, 341 ; de-
faults on non-postponable loan,
x74 ; payments due the United
States in
1931-32
and
x932-33,
272
ence, x39 ; .at Lausanne, 141 $.

;
at
five-power conversations
- in
Geneva, 25x, 254 ff., 323
Hindenburg, President Paul von, re-
elected President
of
Germany,
134 ; forces resignation of Bruen-
ing Cabinet, 135 .

327
Hitler, Adolf, Nazi leader, 21,'327 ;
seeks Presidency,
133 ;
defeated,
134
Hoarding, campaign against in the
Ibafiez,
General
Carlos,
former
United States, 323
President of Chile, 54
Honduras, revolution in, 52, 6o ; ex-
Imperial Economic Conference, meets
ternal debt, 278
at Ottawa, 9o ; imperial prefer-
Hoover Plan .

See Armaments, Iim-
ence, 9x ; other problems, 92-93 ;
itation of
trade agreements negotiated, 94,
Hoover, Herbert, message on foreign
affairs,-
; x x; signs moratorium bill,
13 ; vetoes tariff bill, 31, 32 .

337 ;
proposes creation of Reconstruc-
countries adopting, 8x, 82, 284 ff .

don Finance Corporation, 113,
India, flow of capital to, 70-71 ;
324; urges speed in balancing the
adopts exchange control, 79, 283 ;
budget, 120, 325 ; proposes three-
at Ottawa conference, 9o, 94n ;
point program for the relief of
suspends gold payments, 283
unemployment,
127 ;
criticizes
Institute of Economics, estimate of
Garner bill, 128 ; vetoes Garner
German reparation payments, 272
bill, x30, 326 ; speech of accept-
Institute of Pacific Relations, 225
ence, x61 ; on tariffs, x6o, x62,
International Settlement.337 ;
proposes creation of Reconstruc-
countries adopting, 8x, 82, 284 ff .

don Finance Corporation, 113,
India, flow of capital to, 70-71 ;
324; urges speed in balancing the
adopts exchange control, 79, 283 ;
budget, 120, 325 ; proposes three-
at Ottawa conference, 9o, 94n ;
point program for the relief of
suspends gold payments, 283
unemployment,
127 ;
criticizes
Institute of Economics, estimate of
Garner bill, 128 ; vetoes Garner
German reparation payments, 272
bill, x30, 326 ; speech of accept-
Institute of Pacific Relations, 225
ence, x61 ; on tariffs, x6o, x62,
International Settlement.

See Man-
163, x64 ; on adherence to World
churia-Shanghai incident
Court, x65 ; on Par Eastern Affairs,
Intransigeant,
French newspaper,
x65 ; on arms reduction, 165 ; pro-
quoted, x68
poses arms cut of one-third, 237
Inukai, Tsuyoshi, Premier of Japan,
ff., 322 ; on war debts, 167, 172-
329, 332
173 ; message to Congress on war
Irish Free State, at Ottawa confer-
debts, 172 ; invites President-elect
ence, 9o ; on "Empire content,"
to confer on debt problems, x79,
zoo ; suspends gold payments, 283
341 ;
agrees with President-elect
Italy, 328 ; exports and imports in
Roosevelt on fundamental prints-
1930-31, 83 ; at Lausanne confer-
ples, but disagrees on procedure,
ence, x42n ; makes December 15
r79 ff.

; appoints delegates to
payment due the United States,
Disarmament Conference, 321 ; on
x74 ; payments due United States
anti-hoarding campaign, 323
in
1931-32
and
1932-33, 272 ;
Houghton, Alanson B ., advocates
adopts import quotas, 285
economic sanctions in Sino-jap .

anese dispute, 215
Japan, flow
of capital to, 70-71
;
Houston,
United States cruiser, or-
:
adopts import licenses, 82 ; ex-
dered to Shanghai, 205, 330
ports and imports in 1930-31 .--- PAGE BREAK ---

; appoints delegates to
payment due the United States,
Disarmament Conference, 321 ; on
x74 ; payments due United States
anti-hoarding campaign, 323
in
1931-32
and
1932-33, 272 ;
Houghton, Alanson B ., advocates
adopts import quotas, 285
economic sanctions in Sino-jap . anese dispute, 215
Japan, flow
of capital to, 70-71
;
Houston,
United States cruiser, or-
:
adopts import licenses, 82 ; ex-
dered to Shanghai, 205, 330
ports and imports in 1930-31 . 83 ;
Hugenberg, Alfred, candidate for
at Lausanne conference, 142n ;
German Presidency, x33 recognizes
"Manchukuo",
223-
Hull, Representative Morton D., ad-
224 ; suspends gold payments, 283
;
vocates economic sanctions, 214
adopts exchange control, 283 ;
Hungary, 333 ; flow of capital from
commodity price index. 298 ; pro-
348 .1
96
See also Canada
Import quotas, licenses and surtaxes,

--- PAGE BREAK ---duction
index,
298;
estimated
ternational significance of confer-
number of unemployed, 299
ence, x5o ff., text of reparation
See also Manchuria
agreement, 272
ff.

Jimenez, Ricardo, President of Costa Laval, Pierre, x6,
x7, 326 ; protests
Rica, 59.60.

337
Johnson, Senator Hiram, quoted, 1o ;
resolution to investigate sales of
foreign securities, 75
Johnson, Nelson, American Minister
to China, 219
Jones, Senator Wesley L, 33n
Justo, Augustin, President of Argen-
tna, 335
Kellogg Pact .

See Pact of Paris
Kent, British flagship, at Shanghai,
209, 331
Knox, Colonel Frank, 323
Knutson, Representative Harold,
33
Kredit Anstalt, failure of,
3, xo8
La Follette, Senator Robert M., jr.,
8
La Guardia, Representative Fiorello
H ., attacks sales tax,
113 ;
sup-
ports Garner bill,
129
Lampson, Sir Miles, British Minister
to China, 219, 331
Latin America, deepening of eco-
nomic depression, 49 ; defaults in,
49 ; extent of defaults on, external
debt, 5o ; financial stake of United
States investors,
5o-5i ;
economic
difficulties,
52 ; new political dis-
turbances,
52 ;
external debt of
various countries, 277-278
Latvia, adopts exchange control, 79,
283 ;
adopts import quotas, 8x,
285 ;
asks for postponement of
December x5 payment to United
States, x70, 342 ; makes payment,
x74 ; payments due United States
in 1931-32 and 1932-33, 272
Lausanne Conference, 340, 341 ; post-
poned because of French and Ger-
man elections,
21, 23, 132-133 ;
details of reparation settlement,
138-139.

144-X45 ;
agreement to
reserve intergovernmental debts
during the conference, 142 ; "Gen-
tlemen's
Agreement",
x45-147 ;
Accord of Confidence, 148 ff-, in-
'E 3491
against Bruening statement on
reparations, 21
League of Nations, Chaco dispute
brought to attention of, 66 ; efforts
to effect settlement in Chaco dis-
pute, 66 ff.; approves membership
of Lytton Commission,
197.

329 ;
invokes Stimson doctrine in Far
Eastern dispute,
198, 217, 331
;
Shanghai
incident
before
the
League, 206 ff.--- PAGE BREAK ---

144-X45 ;
agreement to
reserve intergovernmental debts
during the conference, 142 ; "Gen-
tlemen's
Agreement",
x45-147 ;
Accord of Confidence, 148 ff-, in-
'E 3491
against Bruening statement on
reparations, 21
League of Nations, Chaco dispute
brought to attention of, 66 ; efforts
to effect settlement in Chaco dis-
pute, 66 ff.; approves membership
of Lytton Commission,
197. 329 ;
invokes Stimson doctrine in Far
Eastern dispute,
198, 217, 331
;
Shanghai
incident
before
the
League, 206 ff. ; appoints Consular
Committee to report on Shanghai
dispute,
207 ;
convokes extraor-
dinary session of Assembly to con-
sider
Shanghai
dispute,
208 ;
resolution of March 4, 1932, on
Shanghai dispute, 216 ; resolution
of March
11,
1932,
invoking
Stimson doctrine,
217 ;
appoints
Committee of Nineteen to study
whole Sino-Japanese dispute,
218
Lebrun, Albert F ., President of
France,
237, 326
Leticia. See Colombia
Lindsay, Sir Ronald, British Ambas-
sador to United States, confers
with Secretary Stimson on Shang-
hai dispute, 205
Lithuania, asks United States for
postponement of December
15
payment, 170 ; makes December 15
payment,
174 ;
Payments
due
United States in
1931-32
and
1932-33, 272
Litvinoff, Maxim, Russian delegate
at Disarmament Conference, 238. 243
Locarno Treaties, 253
London Naval Treaty,
239,
246 ;
France proposes revision of, 254. 257
Lowell, A. Lawrence, urges economic
sanctions,
215
Luxemburg, signs treaty for reduc-
tion of tariffs, 102
Lytton Commission,
36, 193, 218,
225, 329, 330 ; summary of find-
. 304 ff-

--- PAGE BREAK ---Lytton,
Lord,
elected
Chairman of
Manchurian Commission, 197n,
330
Lytton Report, 199, 210,
222, 324,
225 ff., 333
MacDonald, J.

Ramsay, British Prime
Minister, 341 ; at London Confer-
ence
for
relief
of
Danubian
States, 29, 328 ; invited to Paris
to discuss program for Lausanne
Conference, 139, 140, 340 ; at
Lausanne Conference, 141 ff .; on
Germany's withdrawal from Dis-
armament Conference, 250 ff., 322
McCoy,
General Frank, Appointed
Chairman of Commission of In-
quiry in Chaco dispute, 65 ; ap-
pointed member of Lytton Com-
mission, 197n
McKenna duties, in Great Britain,
86, 95
'"Manchukuo.' See Manchuria
Manchuria, consideration of Far
Eastern questions postponed in the
United States pending report of
Lytton Commission, 35 ; interest
of Western powers
in
Japan's
Manchurian policy, 192 ; Man-
churian events impinge on West-
em post-war peace covenants, 193
;
Lytton Commission appointed by
League, 193, 197, 329 ; renewal
of Japanese advance in Manchuria,
194 ; United States government
promulgates Stimson doctrine, 195 ;
attitude
of
European
powers
toward the pronouncement, 196 ;
League resolution of March 4 on
Shanghai dispute, 216 ; League As-
sembly adopts Stimson doctrine,
198, 217 ; 'appointment of Com-
mission to study whole Sino-
Japanese dispute, 218 ; Lytton
Commission submits its report,
225-226; summary of findings,
304 ff.

;
new state of "Man-
chukuo", 210
ff .

; declaration of
independence by "Manchukuo",
Nadolny, Count Rudolph, German
198, 210 ; Henry Pu-yi appointed
representative at Geneva, 322
Regent, 212 ; government recog-
Nagaoka, Haruichi, Japanese repre-
nized by Japan, 223, 224 ; treaty
sentative in Geneva, 221
'{ 350 1
of
alliance with Japan, 308 ;
chronology of Far Eastern affairs,
329-333 ;
anti-Japanese
boycott
precipitates trouble in Shanghai,
199 ; conciliatory efforts of West-
ern powers, 205-206 ; the case be-
fore the League, 2o6 ; United
States fleet in the Pacific, 212 ;
question of economic sanctions,
216 ff.--- PAGE BREAK ---

;
new state of "Man-
chukuo", 210
ff . ; declaration of
independence by "Manchukuo",
Nadolny, Count Rudolph, German
198, 210 ; Henry Pu-yi appointed
representative at Geneva, 322
Regent, 212 ; government recog-
Nagaoka, Haruichi, Japanese repre-
nized by Japan, 223, 224 ; treaty
sentative in Geneva, 221
'{ 350 1
of
alliance with Japan, 308 ;
chronology of Far Eastern affairs,
329-333 ;
anti-Japanese
boycott
precipitates trouble in Shanghai,
199 ; conciliatory efforts of West-
ern powers, 205-206 ; the case be-
fore the League, 2o6 ; United
States fleet in the Pacific, 212 ;
question of economic sanctions,
216 ff. ; Japanese withdraw from
Shanghai, 222
Martinez,
General
Maximiliano,
President of El Salvador, 57
Massigli, Ren6, French representa-
tive at Geneva, 255n
Matos, Seflor Jose, appointed by
League to study developments of
Chaco dispute, 67
Matsudaira, Tsuneo, Japanese dele-
gate at Geneva, 239
Methodist Episcopal Church, Con-
ference of, urges revision of war
debts, 184
Mexico, 333, 334 ; American capital
invested in, 51-52 ; dispute with
Peru, 60 ; external debt, 278 ; sus-
pends gold payments, 283
Meyer, Eugene, 325
Mills, Ogden L., 19-20 ; statement
on tariffs, 162 ; on war debts, 182
Min Kuo Daily News, 200, 202
Montero, Juan Esteban, President of
Chile, 54-55
Moratorium, Hoover, 5, 132, 137,
237, 340 ; ratified by Congress, 9-
12 ; vote by States in Congress on
ratification, 270 ff. Mosconi, Antonio, Italian delegate
at Lausanne, 145
Moses, Senator George H., state-
ment on tariffs, 162
Mukden, attack on, 210, 225 ; Man-
churian convention at, 212
Murai, Kuramatsu, Japanese Consul
General at Shanghai, 203 ; injured
by bomb, 221
Mussolini, Benito, 328

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I

--- PAGE BREAK ---ttack on, 210, 225 ; Man-
churian convention at, 212
Murai, Kuramatsu, Japanese Consul
General at Shanghai, 203 ; injured
by bomb, 221
Mussolini, Benito, 328

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

National
Association
of
Mutual
Savings Banks, urges revision of
war debts, 184
National Credit Corporation, x x x
Navy, United States, Pacific maneu-
vers, 212
Netherlands, value of exports and
imports in 1930-31, 83 ; treaty for
reduction of tariffs, 102 ; gold
withdrawals
from
the
United
States, 117 ; import quotas, 285
Neurath,
Baron
Konstantin von,
German representative at Geneva,
255n
Neutral
Commission .
See
Chaco
dispute
Newfoundland, at Ottawa Confer-
ence, 90. 91. 94n
New Zealand, 338 ; at Ottawa Con-
ference, 90, 94n; agreement with
Great Britain, 95 ; on "Empire
content", xoo ; suspends gold pay-
ments, 283 ; adopts exchange con-
trol, 283
Nicaragua, Central American five-
power agreement, 6o ; external
debt, 278 ; adopts exchange con-
trol, 283
Nine-Power Treaty, 36, 197,
208,
213, 224, 228, 232
Nomura, Admiral Kichisaburo, re-
places
Admiral
Shiozawa
at
Shanghai, 204 ; injured by bomb,
221
Norway, adopts exchange control,
79, 283 ; value of exports and
imports in 1930-31, 83 ; designates
member to Shanghai Consular
Committee of Inquiry,
207 ;
sus-
pends gold payments, 283 ; adopts
import quotas, 283
O'Brien, Robert L., Chairman of
United States Tariff Commission,
34
Open Door, x96, x97, 228
Ottawa Conference.
See
Imperial
Economic Conference
Oyanedel, Abraham Umberto, 336 ;
Provisional President of Chile, 56
;(35X1
Pacheco, Leonidas, Foreign Minister
of Costa Rica, 6o
Pact of Paris, x6o, 206, 213 . 214,
215, 217, 218, 241, 252, 329
Painlev8, Paul, 326
Panama, external debt, 278
Papen, Franz von, appointed Ger-
man Chancellor, 135 ; at Lausanne
Conference, 142 ff., 327. 328
Paraguay, 335, 337 ; external debt,
278 ; establishes exchange control,
283 ;
suspends gold payments,
283
See also Chaco dispute
Patman, Representative Wright, in
troduces bonus bill, 126
Paul-Boncour, Joseph,' French
dele-
gate at Geneva, 239. 255n
Permanent Court of International
justice, x6o, 165
Persia,
suspends
gold payments ;
adopts exchange control, 283
Peru, American capital invested in,
51-52 ;
naval
mutiny and at-
tempted revolution, 52 ; dispute
with Colombia, 61 ; dispute with
Mexico, 6o ; defaults on external
debt, 8o ; suspends gold payments,
284; external debt, 278
Philippines, 214, 232
Polish Corridor, 152
Politis, Nicolas, Vice-President of
Disarmament Conference, 231
Poland, flow of capital to, 70-71
;
value of imports and exports in
1930-31 . 83; asks for postpone-
ment of debt payment, 169, 170,
341 ; defaults on December 15
payment,
174 ;
payments
due
United States in 1931-32 and
1932-33,
272
;
adopts
import
quotas, 286; production index,
298 ; estimated number of unem-
ployment, 299
Portugal, suspends gold payments,
284 ; adopts exchange control, 284 ;
adopts import quotas, 286
Prices, decline in the United States,
39 ; decline in security values, 40 ;
decline in world prices, 45 -46 ;
index numbers for important coun-
tries, 298ange control, 284 ;
adopts import quotas, 286
Prices, decline in the United States,
39 ; decline in security values, 40 ;
decline in world prices, 45 -46 ;
index numbers for important coun-
tries, 298

--- PAGE BREAK ---adopts import quotas, 286
Prices, decline in the United States,
39 ; decline in security values, 40 ;
decline in world prices, 45 -46 ;
index numbers for important coun-
tries, 298

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Production, index numbers for im-
portant countries, 298
Pu-yi, Henry, Provisional President,
or Regent, of "Manchukuo", 212,
331
Quo Tai-chi, Chinese Foreign Minis-
ter, 219, 222
Reconstruction Finance Corporation,
42, 113, x22, 127, 128, 129, 130,
324
Reed, Senator David A., 33n
Reichsbank, 333, 335 ; extension of
loan to, 26, 27
Renkin, Jules, Belgian delegate at
Lausanne, 145
Reparations Commission, estimate of
German reparations payments, 272
Reparations, Germany seeks relief
under terms of Young Plan, 17 ;
Advisory Committee investigates
Germany's capacity to pay, x7-I8 ;
official American attitude toward
reparations and debts, 23 ; state-
ment by Chancellor Bruening on
reparations, 20 ; postponement of
reparations settlement, x9 ; esti-
mates of total German reparations,
272
See also Lausanne Conference
Republican party, platform state-
ments dealing with foreign rela-
tions, 292
Revenue bill. See Tax Bill
Rhodesia, Southern, at Ottawa Con-
ference,
90, 94n ; Northern and
Southern, suspends gold, payments,
284
Robles, Victor, forms new Coalition
Cabinet in Chile, 336
Roosevelt, Franklin D ., on tariffs,
160-163 ; on World Court,
16o,
x65 ; on war debts, 16o, 161, 162,
178 ;
confers
with
President
Hoover on war debts, 179 ff . ;
elected President, 165
Rosso, Augusto, Italian representa-
tive at Geneva, 255n
Rubio, Ortiz, President of Mexico,
333
Rumania, adopts exchange control,
X 3 52 )
79, 284 ; payments due United
States in x931-32 and 1932-33,
27x
Runciman, Walter, at Lausanne Con-
ference, 1431
Russia, suspends gold payments, 284
;
embargo advocated at Ottawa, on
lumber from, 93, 96
Saito, Viscount Makoto, new Premier
of Japan, 332
Sales tax. See Tax Bill
Salvador, El, revolution
in,
57 ;
United States recognition policy,
57 ff . ; foreign governments fail
to follow American lead, 59 ; ob-
jects to five-power treaty of 1923
between Central American Re-
publics,
S9 ;
new
government
recognized by
Great
Britain,
France and other governments, 59,
334 ; external debt, 278 ; suspends
gold payments, 284
Samuel, Sir Herbert, 141, 338
Sato, Naotakb, Japanese delegate at
Geneva, 208, 209
Schleicher, General Kurt von, Ger-
man Minister of Defense, 322, 328
Schnee, Dr. Heinrich, German mem-
ber of Lytton Commission of In-
quiry, 197n
Shanghai, Japanese attack on, x99-
222 . See also Manchuria
Shigemitsu, Mamoru, Japanese Min-
ister to China, 219 ; injured by
bomb, 221
Shiozawa, Admiral Koichi, in com-
mand of Japanese naval forces,
202, 204, 205, 330
Shirokawa, General Yoshinori, Jap-
anese Commander in Chief, 204 ;
injured by bomb, 221
Shouse, Jouett, 115
Siam, suspends gold payments, 284,
334
Simon, Sir John, 323, 328 ; invited
to Paris to discuss reparations pre-
liminary to Lausanne Conference,
140, 340 ; at Lausanne,
141 ;
at
Disarmament
Conference,
234,
239 ; at five-power conversations
on armaments, 2543, 328 ; invited
to Paris to discuss reparations pre-
liminary to Lausanne Conference,
140, 340 ; at Lausanne,
141 ;
at
Disarmament
Conference,
234,
239 ; at five-power conversations
on armaments, 254

--- PAGE BREAK ---Sinclair, Sir Archibald, 338
Smith, Alfred E ., quoted on war
debts, 184
Smoot, Senator Reed, 31 ; quoted on
war debts, 183
Snell, Representative Bertrand H.,
quoted on war debts, x86
Snowden, Philip, 338
South Africa, adopts surtax, 82 ; at
Ottawa Conference, 90, 94
Spain, adopts import quotas, 81,
285 ; suspends gold payments,
284 ; adopts exchange control,
284 ; designates member to Shang-
hai Consular Committee, 207
"Standstill" agreement.

See Ger-
many
Stimson doctrine, 35 ; invoked in
Chaco dispute, 66, 335 ; invoked
in Far Eastern dispute, 195 $.

;
restatement of, 213 ; invoked by
League of Nations in March x 1
resolution, 217, 229, 253, 329,
331
Stimson, Henry L., Secretary of
State, 323 .

329.

330, 331 .

341 ;
note to French government on
reparations, 22 ; on war debts,
179 ; on Far Eastern dispute, x96
;
on appointment of member to
Shanghai Consular Committee,
207 ; consults with British Am-
bassador on Shanghai dispute,
205 ; letter to Senator Borah re-
affirming Stimson doctrine, 213 ;
approves action of League of Na-
tions invoking doctrine, 218 ;
speech before Council on Foreign
Relations, 223, 229 ; visit to
Geneva, 229, 236 ; cites interrela-
tion between Washington Naval
Treaty and Nine-Power Treaty,
213-214, 232 ; statement on Ger-
many's withdrawal from Dis-
armament Conference, 247
Strawn, Silas H., President of United
States Chamber of Commerce, on
Sino-Japanese dispute, 215
Stresa Conference, 287
Sun Yat-sen, Dr., 226
Swanson, Senator Claude A ., United
[ 353
States representative at Disarma-
ment Conference, 229-230 .330, 331 .

341 ;
note to French government on
reparations, 22 ; on war debts,
179 ; on Far Eastern dispute, x96
;
on appointment of member to
Shanghai Consular Committee,
207 ; consults with British Am-
bassador on Shanghai dispute,
205 ; letter to Senator Borah re-
affirming Stimson doctrine, 213 ;
approves action of League of Na-
tions invoking doctrine, 218 ;
speech before Council on Foreign
Relations, 223, 229 ; visit to
Geneva, 229, 236 ; cites interrela-
tion between Washington Naval
Treaty and Nine-Power Treaty,
213-214, 232 ; statement on Ger-
many's withdrawal from Dis-
armament Conference, 247
Strawn, Silas H., President of United
States Chamber of Commerce, on
Sino-Japanese dispute, 215
Stresa Conference, 287
Sun Yat-sen, Dr., 226
Swanson, Senator Claude A ., United
[ 353
States representative at Disarma-
ment Conference, 229-230 .

321
Sweden, exports and imports in
1930-31, 83 ; short-term indebted-
ness, 107-109 ; suspends gold pay-
ments, 284 ; adopts import quotas,
286; production index, 298 ; num-
ber of unemployed, 299
Swift, Linton B ., statement on un-
employment, 8
Switzerland, exports and imports in
1930-31, 83 ; withdraws gold from
the United States, 117 ; adopts
import quotas, 286
Tardieu, Andrf, 326, 328, 329 ; on
Danubian relief, 29 ; defeated in
French elections, 136 ; resigns,
137; at Disarmament Conference,
230
Tardieu Plan.--- PAGE BREAK ---

341 ;
note to French government on
reparations, 22 ; on war debts,
179 ; on Far Eastern dispute, x96
;
on appointment of member to
Shanghai Consular Committee,
207 ; consults with British Am-
bassador on Shanghai dispute,
205 ; letter to Senator Borah re-
affirming Stimson doctrine, 213 ;
approves action of League of Na-
tions invoking doctrine, 218 ;
speech before Council on Foreign
Relations, 223, 229 ; visit to
Geneva, 229, 236 ; cites interrela-
tion between Washington Naval
Treaty and Nine-Power Treaty,
213-214, 232 ; statement on Ger-
many's withdrawal from Dis-
armament Conference, 247
Strawn, Silas H., President of United
States Chamber of Commerce, on
Sino-Japanese dispute, 215
Stresa Conference, 287
Sun Yat-sen, Dr., 226
Swanson, Senator Claude A ., United
[ 353
States representative at Disarma-
ment Conference, 229-230 . 321
Sweden, exports and imports in
1930-31, 83 ; short-term indebted-
ness, 107-109 ; suspends gold pay-
ments, 284 ; adopts import quotas,
286; production index, 298 ; num-
ber of unemployed, 299
Swift, Linton B ., statement on un-
employment, 8
Switzerland, exports and imports in
1930-31, 83 ; withdraws gold from
the United States, 117 ; adopts
import quotas, 286
Tardieu, Andrf, 326, 328, 329 ; on
Danubian relief, 29 ; defeated in
French elections, 136 ; resigns,
137; at Disarmament Conference,
230
Tardieu Plan. See Danubian States
Tariff, 337 ; Congress makes efforts
at tariff revision, 29 ff .; passage
of tariff bill in House, 3o ; in
Senate, 31 ; vetoed by President,
51 ; tariffs on various products
voted in tax bill, 31 ; Hawley-
Smoot tariff act, 29, 35
Tariff Commission, United States,
29 ; submits report on depreciated
currencies, 34, 35
Tax bill, 325 ; introduced in House,
114; attack on sales tax section,
115 ; revolt over sales tax section,
xx5-1x6, 1x9 ; sales tax defeated
in House, 116 ; new bill adopted
by House, 12o; new bill passed
by Senate, 120
Taxes, defaults by various States, 6-7
Thaelmann, Ernst, candidate for
German Presidency, 133
Thomas, Senator Elmer, proposes
bonus payments to ex-soldiers, 125
Times, New York, quoted, 168
Trans-Andine Railway, 6o
Tsai Ting-kai, General, Commander
of Chinese Nineteenth Route
Army, 208
Turkey, adopts import quotas, 81,
286 ; suspends gold payments,
284; adopts exchange control, 286, 168
Trans-Andine Railway, 6o
Tsai Ting-kai, General, Commander
of Chinese Nineteenth Route
Army, 208
Turkey, adopts import quotas, 81,
286 ; suspends gold payments,
284; adopts exchange control, 286

--- PAGE BREAK ---Twentieth Century Fund, Committee
appointed
by,
urges
economic
sanctions in Sino-Japanese dis-
pute, 215
Uchida,
Count Yasuya, Japanese
Foreign Minister, 224
Unemployment, 7, 8 ; extent of, 7 ;
wage deflation, 42 ; data for im-
portant countries, 299
United States, sentiment unfavorable
to collaboration with Europe as
depression deepens, 5 ff.

; domes-
tic relief demanded in lieu of help
to other countries, 9 ; Administra-
tion
adopts
waiting
attitude
toward economic crisis, 13 ; con-
sideration of war debts postponed
until after election, x5 ; encourages
other nations to seek settlement of
their problems without American
cooperation, x5 ; postpones con-
sideration of Far Eastern question
pending report of Lytton Commis-
sion, 35 ; conditions grow worse
as settlement of urgent problems is
deferred, 37 ; deflation of com-
modity prices, 39 ; weakness in
security markets, 40 ; decline of
new financing, 42 ; increase in un-
employment, 42 ; wage reductions,
42-43 ; shrinkage of profits, 43-44 ;
imports and exports in 1930-31,
83 ; liquidity crisis, 109 ff .

;
ef-
forts to balance the budget, 119
ff .; domes-
tic relief demanded in lieu of help
to other countries, 9 ; Administra-
tion
adopts
waiting
attitude
toward economic crisis, 13 ; con-
sideration of war debts postponed
until after election, x5 ; encourages
other nations to seek settlement of
their problems without American
cooperation, x5 ; postpones con-
sideration of Far Eastern question
pending report of Lytton Commis-
sion, 35 ; conditions grow worse
as settlement of urgent problems is
deferred, 37 ; deflation of com-
modity prices, 39 ; weakness in
security markets, 40 ; decline of
new financing, 42 ; increase in un-
employment, 42 ; wage reductions,
42-43 ; shrinkage of profits, 43-44 ;
imports and exports in 1930-31,
83 ; liquidity crisis, 109 ff .

;
ef-
forts to balance the budget, 119
ff .

; international dangers from an
unbalanced budget, 116-227 ; Ad-
ministration's attitude toward in-
creased taxation, 216 ; measures for
defense of credit, 118 ; plans for
safeguarding gold standard, 230 ;
gold movements, 227-228 ; threat
of inflation, 223 ; measures to pre-
vent inflation, 13o ; short-term
indebtedness, 107-109 ; approves
League action invoking Stimson
doctrine in Sino-Japanese dispute,
218 ; movement of capital to and
from, 277 ; quantity index of for-
eign trade, 288 ; balance of inter-
national payments, 290 ; produc-
tion index, 298 ; commodity price
[354)
index, 298 ; yield
of value of
staple Crops, 299 ; significant busi-
ness indices, 299 ; dividend pay-
ments and railway earnings, 300
Uruguay, dispute with Argentina,
6o ; debt default, 8o ; external
debt, 278 ; suspends gold pay-
ments, 284 ; adopts exchange con-
trol, 284
Uyeda, General Kenkichi, 53o ; in-
jured by
bomb,
221 ;
signs
Shanghai armistice, 222
Valera, Eamon de, President of
League Council, on Chaco dispute,
67 ; on Lytton Report, 224
Vargas, Getulio, Provisional Presi
dent of Brazil, 53
Venezuela, maintains her foreign
exchange, 49 ; American invest-
ments in, 51-32 ; suspends gold
payments, 284
Versailles Treaty, 150 ff ., 246, 248,
249.;
ef-
forts to balance the budget, 119
ff .

; international dangers from an
unbalanced budget, 116-227 ; Ad-
ministration's attitude toward in-
creased taxation, 216 ; measures for
defense of credit, 118 ; plans for
safeguarding gold standard, 230 ;
gold movements, 227-228 ; threat
of inflation, 223 ; measures to pre-
vent inflation, 13o ; short-term
indebtedness, 107-109 ; approves
League action invoking Stimson
doctrine in Sino-Japanese dispute,
218 ; movement of capital to and
from, 277 ; quantity index of for-
eign trade, 288 ; balance of inter-
national payments, 290 ; produc-
tion index, 298 ; commodity price
[354)
index, 298 ; yield
of value of
staple Crops, 299 ; significant busi-
ness indices, 299 ; dividend pay-
ments and railway earnings, 300
Uruguay, dispute with Argentina,
6o ; debt default, 8o ; external
debt, 278 ; suspends gold pay-
ments, 284 ; adopts exchange con-
trol, 284
Uyeda, General Kenkichi, 53o ; in-
jured by
bomb,
221 ;
signs
Shanghai armistice, 222
Valera, Eamon de, President of
League Council, on Chaco dispute,
67 ; on Lytton Report, 224
Vargas, Getulio, Provisional Presi
dent of Brazil, 53
Venezuela, maintains her foreign
exchange, 49 ; American invest-
ments in, 51-32 ; suspends gold
payments, 284
Versailles Treaty, 150 ff ., 246, 248,
249.

250, 251, 322
Vinson, Representative Carl, 33
Voelckers, Hans Hermann, German
representative at Geneva, 255n
Wagner, Senator Robert F., 325 ; in-
troduces relief bill, 228 ; bill
passed in Senate and is compro-
mised with Garner bill, 229
War debts, Greece, Poland, Estonia,
Latvia and Germany ask for post-
ponement, 168-269 ;
Greece and
Hungary default on non-postpon-
able loans, 170 ; France and Great
Britain seek suspension of their
payments due December 15 and
ask for revision, 270 ff.; international dangers from an
unbalanced budget, 116-227 ; Ad-
ministration's attitude toward in-
creased taxation, 216 ; measures for
defense of credit, 118 ; plans for
safeguarding gold standard, 230 ;
gold movements, 227-228 ; threat
of inflation, 223 ; measures to pre-
vent inflation, 13o ; short-term
indebtedness, 107-109 ; approves
League action invoking Stimson
doctrine in Sino-Japanese dispute,
218 ; movement of capital to and
from, 277 ; quantity index of for-
eign trade, 288 ; balance of inter-
national payments, 290 ; produc-
tion index, 298 ; commodity price
[354)
index, 298 ; yield
of value of
staple Crops, 299 ; significant busi-
ness indices, 299 ; dividend pay-
ments and railway earnings, 300
Uruguay, dispute with Argentina,
6o ; debt default, 8o ; external
debt, 278 ; suspends gold pay-
ments, 284 ; adopts exchange con-
trol, 284
Uyeda, General Kenkichi, 53o ; in-
jured by
bomb,
221 ;
signs
Shanghai armistice, 222
Valera, Eamon de, President of
League Council, on Chaco dispute,
67 ; on Lytton Report, 224
Vargas, Getulio, Provisional Presi
dent of Brazil, 53
Venezuela, maintains her foreign
exchange, 49 ; American invest-
ments in, 51-32 ; suspends gold
payments, 284
Versailles Treaty, 150 ff ., 246, 248,
249.

250, 251, 322
Vinson, Representative Carl, 33
Voelckers, Hans Hermann, German
representative at Geneva, 255n
Wagner, Senator Robert F., 325 ; in-
troduces relief bill, 228 ; bill
passed in Senate and is compro-
mised with Garner bill, 229
War debts, Greece, Poland, Estonia,
Latvia and Germany ask for post-
ponement, 168-269 ;
Greece and
Hungary default on non-postpon-
able loans, 170 ; France and Great
Britain seek suspension of their
payments due December 15 and
ask for revision, 270 ff.

; President
Hoover and President-elect Roose-
velt confer on debts, 178 ; agree
on
fundamental principles but
disagree on procedure, 279 ; Brit-
ish and French request for revision
rejected, 170-172 ; American pub-
lic opinion concerning debts, 3181
ff.--- PAGE BREAK ---

250, 251, 322
Vinson, Representative Carl, 33
Voelckers, Hans Hermann, German
representative at Geneva, 255n
Wagner, Senator Robert F., 325 ; in-
troduces relief bill, 228 ; bill
passed in Senate and is compro-
mised with Garner bill, 229
War debts, Greece, Poland, Estonia,
Latvia and Germany ask for post-
ponement, 168-269 ;
Greece and
Hungary default on non-postpon-
able loans, 170 ; France and Great
Britain seek suspension of their
payments due December 15 and
ask for revision, 270 ff. ; President
Hoover and President-elect Roose-
velt confer on debts, 178 ; agree
on
fundamental principles but
disagree on procedure, 279 ; Brit-
ish and French request for revision
rejected, 170-172 ; American pub-
lic opinion concerning debts, 3181
ff. ; arguments for and against re-
vision, 175 ff. ; changes in capacity
of debtors to pay, 286 ff . ; rela-
tion of war debts to world trade,
29o ff. ; payments due United

--- PAGE BREAK ---, 3181
ff. ; arguments for and against re-
vision, 175 ff. ; changes in capacity
of debtors to pay, 286 ff . ; rela-
tion of war debts to world trade,
29o ff. ; payments due United

--- PAGE BREAK ---

States
in
1931-32, and 1932-33,
271-272
Washington Naval Treaty of 1922,
227 . 232, 246, 254
Weimar Constitution, 133
Weiszaecker, Baron Ernst von, Ger-
man
representative
at Geneva,
255n
Wilson, Hugh R., 219 ; alternate
member at Disarmament Confer-
ence, 229-230
Wilson, Woodrow, President, quoted
on war debts, 177
Winter, G., candidate for German
Presidency, 133
Woolley, Dr. Mary, United States
delegate to Disarmament Confer-
ence, 230
Woosung forts, attacked by Japanese,
204 ; occupied by Japanese,
210,
331
World Court. See Permanent Gowt
of International Justice
World Economic Conference, 94. 95,
258
World War Foreign Debt Commis-
sion, 12, 188, 339
Wu, Te-chen, General,
Mayor of
Shanghai, 206, 208, 332
Yangtse River, 198, 204
Yen, Dr. W. W., Chinese delegate
in Geneva, invokes Articles X and
XV in Shanghai dispute, 206, 2150,
221, 330
Young Plan, 17, 18, 21, 22, 24, 132,
137, 138, 142. 143 . 176
Yugoslavia, adopts
exchange con-
trol, 79, 284 ; flow of capital to,
,70-7r ; exports and imports 'in
1930-31 . 83 ; adopts import quotas,
286
t3551

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V