THE BOOK OF WISDOM
The books you are about to read are not the writings of Jewish (Zionist)
sages, but the work of Faith. The difference between these two phenomena is
enormous and fundamental. The source of Jewish ideas is the human mind, whose
main goal is to defile the truth. In Judaism, gold is the highest judge. The
source of the thoughts in these books is Divine Revelation. The purpose of
the human Mind is to comprehend Revelation and derive practical guidelines
from it: how to live on Earth in accordance with the will of the Creator (God
Almighty).
The Jewish (Zionist) sages invented everything contained in the books they
wrote (the Bible, the Gospel, etc.). They turned falsehood into truth. The
greatness of a sage lies not in coming up with ideas and concepts that
become part of the national consciousness, either by force or for reward,
but in revealing to his own and subsequent generations the Knowledge of God
contained in the Ancient Vedas. Those who read these books will enrich
themselves incomparably, for this is the Knowledge of the Ancients.
Book 1.
THE WAY OF THE CREATOR
In the Name of the Great Ra-M-Ha, the Merciful and Compassionate!
Part 1
Chapter 1
[1] Every person must believe and know that there is the First, the Highest,
the Eternal, the Creator (of man). He created all Being and continues to
sustain its existence. This Being is the Most High God, blessed be He.
[2] It is also necessary to know that the true essence of the Supreme God
is completely incomprehensible to anyone except Him. The only thing known
about Him is that He exists and that He is perfect in every way, and there
is absolutely no flaw in Him.
This knowledge was received by people from the Forefathers (Aryans) and
Prophets. All Aryans (Forefathers of humanity) comprehended Him, became
convinced of His truth, and taught this Knowledge to their sons, generation
after generation. For thus did the Almighty lay it upon their hearts.
However, the truth of the Aryan Vedas (Sacred Scriptures) can also be proven
through logical investigation. Their correctness can be demonstrated by
starting from observations of nature, using physics, mechanics, and other
sciences, from which one can derive primary truths and quite definitely
deduce from them these true statements that there is one Supreme Source.
However, we will not deal with this now, but will set out the basic
principles and organize things with the utmost clarity.deduce from them these true statements that there is one Supreme Source.
However, we will not deal with this now, but will set out the basic
principles and organize things with the utmost clarity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---[3] It is also necessary to know that the existence of the Existent,
blessed be His Name, is necessary and that His non-existence is
completely impossible.

[4] It is also necessary to know that His existence is completely
independent of anyone else and occurs by itself.

[5] It is also necessary to know that His existence is simple existence and
that all perfections are found in Him in a simple way.

Explanation: there are
various and numerous powers in the human soul, each of which has its own
sphere of action.

For example: memory is one power, will is another, and
imagination is a third, and none of them intersects with another.

For memory
is one thing, and will is another, and will does not intersect with memory,
and memory does not enter into the realm of will, and so on with all of them.

Thus, it can be said that the human Mind has a structure and is not simple.

But the Lord (God Almighty), blessed be He, is not the possessor of various
powers, although in fact there are aspects in Him that are different in us,
for He desires to delight us with Goodness (Eternal Life), because He is
wise and He is perfect in all kinds of perfection.

However, His true essence
is one and includes within its framework all that is perfection.

It turns out that He possesses perfection not as something additional to His
true essence, but as including all Perfection in His true essence; that is,
His essence itself cannot be imperfect.

But in reality, all this is far beyond our comprehension and imagination, and
we have almost no way to explain it and no words to interpret it.

Our
imagination and perception encompass only that which is limited by the
framework of nature created by the Almighty.

Only this is perceived by our
senses, and only such images are presented to our minds.

The created objects are numerous and divided.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Only this is perceived by our
senses, and only such images are presented to our minds. The created objects are numerous and divided. But we have already said above that the truth of His essence is
incomprehensible, and no analogy can be drawn between what we see in creation
and the Creator, for their essence and nature are completely incomparable,
and it is impossible to judge one on the basis of the other. But this is also one of the things known from the Vedas, and whose truth has
been verified by the study of the laws and principles of nature itself —
that, in any case, it cannot be that there is not one Being Who is outside of
nature, its laws, and its boundaries; and to Him do not apply non-existence
and deficiencies, multiplicity and composition; He is beyond all relation and
comparison and all events that happen to creatures, and He is the true cause
of all that exists and all that happens. For without this, the existence of
the objects we see and their permanence would be impossible. [6] And one more thing must be known, that the Creator is necessarily one and
no more. He always exists in a perfect state; and if other objects (Angels)
exist, it is only because He produces them according to His will, and they
all depend on Him and do not exist by themselves. Chapter 2
[1] The purpose of the creation of man was to give back from the
Goodness of the Creator to other beings (Souls). And it is obvious that God Almighty is true perfection, devoid of any flaws,
and there is no other perfection like Him. Any perfection that can be
imagined, except for His

--- PAGE BREAK ---perfection, is not true perfection.

All other things can be called perfect
only in comparison with other, less perfect things.

But absolute perfection
is only the perfection of the Almighty.

Since He desired to bestow good upon others, it would not be enough for Him
to bestow a little good, but rather the utmost good that His creations could
receive.

And since only He is true Goodness, His good desire can only be
satisfied by bestowing upon others the Goodness that is in Him Himself, for
this is true and perfect Goodness.

On the other hand, this goodness can only be found in Him.

Therefore, His
wisdom decreed that the true reward of Goodness would consist in Him allowing
His creations to partake of Him to the extent that they are capable of doing
so.

And then it turns out that, although the creatures themselves cannot be
attributed with the perfection of the Creator, because of their communion
with Him, they will be attributed with His perfection to the extent that it
is possible.

And it turns out that the creatures enjoy this true Good to the
greatest extent possible for them.

It turns out that God's plan in Creation (Yavi) is to create those who will
enjoy His Goodness in the way that is possible for them.

[2] But His Wisdom has decreed that in order for this Good to be perfect, the
one who enjoys it must be the owner of this Good; that is, the one who
acquires this Good himself, and not the one to whom this Good accompanies by
chance.

And understand that this is called a certain likeness, as far as possible, to
the perfection of the Most High.

For the Most High is perfect in Himself, and
from the truth of His essence, perfection and the absence of defects are
obligatory in Him.

Of course, there can be no one else but God in whom the truth of His essence
would in itself require perfection and the absence of flaws.For the Most High is perfect in Himself, and
from the truth of His essence, perfection and the absence of defects are
obligatory in Him.

Of course, there can be no one else but God in whom the truth of His essence
would in itself require perfection and the absence of flaws.

But for any
creation to resemble Him even slightly, it must at least acquire perfection
on its own, not necessarily from its essence, and eliminate any flaws that
might be present in the creation.

Therefore, the Creator created aspects of
perfection and imperfection, and created man, in whom both possibilities were
equally present.

The Almighty gave man the means by which he would acquire
perfection and eliminate flaws.

And then it would be possible to say that
this man resembled his Creator, and he would be worthy to join Him and enjoy
His Goodness (Eternal Life).

[3] And so, in addition to the fact that a person who has attained
perfection becomes worthy of joining his Creator by becoming like Him,
through the attainment of perfection, this creation continues to join the
Creator, so that, in the end, the attainment of perfection and joining the
Almighty become one and the same.

The reason for this is that His essence is true perfection.

Therefore,
everything that is perfection owes this only to Him, like a branch to its
root, for although it does not attain the perfection of the Root, it is its
offspring and continuation.

And understand that true perfection is His
essence, and any deficiency is nothing but a concealment of His Goodness and
a hiding of His Light.

It turns out that the illumination (revelation) of His
Light and His closeness are the root and cause of all perfection, and the
concealment of His Light
— the root and cause of every deficiency, and according to the degree of
concealment of the Light, there will be a degree of deficiency resulting from
this concealment.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And understand that true perfection is His
essence, and any deficiency is nothing but a concealment of His Goodness and
a hiding of His Light. It turns out that the illumination (revelation) of His
Light and His closeness are the root and cause of all perfection, and the
concealment of His Light
— the root and cause of every deficiency, and according to the degree of
concealment of the Light, there will be a degree of deficiency resulting from
this concealment. And the aforementioned creation (man), standing in equilibrium between
perfection and deficiencies, which are the products of illumination and
concealment

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the Light, in strengthening himself in perfections and acquiring them
within himself, is as it were connected with the Creator, since He is the
Root and Source of perfections.

And to the extent that man multiplies
perfections, he multiplies his connection with Him and his communion with
Him.

And when he reaches the limit of acquiring perfection, he will reach
the ultimate connection with Him and communion with Him and will find
himself attached to Him, enjoying His Goodness and perfecting himself in
Him, and he himself is the possessor of his Goodness and perfection
(Immortality).

[4] In order for all this to be possible, there must be various factors of
perfection and imperfection.

The aforementioned creation (man) must have the
ability and opportunity to acquire perfection and eliminate imperfections,
and there must be means for him to acquire this perfection.

For all this,
there must necessarily be various and numerous degrees of Faith in Creation
and diverse relationships between them.

And the person destined for this great task—bringing people closer to the
Almighty—will be called the main one in Creation (Yavi), while all other
objects will be nothing more than contributors to his success and
achievement of the Goal in some way or another.

Therefore, they will be
called secondary in relation to this aforementioned primary creation.

[5] Truly, this primary creation is man.

All other creations, both lower and
higher than him, exist only for him.

And all of them, in all their numerous
and various aspects with which they should be endowed, exist in order to
create a suitable environment for man.

This is explained in more detail
below.

Reason and all good qualities are the spheres of perfection in which man must
improve himself, while materiality and bad qualities are the aforementioned
elements of imperfection in which man is placed in order to acquire
perfection.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is explained in more detail
below. Reason and all good qualities are the spheres of perfection in which man must
improve himself, while materiality and bad qualities are the aforementioned
elements of imperfection in which man is placed in order to acquire
perfection. Chapter 3
[1] Man is the very creature that was created to attach himself to the
Most High. Man is placed between perfection and imperfection, and he is
capable of acquiring perfection. However, it is necessary that this acquisition of perfection be of his own
choice and desire, for if he were forced to choose perfection in his actions
in any case, he would not truly be called the possessor of his perfection,
and the Higher Purpose would not be fulfilled. Therefore, it was necessary to
make this dependent on his choice, so that his inclination toward both sides
would be balanced and he would not be forced to choose one of them. And so
that he would have the power of choice—to consciously and of his own free
will choose the side he wants, as well as the ability to acquire the side he
wants. Therefore, man was created with a good beginning (EGO—altruism) and an
evil beginning (ego—egoism). And he has the free choice to lean toward the
side he desires. [2] In order to arrange this matter in the best possible way, the Higher
Wisdom decided that man should be composed of two opposites, namely: a
rational pure Soul (EGO) and an earthly selfish body (ego), each of which
naturally leans toward its own side. The body (ego) leans toward
materiality, and the Soul (EGO) toward Spirituality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Thus, there is a constant struggle between the body and the Soul.

If the Soul
prevails, it will elevate itself and elevate the body with it, and such a
person will achieve the perfection that is destined for them; but if they
allow materiality to prevail within them, the body will descend and the Soul
will descend with it, and such a person will be unworthy of perfection and
will be rejected by the Higher Powers.

But even this person has the
opportunity to humble his materiality before his Mind (Soul) and attain
perfection, as we have mentioned.

[3] The Almighty, in His goodness, has decreed that there should be a limit
to the effort required of a person to attain perfection.

And when he
completes his work and reaches his level of perfection, he will rest in his
enjoyment for ever and ever.

Therefore, two periods have been established for
man: the first is the time of labor, and the second is the time of receiving
the reward.

But the measure of good exceeds the measure of evil: man has a set time for
working on himself — as much as the Supreme Wisdom deemed appropriate for
that person.

But the reward is endless, and man continues to enjoy the
perfection he has acquired forever.

[4] Since the periods of working on oneself and receiving rewards are
different, it follows that a person's status and all events happening to them
should be different in these two periods.

For all the time spent working on
oneself, it is necessary for a person to be in such a state that everything
necessary for this work on oneself could exist.

Explanation: it is necessary
that there be a conflict between the Mind (EGO) and matter (ego) within him,
and that there be nothing that would prevent matter from ruling and doing
what it should, and nothing that would prevent the Mind from ruling and
acting at its own discretion.For all the time spent working on
oneself, it is necessary for a person to be in such a state that everything
necessary for this work on oneself could exist.

Explanation: it is necessary
that there be a conflict between the Mind (EGO) and matter (ego) within him,
and that there be nothing that would prevent matter from ruling and doing
what it should, and nothing that would prevent the Mind from ruling and
acting at its own discretion.

There should be nothing that would lead to an
excessive strengthening of matter, and nothing that would lead to an
excessive strengthening of Reason.

For, although on the one hand it seems
better for Reason to be stronger than matter, in light of the True Purpose of
man and what God desires of him — to attain perfection through his own
efforts
— this is not good.

And during the period of receiving the reward, a person should be in the
opposite position.

For any power of matter at that time will only obscure the
Soul and prevent it from attaching itself to the Creator.

Therefore, it is
necessary that only the Soul reigns at that time, and matter completely
follows it, without hindering it at all.

And so three worlds were created: this world, Yavi; the world of good, Prav;
and the world of evil, Nav.

The place and natural laws of this world are such
as befits a person who is always working; and the place and laws of the world
to come are such as befits a person who is receiving reward or punishment.

[5] And here is what else you need to know: the original state of the human
race is not what we see and recognize it as now, for a great change has taken
place in it.

As a result of human sin, both man and the world have changed
from their original state.

The details of this change and its consequences
are numerous.

It turns out that there are two sides to the conversation about the human
race.

[6] At the moment of its creation, man is exactly in the position mentioned
above.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It turns out that there are two sides to the conversation about the human
race. [6] At the moment of its creation, man is exactly in the position mentioned
above. He was composed of two opposite parts
— the soul and the body; there are two phenomena in the world — good and evil
— and he stands at an equal distance from both, ready to attach himself to
whichever one he wants. A person should choose goodness and ensure that the Soul (EGO) overpowers
the body (ego), and the Mind overpowers matter (mind), and then he will
immediately become perfect and will be perfect forever.

--- PAGE BREAK ---[7] It is necessary to know that although we do not feel any other action of
the Soul in the body except vitality and understanding, it is in the nature
of the Soul to purify the body itself and its matter and elevate them step
by step until the body becomes worthy to accompany Her in the enjoyment of
perfection.

Indeed, if a person did not sin, he would achieve that his Soul would
gradually purify the body to the necessary level, and it would be worthy,
together with the Soul, of eternal enjoyment (Paradise Bliss).

[8] But since man sinned, all this underwent a great change.

At the
beginning, there were just enough flaws in Creation for man to remain in the
aforementioned balanced state and to have the opportunity to achieve
perfection through his own efforts.

But because of sins, flaws were added and
multiplied in man himself and in all of Creation (Yavi), and correction
became even more difficult than it had been before.

That is, at first it was easy for a person to get rid of the flaw inherent in
him and achieve perfection.

For the Supreme Wisdom arranged everything in the
best and most just way.

Since the only cause of evil and deficiency in man
was that it was inherent in him at the time of his creation, by distancing
himself from evil and turning to good, he would immediately get rid of his
deficiency and attain perfection.

But after sin, perfection disappeared more than before, and shortcomings
multiplied, and man himself became the cause of his own evil.

And now it is
not so easy for him to get rid of shortcomings and acquire perfection, as it
was when he was not the cause of his shortcomings, but was originally created
that way (with shortcomings).

Therefore, now, in order to achieve perfection,
man needs to make a double effort.

For it is necessary that man and the world
(Yavi) first return to the position they were in before sin.Therefore, now, in order to achieve perfection,
man needs to make a double effort.

For it is necessary that man and the world
(Yavi) first return to the position they were in before sin.

And
subsequently, man will be able to rise from this position to the perfection
to which he ought to ascend.

[9] And, in addition to all this, the Righteous Judge has decreed that
from now on, neither man nor the world will be able to achieve perfection
while in their corrupted form, that is, in the form they have now, in which
evil has multiplied.

But they will be forced to go through destruction,
namely: death for man and destruction for all other realities corrupted
along with him.

The soul can purify the body only after it first breaks free from its
dependence on it (the ego), and the body (egoism) dies and is destroyed.

Then
a new building will be constructed, and the soul will enter it and purify it.

Likewise, the entire current form of the world will be destroyed, and it will
take on a different form, one befitting perfection.

Therefore, it is decreed that a person will die and come back to life (in the
Spiritual world), and this is the resurrection of the dead.

And it is decreed
that the world will be destroyed and renewed, and the Sages said about this:
"The world has existed for 26,000 years, and it will be destroyed," and at
the end of the years, the Holy One, blessed be He, will renew His world.

[10] Thus, the time of true retribution, that is, the aforementioned time of
receiving reward or punishment, takes place after resurrection in the
Spiritual world.

A righteous person will enjoy it with his soul and body,
since his body has been purified by the soul and prepared by it to enjoy
that Goodness.

However, the people there will differ.

The rank and exaltation of each will
be determined according to the measure of his labor in the world of service
and according to what he strove to achieve in terms of perfection.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, the people there will differ. The rank and exaltation of each will
be determined according to the measure of his labor in the world of service
and according to what he strove to achieve in terms of perfection. For as
this happens, the Soul itself will shine forth and illuminate the body and
purify it, and both will acquire value and

--- PAGE BREAK ---significance and will be worthy to approach God, to be illuminated by His
Light (Inglia) and to enjoy His true Goodness (Immortality).

[11] And since death is prepared for man, it follows that this union (of Soul
and body) must be separated for a certain time, and after that — reunited
again.

During this separation, there must be a place for the Soul and for the
body, corresponding to the purpose of this separation.

It is necessary for
the body to return to its foundation, for its structure to decompose and its
form to be destroyed.

Since the body was created from dust, it will return to
it, as the Blessed One said to man: "For you are dust, and to dust you shall
return."
For souls with good deeds, the world of Prav has been prepared, where all
pure souls will enter after leaving their bodies, and will remain there
forever and receive the Good that has been prepared for them.

And all this time (eternity) these Souls will dwell in dignity and enjoyment,
similar to what will be given to them afterwards, during the aforementioned
true reward.

For the level of reward in the world of Prav will, of course, be
measured according to a person's deeds, as will the level of ascent through
the steps of Faith (Knowledge of God).

But the true reward, intended for those who deserve it, will be attained by
the Soul only after resurrection.

[12] In addition to the fact that the world of Prav is the abode of
righteous Souls, there is an additional great benefit for the Souls
themselves.

It has been decreed that a person can only achieve perfection (the world of
God) after death, even if his deeds made him worthy of perfection during his
lifetime.

If a person was not worthy of perfection during his lifetime, he
would never achieve it, because the time for acquiring perfection is only in
this world, before death.It has been decreed that a person can only achieve perfection (the world of
God) after death, even if his deeds made him worthy of perfection during his
lifetime.

If a person was not worthy of perfection during his lifetime, he
would never achieve it, because the time for acquiring perfection is only in
this world, before death.

It also follows from this ruling that as long as the Soul remains in the body
in this world, which contains evil (for evil cannot be eliminated from this
world until the end), the Soul will also be dark and dull.

And although through the good deeds that a person does, the Soul acquires
perfection and dignity (Light), this cannot be revealed.

The Soul cannot
shine with the Radiance that it should shine with according to the dignity
(Light) that it actually possesses.

All this remains hidden in its essence
until the time when it is given to reveal itself.

But this delay is not on
the part of the Soul (Mind), but on the part of the body (mind), and the
person himself loses out because of this, since he does not receive the
purification that he should have received all this time.

However, the Soul also loses out, because it is closed in on itself and
cannot radiate its Radiance; and also because it does not perform the action
that befits it — the purification of the body.

And if it did perform this
action, it would greatly improve itself because of it, since the function of
perfection is to do good and improve others.

Furthermore, purification of the
body is an action befitting the Soul by its nature and law, for this is what
it was created for.

And every creation is perfected when it performs what the
Creator has decreed for it to do, and this creation lacks perfection as long
as it does not perform what the Creator has prescribed for it.

But when the Soul leaves the body and moves into the world of Prav, it opens
up and shines with its Radiance, which befits it according to its deeds.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And every creation is perfected when it performs what the
Creator has decreed for it to do, and this creation lacks perfection as long
as it does not perform what the Creator has prescribed for it. But when the Soul leaves the body and moves into the world of Prav, it opens
up and shines with its Radiance, which befits it according to its deeds. And
by comprehending everything during its stay in the world of Prav, the Soul is
strengthened after having weakened in the body, and becomes more prepared for
what it must do during the resurrection. Thus, when it returns to the Light
(Inglia), it will be able to perform the action befitting it, namely, the
aforementioned purification.

--- PAGE BREAK ---[13] And it is necessary to know that even now, when the Soul enters the
mortal body, despite the fact that it has not yet attained perfection
through its deeds, it is at a high level of perfection and, from the point
of view of its own merits and Radiance, is capable of giving such great
purification to a person that he would go beyond the boundaries of the human
race.

But the Creator's decree stops Her, hides Her power, and diminishes Her
Radiance so that She cannot do this.

She will remain in the body, closed
within Herself to the extent necessary according to the Higher intention, and
will act only according to the measure and order desired by the Wisdom of the
Most High.

As a result of the good deeds that the Soul constantly performs, it should
reveal itself and shine, as we mentioned, and then the body would receive
purification from it.

But according to the decree explained above, it can
only reveal itself in the world of Prav.

But when the Soul returns to the Light (Inglia) after resurrection, it will
not diminish or hide, but will enter into Him (Paradise) in all its Radiance
and in all its power, and then immediately purify the body (ego) with a great
purification.

And a person will not need the gradual maturation that children
need now, but immediately at that moment the Soul will shine in him and
immediately purify him with a great purification.

This does not mean that a resurrected person will not continue to ascend.

But
the fact is that when the Soul enters the body, a person becomes worthy and
exalted, and his body (egoism) immediately undergoes its first purification
and rises above everything that was in his first life (before his birth into
the world of Yavi).

The level of this purification will depend on all the good deeds that the
person has already done.

This purification will place the person on the level
of Faith, where he belongs among the worthy and enjoys perfection (Good).--- PAGE BREAK ---

The level of this purification will depend on all the good deeds that the
person has already done. This purification will place the person on the level
of Faith, where he belongs among the worthy and enjoys perfection (Good). And
after that, the Soul will continue to ascend depending on the initial level
of Faith (Knowledge of God) to which the person was placed. Chapter 4
[1] There are two circumstances that distinguish a person's position in
this world: the properties of the person themselves, their parts and
structure, and the place in which they are placed with everything that
accompanies them. [2] The person himself, as we have already mentioned, is composed of two
opposites: the Soul (EGO) and the body (ego). And we see with our own eyes
that materiality is primary in him, and its manifestations in him are very
strong. After all, immediately after birth, a person is almost entirely
material (egoistic), and the Mind (altruism) barely functions in him. And as
he grows up, the Mind will strengthen or weaken in each person in its own
way. But even when a person becomes an adult, materialism does not cease to rule
over him and draw him to its side. But if he grows up in Wisdom, studies Her
(Faith) and strengthens himself in Her ways, he will try to conquer his
nature, will not let go of the reins of his passions, and will try to walk in
the ways of Reason. The inner meaning of these things we see is that in reality, matter and its
essence are by nature murky and dark, and this reality is very distant and
opposite to what is necessary for those who are close to God and who partake
of His Light (Ingliya).

--- PAGE BREAK ---And although the Soul itself is pure and sublime, when it enters the material
body and becomes attached to it, it finds itself separated and pushed away
from its natural state to its opposite.

It is confined in this position by
force of coercion, and can only escape from it if it overcomes this force.

And since the Lord, blessed be He, has decreed that this union of Soul and
body will never be separated—that is, that the separation of death is only
temporary, until the resurrection, but after that the Soul must return to
the Light and they will exist together forever and ever—it is necessary for
the Soul to strive, strengthen itself (fast) and constantly weaken the power
of the darkness of materiality (ego) until the body becomes unclouded.

And
then the body will be able to ascend with it and receive the Higher Light,
instead of the Soul being humiliated and saddened in Navi.

However, as long as a person is in this world, matter (ego) is strong in
him, as mentioned.

And since matter is murky and dark, a person is in great
darkness, and he is very far from his destiny — communion with the Most
High.

And a person must direct his efforts toward strengthening his Soul
against the power of matter, improving his condition, and elevating himself
to the level of Faith that befits him.

[3] The place where man finds himself is also material and dark.

And man's
occupation in this world can be nothing other than a material and physical
occupation, since everything in this world is material and physical.

Moreover, human nature and the structure of the human body compel us to
engage in this activity.

After all, we cannot survive without food, drink,
and other natural necessities, and we cannot satisfy these needs without a
home and property (land).

It turns out that from the perspective of the human body, the world in which
he finds himself, and his activities, he is immersed in materiality and
plunged into its darkness.After all, we cannot survive without food, drink,
and other natural necessities, and we cannot satisfy these needs without a
home and property (land).

It turns out that from the perspective of the human body, the world in which
he finds himself, and his activities, he is immersed in materiality and
plunged into its darkness.

It will take a lot of hard work and effort for him
to rise to a more purified position, being by nature doomed to this
materiality.

[4] But it was the Creator's profound intention to arrange things in such a
way that man, even when forced to be immersed in materiality, could achieve
perfection and elevation to purity and height from matter and bodily activity
itself.

And, conversely, the descent will become his ascent, and from there
he will acquire dignity and glory unlike any other, for he will turn darkness
into Light and cause the impenetrable darkness to shine.

This is because the Almighty has established boundaries and rules for man in
his use of the world and creation, and the intention that he should have in
mind when doing so.

When a person acts within those boundaries and rules and
with the intention commanded by the Creator, then that bodily and physical
action will in itself produce perfection, and with its help, perfection will
increase in a person and virtues will multiply, and he will rise from his
lowly position and rise above it.

The Supreme Wisdom took into account all the shortcomings inherent in human
nature and all the aspects of excellence and true virtue necessary for him to
be worthy of communing with the Most High and enjoying His Goodness.

Accordingly, rules and boundaries were established for man, the observance of
which would strengthen in him all that is necessary for true dignity and
remove all that distances him from God.

And if it had not been established
that man would die, then with the help of these actions, the Soul would be
strengthened and the darkness of the body weakened.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Accordingly, rules and boundaries were established for man, the observance of
which would strengthen in him all that is necessary for true dignity and
remove all that distances him from God. And if it had not been established
that man would die, then with the help of these actions, the Soul would be
strengthened and the darkness of the body weakened. Thus, the body

--- PAGE BREAK ---would be purified once and for all, and the Soul would ascend, joining the
Most High.

But since death has been decreed, it does not happen all at once (in one
birth).

However, in any case, the Soul itself is strengthened, and the body,
although not actually purified, is potentially purified, and a person
acquires the status of potential perfection, which will become a reality in
due course.

[5] These orders and boundaries are the commandments of the Most High:
prescriptive and prohibitive.

Each of them is aimed at acquiring and strengthening in a person one of the
stages of true excellence (Faith) and at eliminating one of the aspects of
darkness and shortcomings.

This happens through the fulfillment of a specific
prescriptive commandment and the Law.

The details of all commandments, and the details of each commandment
individually, are based on the truth of reality and the essence of man in all
his qualities, and on the true aspects of the required perfection.

Each
commandment has its own conditions and boundaries necessary for the
perfection of man.

The Supreme Wisdom, which knows all this in truth and knows the nature of
creatures and their proper use, took all this into account and included
everything necessary in the commandments of God, which He commanded people in
the Vedas.

[6] The root of all Wisdom is that a person should always turn to his
Creator, so that he may know and understand that he was created only to
attach himself to the Creator, and was placed in this world only to
conquer his evil nature and submit himself to the Creator by the power of
the Mind, which opposes material desires and inclinations.

A person must
control all their actions to achieve this goal, without deviating
anywhere.

[7] Everything that a person does can be divided into two categories.

The
first is
what he does because it was commanded to him by the Creator, and the second
— what he does out of necessity.--- PAGE BREAK ---

[7] Everything that a person does can be divided into two categories. The
first is
what he does because it was commanded to him by the Creator, and the second
— what he does out of necessity. That is, the first part is the whole set of
commandments (the Vedas), and the second is the use of this world by man to
achieve the Higher Goal (Immortality). The purpose of a person's fulfillment of the commandments is known: to
fulfill the Creator's commandment and carry out His will. By doing so, a
person fulfills the Will of the Creator in two ways, one following the other. First, he fulfills His will by doing what the Almighty has commanded him to
do, and he does it. Second, with the help of this commandment, he perfects
himself in one of the stages of perfection (Faith), which is the product of
this commandment. And thus the Will of the Almighty is fulfilled, for He
desires that man perfect himself and attain enjoyment of His goodness. And what a person uses from this world for their needs must, first and
foremost, not go beyond the boundaries of the Creator's Will. That is, there
should be nothing in it that God has prevented and forbidden, but only what
is necessary to sustain life in the best possible way. And this should not be
a consequence of material inclinations and a passion for excess, but rather a
preparation of the body for its use by the Soul in the service of the
Creator, so that no obstacles arise for it due to the unpreparedness and
weakness of the body. And when a person uses the world in this way, the use itself will produce
perfection, and the person will acquire true elevation through this use, just
as he acquires it by observing all the commandments. For it is also a
commandment to preserve the body and prepare it appropriately so that we may

--- PAGE BREAK ---serve the Creator with it, using the world for this purpose as
necessary.

It turns out that we elevate ourselves through such actions, and the
world itself is elevated as a result, being an assistant to man in
serving the Almighty, blessed be His Name.

[8] What a person must strengthen within himself is love for the Creator and
fear of Him.

To do this, he must reflect on His great exaltation and the
lowliness of man, bow down before Him, and be ashamed before His exaltation.

Let a person passionately desire to be one of His sons, to be glorified by
His praise, and to admire His greatness.

For love and fear of God are
powerful means that bring a person closer to his Creator, purify the darkness
of matter, ignite the Radiance of the Soul, and raise a person from elevation
to elevation until he reaches closeness to the Creator.

[9] God has given us one means that rises above all other means of
bringing man closer to Him.

This is the study of the Sacred Texts
(Vedas).

The study of the Vedas is divided into two categories: the first is
recitation and study, and the second is knowledge.

The Almighty, in His goodness, desired and compiled a collection of sayings
(prayers) for people, as His Wisdom decreed, and passed it on to people.

And
this is
— the Books of Faith (the Aryan Vedas), followed by the Books of the
Prophets (the Sages).

The nature of these sayings is such that whoever
utters them in holiness and purity, with the right intention—to fulfill
the Will of the Almighty
— the highest and greatest perfection (Spirituality) will increase in him.

And whoever strives to understand and comprehend what He has conveyed to us
from the explanations of these sayings will acquire—in proportion to his
efforts—even greater perfection.The nature of these sayings is such that whoever
utters them in holiness and purity, with the right intention—to fulfill
the Will of the Almighty
— the highest and greatest perfection (Spirituality) will increase in him.

And whoever strives to understand and comprehend what He has conveyed to us
from the explanations of these sayings will acquire—in proportion to his
efforts—even greater perfection.

And even more so, if he works hard to
comprehend the hidden part of these words and their mysteries, then each
thing from them that he understands will establish and strengthen in his
Soul (the 3rd) step of Faith from the highest (8-9) steps of Knowing God:
elevation and true perfection.

In all these things, a person not only
acquires dignity and perfection for himself, but also elevates and perfects
all creation, in general and in particular; and especially — with the help
of Faith.

[10] But the cause of all human states, both darkness and enlightenment, is
the revelation or concealment of the Light of the Most High.

For in
everything that the Lord, blessed be He, radiates His Radiance, purity
increases, and in those whom His Radiance reaches, perfection increases; the
measure of Radiance is the measure of the perfection and purity that comes
from Him.

When it is hidden, the opposite occurs.

The Lord, blessed be He, always shines upon those who draw near to Him, and
He never withholds goodness on His part.

But those who do not draw near to
Him will lack Light, and the obstacle is on the part of the recipient, not on
the part of the Most High.

And the Highest Wisdom has decreed that by fulfilling the commandments, a
person will ascend to a certain step of Faith each time.

As a result, he will
reach a certain step of Light corresponding to his level of knowledge.

Light
will give rise to a certain degree of perfection (Faith) in a person, which
is a derivative of Light.

And the opposite of this is sins.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Light
will give rise to a certain degree of perfection (Faith) in a person, which
is a derivative of Light. And the opposite of this is sins. Any action related to them, which, God
forbid, a person commits, will distance him from the Almighty by a certain
step of Faith, and a certain level of concealment of His Light and
concealment of Him will be added, and a certain step of imperfection, which
is a product of this level of concealment, will be strengthened in a person.

--- PAGE BREAK ---[11] From everything we have said above, it follows that the true purpose of
the commandments is to turn to the Creator in order to come closer to Him and
perceive His Light.

And abstaining from sins is to avoid distancing oneself
from Him, and this is their true purpose.

Chapter 5
[1] All of Creation (the 3 Worlds) is divided into two parts—the
material (Ya) and the spiritual (the worlds of Puri and Navi).

The material realm is that which can be perceived by our senses.

It is
divided into higher actions (altruism) and lower desires (egoism).

The
spiritual realm is divided into higher and lower spheres (worlds).

The
higher spheres are the Heavenly spheres (the worlds of Puri) and their
Luminaries.

The lower spheres are everything that is in the space of the
lower sphere (the world of Navi), namely: fire, heat, hunger, thirst, and
all the sinful Souls contained therein.

Spiritual entities are non-physical creatures that cannot be perceived by our
senses.

They, in turn, are divided into two categories: Souls and
transcendent entities (Angels).

Souls are a type of spiritual creature that is predestined to enter the Light
(Inglia), remain within it, connect with it through a strong bond, and
perform various actions within it at different moments in time.

Transcendent entities are a type of spiritual being that is not destined to
enter the body.

They are divided into two categories: the first is called the
Higher Powers (Archangels), the second is Angels (Gods), which are also
subdivided into various and numerous levels (God's knowledge), and they have
natural laws according to their level and degree of Faith, so that in fact we
can call them different types of one class — the class of Angels (Gods:
Aranas, Arlegis, and Legis).

However, there is one type of creature that is, as it were, intermediate
between the spiritual and the material.They are divided into two categories: the first is called the
Higher Powers (Archangels), the second is Angels (Gods), which are also
subdivided into various and numerous levels (God's knowledge), and they have
natural laws according to their level and degree of Faith, so that in fact we
can call them different types of one class — the class of Angels (Gods:
Aranas, Arlegis, and Legis).

However, there is one type of creature that is, as it were, intermediate
between the spiritual and the material.

These creatures are not perceptible
to our senses and are not limited by the boundaries of matter as we perceive
it and its laws, and from this point of view, they can be conditionally
called Spiritual.

But their essence is different from that of Angels (Gods of
Prav), although they are similar to Angels in some respects.

These creatures
have their own particular laws and special boundaries according to their True
Essence.

This species is called the evil species (the dark essences of Navi).

But it is also divided into separate types (Koshchei, Dark Legions, and
demons).

Only the human race is different and separate, being composed of two
completely different parts of creation — the Higher Soul (EGO) and the lower
body (ego), which we do not find in any other creature.

Here we must be careful not to make a mistake and think that animals are
similar to humans in this respect.

For the soul of an animal is nothing more
than a material object, one of the most subtle in materiality.

The animal
soul is also present in humans in their animal aspect.

But in addition to this, humans have a Higher Soul — a special kind of
creation, and It is completely different from the body and very distant from
it.

It entered the body and connected with it by order of the Creator for the
purpose mentioned in the previous chapters.

[2] We are familiar with material creations, and their natural laws are well
known.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It entered the body and connected with it by order of the Creator for the
purpose mentioned in the previous chapters. [2] We are familiar with material creations, and their natural laws are well
known. But it is impossible for us to describe Spiritual creations properly,
since they are beyond our imagination; and we will speak of Spiritual objects
and phenomena only according to the tradition that is in our hands.

--- PAGE BREAK ---One of the great principles we possess states that everything in the lower
worlds corresponds to transcendent forces (Higher Forces) above.

Every object
and process in our world develops from these Forces and emerges from them in
a chain of transmission (the stages of Faith) established by Higher Wisdom.

Thus, these Forces (Gods of Prav) are the roots of the lower objects
(people), which, in turn, are the branches and offspring of these Forces; and
they are connected to each other like links in a chain.

Each object or process in our world is assigned rulers from the
aforementioned kind of Angels (Gods Prav).

Their duty is to support the
existence of life or the process of ascension through the steps of Faith
(Great Ra-M-Ha) in the earthly world (Yavi), each in their own way, and to
bring about changes in it according to the Higher decree.

[3] The basis of the essence of the world (Yavi) and its true state lies
in these Higher Powers (Gods of Prav).

Everything that exists in our
physical world is the creation of the Higher Powers.

This is true both in
relation to what was in material objects from the beginning and in
relation to the changes that occur over time.

The Higher Powers (Ancient Gods) were created in the beginning, established
in a certain order, and limited by certain boundaries.

What later developed
from these Forces according to the Law of Development (Faith) established by
the Creator (Great Ra-M-Ha) corresponds to these Forces, their order, and
their boundaries.

Thus, everything that happens in the earthly (Yavi) and
lower worlds (Navi) stems from the processes taking place in these Forces.

But the essence, position, order, and all other aspects of these Forces
correspond to their true nature; and the essence, position, order, and
everything else in Spiritual objects descend and are transferred from the
Forces to those who correspond to Their true (Divine) nature.Thus, everything that happens in the earthly (Yavi) and
lower worlds (Navi) stems from the processes taking place in these Forces.

But the essence, position, order, and all other aspects of these Forces
correspond to their true nature; and the essence, position, order, and
everything else in Spiritual objects descend and are transferred from the
Forces to those who correspond to Their true (Divine) nature.

[4] According to this principle, the beginning of all that exists is
Above, in the Higher Forces (the Gods of Prav), and the end is below
(in Navi).

However, there is one exception to this rule: everything that concerns human
choice.

The Creator wanted humans to have the opportunity to freely choose
between good and evil, and therefore made them independent in this regard
from anyone else.

Conversely, the Almighty gave humans the power to be the
driving force behind changing the world itself (Yavi) and its creations
according to what they choose of their own free will.

It turns out that there are two opposing general influences in the world:
one is forced natural, and the other is elective; one is top-down, and the
other is bottom-up.

Compulsory influence is that which the lower receive from the Higher forces;
it is top-down, while elective influence is the result of human free will.

And what a person directly influences can be nothing other than material
objects, because a person is material and his actions are material.

But
because of the connection and union that exist between the Higher Forces and
material bodies, an influence on the material body will also have an effect
on the Higher Force above it.

It turns out that this influence — from the bottom up — is opposite to the
aforementioned natural influence.

However, it is important to know that not all of a person's actions are the
result of free choice.

This is true only for some of their actions, while
others are caused by a Higher Decree and serve to reward or punish the
person.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, it is important to know that not all of a person's actions are the
result of free choice. This is true only for some of their actions, while
others are caused by a Higher Decree and serve to reward or punish the
person. However, what happens to them as a result of the Decree from Above is
similar to all other processes in the world (Yavi), which move from the
bottom up. And what

--- PAGE BREAK ---happens on the part of a person's choice has an impact from above to below.

[5] And the Creator has established that everything related to a person's
choice will affect the Higher Forces to a certain degree.

That is, not only
a person's actions will affect Them, but also his speech and even his
thoughts.

But the measure of influence and its level will only be within
the limits that the Higher Wisdom has decreed and limited.

[6] However, elective influence will inevitably be followed by coercive
influence.

For since the Higher Powers have been influenced by man, they,
in turn, will exert a natural influence on the lower objects subordinate
to them.

And there are numerous specific laws in all this, befitting Creation, as
established by the Higher Wisdom in the depths of its plan (the Last
Judgment).

Both the achievement of influence from man to the Higher Forces
and the achievement of influence from these Forces to creations (people)
depend on many factors.

And according to these profound mysteries, all
spheres of His governance turn in everything that was and will be.

[7] And since the Higher Wisdom has established that there should be good
and evil (duality) in the world (Yavi), it is necessary that good should
begin in the root forces (Above), and evil from demons, and from both of
them an influence extends to the physical world (Yavi).

His Wisdom established transcendent forces (Higher Forces) — the roots of
creations — in a certain order and gave them certain properties.

This order
and these properties are such that creations can be either corrected or
corrupted.

Namely, they can be in either a good or a bad state.

The essence of a good state lies in their readiness to receive His Light
(Ingliya), and He will shine upon them; while a bad state lies in their lack
of this readiness, and the Light will be hidden from them.

The result of the "soundness" (harmony) of these Forces is goodness in our
world.The essence of a good state lies in their readiness to receive His Light
(Ingliya), and He will shine upon them; while a bad state lies in their lack
of this readiness, and the Light will be hidden from them.

The result of the "soundness" (harmony) of these Forces is goodness in our
world.

The "malfunction" (imbalance) of these Forces, on the other hand, generates
evil in our world.

[8] And it is necessary to know that the cause of all good in every
place, that is, both in the Forces and in their creations (people), is
His Radiance, and the cause of evil in any place is the concealment of
His Radiance.

With regard to good, the Lord (the Great Ra-M-Ha), blessed be He, will be
called the direct cause in general and in particular.

But with regard to
evil, we do not describe Him as the direct cause, for "the Holy One, blessed
be He, does not associate Himself with evil."
But the concealment of His Light and the hiding of His Holy Scriptures (the
Aryan Vedas) will be considered the root of evil, for this is the real cause
of evil in our world, and this is due to the lack of faith in God among the
Jews (Judas - the betrayer of the Prophet of God Almighty, JudasISM
translates as: Judah - Truth of the Earthly World [ISM]).

However, in order to realize the details (stages of Faith) of this reality,
Almighty God, for whom there are no obstacles or boundaries, created a
private Root (good) and a source of evil (the Jews).

The purpose of this
source of evil is to produce detailed aspects of evil, according to what the
Supreme Wisdom deemed necessary for the desirable state of man and the world
(Yavi).

But the root of evil is a combination of various forces from which all
aspects of evil in all its forms develop.

This can apply to both the Soul
and the body, in all their parts according to their division.

And the
combination of all these forces can act or remain inactive, completely or
partially, after His Light is hidden and concealed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This can apply to both the Soul
and the body, in all their parts according to their division. And the
combination of all these forces can act or remain inactive, completely or
partially, after His Light is hidden and concealed. For as it is
concealed, power is given to the combination of these forces or their
parts to act.

--- PAGE BREAK ---When the forces of evil grow stronger and rule (the time of Darkness), the
power of good is depleted and the state of the Higher Forces — the Roots of
creation — deteriorates; they and their branches are weakened.

And when the forces of evil are conquered and their power and action are
taken away, good will be strengthened and the Roots of creation will be
corrected, they will be brought into good working order and will be
strengthened together with their branches.

Thus, everything we have mentioned regarding the aspects of good and evil,
the opposition of Mind and matter, correction and corruption.

[9] There are many different levels of dark forces and the results of their
influence.

In general terms, the results of their influence are called:
impurity, darkness and filth, or profanity, ignorance, unawareness, etc.

And
the results of the Radiance of the Most High are called: Holiness
(Immortality) and Purity of the Soul, Light (Inglia), Goodness, etc.

All this is in general; these classes themselves are divided into many types
and particulars.

And around them revolves all the governance with which the
Lord, blessed be He, governs His world (Yavi).

And for all these things there are watchers from the race of Angels (Gods of
Prav) to implement this governance, down to the level of matter (Yavi), for
the good.

They are the children of the Creator, the executors of His word.

For He so desired and established that His decrees be carried out through the
Angels, according to how He appointed Them and what He authorized Them to do.

Part Two
Chapter 1
[1] It is well known that all creations, both higher and lower, were created
because the Supreme Wisdom saw in them a necessity and benefit for the
Supreme Purpose of creation.

And all their natural laws were established by
the Supreme Wisdom so that they would best correspond to the intention with
which they were created.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Part Two
Chapter 1
[1] It is well known that all creations, both higher and lower, were created
because the Supreme Wisdom saw in them a necessity and benefit for the
Supreme Purpose of creation. And all their natural laws were established by
the Supreme Wisdom so that they would best correspond to the intention with
which they were created. And for the same reason that creations were created,
it is necessary that they continue to exist as long as they are useful to the
whole of Creation, as we have mentioned. And therefore, the Lord, blessed be
He, who created all these creations, will not fail to watch over them and
maintain their existence in the state He desires. [2] The Ancient Vedas (Charters of Light) say that the beginning of all
creations is the Supreme God, the Great Ra-M-Ha, and from His Light, the
Ingli, all material objects develop. And material things in all their details
correspond to what is transferred to them from the Higher Light in all its
aspects, and there is nothing big or small in material things that does not
have a cause and root in some aspect of Light (everything consists of Light,
including the nucleus of an atom). And the Lord, blessed be He, supervises all Creation in the order of
creation, namely, first over the transcendental forces and over everything
that develops from them, as it is; and He also supervises the Angels
appointed by Him over the realities (worlds), as mentioned in the Vedas,
supporting their existence and their functions and continuously giving them
strength to perform their actions. [3] However, since the human race is different from all other species in that
it is given the choice and opportunity to acquire perfection or imperfection,

--- PAGE BREAK ---and in this respect it is active and influential, rather than influenced,
therefore the supervision of man must differ from the supervision of other
species, for it is necessary to supervise and oversee the details of his
actions, rewarding him according to his ways and the fruit of his actions.

It turns out that all his actions and their results are subject to
supervision, and after that, in turn, he is supervised according to the
results of each of these actions and is rewarded measure for measure,
according to the Law of Karma, as mentioned in the Vedas.

This is not the case for any species other than humans.

Representatives of
other species do not act on their own, but are influenced.

They exist only to
support the existence of the species as a whole, according to what is laid
down in its spiritual roots.

Providence will support the existence of this Root and its branches according
to the nature and law of this Root.

But over the human race, whose
representatives are active and influential, as we have mentioned, detailed
supervision is necessary according to what their actions will entail, no more
and no less.

Chapter 2
[1] It has already been said that the purpose of the creation of the human
race is that it may be worthy of and attain the True Good—communion with
God—in the Future World (Eternal Life).

Thus, the end of all human
wanderings is Bliss in the Future World.

But the Highest Wisdom has decreed that it is necessary and proper for man to
first dwell in this world, bound and limited by the natural laws of this
world.

And this will be a real and worthy preparation for achieving the
desired goal.

And according to this principle, the Highest Wisdom established
all aspects of this world so that they would serve as preparation for what
will come later in the Spiritual world, which is the Highest Goal.

[2] This preparation revolves around two poles: one is individual and the
other is general.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And according to this principle, the Highest Wisdom established
all aspects of this world so that they would serve as preparation for what
will come later in the Spiritual world, which is the Highest Goal. [2] This preparation revolves around two poles: one is individual and the
other is general. The individual pole is a matter of a person acquiring
perfection through their actions, and the general pole is the preparation of
the entire human race as a whole for the Spiritual world. And the explanation for this question is as follows. Since the human race
was created with both good and evil tendencies and freedom of choice, it is
possible that some individuals will be good and some will be bad. And in the
end, the bad must be rejected, and the good must be gathered together, and
they will be made into one community, which is destined for the Future World
and the True Good that can be attained in it. [3] The law of free will necessitates the possibility that some parts of the
human race will be good and some will be bad. This same law necessitates the
same possibility in the actions of each individual person. It is possible
that all the actions of an individual will be good, or all bad, or perhaps
some will be good and some bad. And this is one of the reasons delaying the
aforementioned gathering of the perfect. For the same person may have both
good and bad sides; to take into account only some of them and discard the
rest, even if those taken into account constitute the majority, would be an
unjust judgment. For, according to justice, all actions must be rewarded,
both great and small, whether many or few. Therefore, the Highest Wisdom has decided to divide the reward — both reward
and punishment — into two periods and two places, that is, that all deeds

--- PAGE BREAK ---will be divided into a majority and a minority.

And the majority will be
judged separately, in a place and at a time appropriate to them, and the
minority will be judged separately, in a place and at a time appropriate to
them.

However, true retribution and its main part will be in the future, in the
Spiritual world, and the reward for the deserving person will be Eternal Life
and communion with the Blessed for ever and ever, and the punishment will be
rejection from the True Good (Paradise) and the disappearance of His Light.

And the Judgment will be according to the majority of deeds.

But for the good
deeds of the wicked and for the bad deeds of the righteous, as a minority,
there exists this world with its successes and misfortunes.

In it, the
villain will receive retribution for the minority of merits he has in the
form of successes in this world; and the righteous will receive punishment
for their sins in the form of suffering.

Thus, the Judgment will acquire
overall integrity, and what is appropriate for this perfect state will remain
for the Future World.

Namely, only the righteous will remain, without any
villains among them, and they (the righteous) themselves will have no
obstacles (i.e., sins) to future enjoyment; and the villains will be rejected
and disappear without any claims remaining.

[4] And the Blessed One, in His goodness, decided to multiply the chances of
the sons of men to achieve their goal: that there should be another kind of
purification for those who are capable of purification, that is, for those in
whom evil has greatly increased, but not so much that their sentence would be
complete destruction.

This purification is a set of punishments, the most
well-known of which is torment in Hell (Fire).[4] And the Blessed One, in His goodness, decided to multiply the chances of
the sons of men to achieve their goal: that there should be another kind of
purification for those who are capable of purification, that is, for those in
whom evil has greatly increased, but not so much that their sentence would be
complete destruction.

This purification is a set of punishments, the most
well-known of which is torment in Hell (Fire).

The idea is to punish the
sinner for his sins in such a way that after receiving punishment, he will no
longer have a "debt" for the bad deeds he has committed, and he will then be
able to receive true reward for his remaining good deeds.

It turns out that, thanks to these punishments, very few will actually be
destroyed, for they will be only those in whom evil has grown so strong that
it is impossible in any way to find a place for them to remain in True Reward
and Eternal Delight.

Thus, the Court is divided into three parts.

Its main part is in the
Spiritual World after resurrection, as mentioned; but deeds for which reward
or punishment should be given earlier will be rewarded in this world (Yavi)
and in the Spiritual World.

The details of this Judgment are known only to
the True Judge, for He knows the true essence of human deeds and their
consequences in all their aspects and particulars; He knows which of them
should be rewarded at one time and in one way, and which at another time and
in another way.

We know only the general outlines of this administration:
what it is based on and what it revolves around.

As already explained, the
purpose of all this is to gather an Assembly of the perfect, who will be
worthy of eternal communion with God, blessed be He; and in order for this to
be concluded properly, all these preliminary things were necessary to prepare
for the completion, as we have mentioned.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We know only the general outlines of this administration:
what it is based on and what it revolves around. As already explained, the
purpose of all this is to gather an Assembly of the perfect, who will be
worthy of eternal communion with God, blessed be He; and in order for this to
be concluded properly, all these preliminary things were necessary to prepare
for the completion, as we have mentioned. [5] If we delve deeper into this question, we will see that, in addition
to being defined (punishment for sins) by the Law of Karma and justice, it
is also based on human nature. We have already explained that good deeds strengthen perfection and
excellence in the human soul and body. On the other hand, bad deeds
strengthen turbidity and imperfection in a person — all this corresponds
exactly to the deeds themselves: no more and no less. A righteous person greatly increases the Radiance and superiority over
ignorance (ego) within himself. But, on the other hand, there may be some
admixture of

--- PAGE BREAK ---darkness and turbidity in him because of his bad deeds.

And as long as this
admixture is in him, he is not ready and not worthy to commune with God.

And so, in His supreme goodness, He decreed that there should be purification
for man: suffering.

The nature of suffering is to remove this cloudiness from
man so that he remains pure and clear, ready to receive good at the
appropriate time.

The amount of suffering necessary for the purification of a
person depends on the degree of cloudiness that a person has acquired through
his deeds.

And it is possible that physical suffering alone will not be able
to remove the cloudiness from a person, and he will need mental suffering.

There are many details in all this, and it is impossible for the human mind
to comprehend them all.

[6] Complete villains are those in whom, as a result of their evil deeds,
such great turbidity and such great Darkness have taken root that they
have truly been destroyed in Soul and body and have become unworthy in any
way to cling to the Blessed One.

And it is possible that there are a few good deeds in their hands.

However,
these are deeds which, when placed on the scales of the Almighty's justice,
cannot tip the scales in the direction of true good for those who committed
them, either in terms of their quantity or their quality.

For if they
outweighed the bad, these people would no longer be considered complete
villains, but would be among those who are purifying themselves to a state of
readiness for good.

But in order to avoid injustice, if good deeds remain unrewarded, it was
established that they would be rewarded in this world, as we mentioned.

And
it turns out that this merit dries up and proves unable to strengthen any
true dignity in the villain.

[7] But there is another very important detail in this matter.And
it turns out that this merit dries up and proves unable to strengthen any
true dignity in the villain.

[7] But there is another very important detail in this matter.

In the future
Assembly of the Perfect, which was mentioned, it is not meant that everyone
will be on the same level of Faith and will attain the same Knowledge
(Knowledge of God).

But the fact is that the Highest Wisdom has measured how
far the last edge can reach, that is, the smallest measure in the communion
with the Blessed One and the enjoyment of His perfection.

And accordingly, it
has been established that anyone whose deeds reach this minimum measure will
be counted among this Assembly and will be among those who remain forever to
enjoy Him.

But those who do not attain purification will be completely
rejected by God and destroyed in the Fire.

And the greater a person's merits,
the greater and more exalted he will be in this Assembly.

The depth of the Creator's plan is that a person will be the complete owner
of his Good, both in general and in particular.

That is, not only will he be
worthy of Good only after achieving it through his own labor, but even the
particular share that will be given to him will correspond exactly to his
deeds.

It turns out that a person will occupy precisely that level of Faith which he
has chosen and placed himself on.

And there will be higher and lower, great
and small in this Assembly, but only the person himself will be the cause of
his elevation or humiliation, so that he will have no claims whatsoever
against another.

[8] There is another important aspect of the Judgment of a person's actions:
it is necessary to judge which of them will lead to the elevation of a
person in the aforementioned Assembly of the perfect, and it is necessary to
determine the extent of this elevation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And there will be higher and lower, great
and small in this Assembly, but only the person himself will be the cause of
his elevation or humiliation, so that he will have no claims whatsoever
against another. [8] There is another important aspect of the Judgment of a person's actions:
it is necessary to judge which of them will lead to the elevation of a
person in the aforementioned Assembly of the perfect, and it is necessary to
determine the extent of this elevation. For there are actions which,
according to the Highest precise and righteous law, will not bring a person
elevation in the Spiritual world, but will be repaid in this world. And then
such a person will remain among the lowly in Eternity, among the small in
that Assembly. They are somewhat reminiscent of the villains mentioned
above, who receive their reward in this

--- PAGE BREAK ---world and are destroyed in the Future world, but they differ from them in one
major way.

This difference is that for complete villains, all the power of
their good deeds is embodied in the reward of this world, and they do not
reach Eternity (Svarog) at all.

The righteous, on the other hand, are led to
Eternity by their actions, and even if they have to go through a very great
spiritual purification, they still have a share in the Spiritual world
(Pravī).

But because of the corruption of their deeds, the commandments they
have fulfilled make it possible for them to receive the small share we have
mentioned, and many of their merits are rewarded in this world.

And if,
according to the Law, it were to be that they would be rewarded for these
merits in the Spiritual world, and not in this world, then these people would
be on one of the highest steps of Faith in the Assembly of the Perfect.

[9] Everything said so far clarifies the problem of the suffering of the
righteous and the serenity of the wicked in this world.

We also see that the
punishment of Souls is part of the preparation for true retribution in the
Future (Spiritual) world.

However, the good received by the righteous in this
world has a different origin.

Everything in this world (Yavi) corresponds to the general preparation of all
humanity as a whole for the Future (Spiritual) world.

But the preparation of
each person individually follows a different path.

Chapter 3
[1] We have already discussed that the service to God entrusted to man
depends on the fact that good and evil have been created in the world, and
man is placed between them in order to choose good.

But the categories of good, like the categories of evil, are very numerous.

After all, every good quality belongs to good, and vice versa — every bad
quality belongs to evil.But the categories of good, like the categories of evil, are very numerous.

After all, every good quality belongs to good, and vice versa — every bad
quality belongs to evil.

For example, pride belongs to the category of evil,
and modesty to the category of good; mercy belongs to the category of good,
and cruelty to the opposite category; moderation and contentment with one's
lot belong to the category of good, and the opposite quality to the category
of evil; and so on with all other details of qualities.

The Supreme Wisdom measured all the details of the qualities that should be
possible in human nature according to the main Purpose, produced all these
qualities in all their aspects, their causes and consequences and everything
that accompanies them, and established their possibility in man.

However, for all these things to take place, various states of people were
necessary to serve as a test for them.

These states must create space for
the manifestation of all the details of the categories of evil and for man
to overcome them in order to adhere to good qualities.

For example, if all people were equal—there were no rich or poor—then there
would be no place in man for either mercy or cruelty.

But now, since they
exist, the rich will be tested by their wealth: will they show cruelty to the
poor who need them, or will they pity them?

And the poor will also be tested:
will they be content with what they have and thank the Almighty, or will they
do the opposite?

And wealth will also be a test for the rich: whether he will
become proud because of it, whether he will pursue the vanities of the world,
abandoning the service of the Creator, may He be blessed, or whether, with
all his wealth, he will be humble and submissive and despise the vanity of
this world, choosing Faith (the Great Ra-M-Ha) and service.

And so it is in
all other matters.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And wealth will also be a test for the rich: whether he will
become proud because of it, whether he will pursue the vanities of the world,
abandoning the service of the Creator, may He be blessed, or whether, with
all his wealth, he will be humble and submissive and despise the vanity of
this world, choosing Faith (the Great Ra-M-Ha) and service. And so it is in
all other matters. The Supreme Wisdom divided all these aspects among the representatives of the
human race, as it deemed appropriate and worthy in the depths of its plan. It
turns out that each person has a special share in

--- PAGE BREAK ---trial and war with evil, and this is his purpose and his burden in this
world.

He must endure this trial as it is.

His deeds will be judged by the
justice of the Almighty, according to the burden that was actually given to
man in all its aspects, with utmost precision.

This is similar to the
servants of a king, who are all under his command, and all of them together
must perform the service of his kingdom: he gives each of them a certain
part of the work, so that through their joint efforts, all the necessary
parts of the work will be completed.

And each of the voluntary servants is
responsible for performing the part of the service that has been assigned to
him, and according to how he performs the task entrusted to him, so shall
the King reward him.

But the measure of this division and His ways are beyond our comprehension.

Only the Highest Wisdom, exalted above all minds, has measured them and
established them in the most perfect way.

[2] All objects in this world are attracted and projected in a chain: from
their existence in transcendental forces to their existence in materiality,
as explained above.

Therefore, the root of all details of human experience
lies in transcendental forces, according to their corresponding realities of
soundness and corruption, as described above.

And according to their
condition there, they are judged and determined to spread and be realized in
materiality in their corresponding objects.

And this division encompasses all
the details of existence according to their levels of Faith.

The Supreme Wisdom took into account all these details of the test and,
according to their true essence, established what is most appropriate and
worthy, and this is clear according to the principles we have discussed.

[3] According to this principle, the fortunes and misfortunes of this
world exist so that a person may be tested with a certain amount of trials
that the Highest Wisdom has deemed appropriate for that person.The Supreme Wisdom took into account all these details of the test and,
according to their true essence, established what is most appropriate and
worthy, and this is clear according to the principles we have discussed.

[3] According to this principle, the fortunes and misfortunes of this
world exist so that a person may be tested with a certain amount of trials
that the Highest Wisdom has deemed appropriate for that person.

[4] But there is another reason for good fortune and misfortune, based on
judgment and retribution.

The Supreme Judge has decreed that one of the
consequences of a person's actions will be help from the Blessed One—to make
it easier for him to achieve perfection and save him from stumbling blocks,
as it is said: "He will preserve the steps of His pious ones."
But, of course, there are also many stages (details) in this.

For there may
be a person who, according to the deeds he has already done, will be entitled
by law to a small amount of help from the Creator, and another who will be
deemed to receive a great deal of help from Him and will be greatly
facilitated in achieving perfection, and a third who will be granted the
greatest amount of help.

And vice versa: there may be one who, according to the Law, is not entitled
to help from Heaven, but it will not be difficult for him to achieve
perfection, and another, who will face multiplied obstacles according to the
verdict, and will need great effort and diligence to achieve perfection, and
a third — a complete villain, before whom all doors of correction will be
closed, and in his villainy he will be rejected.

And there are many details
and details of details in all this.

It turns out that perhaps a person will be honored and given good fortune in
this world to help him in his service, so that it will be easy for him to
achieve the desired perfection without overcoming obstacles.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And there are many details
and details of details in all this. It turns out that perhaps a person will be honored and given good fortune in
this world to help him in his service, so that it will be easy for him to
achieve the desired perfection without overcoming obstacles. Or perhaps he will be punished for his deeds with losses and misfortunes that
will stand before him like a wall, separating him from perfection, so that it
will require great effort and hard work on his part to overcome this
obstacle, strengthen himself in all his cares, and still achieve perfection.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The opposite of this is the villain.

It is possible that he will be granted
good fortune in order to open before him the gates of destruction, into which
he will be cast; or it is possible that he will be granted misfortune in
order to prevent him from carrying out the evil deeds he has planned.

This
may happen when the Supreme Ruler decides that, for some reason, these evil
deeds should not be carried out.

The Creator does all this in His wonderful Wisdom, according to what is best
for all His creations, and He judges all creations according to their true
state.

That is, for example, the situation of one who does not experience
difficulties, and nevertheless is careless in his duties, is not the same as
the situation of one who does not perform the task entrusted to him, being
constrained and under pressure.

Their judgment will not be the same, but each
will be judged according to what he truly is: whether he acts out of error or
malice, under duress or of his own free will.

And He knows the true state of
all things, actions and thoughts, and judges them according to the truth.

[5] From this principle arises another consequence in the realm of suffering.

For it is possible that there may be a righteous person who has sins to his
name, or an average (ordinary) person who has an equal share of sins and good
deeds, and it will be decreed to awaken them to repentance.

Then suffering
will be sent to them from Heaven so that they may pay attention to their
actions and analyze them.

But this suffering is not the suffering of
atonement mentioned above, the purpose of which is to atone for sins in this
world, but the suffering of awakening, to awaken the heart to repentance.

For
punishments are created only for cases where there is no repentance; but the
Most High desires that man should not sin, and if he sins, he should repent,
and if he does not repent, he should be purified by punishments so that he
does not perish.But this suffering is not the suffering of
atonement mentioned above, the purpose of which is to atone for sins in this
world, but the suffering of awakening, to awaken the heart to repentance.

For
punishments are created only for cases where there is no repentance; but the
Most High desires that man should not sin, and if he sins, he should repent,
and if he does not repent, he should be purified by punishments so that he
does not perish.

And therefore, suffering will come first to awaken them, and
if a person is not awakened by it, then he will be punished with the
suffering of purification, and the Prophet said about this: "And He will open
their ears to instruction, and tell them to turn away from evil."
[6] And it is necessary to know that a limit has been set for the wicked,
how long they will be allowed to do evil in their bad choices.

And when they
reach this limit, they will not be delayed at all, and they (the wicked)
will perish from the face of the Earth.

And until that time, it is possible that the wicked man will continue to
prosper for the reason mentioned above: to open the gates of destruction for
him.

And the Sages said about this: "For those who come to defile themselves,
the gates of Hell are opened." But when he reaches this limit, he will attain
destruction and perish in his sins, and then the wrath of the Most High will
be kindled, and destruction will fall upon the villain, in which he will be
destroyed.

[7] It is also necessary to know that the Higher Providence takes into
account all circumstances related to every detail: both what precedes it and
what follows it.

The impact of each element on the whole community is
calculated, and the way each element relates to others in the structure of
Creation as a whole is taken into account.

In the Court, each person's level and position is taken into account in
relation to what preceded them, what will follow them, and what they are
currently connected to.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The impact of each element on the whole community is
calculated, and the way each element relates to others in the structure of
Creation as a whole is taken into account. In the Court, each person's level and position is taken into account in
relation to what preceded them, what will follow them, and what they are
currently connected to. And after all this is taken into account, their share
of service to God and trials will be determined, as we mentioned above, and
they will be given a burden (trials) to serve before the Creator. But this applies only to the Court in this world. This means that a person
will be assigned his share of service to God, namely, what position he will
occupy in this world. And this position will correspond to his burden
(trials).

--- PAGE BREAK ---But in the Future (Spiritual) world, a person is judged only by his deeds,
according to the position he was in, and the Prophet said about this: "The
son shall not bear the sin of the father."
So, for example, if a person is honored with greatness and wealth, his
children will be born rich, and if circumstances do not change, they will
remain rich and noble, and vice versa.

It turns out that this wealth came to the children only because they were the
sons of those fathers.

But the true essence of the matter is that a person bestows upon his children
the things listed by the Sages.

And it is possible that a person will be born
with goodness from the fact that his father already has it, and it is also
possible that, due to his father's merit, goodness will come to him at some
point, or vice versa.

On the other hand, it is possible that salvation or
goodness will be decreed for him because of the offspring that will come from
him in the future.

It is also possible that goodness or evil will be decreed
for a person in this world because of the place where he lives or because of
his surroundings.

[8] And, in addition to all this, there is another aspect that follows from
the two aforementioned aspects of governance: individual and general.

When the Supreme Wisdom looked at everything necessary to correct the type
from which the aforementioned Assembly of the Perfect would be composed, it
saw that it was very appropriate for one part of the people to be in a
position to help the other part and to reward them with good.

That is, not only those who achieve perfection on their own will be among
those who enter the Assembly of the inhabitants of the Future (Spiritual)
world.

But also those whose deeds allow them to enjoy perfection while being
dependent on another, more worthy than themselves, will enter this
community.

However, they will be on the lowest level of Faith — the level of
dependence on another.But also those whose deeds allow them to enjoy perfection while being
dependent on another, more worthy than themselves, will enter this
community.

However, they will be on the lowest level of Faith — the level of
dependence on another.

It turns out that only those who are unworthy of enjoying either on their own
or while depending on another will be rejected from perfection; and it turns
out that salvation is great, and those who enjoy will multiply.

However,
those who enjoy themselves and allow others to enjoy themselves will, of
course, be the greatest in this Assembly, and they will be the leaders, while
those who are forced to depend on them will be subordinate to them and need
them.

And in order to make room for this great correction, the Higher Wisdom
initially connected people with one another.

The Sages said about this: "All
people are responsible for one another." And because of this, it turns out
that we are all connected with one another and do not isolate ourselves.

And
the measure of good always exceeds, and if they are punished for each other's
sins, then all the more they will help each other with their merits.

According to this principle, it is established that a righteous person may
suffer misfortune and suffering, and this will be the atonement for his
generation.

And it is the duty of the righteous to accept with love the
sufferings that befall him for the benefit of his generation, as he would
accept with love the sufferings that would befall him himself.

By this he
repays his generation, which he atones for, and he himself is greatly
exalted and becomes one of the leaders in the assembly of the inhabitants of
the Future World, as mentioned.

In this category of suffering, there is another type that is higher than the
one mentioned above.--- PAGE BREAK ---

By this he
repays his generation, which he atones for, and he himself is greatly
exalted and becomes one of the leaders in the assembly of the inhabitants of
the Future World, as mentioned. In this category of suffering, there is another type that is higher than the
one mentioned above. For the type mentioned above consists in the righteous
person being beaten for his generation, which was worthy of great punishment
and close to destruction or death, and he atones for them with his suffering,
saves them in this world, and also helps them in the World to Come.

--- PAGE BREAK ---But there are also sufferings that are given to the most pious, who have
already attained their own perfection.

Their purpose is to help the entire
aggregate of the Spheres of Governance attain the end—perfection.

The explanation of this matter is as follows.

According to the first order
established for the governance of the world and its transformations, man had
to endure minor suffering so that he and the whole world together with him
could attain perfection.

This circumstance arises and stems from the
concealment of the Light of the Most High and His concealment, which is one
of the fundamental foundations of human existence, as we mentioned in the
Vedas (The Book of Radiance - ZoAR).

Moreover, when the damage to the world multiplied due to the great and
powerful sins that were committed in it, the concealment and hiding of
goodness multiplied even more: the world and its inhabitants found themselves
in a lowly and evil position, and now it is necessary that through the
transformations that His wonderful Wisdom arranges in the world, its elements
achieve correction.

And one of the foundations of these transformations is that people receive
punishments commensurate with their wickedness until the Attribute of Justice
is satisfied.

And the Lord, blessed be He, has decreed that perfect and significant people
will be able to atone for the sins of others, as we have mentioned, and the
Attribute of Justice will strike them instead of striking the whole world.

But since they themselves are perfect and worthy of good and suffer only for
others, the Attribute of Justice will certainly be satisfied with a small
measure of punishment for them, instead of a great punishment for sinners.

And, moreover, because of this, their merits increase and their (spiritual)
power multiplies, which further increases their ability to correct what has
been distorted by others.But since they themselves are perfect and worthy of good and suffer only for
others, the Attribute of Justice will certainly be satisfied with a small
measure of punishment for them, instead of a great punishment for sinners.

And, moreover, because of this, their merits increase and their (spiritual)
power multiplies, which further increases their ability to correct what has
been distorted by others.

Namely, they will correct not only their own
generation, but all the damage done to the world since sinners appeared in it
until now.

And, of course, after that, they will be in the Assembly of the perfect, the
first of the first and the closest to the Blessed One.

[9] Everything we have discussed so far from the perspective of justice can
also be explained from the perspective of the true order of reality.

For because of the sins in people and in the world, filth multiplies and
intensifies, which leads to the concealment of His Light, which will be
increasingly hidden.

And as this filth is removed and creatures are cleansed
of it, His Light will gradually be revealed again.

Suffering purifies the filth in man and in the community.

With the help of
the suffering of the righteous, this filth is scraped off and removed from
all of Creation as a whole, and, step by step, the world approaches
perfection.

[10] There is another principle in the governance of this world.

The Supreme
Wisdom has established that salvation should be multiplied by the fact that
the same Soul will come into the world several times in different bodies and
thus be able to correct in one life what it has spoiled in another, or
complete what it has not yet completed.

But at the end of all the Soul's reincarnations, at the Last Judgment, it
will be judged according to everything that happened to it in all its
reincarnations and in all the situations in which it found itself.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Supreme
Wisdom has established that salvation should be multiplied by the fact that
the same Soul will come into the world several times in different bodies and
thus be able to correct in one life what it has spoiled in another, or
complete what it has not yet completed. But at the end of all the Soul's reincarnations, at the Last Judgment, it
will be judged according to everything that happened to it in all its
reincarnations and in all the situations in which it found itself. And it is possible that certain events in the life of a person whose Soul is
reincarnating will occur as a result of his actions in a previous
incarnation. And this person's position in the world will be determined
accordingly, and in accordance with the position established for him, a
burden will be placed on him, as we mentioned above.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Court of the Blessed One judges each person as they are, in all aspects,
that is, in all details of their situation.

In the Future World, which is
true goodness, no one will be blamed for something they truly did not do.

But in this world, they will be given a burden and a purpose measured out by
the Highest Wisdom, and their deeds will be judged accordingly.

The details of the aspects of the transmigration of Souls (reincarnation)
are numerous.

A person will be judged according to what he represents in
this transmigration and what was in the previous one — all according to the
true and direct Law (karma).

It is said about this: "The Rock, His work is
perfect, for all His ways are truth, God is faithful, and there is no
injustice in Him; He is righteous and upright."
Creations do not possess knowledge capable of comprehending His thoughts and
the depth of His plan.

Along with other general principles, we know only this
general principle: that one of the sources of what happens to people in this
world is the transmigration of souls, which occurs according to the laws and
rules that the Creator has established for the perfection of all humanity.

[11] According to all that we have explained, there are various,
successive causes in this world for the good and bad events that happen to
people.

But it is not the case that every event that occurs follows from all of
these causes.

Rather, each of these causes gives rise to certain events in
this world: some events arise from one cause, and others from another.

But the Supreme Wisdom, which knows everything and constantly observes
everything that is necessary for the correction of all creation, weighs all
these things together in the depths of its plan and, according to this,
governs the world in all its details.

For in reality, it is impossible for all these causes to always produce their
effects in equal measure, since one of them will often negate another.But the Supreme Wisdom, which knows everything and constantly observes
everything that is necessary for the correction of all creation, weighs all
these things together in the depths of its plan and, according to this,
governs the world in all its details.

For in reality, it is impossible for all these causes to always produce their
effects in equal measure, since one of them will often negate another.

For
example, it is possible that, according to the merits of his fathers, a
certain person deserves wealth, according to his personal actions — poverty,
and according to the general distribution — either wealth or poverty.

And
even according to his own actions: if a person does one thing, it will be
decided that some good will come to him, and for another action it will be
decided that he will be deprived of this good.

But Supreme Wisdom weighs and decides everything in the best way possible,
and sends each person situations that are the products of various
combinations of these causes.

That is, each event is generated by its own
group of causes, but no event can happen to a person that is not a
consequence of one of the above-mentioned causes.

Still, it is impossible for
a person to know all the details, and we already know a lot if we know the
rules (laws) of all these things according to their types.

[12] But it should be known that there are two types of events that happen
to people: one type is purposeful events, and the second is intermediate
events.

Targeted events are those that are decreed for a person as due to
him for one of the aforementioned reasons, and intermediate events are those
that happen to him so that through them another event that is due to him may
happen.

The Prophet said about this: "I will thank You, Lord, for You were
angry with me," which, according to the Sages, refers to a man whose cow
broke its leg and fell, and he found a treasure under it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Targeted events are those that are decreed for a person as due to
him for one of the aforementioned reasons, and intermediate events are those
that happen to him so that through them another event that is due to him may
happen. The Prophet said about this: "I will thank You, Lord, for You were
angry with me," which, according to the Sages, refers to a man whose cow
broke its leg and fell, and he found a treasure under it. Or, through an
intermediate event, a person will avoid an accident that should not befall
him, as in the example of a man who was late for a ship, and the ship sank
in the sea. These intermediate events may

--- PAGE BREAK ---happen to the person himself, or they may be for the needs of another
person, so that through them good or evil may happen to him.

Just as Supreme Wisdom measures out what a person must experience, it also
measures out the means by which this will happen.

So everything is set with
the utmost precision to achieve true good.

Chapter 4
[1] One of the profound concepts in His management of the world is the
concept of the status of the Rus (RUS) and other peoples.

From the point of
view of human nature, all people seem completely identical, but from the
point of view of Faith (Knowledge of God), they are very different and
separated from each other like two completely different species.

[2] The first people (Aryans) before sin were in an unusually exalted state
compared to what man is today, and we have already explained this issue.

In
this state, humanity occupied a very honorable position of Faith, befitting
its exalted eternal dignity.

And if people had not sinned, they would have
perfected themselves and ascended, passing from level (step) to level (step)
of God's Knowledge.

And in that blessed state, it was fitting for the first people (Aryans) to
produce a certain number of descendants.

This number was measured by the
Wisdom of the Creator, according to the truth of what is fitting for the
perfection of those who enjoy His Goodness.

And all these future generations
would enjoy that Goodness together with the Angels (Aryans).

The Almighty also decreed that all generations that the Aryans were to
produce would be divided into separate levels of God's Knowledge.

That is,
there would be primary and secondary ones among them, "roots" and "branches,"
originating from one another in a certain order, like trees and their
branches; and the number of "trees" and the number of "branches" were
measured with extreme precision.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Almighty also decreed that all generations that the Aryans were to
produce would be divided into separate levels of God's Knowledge. That is,
there would be primary and secondary ones among them, "roots" and "branches,"
originating from one another in a certain order, like trees and their
branches; and the number of "trees" and the number of "branches" were
measured with extreme precision. But, having sinned, people descended to a very low level of Faith, and a
great measure of darkness and confusion entered into them, and the entire
human race fell from its high level of Faith and occupied a very low level of
Faith, unworthy of the Exalted and Eternal Level originally intended for it. Man became only capable of a much lower level of Faith, and in this capacity
he begot offspring in the world, all at the aforementioned low level of
Knowledge of God. However, despite all this, from the perspective of its true Root, the human
race did not lose the Higher aspect of those aspects it possessed at the
moment of committing sin. Man was not rejected by the Higher Ones completely,
to the extent that he cannot return to the Higher level of Faith, but he is
currently at the lowest level of Faith, possessing the potential to rise to
the Higher level of Faith — Immortality. The Lord has given man a choice: the opportunity to strengthen himself and
try to raise himself from the lowly step of Faith and ascend to the Highest
step. He has given them the time that the Highest Wisdom has deemed
appropriate for this effort, just as it now deems it appropriate for us to
attain perfection and the level of Faith in the assembly of the possessors of
the Future World, as mentioned above. For every effort must have a limit. [3] And the Highest Wisdom deemed it appropriate to divide this effort
between
the "roots" and the "branches." That is, so that first there would be time
for the effort of

--- PAGE BREAK ---"root" offspring (Rus), and then for those belonging to the "branches." For
then the entire human race would have a chance to return to its original
position and correct the corruption that had appeared in it.

And according to
the order of governance, it was necessary that first the "roots" and heads of
human offspring be strengthened on the corrected level of Faith, and then not
only they, but also their "branches" would be on it, for branches always
follow the root.

The time for this effort for the "roots" was limited, and those of the Great
Race who would be worthy of the opening of the gates of Heavenly Asgard and
who would be able to achieve this — to prepare themselves properly — would be
able to become one of the good and precious "roots." Then he would be
prepared for the exalted level of Faith that befits a person in a good,
rather than a corrupt state.

This person would also achieve what would be
given to him to produce descendants worthy of him, that is, those who already
occupy the level of Faith and the position that he has already attained in
his existence as a "root."
This era stretched from the first people (the Aryans) to the time of the
Separation (the Great Transition of the Aryans from Daaria [Hyperborea] to
the lands of Holy Rus [Asia]).

And all this time, there were righteous people
in Asia (Holy Rus) who publicly spoke the truth and warned everyone of the
need for correction.

And since during the Separation the "cup of human sins was overflowing," the
Righteous Judge decided that the time of "root" effort should end, and that
the end of all things would be determined in accordance with what befits them
as "root" objects based on what had already happened up to that point.

Then
He looked upon all people, determined all the stages of Faith (trials) that
needed to be established for these people according to their deeds, and
established these stages of Faith in their "fundamental" capacity.And since during the Separation the "cup of human sins was overflowing," the
Righteous Judge decided that the time of "root" effort should end, and that
the end of all things would be determined in accordance with what befits them
as "root" objects based on what had already happened up to that point.

Then
He looked upon all people, determined all the stages of Faith (trials) that
needed to be established for these people according to their deeds, and
established these stages of Faith in their "fundamental" capacity.

And so, based on how they were arranged, it was decided that they would
produce offspring possessing qualities that were deemed appropriate for this
"root." And they all turned out to be established species in the world, each
with its own laws and nature, like all other species of creation, and they
were given to produce offspring according to their nature and their aspects,
like all other species.

And so, according to the Highest Court, it turned out that they were all
worthy of remaining at the low level of Faith, to which man and his offspring
had descended because of sin (the murder of Yeshua [Joshua] by the Jews).

Only one race (the Rus) was chosen for its deeds, rose up, and was deemed
worthy of becoming the distinguished and precious Tree, corresponding to the
highest level of Faith of humanity, and it was given to produce "branches" in
accordance with its Aryan (Divine) nature.

It was then that the world was
divided into many tribes: each at a known level of Faith, but all together,
in terms of their human essence, in a lowly state; and Asia (Holy Rus) was in
an exalted state until the Age of Darkness and was called the Holy Land.

But after the onset of the Age of Darkness, the Gates of the "roots" — the
forefathers of the Aryans — were closed, and conversion and control began in
the "branches" — the descendants, in each
"branch" according to its nature.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was then that the world was
divided into many tribes: each at a known level of Faith, but all together,
in terms of their human essence, in a lowly state; and Asia (Holy Rus) was in
an exalted state until the Age of Darkness and was called the Holy Land. But after the onset of the Age of Darkness, the Gates of the "roots" — the
forefathers of the Aryans — were closed, and conversion and control began in
the "branches" — the descendants, in each
"branch" according to its nature. It turns out that, although at first glance
we seem to be equal to our Ancestors, in reality this is not the case: before
the Division, there was the time of the "roots" — the forefathers of humanity
(the Aryans) — and all events took place in a just manner, but when the time
of Light came to an end, everything was established according to the law of
Darkness, and another time began — the time of the
"branches" (Jews). [4] But in His great kindness and goodwill, the Creator decided and allowed
even the "branches" of other nations, if they so desired, to choose and

--- PAGE BREAK ---actions, to uproot themselves from their dark "root" (Judaism) and enter into
the community of the Holy "branches" (to accept the Aryan Faith).

But if they
(the Jews) do not try to correct all that they have done, they will remain
under the power of darkness (Satan) and will be rejected from the Assembly of
the righteous forever and ever.

[5] And it is necessary to know that, just as all of humanity is divided into
"root trees" and their "branches," so too in each "tree" itself there are
distinguishable main branches from which all other details originate and
branch off.

The tree of the Aryans has four main branches: the Rasseni, the Da'Aryans,
the SvyatoRUSy, and the Kh'Aryans (abbreviated as RASA/RUSA).

These are the
ones who came out of Daaria (Hyperborea) and formed the people of Asia; they
were also scattered throughout the Earth.

All the tribes that came after them
are considered children (descendants) and offspring of the main branches
(Arians).

It was the Rus (direct descendants of the Arians) who were given
the Aryan Faith, and this tree (tribe) came to be called the chosen people of
God Almighty.

The Holy One, blessed be He, did a great good to all nations by delaying the
Judgment upon them until the time of the granting of the Faith (Vedas) and
bypassed everyone with the Faith so that they would accept It.

And if the
Jews had accepted It, then they would still have had the opportunity to rise
from the lowly step of Faith.

But since the Jews do not want it, their
Judgment will be carried out to the end, and the gates of Asgard (Paradise)
will be closed before them with a bolt that cannot be opened.

[6] The verdict was not to destroy the Jewish people (the Hebrews), but to
leave them at that low level of Faith mentioned above.

This type of humanity
should not exist; it is they who, through their sin, brought about ignorance
and delusion.[6] The verdict was not to destroy the Jewish people (the Hebrews), but to
leave them at that low level of Faith mentioned above.

This type of humanity
should not exist; it is they who, through their sin, brought about ignorance
and delusion.

But since there is a human aspect in them (the Jews), albeit a
lowly one, the Holy One, blessed be He, desired that they have something
similar to what befits true humanity, namely: that they have a Soul similar
to the Souls of the sons of Aryans, although its level is much lower than
that of the Souls of the sons of Aryans (Rus), and that they also have
commandments with which the Jews achieved physical and spiritual success,
also in accordance with their nature.

All these things were prepared from the
beginning of creation in case man sins, just as all other kinds of harm and
punishment were created conditionally ("in case"), as the Sages said.

[7] But in the World to Come, there will be no other nations except those
who believe in God.

And the souls of the righteous of the people of Israel
will be given existence as an addition and appendage to Asia, and they will
be secondary to them (the Rus), as clothing is secondary to a person.

And in
this capacity, they will receive what is due to them from the good, and by
their nature, they will not be able to achieve greater perfection.

[8] At the hour when the world is divided in this way, the Holy One,
blessed be He, has appointed ministers from among the angels to watch
over all nations and supervise their affairs.

Thus, the Almighty exercises only general supervision over us.

The angel
appointed over the family will exercise private (detailed) supervision over
it with the power that the Lord has given him for this purpose.

However, this does not mean that He is unaware of these details, for
everything is known to the Creator in advance and has been revealed from the
very beginning.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The angel
appointed over the family will exercise private (detailed) supervision over
it with the power that the Lord has given him for this purpose. However, this does not mean that He is unaware of these details, for
everything is known to the Creator in advance and has been revealed from the
very beginning. But the fact is that He does not supervise or influence
(directly) their details. And this will become clear, with God's help, from
further explanations. [9] As mentioned above, the Lord, blessed be He, has made the correction
and elevation of all Creation dependent on the actions of people
themselves. He

--- PAGE BREAK ---has, as it were, subordinated His governance to their actions: to illuminate
and influence or to conceal and hide, according to their deeds.

The actions
of the peoples of the world will not add to or detract from the essence of
Creation and the revelation or concealment of the Most High, but will only
bring benefit or harm to themselves, to their bodies or to their Souls, and
will add strength to their Guardian Angel or weaken Him.

And although the Holy One, blessed be He, does not supervise all nations in
detail, He nevertheless exercises detailed supervision over them for the
needs of each tribe and each individual (God helps everyone, but not everyone
knows it).

Chapter 5
[1] So far, we have explained the laws of Providence.

Now let us talk
about the ways of Providence.

This question is divided into two parts:
the first is the Creator's supervision, and the second is His influence.

[2] Regarding His oversight, we already know that He knows everything, and
there is no deficiency whatsoever in His knowledge, whether it be about the
future, the present, or the past; and everything that has been and will be
has already been foreseen by Him from eternity, and nothing is hidden from
Him.

And everything that exists is open before Him, known to Him in all its
aspects and completely undisguised from Him.

His "supervision" of things (worlds) is that He judges them and makes
decisions about them, limited by the time frame in which He wants them to be
renewed (perfected).

[3] And His influence is the realization of His Will, in the order and
sequence that He desires.

And since He has arranged His creations in a
certain hierarchy of order (the stages of Faith) and development, He has also
created such a sequence (the stages of Faith) in the existence of all things
(the three Worlds).

He also supports their (the Worlds) existence and
functioning.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And since He has arranged His creations in a
certain hierarchy of order (the stages of Faith) and development, He has also
created such a sequence (the stages of Faith) in the existence of all things
(the three Worlds). He also supports their (the Worlds) existence and
functioning. And in the same order, He supports the existence of all the
details (entities) of Being (the 3 Worlds) and influences them and the
relationships between them. The Creator influences the Angel, and the Angel influences the Angel of a
lower stage of Faith, and so on, step by step, until the last Angel produces
an effect in the material world: He sustains or renews the existence of
something according to the decree of the Creator. But the realization of all Being at all levels of Faith comes only from God. For He, by His Power, brings about creations and their development from one
another, each in its own way. The embodiment of actions in matter, according
to the above-mentioned order of objects and their relationships, occurs in
stages of Faith, as mentioned. [4] And the Lord, blessed be He, has instilled in the nature of every servant
to stand at his post and courageously perform what has been entrusted to him. He can only be removed from his post in accordance with the order established
by the Creator. For example, the Angel who controls the trees will try and
exert his power to keep his trees. But when the decree comes from the Most
High, the Angel appointed over the winds will strengthen the wind in
accordance with the decree. The Angel who controls the trees will be removed,
and a number of trees will be uprooted by the force of the wind. And there is a developed hierarchy and great detail in all this. For there
are Angels appointed over material nature, supporting all parts of material
phenomena within the limits of their natural laws; and above them
— Angels who implement decrees of reward and punishment, prompting

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Angels of nature to arrange all things according to these decrees.

In all
this there are many details, according to the wonderful mysteries of His
governance.

[5] However, the Creator Himself supervises everything: the lower and the
higher, the "roots" and
"branches," and always directs toward universal perfection, and all of
Creation leads to this.

And in different parts of Creation, different
processes take place according to their readiness: one is repelled, and
another is brought closer; one is purified, and another is left alone; each
part undergoes what it must undergo in order to establish all of Creation in
perfection.

[6] And the Most High, according to His desire, changes the order of the
Universe at any moment He wishes, and performs signs and wonders in various
things according to His desire, as He deems necessary for the benefit of
Creation according to the circumstances and time.

But what about what the
Sages said:
"The Holy One, blessed be He, set conditions for all created beings that they
would not deviate from the paths of Faith prescribed for them by the
Creator"?

This statement does not mean that the Almighty will not change
anything since then, for, of course, He completely changes whenever He wants.

But the fact is that at the moment of creation, He showed and made known to
all the roots of creation their nature and their True Essence and Purpose of
Life, in the name of which they were created, and what they must come to in
their incarnations (reincarnations) and what their end will be.

And they
understood and knew that everything moves toward the Higher Purpose of
achieving true Good (Immortality), so that people would desire Eternal Life
and rejoice in the Reward for their efforts to improve themselves.But the fact is that at the moment of creation, He showed and made known to
all the roots of creation their nature and their True Essence and Purpose of
Life, in the name of which they were created, and what they must come to in
their incarnations (reincarnations) and what their end will be.

And they
understood and knew that everything moves toward the Higher Purpose of
achieving true Good (Immortality), so that people would desire Eternal Life
and rejoice in the Reward for their efforts to improve themselves.

The Sages
said about this: "All creations were created with their consent." But when
the Creator made known to them their True Essence, the Law, and all their
transformations (reincarnations) in reality, He also showed them that one of
the necessary conditions for their perfection was that through them, known
miracles would occur for all humanity and for the righteous at various times.

All of the above applies to the Higher "roots" (Angels).

After that,
according to all this, material phenomena (people) developed sequentially
from these "roots" and were fixed in their appropriate form; servants
(Angels) were placed above them to support them according to natural law.

And
when the Most High so desires, He commands the servants (Angels), and they
cease to fulfill their purpose, and material phenomena change the course of
their natural processes according to the command.

The command may come to them in various ways.

That is, figuratively speaking,
like a decree of a king or a shout of an angry ruler and in similar ways,
according to the circumstances of each time.

Chapter 6
[1] The Lord, blessed be He, has arranged that all governance of the Worlds
— both the Judgment of people with free will and that which should be
renewed in the Worlds and their inhabitants — takes place in an order
similar to the functioning of the earthly kingdom (the world of Yavi).--- PAGE BREAK ---

That is, figuratively speaking,
like a decree of a king or a shout of an angry ruler and in similar ways,
according to the circumstances of each time. Chapter 6
[1] The Lord, blessed be He, has arranged that all governance of the Worlds
— both the Judgment of people with free will and that which should be
renewed in the Worlds and their inhabitants — takes place in an order
similar to the functioning of the earthly kingdom (the world of Yavi). And
so the Sages said:
"The Heavenly Kingdom is like the earthly one." Namely, in the Heavenly
Kingdom there are Courts of higher and lower ranks with all their procedures
and laws. For He has established various Courts of Spiritual beings at known
levels (of Faith) and in known orders (degrees), before which all matters
subject to Judgment will be presented; their decisions will determine
everything that happens. As the Prophet said: "This matter is accepted by the
decision of the Angels and by the will of the Saints."
[2] The Creator is present in all these Courts, influences them, and makes
them understand the true meaning of the matter so that a righteous judgment
may be rendered. And there are

--- PAGE BREAK ---Courts, headed by the Holy One, blessed be He, as it is said in the Prophet:
"I saw the Lord sitting on His throne, and all the heavenly hosts standing
beside Him on His right and on His left." The Sages explained: "They (the
Angels) incline the Court to the right—toward acquittal, and the demons
incline the Court to the left—toward condemnation."
But the basis of all this is that the Judgment over every person is
righteous.

For, generally speaking, there are many claims against every
person, arising from various reasons, for which he will be judged by various
judicial procedures; and also, in particular, in every one of his actions
there will be a reprehensible aspect and several different sides, for all
phenomena of this world actually consist of many parts and arise in different
ways.

But all these aspects are revealed in these higher Courts according to the
truth, and each member of the Heavenly Host present in that Court is shown,
according to his nature, one of the aspects, so that all aspects of the case
are revealed to all, and none of the aspects remain unknown, and then
everything will be weighed according to all these true aspects, and a fitting
judgment will be rendered.

However, the final decision will be made by the Head of that Court.

And if
this is one of the Courts where the Lord, blessed be He, wished to sit at the
head, then, despite the fact that He knows everything in advance, He gives
all His servants—the army before Him—the opportunity to present their
arguments according to what is revealed to them in truth from the aspects of
the case, and He will conclude the Court in a fitting manner, as we have
mentioned.

[3] From this principle it follows that the Holy One, blessed be He, judges
the world not from His Knowledge, but according to the rules that He desired
and established for this purpose.And if
this is one of the Courts where the Lord, blessed be He, wished to sit at the
head, then, despite the fact that He knows everything in advance, He gives
all His servants—the army before Him—the opportunity to present their
arguments according to what is revealed to them in truth from the aspects of
the case, and He will conclude the Court in a fitting manner, as we have
mentioned.

[3] From this principle it follows that the Holy One, blessed be He, judges
the world not from His Knowledge, but according to the rules that He desired
and established for this purpose.

One of these rules is as follows: no case
shall be judged in any court until the servants (Angels) appointed over the
phenomenon under consideration appear before it.

Namely, the Creator,
according to His desire, appointed servants from among the angels to
supervise all phenomena existing in the world, and these angels will come to
the Highest Court and testify about the phenomena that they have comprehended
and that have been revealed to them, and then these phenomena will appear
before the Court.

It has already been mentioned that all these things do not proceed from His
Knowledge, for none of these things are necessary to Him, since He knows
everything from the beginning; but He has so decided and decreed in His
wonderful and great Wisdom.

And according to all these orders, the world is governed.

Angels appointed to
supervise things in the world (Yavi) and bear witness to them are called
"the eyes of the Lord." And when He reveals Himself in one of the Courts in
order to judge some matter, Faith (the Vedas) says that "the Lord has come
down to see." All similar expressions are explained in the same way.

However, it should be understood that the similarity between all these things
and the earthly kingdom (the world of Yavi) is only in the orders.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Angels appointed to
supervise things in the world (Yavi) and bear witness to them are called
"the eyes of the Lord." And when He reveals Himself in one of the Courts in
order to judge some matter, Faith (the Vedas) says that "the Lord has come
down to see." All similar expressions are explained in the same way. However, it should be understood that the similarity between all these things
and the earthly kingdom (the world of Yavi) is only in the orders. In the
image of fulfillment, there is no true similarity, for in material phenomena,
comprehension and all other procedures occur in a manner relevant to them,
and in Spiritual ones — according to what is relevant to them from
comprehension and their aspects. [4] The Lord, blessed be He, has appointed an accuser, and that is the Angel
Navi (the Deity of the world of Darkness). His purpose is to bring cases
before the Courts, and when He seeks, the judges take up the case and begin
to judge. One of the manifestations of the quality of the Almighty's
goodness is that a person is not brought to trial until the accuser accuses
him, even though the sins of the sinner are open before Him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---But He also set laws and established rules for the accuser, as one wise man
said: "Satan leaves man in times of danger."
[5] All these aspects of the Judgment, in general and in particular, have
their own established laws and rules, as decreed by His Wisdom concerning the
time of the Judgment and its aspects.

Chapter 7
[1] We explained in the first chapter that the root of all material objects
is in the transcendent forces (Higher Forces).

All these objects are rooted
in them in all the ways they should be rooted, and after that they must be
projected and extended to materiality in the proper form.

The Heavenly Spheres (Worlds) and their stars are intended for this purpose.

Through them and their rotation, all those phenomena that are rooted and
prepared Above, in Spirituality (Prav), are extended and projected into
materiality and transformed here into the appropriate form.

The number of stars and their hierarchy (levels) in all their divisions were
established according to what the Highest Wisdom deemed necessary and
appropriate for the aforementioned translation from Spirituality into
materiality.

And from the stars emanates the Power that sustains the
existence of the material bodies beneath them; through them, the essence of
material objects is transferred from the Higher,
"root" aspects into their lower aspects.

[2] However, the Creator, blessed be His Name, has established another
function in these stars.

It consists in the fact that all events that
happen to material beings and everything that befalls them, after being
prepared Above, will be drawn down by the stars in the proper form.

For
example, life, wealth (being on familiar terms with God), wisdom,
offspring, etc.

— all these things are prepared Above, in the "roots," and
with the help of the stars are transferred down to the "branches" in the
appropriate form.

This is accomplished through a certain distribution and
combination of stars and their known cycles.--- PAGE BREAK ---

— all these things are prepared Above, in the "roots," and
with the help of the stars are transferred down to the "branches" in the
appropriate form. This is accomplished through a certain distribution and
combination of stars and their known cycles. All events that happen to various types of material objects are distributed
among the stars. All material phenomena are connected under the power of the
stars according to their order, so that renewal occurs in the material world
according to the influence that will come from this system in accordance with
the connection that each individual will have with it. [3] All people are also subject to this order, and as a result of the
influence of this system, various events occur to them. However, it is
possible that what is generated by the stars will be canceled by the Higher
Power. And the Sages said about this: "There are no stars above God." For
the power of the Almighty's decree and His influence overcome the power
inherent in the influence of this system, and the result will be determined
by the Higher Mind, His influence, and not by the influence of the star
system. [4] However, the laws governing this influence of the stars are also limited
in accordance with what the Supreme Wisdom has deemed appropriate. Chapter 8
[1] Furthermore, from what we can discern in the Providence of the Most
High, all the orders of Providence and its ways are the righteousness of
Judgment and the clarity of the Law, as it is said

--- PAGE BREAK ---it is said: "The scepter of the Kingdom of God is the scepter of
uprightness." And it is written: "The king will establish justice with
righteousness."
And yet we know for certain that the desire of the Holy One, blessed be He,
is only to do good, and He loves His creations as a father loves his son.

But
because of love itself, it is necessary to keep the son in strictness, so
that in the end he may be rewarded with good, as it is said: "For as a father
punishes his son, so God punishes man."
It turns out that justice and law themselves stem from the source of love,
and the punishment of the Almighty is not a blow from an enemy and avenger,
but the instruction of a father who wants good for his son, as we mentioned.

Two consequences follow from this principle: first, that the punishment
itself will be "sweetened" and will not be severe and cruel, for love will
"dilute" the Judgment with mercy; and second, that sometimes, at the
necessary moment, the Lord, blessed be He, will cross the line of the Law and
act mercifully, as it is said: "And I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion."
And so it turns out that the Holy One, blessed be He, desiring man's free
choice and the justice of the law of retribution, in order to reward man
according to his deeds, makes His Administration dependent on man's actions,
and rewards man with good or evil only according to his deeds.

But in reality, the Lord, blessed be He, is not subject to any Law and does
not need anyone else.

He is not compelled by anything, and therefore, when He
wants to use His Ascension above all, He will act and rule according to His
Will, completely without compulsion or delay.But in reality, the Lord, blessed be He, is not subject to any Law and does
not need anyone else.

He is not compelled by anything, and therefore, when He
wants to use His Ascension above all, He will act and rule according to His
Will, completely without compulsion or delay.

However, when He rules according to justice, He will act according to human
actions; but when His Wisdom deems it appropriate to cross the line of the
Law, He will use His exaltedness and the unity of His power, will not impute
the crime, and will correct with His great Power everything that has been
corrupted.

Thus, there are two types of Providence: the Providence of Justice of the
Most High and the Providence of Power and Unity.

And through these two paths,
the Lord constantly supervises His creations.

For He constantly supervises
through Providence of Justice, judging every action, and supervises through
Providence of Power, supporting the existence of Creation (Yavi) with His
Strength and Might, so that it would not be destroyed because of human evil
deeds.

[2] And it is also necessary to know that His influence is divided into two
types: one of them is influence on the body, and the second is influence on
the Soul.

The essence of influence on the body has already been explained,
namely, that which relates to a person's success and peace of mind in this
world.

And the effect on the Soul is that which relates to a person's
understanding, knowledge, and closeness to the Almighty, to the value and
dignity of his Soul.

For the true good state of this world consists in people becoming acquainted
with Wisdom and serving the Creator, and in Truth being revealed and made
clear, and evil being pursued and defeated, and injustice being cast aside.

So that there would be no other service in the world except service to God,
and all good qualities would be present and prevail, and bad ones would be
removed and despised.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For the true good state of this world consists in people becoming acquainted
with Wisdom and serving the Creator, and in Truth being revealed and made
clear, and evil being pursued and defeated, and injustice being cast aside. So that there would be no other service in the world except service to God,
and all good qualities would be present and prevail, and bad ones would be
removed and despised. And accordingly, peace and quiet will multiply, there
will be no suffering, sickness, or injury, and the Lord, blessed be He, will
openly place His Light in the world (Yavi) and rejoice in His creations, and
His creations will rejoice and exult before Him. The opposite of all this is when people are drawn after their passions,
despise Wisdom (the Vedas) and are far from it, when they do not turn to the
service of God at all or make little effort to work on themselves, when truth
is defeated on

--- PAGE BREAK ---the ground, evil prevails and prospers, and injustice and delusion are great.

When the world is full of foreign services (idolatry), good qualities
disappear and bad ones multiply, and accordingly there is no peace and
tranquility, but suffering and damage are numerous.

The Lord, blessed be He,
hides His Light from the world, and the world spins as if left to chance and
given over to nature; The Holy One, blessed be He, does not rejoice in His
creatures, and people do not rejoice before Him, and do not know what it is —
the joy of creatures before their Creator.

At such a time, the wicked grow
stronger, and the good are humiliated.

It turns out that in each of these states, all aspects, both those related to
the body and those related to the Soul, are influenced by the Almighty.

[3] It has already been explained that the state of a person in this world is
such that materiality and darkness are fundamental to it, and Light only
joins and participates in it, and from it comes Consciousness and Mind.

And
in the beginning of a person's days, his foolishness is great, and his
knowledge is little, but as the young man matures, his knowledge multiplies.

But in reality, the cause of all these realities is in the influence of the
Most High, for according to the influence received by a person, there will be
realities in him in general and in particular.

The root of all this is the
Radiance or its concealment, which are the roots of the existence of good and
evil in every place.

And the influence proceeds according to the Radiance or
its concealment, according to what the Supreme Wisdom establishes.

The
influence of the Radiance produces abundance, purity, and nobility, while the
influence of concealment produces scarcity, coarseness, and baseness.And the influence proceeds according to the Radiance or
its concealment, according to what the Supreme Wisdom establishes.

The
influence of the Radiance produces abundance, purity, and nobility, while the
influence of concealment produces scarcity, coarseness, and baseness.

The reality of existing objects and their proper management are composed of
these qualities in a complex way, for in the same object there may be the
quality of insufficiency on the one hand and the quality of sufficiency on
the other, the quality of coarseness and the quality of transparency, the
quality of baseness and the quality of nobility.

Therefore, in the influence exerted on each thing, Radiance and concealment
must be combined according to the desired result and what is rooted in that
influence.

And according to the order that will be established and the place in the
hierarchy in which these qualities will be rooted in the influence, such will
be the result in all its categories and boundaries.

This is the great law of
all objects and events in any place.

[4] When we look at the entire aggregate of the world's states since its
creation: at what has already happened in it and at what the Prophets have
predicted, we find in it four stages of Faith (0,1,2,3), similar to the
stages of development of a human being from birth to maturity.

In the first state, ignorance and darkness are very strong, and true
knowledge of the Creator, blessed be His Name, and of His perfection is
largely absent.

The second state is better than the first, and it is the state of man today,
when he has, thanks to God, Knowledge of the existence of the Creator and His
perfection, and Faith in the Most High with believers, for they serve before
Him.

However, there are no signs and prophecies, and there is a lack of true
understanding—the Spirit of Holiness.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The second state is better than the first, and it is the state of man today,
when he has, thanks to God, Knowledge of the existence of the Creator and His
perfection, and Faith in the Most High with believers, for they serve before
Him. However, there are no signs and prophecies, and there is a lack of true
understanding—the Spirit of Holiness. For, in fact, what a person knows with
his Mind through his human activities, compared to what he understands
through the Spiritual influence from Above, is like the body compared to the
Soul. The third state, better than the previous one, took place during the time of
Pharaoh, when the human race saw signs and wonders and possessed prophecy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---However, these gifts did not reach everyone, but only some, and even then
with difficulty, for there were already factors that prevented and delayed
this.

The fourth state is the best of all, about which the Prophets predicted that
in the future, foolishness would not exist at all, and the Spirit of Holiness
would be poured out on the entire human race without any difficulty.

Then it
will be possible to say that the formation of the human race has ended, for
from that time onward it will rise and enjoy itself for ever and ever.

[5] In the aforementioned aspect of influence on the Soul, there are also
temporal and spatial boundaries and other conditions.

For the Most High has
decreed and arranged to reveal Himself at certain moments in certain ways to
a greater extent than He reveals Himself at other moments, and also to reveal
Himself in certain places to a greater extent than in other places.

All this
has many different aspects and details, measured with extreme precision
according to what is needed for the correction of creations.

This is the reason for the holiness of certain days (fasting) and holy
places, where people are more influenced and receive more light, purity, and
excellence, according to the degree of faith measured out to them.

Part 3
Chapter 1
[1] The essence of man has already been explained.

There is something in him
that is not found in any other creation, namely, the combination of two
distant and separate essences—the body and the Soul.

Man, like other animals, has an animal Soul that serves the senses and mind
inherent in his nature.

This Soul in all animals is one very subtle essence
that is attracted to and enters the egg cell after its fertilization.

It
spreads and builds the body as befits the species.

And it determines the
senses and mind appropriate to a given species.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It
spreads and builds the body as befits the species. And it determines the
senses and mind appropriate to a given species. For animals themselves differ
greatly from one another in their understanding, and the mind of humans
differs greatly from the understanding of animals. All this happens in the Soul according to its natural law and the degree of
readiness of the organs that serve it; in each form — in its own way. In the
human Soul, categories and forces can be distinguished. For example:
imagination and memory, mind and will — all these are forces of the Soul,
limited by known boundaries and acting in a certain way. [2] But besides all this, there is also a separate and very high Spiritual
essence in a person. It comes to a person only to connect him with the Higher
"roots" with which he should be connected so that his actions can produce
offspring in the Higher Forces with great power. This essence (the Higher
Soul) receives an influence from the Higher Sources, which then affects the
animal soul we mentioned, and from there, the body. And this Higher Soul
controls the lower (animal) Soul and performs the necessary actions in it at
all times, according to the relationship and connection of the person with
the Higher Forces. The Higher Soul connects with the lower (animal) Soul, and
the lower Soul connects with the most subtle substance of blood, and thus the
human body and the two Souls are connected with each other. [3] Because this higher Soul is connected to the body through the lower
Soul, it finds itself limited by certain boundaries and deprived of

--- PAGE BREAK ---the ability to cooperate and interact with Spiritual and Divine entities for
as long as it remains in the body, that is, for the entire duration of a
person's life.

The Higher Soul is influenced by the actions of the body (of a person):
whether to connect with the Light of the Creator, blessed be He, or to
deviate from Him and cling to the forces of impurity.

And this determines its
readiness for its destined perfection or its departure from it.

And She (the
Higher Soul) acts in a person, controls the lower Soul and instructs it, she
forms intellectual images in it according to its readiness and generates
thoughts and desires in it according to the direction to which it inclines.

[4] Although we usually refer to the highest Soul as a single entity, it
actually consists of many parts and different levels, which we can describe
as several Souls connected to each other like links in a chain.

And just as
all the links form a single chain, so all these Spiritual levels form a
single Higher Soul, which we have been discussing, and they are all connected
to each other, and the last (lower) level of Faith is connected to the lower
Soul, and that to the blood.

And it is possible that some of these parts will disappear at a certain time
and then return, or that levels will be added to them and then disappear, and
there will be no noticeable trace of these changes in the body.

For the
action of these Souls in the body is imperceptible, and they neither add to
nor detract from vitality or sensations.

But their action takes place in the
True Essence of man and in his relationship with the Higher "roots,"
according to how worthy he is to be connected with them.

One of these parts is an additional Soul that comes to a person during Holy
Lent and leaves him at the end of Lent; its arrival and departure are not
felt by the body.But their action takes place in the
True Essence of man and in his relationship with the Higher "roots,"
according to how worthy he is to be connected with them.

One of these parts is an additional Soul that comes to a person during Holy
Lent and leaves him at the end of Lent; its arrival and departure are not
felt by the body.

[5] Although this higher Soul is connected to the body, events still occur
with it that are appropriate to its essence, as we have mentioned.

It still
retains some connection with Spiritual objects, which does not deprive it of
its connection with the body.

But only occasionally, in a minority of cases,
does this give rise to anything tangible and noticeable in the human Mind.

And the Sages said about this: some information has already reached this
higher Soul, but from it to the mind and intellect, not a complete image was
transmitted, but only a small fragment and nothing more.

[6] The highest Wisdom decided to divide time into two periods: the first for
the activity of creatures, and the second for rest.

Namely, day and night;
day is the time for action, and night is the time for rest.

The Creator made sleep a part of the nature of living beings so that they and
their Spirit could rest from their labors.

During this time, their entire
being gathers strength in all its parts, both physical and spiritual, so that
they may wake up in the morning refreshed and ready for their service, as
before.

When a person sleeps, their strength rests and their senses are silent, and
their intellect (mind) also rests and is silent, and only their imagination
works and imagines and pictures various things.

These images arise according
to what remains in the imagination from what is imprinted in it during
wakefulness, and depending on the substances that rise to the brain during
sleep: from natural bodily moisture or from food eaten.

And these images
are dreams that all people see.--- PAGE BREAK ---

These images arise according
to what remains in the imagination from what is imprinted in it during
wakefulness, and depending on the substances that rise to the brain during
sleep: from natural bodily moisture or from food eaten. And these images
are dreams that all people see. But the Creator, blessed be His Name, also decreed that during this time
(sleep), the aforementioned higher Soul will briefly detach itself from its
attachment to the body, and its parts, namely, those up to the level of the
Mind, will rise and detach themselves from the body, and only one part will
remain with the lower Soul.

--- PAGE BREAK ---And the detached parts will wander where they are allowed and will
communicate with Spiritual objects: with ministers (Spirits) appointed over
nature, or Angels of reception, or with demons, as happens to them for some
reason.

Sometimes these higher levels of the Soul can convey what they have
comprehended step by step to the lower Soul; this will awaken the imagination
and present, as usual, some images.

The things comprehended by the higher Soul may be true or false, depending on
the means through which they were comprehended.

This information reaches the
imagination and is depicted there, sometimes with great distortion and
admixture of corrupted images formed by various substances (rising in the
brain), and sometimes more clearly.

In this way, a person can receive information and revelation about what will
happen to him in the future.

This happens by the decree of the Most High; the
information becomes known to the Soul from one of His servants of some kind,
and reaches the animal Soul, appearing in the imagination either hidden or
openly, according to the decree of the Supreme Wisdom.

Thus, dreams, generally speaking, are images of the imagination, either from
the imagination itself or from its excitation by the Soul, according to its
comprehension.

However, in all these cases, only one of the Spiritual forces
acts, which communicates information to the Soul, and the Soul brings it to
the imagination.

And if this force is from the Holy ones, this information
will be true, and if from the opposite forces, it will be false.

And in all
dreams there is an admixture of imagination.

But there are also other dreams — prophetic dreams.

Chapter 2
[1] We have already explained in previous sections that the origin of all
creations lies in the combination of transcendental (divine) forces.

These
forces are brought into a logical system with known parts, and from them all
material objects develop in stages.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 2
[1] We have already explained in previous sections that the origin of all
creations lies in the combination of transcendental (divine) forces. These
forces are brought into a logical system with known parts, and from them all
material objects develop in stages. We have also clarified the question of
the forces of evil, from which all evil in the physical world develops. And
we have also explained that the basis of the true essence of any creation
lies in its transcendental
"roots." That which exists on the physical plane is only a continuation of
that which is rooted and founded there, Above. And there it was established to spread what should be spread in accordance
with the true essence of creatures and their various qualities, according to
what should be in the "roots" and what in the
"branches." And the Highest Wisdom continued these things in a certain
sequence and transferred their essence from one form to another until they
became connected and limited by their material form. And above each material object stands a chain of its roots, one above the
other, up to the most primary forces. Each of them stands at its post and
exists at its level of Faith and within its boundaries established by the
Creator, without going beyond them. All "roots" affect their "branches"
according to this sequence, without taking them beyond their natural
boundaries. [2] But Supreme Wisdom decreed that these forces, acting in material objects,
could also act in another way, not according to this sequence of development. That is, so that they themselves could produce actions in materiality that
relate to the nature of these forces, and not to the nature of materiality. These are actions in which material objects change their constant nature.

--- PAGE BREAK ---And man has been given the ability to use creations in this [supernatural]
way, along with the ability to use them in a natural way.

(What they have in
common is that both of these abilities are limited).

That is, as with the
natural use of Creation, man cannot do everything he wants, but can only use
known methods and within certain limits.

After all, one can only cut with a
knife and similar things, climb only with the help of a ladder, crumple only
soft things, and so on.

Likewise, the use of the Spiritual method is given to
him only within known limits and in certain ways, according to what the
Higher Wisdom has deemed appropriate.

[3] And more about this principle.

We have already explained that a person is
composed of two opposites — the body and the Soul.

The Soul is limited within
it and bound by the Laws established by the Wisdom of the Creator.

Thus, a
person in his material state is limited by the laws of the body and the
statutes of matter, and his Soul is bound by these bonds and cannot escape
them.

But the Lord, blessed be He, wanted man to have a way to free himself a
little from these bonds and shackles of physicality.

Then he will be affected
by events that occur according to the laws of Spirituality, and not according
to the laws of materiality.

With their help, he will come to understand and
comprehend Spirituality, a comprehension that was hidden from him due to his
material condition and its limitations.

In this way, man will be better able
to elevate all objects above and below, in the "roots" and "branches," to the
blessed state that befits them.

[4] The Higher Wisdom has provided for the possibility of annulling the
boundaries of the nature of matter and this world, which separate and
distance man from Spiritual objects and their qualities.

In this case, man
will be freed from some of his bonds and will occupy a state higher than
the material one.[4] The Higher Wisdom has provided for the possibility of annulling the
boundaries of the nature of matter and this world, which separate and
distance man from Spiritual objects and their qualities.

In this case, man
will be freed from some of his bonds and will occupy a state higher than
the material one.

In this state, he will be able to come into contact and
relate to Spiritual objects while still in this world, in his body deprived
of Light.

However, it has been established that not all boundaries of
nature can be annulled, but only some of them, those whose annulment the
Higher Wisdom has deemed appropriate for the general intention of
Providence.

And even these boundaries can be annulled only under certain
conditions and in known ways, with extreme precision.

[5] The Creator's Wisdom has provided man with the means by which, if he
so desires, he can achieve this goal: the annulment of these boundaries of
nature and the attainment of the aforementioned state.

It has already been explained that the existence of all objects, in general
and in particular, depends solely on the Creator.

All entities and their
orders—in the Higher Forces, in Spiritual creations, and in material
creations—exist only because the Almighty allows them to depend on Him.

And He exists, reveals Himself to each of His creations, and influences them
as necessary for the realization of their existence.

There are numerous and
varied influences, corresponding to the multitude of those receiving these
influences and their variations, and the existence of all classes of
realities and their qualities depends on these influences.

And when these influences are actualized, all their offspring will arise
throughout the entire sequence of creations, as established by the Almighty.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There are numerous and
varied influences, corresponding to the multitude of those receiving these
influences and their variations, and the existence of all classes of
realities and their qualities depends on these influences. And when these influences are actualized, all their offspring will arise
throughout the entire sequence of creations, as established by the Almighty. Angels will receive Light from the Creator, who reveals Himself to them, and
what they receive, the Higher ones will influence those below them, and the
lower ones will influence those even lower, and so on until the end of the
entire sequence. [5] God wished to be called by name so that His creations could stir
themselves and call upon Him, mention Him, and draw closer to Him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---For His glorification, He set aside a special Name: the Great Ra-M-Ha, about
which He said, "This is My Name forever." This is the Greatest of the Names
by which He calls Himself, because He wanted to be called by name.

But
according to all the details of His actions, He desired to be called by
different names (Gracious, Merciful).

The Creator decreed that when His Name is mentioned by His creations, His
Radiance and the influence of His Light will extend to them.

And in the continuation of the influence, the predetermined offspring will
inevitably arise, and this process will spread throughout the entire sequence
from beginning to end.

The Supreme Wisdom has limited all this with known
boundaries and special conditions: only when the mention of the Name
corresponds to these conditions and no other, will this influence occur and
produce its consequences.

The Creator has established that among His effects there will be such that,
upon reaching the recipient, their certain boundaries of nature will be
annulled by their Power, as we have mentioned, and this person will connect
with Spiritual entities and receive Knowledge and understanding
comprehensible to man, as well as other things from this category — the
stages of the Holy Spirit and prophecy.

He decreed that the attraction of
these influences (the Holy Spirit and prophecy) will also be through the
aforementioned means: His Name.

This happens when a person says them
mentally, or pronounces them aloud, or combines them with other words, while
fulfilling the necessary conditions.

[6] It is known that although the general concept is one—going beyond nature—
its details are numerous, corresponding to the orders of objects and their
levels.

For the details of the actions necessary to accomplish this "going
beyond" in all aspects will correspond to the nature of objects and their
order, and according to this, the details of mentioning the Name and their
conditions will multiply.[6] It is known that although the general concept is one—going beyond nature—
its details are numerous, corresponding to the orders of objects and their
levels.

For the details of the actions necessary to accomplish this "going
beyond" in all aspects will correspond to the nature of objects and their
order, and according to this, the details of mentioning the Name and their
conditions will multiply.

And in this very "exit" (beyond the limits of nature) there are many levels,
as in all general concepts, divided into many details.

Some people will free
themselves only from a small part of their ties and limitations, while others
will free themselves from most of them.

[7] This is the basis for a person's ability to use objects in a
Spiritual way and perform such significant and powerful actions that
cannot be performed in a physical way.

The fact is that the Lord, blessed be He, established the order of Being and
its foundations in such a way that they are all interconnected.

They all
depend on the aforementioned influences of the Creator in such a way that
when any influence is brought about by mentioning His Name, it will produce
changes in the entire sequence until its very end.

For the Most High responds to everyone who calls upon Him by His Name as He
has willed and established; He will send that very Light and produce that
very influence on which the existence of the phenomenon requested by man
depends, until the final result is obtained in materiality.

The Creator, blessed be His Name, has likewise established another principle,
which is as follows:
All Angels at all their levels are endowed with the power to perform the
actions entrusted to their control.

They do not act continuously, but
according to the order established for the constant natural management of the
world.

However, Angels are endowed with the power to perform actions of the
same kind more than usual, and with greater power and strength, not according
to the usual order.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They do not act continuously, but
according to the order established for the constant natural management of the
world. However, Angels are endowed with the power to perform actions of the
same kind more than usual, and with greater power and strength, not according
to the usual order. And thus they often act in signs and wonders performed in
the world according to the will of the Most High, blessed be His Name, at the
moment He desires.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Lord, blessed be He, desired to honor His Name when it is mentioned above
the Angels, according to the order He established.

When the Name attributed by the Almighty to the influence on which the entire
matter depends is mentioned above the Angels of a certain action, the Angel
will be compelled to act with additional power given to him for this action,
since the one who mentions this Name will thereby oblige him.

Thus, there are two ways of using the Name of the Most High.

The first way is
to mention the Name of the Most High, as if calling upon Him to respond and
produce an effect that will renew certain things.

The second way is to compel
the Angels, with the help of the Name of the Most High, to act with greater
force than usual.

However, none of these processes is determined solely by human desire, but
all processes are limited, conditioned, and measured by the extent of a
person's ability to use them and how to achieve success.

And it is possible
that the creation will not be realized, and the influencer will not be able
to influence, even within the designated limits of normal use, just as the
results of natural processes may not be allowed to be realized by the decree
of the Most High.

For the first type—mentioning the Name of the Almighty in order to elicit His
influence—one will, of course, need closeness and intimacy with Him.

And the
closer the one calling upon Him is to the Creator, the more successful he
will be; and the further away from Him the one calling upon Him is, the more
difficult it will be for him to achieve his goal.

In the second type of use of the Name, this condition (closeness and
communion with the Almighty) is not necessary, although it will help if it is
fulfilled.

For since it is inherent in the properties of His Name that it
compels the Angels when mentioned, they are like all other natural means that
can be used at will, provided that a person uses them correctly.In the second type of use of the Name, this condition (closeness and
communion with the Almighty) is not necessary, although it will help if it is
fulfilled.

For since it is inherent in the properties of His Name that it
compels the Angels when mentioned, they are like all other natural means that
can be used at will, provided that a person uses them correctly.

However, it is obvious that it is not right or proper for an ordinary person
to use the king's scepter.

Only holy people who are close to the Almighty and
attached to Him are allowed to do such things, so that they may use it to
sanctify His Name and fulfill His Will.

Otherwise, even if the action is
performed, if (this unworthy person) does not follow the proper rules, he
will be punished for his malicious crime.

And it has already been said that
all this (the use of the Name) is not absolute, but limited by the boundaries
that the Supreme Wisdom deemed necessary to establish; and even within these
boundaries, the Creator's decree will cancel the generation of this use at
any moment He wishes, when the Supreme Wisdom deems this cancellation
necessary and appropriate.

[8] Since His Wisdom decreed that there should be good and evil in the world,
an order was established so that evil would indeed exist at all levels where
it could exist.

The task of man is to prevent the power and action of evil in
all its ways and levels until it is finally eliminated from all of Creation.

And note that the true essence of the Almighty excludes all kinds of
shortcomings in Him.

Evil and flaws can only exist in creatures.

And it was
established that levels of good would be created for creatures and their
opposite—evil, or more precisely, a reality that can become evil.

Man will
come and, through hard work on himself, will eliminate all evil from himself
and from all of Creation in order to establish good in himself and in
Creation forever and ever.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And it was
established that levels of good would be created for creatures and their
opposite—evil, or more precisely, a reality that can become evil. Man will
come and, through hard work on himself, will eliminate all evil from himself
and from all of Creation in order to establish good in himself and in
Creation forever and ever. Therefore, it was established that opposite every aspect of good there would
be an aspect of evil, as it is said in Scripture: "God also made one opposite
the other."

--- PAGE BREAK ---And only in one thing does good have an advantage over evil: the root of good
is in the perfection of the Most High, which has no beginning and no end,
while evil is a creation that was made to be nullified and is destined to
function only as long as man strives, as we mentioned above.

[9] According to this principle, just as God created for man a way to attain
Radiance, understanding, and the Spirit of Holiness in a supernatural way
(using the Name of the Most High), so it was necessary that there be an
opposite to this great good.

Namely, that man might also attract darkness,
murkiness, and the spirit of impurity in a supernatural way.

Such is the
impurity of witchcraft and the summoning of dead (fallen) angels, from which
Faith commands us to depart.

Their essence is to attract, through mention under certain conditions, the
influences of spiritual impurity and defilement, which is the greatest
distance from the Most High, blessed be His Name, the literal opposite of
communion with Him.

These influences are drawn from the forces of evil.

By
decree of the Most High, they were given names by which they can be
mentioned.

Such mention will cause a flow of spiritual impurity from them at
known levels in a manner that goes beyond nature.

Through this, supernatural
actions such as witchcraft and the like can be performed, according to the
potential transferred to these forces of evil and within the limits set for
them.

These actions can also be performed with the help of demons, according to
what they are instructed to do and within the specific boundaries set for
them.

The Lord has decreed that, to the extent that they are given the
ability to act, demons that support aspects of evil in the world (Yavi) in
their natural state, and all Angels who do not bring about the influence of
the Most High according to the established order, will be repelled before
them.These actions can also be performed with the help of demons, according to
what they are instructed to do and within the specific boundaries set for
them.

The Lord has decreed that, to the extent that they are given the
ability to act, demons that support aspects of evil in the world (Yavi) in
their natural state, and all Angels who do not bring about the influence of
the Most High according to the established order, will be repelled before
them.

But all this is possible only within certain limits and no more; and even
within these limits, the forces of evil can be repelled by a Force more
powerful than they, and their action will be prevented by the decree of the
Most High.

It is said about this: "There is nothing but Him, and even
witchcraft." And it is explained that those whose merits are great will be
saved from Heaven and repelled by those who wish to harm them.

It is said:
"The sons of God (the Rus) are distinguished by the fact that they are not
susceptible to witchcraft, for their merits are great."
Chapter 3
[1] The Creator has established in human nature the ability to learn,
understand, and cognize in the process of observing objects and their
properties.

And based on what is revealed to him, he will ponder and seek
what is not revealed until he comprehends it and masters it.

Such is the
natural process of cognition.

The Creator also decreed that there should be another kind of cognition, far
superior to the previous one, and that is cognition through external
influence.

Namely, that man will receive the influence of the Most High
through certain means prepared for this purpose.

And when this influence
reaches the mind, knowledge of a certain phenomenon will arise in it clearly,
undoubtedly, and unmistakably, and he will know this phenomenon perfectly,
its causes and consequences, every phenomenon at its level.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Namely, that man will receive the influence of the Most High
through certain means prepared for this purpose. And when this influence
reaches the mind, knowledge of a certain phenomenon will arise in it clearly,
undoubtedly, and unmistakably, and he will know this phenomenon perfectly,
its causes and consequences, every phenomenon at its level. This influence is
called "Knowledge of God."
[2] In this way, things that are within the scope of natural knowledge can be
comprehended with greater clarity; and things that cannot be comprehended by
natural knowledge can also be comprehended, in particular, knowledge of the
future and hidden secrets.

--- PAGE BREAK ---[3] There are many different levels of "God's Knowledge." They differ in
terms of the strength of their impact, the time of their impact, the ways
in which the impact reaches a person, and the essence of the phenomena that
are revealed to him and known by him.

But in any case, the impact will be
such that a person will clearly feel it.

It may happen, however, that an impact will be sent to a person's heart that
will give them a clear understanding of the essence of a certain issue, but
the person affected will only feel a thought suddenly arising in their heart.

This is sometimes called by the Sages, in a broad sense, "Knowledge of God";
but true Knowledge of God is clearly noticeable and perceptible to those who
possess it.

[4] But above all this rises another level of Faith — prophecy.

Its essence
is that the Prophet reaches such a level that he connects with the Creator,
blessed be His Name, and literally becomes one with Him.

This happens in such
a way that the Prophet feels this communion and comprehends the Light (the
level of Faith) to which he is connected.

And this will be clear and tangible
to him without any doubt, just as he has no doubt about a material thing that
he perceives with his senses.

[5] The basis of prophecy is the attainment of this communion and connection
with God while still alive, which is, of course, a great perfection.

However, this will be accompanied by knowledge and understanding, for
through this communion the Prophet will comprehend true and very important
things from the hidden mysteries of the Holy One, blessed be He.

The Prophet
comprehends them clearly, like any influenced knowledge we have mentioned,
but with greater power than those who possess the Knowledge of God.

But this comprehension occurs through intermediaries.The Prophet
comprehends them clearly, like any influenced knowledge we have mentioned,
but with greater power than those who possess the Knowledge of God.

But this comprehension occurs through intermediaries.

A person does not
connect directly with the Light of the Most High and does not comprehend Him
as he sees another person before him, but through His servants, who play the
role of "lenses" through which the Light is comprehended.

And although what
is comprehended is, in fact, nothing other than the Light, comprehension
changes according to the change in the means, as when looking through lenses.

And there are different degrees in this: distance or proximity, and the
clarity or cloudiness of the "lens."
[6] When the Most High reveals Himself and sends His influence to the
Prophet, this influence is extremely strong.

For according to its law,
matter cannot withstand the revelation of Spirituality, and even more so,
the revelation of the Light of the Most High.

The Prophet's senses cease to
function, and his mental functions also cease to function independently, but
become directly dependent on the Almighty and His influence.

As a result of this union, the Soul will gain knowledge (Veda) of God that is
completely beyond human understanding, for this knowledge will come to the
Soul not from itself, but from its connection with the Higher Root.

And then
it will comprehend (phenomena) in a more sublime way than it does from
itself.

This is the advantage of the Prophet over the servant of Faith, even in the
comprehension of knowledge.

For the Prophet comprehends in the highest way
possible for a human being: comprehension in a state of connection between a
person and the Creator.

The revelation of the Light of the Most High is the
active principle in everything that is transmitted to the Prophet in his
vision.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For the Prophet comprehends in the highest way
possible for a human being: comprehension in a state of connection between a
person and the Creator. The revelation of the Light of the Most High is the
active principle in everything that is transmitted to the Prophet in his
vision. It influences the power of imagination in the Prophet's Soul, and
there things will be depicted that are compelled by the Power of the Highest
revelation. The imagination adds nothing of its own. And from these images,
thoughts and knowledge arise in the Prophet, which are imprinted by the power
of the Light that is revealed. They remain fixed in his memory, and when he
returns to his human state, this knowledge remains in him with perfect
clarity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---What has been explained above is the general principle of prophecy for all
Prophets.

But there are numerous degrees of Faith in this phenomenon.

And
above all is Immortality.

Chapter 4
[1] When the Prophet reaches the stage of Faith in prophecy in perfection, he
comprehends everything that comes to him with clear understanding and
complete knowledge.

That is, although the information is transmitted to him
through the stages of Faith, first in the form of images and only then
translated into thoughts (words) by the aforementioned means, when a person
clearly understands his prophecy, he comprehends what it truly means to be a
Prophet.

That is, he understands that he is connected to the Creator, and He
reveals Himself to him and produces all these actions in him.

And the Prophet
comprehends that the images that arise in him are prophetic visions generated
by Divine influence, and that the knowledge of the subject that has
established itself in him is the result of influence from Above.

And he will
have no doubt about the prophecy or its quality, both previous and
subsequent.

[2] It should also be noted that the Prophet does not reach this highest
level of Faith in one go, but rises higher and higher until he reaches
perfect prophecy.

And this requires study, like all other sciences and
crafts, in which a person progresses step by step until he masters them.

[3] And it is possible that a person will receive a revelation of Light from
God, but he will not recognize it as the Prophet does, but will mistake it
for sensory perception.

And only when the prophetic influence on him
intensifies will he know the Truth.

Something similar happened when the Almighty (for the first time) addressed
Abraham (Rama).

He did not prophesy at first and did not receive prophetic
influence.

He only heard a voice as a tangible sound, and nothing more.

And
only later did he receive prophetic influence, know and comprehend the ways
of prophecy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He only heard a voice as a tangible sound, and nothing more. And
only later did he receive prophetic influence, know and comprehend the ways
of prophecy. The same thing happened when Moses saw the vision of the bush: at first, only
something tangible was revealed to him, and he saw the burning bush. Then the
Holy One, blessed be He, called him with the voice of his father, and only
after that did He send him prophetic influence, and then Moses understood the
true essence of this prophecy. [4] Students of prophecy (Faith) study special things that will attract the
Supreme influence to them, remove the obstacles of the materiality of the
body, and attract the revelation of the Light of the Most High and communion
with Him. This teaching includes inner attunement, the mention of the Holy
Name, and the glorification of the Most High with praises that include His
Name and prayers combined in a specific way. And according to how much they (the disciples of Faith) are worthy through
their deeds and how much they are purified through these things, to that
extent they will approach the Blessed One and begin to receive the influence
(Light), comprehending comprehension after comprehension, until they reach
the stage of prophecy. And the distinguished Prophet, already knowing the ways of prophecy, will
teach each one according to his readiness what to do to achieve the desired
goal. When they begin to receive revelations, the Prophet will instruct them
according to the essence of the revelation and teach them what they still
lack to achieve the desired goal. And until they attain the stage of prophecy
in perfection, they need a teacher and mentor. For even after they have begun
to receive revelations and influence from above, this alone

--- PAGE BREAK ---they will not exhaust this subject to the end; they will need even more
instruction to reach the end properly, each according to his level and
readiness.

[5] However, even after reaching the level of Faith of Prophecy, the Prophets
will differ from one another in terms of the level and degree of Faith, both
quantitatively and qualitatively.

Explanation: there are those who prophesy
many times, and there are those who prophesy only a little; and also in the
quality of the prophecy itself: some will achieve great communion with the
Most High and very great knowledge (Knowledge), while others will not have
such a close connection, nor such great knowledge.

But all those who prophesy
are equal in that they are obviously connected to the Blessed One, and His
revelation is clearly visible in them, and they do not doubt it.

But in the
very connection, in the revelation and in the knowledge, one can distinguish
9 stages (trials) of Faith.

[6] And it also happens with prophets that they are sent with a mission from
the Almighty.

That is, this (mission) is not the essence of prophecy; the
essence of prophecy is communion with the Almighty and divine revelation,
accompanied by a certain knowledge of God and understanding of Faith.

But it often happens that Prophets are sent to other peoples.

This can happen
to a distinguished Prophet who perfectly knows the ways of prophecy, or to
one who is not so knowledgeable and experienced in this.

And because of their
inexperience, Prophets can err in what they prophesy.

[7] It may happen that a prophet comprehends the true thing in his prophecy,
but does not comprehend all the true things that it contains.And because of their
inexperience, Prophets can err in what they prophesy.

[7] It may happen that a prophet comprehends the true thing in his prophecy,
but does not comprehend all the true things that it contains.

For example,
in the prophecy of Jonah, son of Amittai, the words "And Nineveh shall be
overturned" have two true meanings: one is the punishment assigned (to the
inhabitants of the city) for their sins, and the second is that it was known
before the Most High what would happen: they would "overturn" from evil to
good.

If these words referred only to punishment, then when the Holy One, blessed
be He, changed the decree and abolished the punishment, He would have
revealed this to the Prophets, and in particular to Jonah.

But since the Holy
One, blessed be He, included two meanings in one phrase, there was no need
for a new decree: the prophecy was fulfilled in the second meaning, not the
first.

But Jonah initially understood only the first meaning, not the second,
and the Sages said about this: "Jonah
— he did not know."
[8] And it is necessary to know that there are two aspects to prophecy: one
is the essence, and the other is the words.

Sometimes the Prophet comprehends
something that is not limited by words and expresses it in his own words.

For
their words in prophecy were determined to bring many things together.

But
even in this case, the phraseology also depends on the readiness of the
Prophet himself, his style of language, and his manner of speech.

And in many cases, the Prophets are given to perform various actions along
with the prophecy.

The essence of these actions was that they awakened certain Higher Powers
necessary for the true essence of the matter prophesied.

After performing
this action, these powers were ready to carry out this task at the right
moment.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The essence of these actions was that they awakened certain Higher Powers
necessary for the true essence of the matter prophesied. After performing
this action, these powers were ready to carry out this task at the right
moment. [9] It is also necessary to know that the title of Prophet truly and
accurately befits only those who have already comprehended the prophecy in
its entirety and to whom it has become clear that they receive prophecy from
the Most High, as we mentioned above. Those who have achieved this will have
no doubt about their prophecy, and no error will creep into their prophecy. But in a broader sense, a Prophet is also someone who has begun to receive
prophetic insights and who has been struck by a revelation from Above.

--- PAGE BREAK ---However, such a person is not yet confident in his prophecy and may stumble.

But those who know the ways of prophecy perfectly know all this well: they
know the possible obstacles, they know their signs and how to avoid them in
order to achieve true prophecy.

They taught their disciples, as we mentioned
above, prevented their mistakes, and led them to the truth.

[10] The source of such errors is the forces of impurity that exist in the
world, acting in accordance with what is imprinted in their nature and
given to their power.

They have the power to mislead people by sending
influences upon them that resemble true prophecy, revealing to them both
true and false things, and even performing certain miracles before them.

Such a thing can happen to a person against his will, or it can happen
according to his desire.

Namely, such a case can happen to a person even
though he did nothing to bring it about or even tried to achieve the opposite
(true prophecy), but was not perfect in his deeds and efforts.

Or it may
happen to someone who, in their wickedness, desired it and sought to obtain
it, namely, they followed the forces of evil and tried to join them of their
own accord in order to achieve what they wanted with their help: that certain
things would be revealed to him, as we mentioned, with the help of which he
would be considered a Prophet and would incite people according to his desire
or would be respected in their eyes.

Such are the prophets among the Jews, who strive to join forces with evil and
attain knowledge of certain things, with which they tempt those who believe
in God.

With the help of unclean forces, they perform miracles to confirm
their prophecies.

However, they themselves know that all they have comes from
the uncleanness they have chosen for themselves, and they do not consider
themselves prophets, but act in this way out of the wickedness of their
hearts.With the help of unclean forces, they perform miracles to confirm
their prophecies.

However, they themselves know that all they have comes from
the uncleanness they have chosen for themselves, and they do not consider
themselves prophets, but act in this way out of the wickedness of their
hearts.

But even those who did not seek to achieve this evil could have
fallen into it, and therefore those who wished to attain the level of
prophecy needed an experienced Teacher to instruct them, and with his help
they would be saved from this evil until they attained the level of Faith of
true prophecy.

For when they reached it, they would see the great difference
between true and false prophecy, and they would know it and could no longer
doubt the truth.

[11] Something similar happened to the prophets of King Ahab, who were
seduced by the evil spirit.

Because of the king's evil deeds, it was decreed
that he would go to war and be killed there.

And it was necessary to make him
experience a strong temptation that would draw him into this war and prevent
him from retreating from it, even though something happened to him that
should have turned him away from war.

He did not properly study the ways of true prophecy and did not distinguish
between falsehood and truth, and therefore the Sages said of him, "The spirit
of Navi confused him," and they also said, "He should have been more
scrupulous," as the true Prophet warned him.

In fact, the king was mistaken
and thought that this time the prophecy of his prophets (idolaters) was true,
although their efforts were directed toward impurity.

But all this was caused
by the Most High.

Understand all this well.

Chapter 5
[1] Generally speaking, prophecies are divided into two levels: the first
is the level of all Prophets, and the second is the level of the Teacher.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Understand all this well. Chapter 5
[1] Generally speaking, prophecies are divided into two levels: the first
is the level of all Prophets, and the second is the level of the Teacher. The Holy One, blessed be He, Himself made a distinction between them and
explained it: "If there is a Prophet among you, then I will reveal Myself
to him and speak with him."

--- PAGE BREAK ---[2] The prophecies of all prophets occur in visions and dreams.

That is,
the Almighty uses dreams, which are inherent in human nature, as a means of
conveying prophecy.

However, this does not mean that prophecy and dreams are phenomena of the
same order; it is simply that the Higher Wisdom considered dreams to be a
worthy means of conveying prophecy.

And when the Sages called dreams one-
sixtieth of prophecy, they only meant that in dreams, messages are conveyed
to a person in a way that is different from the human mind, through
Consciousness.

[3] When the prophetic influence intensifies, the Prophet loses his senses
and feelings and plunges into something like a dream.

His thoughts become
similar to those of a sleeping person who is dreaming, and then prophecy is
attracted to him.

This can happen to the Prophet while awake, as we have
mentioned, or he may receive prophecy in a night dream while lying in bed.

But in any case, prophecy can only come to him when he loses his senses and
is immersed in this slumber (samadhi).

It is possible, however, that this
will happen for a short period of time, and then he will immediately return
to his original state; but at the moment of prophecy, he will lose
sensitivity and sink into a trance (the Akashic Records) for a while, until
the prophecy is received.

[4] Prophets do not see as a person sees an object in front of him, but as
one who sees it through glass (a reflection in a mirror), not just one, but
as if through a system of many panes, in which the image is transmitted from
one pane to another; but the visible object is undoubtedly one, and its
movements are visible through the panes, although they do not see it
directly.

Moreover, their vision is like looking through unpolished glass, in
which it is impossible to see the object clearly.[4] Prophets do not see as a person sees an object in front of him, but as
one who sees it through glass (a reflection in a mirror), not just one, but
as if through a system of many panes, in which the image is transmitted from
one pane to another; but the visible object is undoubtedly one, and its
movements are visible through the panes, although they do not see it
directly.

Moreover, their vision is like looking through unpolished glass, in
which it is impossible to see the object clearly.

So it is impossible for
them to see the Light of the Most High clearly, even after many reflections
of the image, although they actually see the Light and have no doubt about
it.

And in this, too, the Prophets differ and are divided into levels of
Faith, since one's "glass" is more "polished" than another's, and he
comprehends more clearly.

But the Prophet who comprehends all this comprehends it in a true way, that
is, he understands that the One who reveals Himself to him is the Creator,
blessed be His Name.

The Prophet comprehends the essence of the
"reflection," its nature and mystery, and comprehends and grasps with his
mind the ideas that influence him truly and clearly.

But just as the
revelation of Light to him occurs through these "reflections of the image,"
so knowledge comes to him in the form of parables and allegories, which are
the means through which prophecy comes.

[5] But the Master's prophecy is carried out in a higher way than all of
this (described above).

The Teacher does not need to lose consciousness and fall asleep.

Prophecy
comes to Him in His normal state, and it is said: "I speak with him face to
face." The message is revealed to the Teacher as if it were the only one.

However, Light is revealed to the Teacher in accordance with what he can
accept, in the form of an image (reflection), for without this it is
impossible for a person to comprehend his Creator.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Prophecy
comes to Him in His normal state, and it is said: "I speak with him face to
face." The message is revealed to the Teacher as if it were the only one. However, Light is revealed to the Teacher in accordance with what he can
accept, in the form of an image (reflection), for without this it is
impossible for a person to comprehend his Creator. But at least this image
(reflection) he comprehended the entire Light clearly, like one who looks
into polished and transparent glass without any obstruction to his vision. And it is said about this: "And he sees the image of the Lord," for the image
revealed there is seen very well by the Teacher, unlike all the Prophets, who
were unable to perceive that image well. And from the comprehensible image,
the Teacher receives a very great and clear understanding, surpassing the
understanding of all other Prophets.

--- PAGE BREAK ---[6] And there was another difference between the prophecies of all the
Prophets and the prophecies of the Teacher: the other Prophets could not
prophesy at any time, but only at the moment when the Creator, blessed be His
Name, desired it, He sent His influence upon them and they prophesied.

But
for the Teacher, receiving prophecy depends on his desire; he can connect
with the Most High and draw down revelation as needed.

And furthermore: other prophets understood only their own particular matters,
that which the Lord, blessed be He, wished to reveal to them; but the Teacher
was honored with the revelation of all the orders of creation; he received
permission to investigate everything and search everywhere, and he was given
all the keys that had never been given to anyone else, and this is what the
Scripture says: "In all My house he is trusted," and it is also said: "I will
bring all My goodness before you."
[7] All the Prophets, when they comprehended the image in which the Light
(Inglia) was presented to them, comprehended the mystery of His image and its
essence, that is, the mystery of the existence of this concept — the image of
the Light, and how it comes about, and what is meant by all this.

Through
this image, they also comprehended the true knowledge of the mysteries of the
Blessed One's greatness.

They also understood the truth that God actually has
no image at all, and that the image they saw was something created for the
eyes of the Prophet at the will of the Most High, for reasons known to Him.Through
this image, they also comprehended the true knowledge of the mysteries of the
Blessed One's greatness.

They also understood the truth that God actually has
no image at all, and that the image they saw was something created for the
eyes of the Prophet at the will of the Most High, for reasons known to Him.

It is said about this: "And you do not see the image, only the voice," and
"For you have not seen any image." For in fact, the Arians understood two
things: first, they understood that the true essence of the Most High has no
image at all, and that all these representations have nothing to do with it;
and after this knowledge, an image from the category of prophetic images was
also revealed to them, about which it is said: "And they saw the image of
God." This means that prophecy is not, in fact, a vision of Light, but a
vision depicted by the "power of speech," which is like an image on glass,
through which they comprehend various details in the mysteries of the
Divinity of the Blessed One and His creation and governance.

Part 4
Chapter 1
[1] All service to God is divided into two parts: the first is the
study of the Holy Scriptures, and the second is the fulfillment of the
prescriptions of the Vedas.

[2] The fulfillment of the prescriptions of the Vedas is divided into
four types: the first is constant, the second is daily, the third is
time-dependent, and the fourth is circumstance-dependent.

[3] Permanent observance of the Vedic injunctions is that which a person must
observe constantly, such as loving God and fearing His wrath.

Daily
observance is that which a person must observe every day, such as offering
prayers and reading the Vedas (sacred texts).

Time-dependent duties are those that must be observed at certain times, such
as fasting and religious holidays.

Circumstantial — that which must be observed when certain circumstances
arise.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Time-dependent duties are those that must be observed at certain times, such
as fasting and religious holidays. Circumstantial — that which must be observed when certain circumstances
arise. In all these categories, there are commands and warnings, that is,
prescriptive and prohibitive commandments, which are mentioned in Scripture:
"Turn away from evil and do good."

--- PAGE BREAK ---[4] The basis of these principles (of serving God) has been explained in
general terms.

It consists of turning to the Almighty and seeking His
closeness in the ways He has established for us to draw near and commune with
Him.

We must strive to remove all obstacles of evil, inseparable from the
darkness of the materiality of this world, and make efforts to draw closer to
God so that we may become one with Him and attain perfection through His
perfection.

This is the desire of the Almighty and the main purpose of His
creation of the world (Yavi).

[5] But the details of these principles depend on the laws established for
man and the world in all their aspects, and on the ways given to man for
self-improvement and the improvement of all Creation in accordance with the
order in all its parts, in the "roots" and in the "branches."
Chapter 2
[1] The study of Faith (Veda) is necessary, because without it it is
impossible to fulfill the precepts of the Holy Scriptures.

For if a person
does not know what he is commanded to do, how can he do it?

But, in addition
to all this, the study of Faith has another important purpose in the
perfection of man.

[2] Among the influences that the Blessed One exerts for the needs of His
creations, there is one influence (Radiance) that is superior to all others,
and the essence of this influence is more significant and excellent than
anything that exists in reality.

That is, it (Radiance) is the greatest
likeness of the True Essence of the Most High that can exist in creation
(man), and its significance and level are similar to the truthfulness of the
level of the Blessed One, and it is precisely this (Radiance) that the Lord,
blessed be He, bestows from His Light upon His creations.

The Creator has
linked this influence of His with a phenomenon created by Him for this
purpose — Faith (Knowledge of God).

There are two aspects to Faith: utterance
and knowledge.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Creator has
linked this influence of His with a phenomenon created by Him for this
purpose — Faith (Knowledge of God). There are two aspects to Faith: utterance
and knowledge. It has already been explained above that the Lord, blessed be He, compiled a
collection of words and sayings — the Books of Faith (the Aryan Vedas) and
the books of the Prophets and Holy Scriptures that follow them in level — and
connected this influence (Radiance) with these Books in such a way that when
they are read aloud, this influence will be attracted to the one pronouncing
them, provided that this pronunciation is performed by a believer. And also,
when the true meaning of these sayings is known, this Radiance will be
attracted to the one who knows them. But there are many levels of Faith in this influence, as in all other
influences and phenomena of reality (Yavi), and the effects of recitation and
knowledge are subdivided as the Supreme Wisdom deemed appropriate. One type
of utterance attracts the influence of a certain level, and another attracts
the influence of another level, and similarly in cognition (Veda). But there
is no element in the study of Faith that would not attract one of the levels
of this sublime influence (Radiance), if the necessary conditions are met. [3] It is evident that as knowledge increases, so does the level of influence
it exerts. One who understands only the language of the Vedas is not equal to
one who understands their meaning, and one who understands the superficial
meaning is not comparable to one who penetrates deeply, and one who delves
only a little is not comparable to one who reaches considerable depths. But one of the manifestations of the Blessed One's kindness was that each
step of Faith attracts a certain level of influence, so that anyone who has
learned anything from Faith will receive from this great influence that which
is connected with

--- PAGE BREAK ---that knowledge.

The same person who has not attained any knowledge, but is
only at the level of saying prayers, will receive a small share of this
impact (Radiance) from this alone.

It turns out that most people are worthy
of it: some less, some more.

[4] But besides this division, which exists in order to truly reward people
for their efforts in Her (Faith), there is also a hierarchy (levels) and
division (steps) in accordance with the need to correct all of Creation.

There is no part of Faith through which some part of Creation (man) is not
corrected and perfected.

It turns out that those who want to serve the Creator with perfect service
must engage in all parts of Faith in accordance with their abilities in order
to participate in the correction of all Creation.

[5] The conditions that must accompany the study of the Holy Scriptures
(Vedas) are as follows: God-fearingness in the study itself and constant
correction of one's actions.

For the entire Power of Faith lies only in what the Blessed One has connected
with it and conditioned His precious influence (Radiance) upon it, that it
will be brought about by the utterance of Holy words and the knowledge of the
Vedas.

Without this, the pursuit of Faith would be no different from the
pursuit of any other endeavors or books of wisdom in all other areas of
knowledge, which inform us about certain phenomena, but which do not lead to
an increase in the value and significance in the Soul of the one who reads
them and gains wisdom from them, nor to the correction of creation (ego).

The influence of Faith is divine, as we have mentioned, and, moreover, it is
the most sublime and exalted of all that is drawn and comes from the Creator
to His creatures.

And therefore, it is quite clear that a person should fear
and tremble when engaging in such an endeavor, for he stands before God and
is engaged in drawing the Great Light from Him to himself.The influence of Faith is divine, as we have mentioned, and, moreover, it is
the most sublime and exalted of all that is drawn and comes from the Creator
to His creatures.

And therefore, it is quite clear that a person should fear
and tremble when engaging in such an endeavor, for he stands before God and
is engaged in drawing the Great Light from Him to himself.

He should be
ashamed of his human baseness, tremble before the exaltedness of the Blessed
One, and rejoice greatly that he has been granted a good lot, but also
rejoice with trembling.

This attitude means that a person should not be
frivolous in their pursuit of Faith or show disrespect for its words or its
Books (the Vedas).

They should know before Whom they stand and with Whom they
are engaged.

And if they do so, their teaching will be as it truly should be,
and through them that influence (Radiance) will be attracted.

The Divine
distinction will be strengthened in the person, and correction and Radiance
will be attracted to all Creation (Yavi).

But if this condition is not fulfilled, then the Radiance will not be
attracted, and the words will be like all other human speech, reading them
will be like reading a letter, and thoughts will be like thoughts about the
affairs of this world.

On the contrary, it will be counted against him, for
he approached the Holy One without fear and behaved frivolously before the
Creator at the very moment of contact with His Holiness.

And according to the
level of fear and the degree of reverence and caution, there will be a
measure of the value of the teaching and the level of Radiance attracted by
it.

[6] And the second condition is the correction of deeds.

For whoever wishes
to attract influence (Radiance) must be worthy and ready to attract it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

[6] And the second condition is the correction of deeds. For whoever wishes
to attract influence (Radiance) must be worthy and ready to attract it. If he
defiles himself with sins and misdeeds, distances himself from the Creator,
and wanders after the forces of impurity and evil, he will certainly be told:
"And God said to the wicked man: Who are you to tell My Laws and utter the
words of My Covenant?" The Sages also said: "Anyone who teaches an unworthy
student is like one who offers a sacrifice (prayer) to an idol." Undoubtedly,
the teaching of such a person will not attract the influence we have
mentioned, even in the slightest degree.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Nevertheless, the Sages discovered a great secret: if the wicked had not
abandoned the study of Faith, they would eventually have returned to
goodness.

And although they are unable to exert any influence from the Most
High, the words of Faith are holy in themselves, and with constant study,
they will bring about a small awakening and a kind of tiny epiphany to those
who study them, which will eventually overcome them and return them to
goodness.

The Sages said about this: "Let them (even) leave Me, but observe
My Faith, for because they will engage in it, the Light contained within it
will return them to goodness." But it is clear that this does not refer to
those who engage in Faith for laughter and mockery or distort its true
meaning, but to those who engage in it at least as they engage in other
sciences.

[7] But those who purify and sanctify themselves in their deeds will attract
the influence of their teaching in accordance with their readiness.

And the
more they prepare themselves, the greater the value and power of the
teaching will grow.

We find in the Ancient Sages that their Teaching crowned
them with great power, superiority, and distinction, which is not found in
later generations, and all because of the advantage of their readiness over
the readiness of the latter.

Chapter 3
[1] The Vedas (Ancient) explain the aspects of love and fear that bring a
person closer to and unite them with the Creator, blessed be His Name.

This
refers to true love and fear — love for the Almighty Himself, not for the
reward for love, and fear of His exaltedness, not of punishment for sins.

Such fear purifies a person from the darkness of his materiality and
physicality and attracts Radiance to him.

The measure of fear determines the
measure of a person's purification and attraction of Radiance.

Those who
reach a state in which such fear is always present will have Radiance
constantly.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The measure of fear determines the
measure of a person's purification and attraction of Radiance. Those who
reach a state in which such fear is always present will have Radiance
constantly. The Russians (Rus) possessed this quality in perfection, about
whom it is said: "For the Russians, fear is a small matter."
It is difficult for other people to achieve this properly; but the measure of
a person's attainment of fear of God determines the strength of his purity
and holiness. And especially when a person fulfills the commandments
(prescriptions of the Vedas) or studies the Faith (Vedas): God-fearingness is
a necessary condition for this study. [2] And love for God brings a person closer to and connects them with the
Creator, multiplies their spiritual strength, and crowns them with great
crowns. The main thing is in the joy of the heart, in the burning of the soul
before its Creator, and in a person's dedication of their whole self to the
sanctification of the Name of the Most High, in order to do what is pleasing
to Him. And to this are added faith in Him, the Blessed One, and, in particular, hope
in Him, etc. — all things that bring a person closer to the Creator, blessed
be His Name, and strengthen holiness and radiance within him. Chapter 4
[1] Two duties are incumbent upon a person to perform before the Almighty
every day: reading the Vedas and prayer, and during times of fasting —
additional obligations. The first daily duty is the recitation of prayer. Its content is the unity of
the Most High and acceptance of Him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Creator, blessed be His Name, produced various objects according to His
desire, higher and lower, spiritual and material, established various orders
for them, and laid down in the nature of each of them to perform actions and
undergo various transformations and conversions, as His Wisdom bestowed upon
each of them.

But the Creator, blessed be His Name, is the Root and Cause of
all of them.

And this is understandable in two aspects: in the aspect of
existence and in the aspect of action.

In terms of existence: this is what we have already explained in the first
part, how all realities depend on Him and arise from His Will, which cannot
be said about His existence, which is necessarily self-sufficient and does
not depend on anyone else.

But all other realities (worlds) exist only
because He desired them and sustains their existence by His Will.

In terms of action: the Creator has endowed the elements of Creation with the
nature to rule over what is within their power and to perform great deeds,
each according to its nature.

But despite this, in reality, they possess only
the power and authority that the Creator, blessed be His Name, the True Lord,
the Ruling and Almighty, has given them, and they do only what He has given
and gives them the power to do, and He, the Lord over them, is able to
increase or decrease their power at any moment He wishes.

Here, one profound point should be noted.

The system established by His
Wisdom to correct creation contains many aspects of evil.

They appear again
and again in the world, both as a result of the bad choices of sinners and as
a result of decrees to punish people.

At first glance, it seems that this
(the existence of evil) is contrary to the will of the Almighty.

After all,
He desires only good; His entire desire is to bestow blessings, but His Name
is defiled when evildoers rule and evil and corruption increase among people.At first glance, it seems that this
(the existence of evil) is contrary to the will of the Almighty.

After all,
He desires only good; His entire desire is to bestow blessings, but His Name
is defiled when evildoers rule and evil and corruption increase among people.

But those who know the ways of the Almighty and delve into their essence will
understand that all this is nothing more than the construction of a chain of
causes in a profound plan, all of which are directed toward one point: the
perfection of Creation.

When this goal is achieved, all elements of evil will
cease to exist, as we mentioned in the first part.

It turns out that the Creator is the True Ruler of everything, and only
His plan is carried out.

This plan consists in bringing His Goodness and
perfection to creation (human beings).

But truly, according to the foundations of wonderful Wisdom and true
Goodness, all events must pass through the stages of Faith (trials), which
include evil.

And at the end of all trials, it will become clear that the
Creator, blessed be His Name, is one, unique, and separate, and that He
causes all these events on the path to the True Goal—True Goodness
(Immortality).

And this includes one more profound thing: the revelation of the truth of His
unity.

We have already explained that the general principle of all
circumstances existing in the world is that the Creator created evil (ego) so
that people would remove it and establish good (EGO) in themselves and in
Creation (Yavi).

This principle is the root of many laws and important
foundations necessary for achieving perfection in all parts and aspects
(degrees of Faith).

For there are many details in Creation regarding the
existence of evil, its actions, and its power, and there are many details
regarding evil's relationship to a person who is susceptible to evil's
influence and placed in its environment.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This principle is the root of many laws and important
foundations necessary for achieving perfection in all parts and aspects
(degrees of Faith). For there are many details in Creation regarding the
existence of evil, its actions, and its power, and there are many details
regarding evil's relationship to a person who is susceptible to evil's
influence and placed in its environment. And there are also many details in
overcoming evil, freeing oneself from its shackles and defeating it, and in
relation to the existence of good. — its spread and strengthening as evil is conquered and defeated. But the
root of evil's existence, its activity, and power lies in the concealment

--- PAGE BREAK ---by the Creator of His unity, in that He does not reveal His True Essence to
everyone.

The degree of reality of evil depends on the extent of this
concealment.

The root of all destruction of evil, its removal, and the establishment of
all Creation (Yavi) in goodness is the revelation of the unity of the Most
High.

The Scripture says about this: "See now that I am He, and there is no
other god besides Me; I kill and I make alive; I wound and I heal; and there
is none that can deliver out of My hand."
It turns out that the final correction of all Creation depends on the
revelation of the unity of the Almighty.

He was, is, and will always be one,
unique, and separate, but at present He is not revealed to everyone as He
should be.

In the future, however, He will reveal Himself to all creatures,
as it is written in Zechariah (Asa Hari): "On that day the Lord will be one
and His name will be one."
But the people of Asia (Rus), who were honored with His true Teaching
(Faith), knew this truth and testified to it, and this is said in Scripture:
"And you, Rus
— My children," said the Lord.

And this is a great merit for the RUS
(descendants of the Aryans).

All governance of this world is divided into daytime governance and
nighttime governance.

Every morning and every evening, the structures and
positions of the Angels who perform their duties according to the order of
governance are renewed.All governance of this world is divided into daytime governance and
nighttime governance.

Every morning and every evening, the structures and
positions of the Angels who perform their duties according to the order of
governance are renewed.

And the sons of God (believers) are obliged to bear witness to the unity of
the Most High in all aspects, namely:
in the aspect of existence: that only His existence is necessary, and
everything else exists by His Will and depends on Him;
in the aspect of power: that only He is the sole Ruler, and everyone who
acts does so only with the permission of the Most High, given by Him for
this purpose;
In terms of management: although the causal chains are numerous, extensive,
and deep, there is only one Cause and one Goal, that is, God, blessed be His
Name, directs everything toward the Highest Goal—True Perfection
(Immortality).

And although this is not revealed now, in reality this is the
truth, and it will be revealed and known.

[2] It is also necessary to understand that the Creator, blessed be His Name,
is the King over all His creations.

The explanation for this is as follows:
the existence of the Most High does not depend on anyone else and does not
relate to anyone else.

His existence is necessary, and He is perfect in
Himself; there is nothing higher or lower than Him to which He relates.

That
is, there is nothing on which He depends: neither as a consequence with a
cause, nor as something that joins with that to which it joins.

And in this capacity, we call Him by the name Great Ra-M-Ha, that is, the One
Who Is, Whose existence is necessary in and of itself.

But since He desired to create creatures, and all of them depend on Him in
their existence and in all their aspects, as we have mentioned, in this
capacity we call Him "Lord of all," for everything is from Him, and
everything belongs to Him, and He rules over everything according to His
desire.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And in this capacity, we call Him by the name Great Ra-M-Ha, that is, the One
Who Is, Whose existence is necessary in and of itself. But since He desired to create creatures, and all of them depend on Him in
their existence and in all their aspects, as we have mentioned, in this
capacity we call Him "Lord of all," for everything is from Him, and
everything belongs to Him, and He rules over everything according to His
desire. And in His goodness and favor, God wanted to humble Himself in His modesty,
to lower the exaltation of His Radiance and be comparable to His creations,
even though in reality they have absolutely no relation to Him. He wanted to
be for them what a king is to his people, to be considered their Head and
Ruler, and to be glorified by them as a king is glorified by his people, as
it is said in the Vedas: "In the multitude of the people is the greatness of
the king." In this capacity, we call Him "King of the Universe." And in this
capacity, He is considered our Head and is revered by us. And we too are
obliged to serve Him and obey Him in everything He commands, just as subjects
obey their king. And in this capacity

--- PAGE BREAK ---we are also obliged to acknowledge Him every day, to enthrone Him above us,
and to submit to Him and His commands as servants submit to their king.

That is, recognizing that He is the King of kings, reigning over all His
creations, both higher and lower, accepting His yoke and submitting to Him.

[3] All this is very important for the correction of the entire Creation.

For the order and structure of Creation are such that when the Kingdom of
the Most High becomes known and recognized by all creatures, every kind of
goodness and tranquility is present in Creation, blessings multiply, and
peace increases.

And when the servants (Jews) do not obey and do not
recognize His Kingdom, all good is lacking, darkness prevails, and evil
reigns.

And these ways of God can be traced in all parts of His Creation, upper and
lower, active and passive.

But recognition or non-recognition of His Kingdom
follows, without question, from the deeds of men.

When the Creator reveals
Himself and reigns over the world (Yavi), it will bring great good and great
peace to His creation, and Radiance, Holiness, purity, and all good will
multiply, while the forces of evil will bow down, submit, and no longer spoil
the good of the world.

And when the Holy One hides His Face and does not
reveal the Power of His reign, the forces of evil and its offspring (the
Jews) spread and rule — in all places where possible, and this is the
totality of evil that exists in the world.

And as long as believers are
strengthened in their faith every day, honor the Most High, and acknowledge
Him with all their hearts and mouths, the Holy One, blessed be He, manifests
Himself in our world, the forces of evil weaken under the influence of
goodness, and Goodness (Radiance) is drawn into the world.

When believers
testify to His unity, He responds to them, exalts Himself in His unity, and
strengthens them (believers).And as long as believers are
strengthened in their faith every day, honor the Most High, and acknowledge
Him with all their hearts and mouths, the Holy One, blessed be He, manifests
Himself in our world, the forces of evil weaken under the influence of
goodness, and Goodness (Radiance) is drawn into the world.

When believers
testify to His unity, He responds to them, exalts Himself in His unity, and
strengthens them (believers).

He adds correction after correction to the
world in the aspect of the true correction we mentioned, to which all chains
of command are directed, and He realizes His plan: bringing Creation to a
state of perfect goodness.

And it is necessary to understand that all these things are intended only for
the correction of Creation to be carried out by people, and not by itself.

For the management of the world has already been established and is carried
out in such a way that all its cycles move toward complete perfection, guided
by the kindness and Power of the Creator.

But His Wisdom has decreed that
this perfection be carried out through people.

And when the people who have
done evil are perfected, then the perfection itself will be complete, since
the creations themselves will be the possessors of their perfection.

And it turns out that the basic principle of these things is that what the
Lord, blessed be He, has ordered and prepared for the perfection of creatures
will be fulfilled and realized by people.

Then people themselves will be
perfected in a fitting manner.

[4] True Perfection is drawn to Creation from the perfection of the Most
High, for only He is true perfection.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then people themselves will be
perfected in a fitting manner. [4] True Perfection is drawn to Creation from the perfection of the Most
High, for only He is true perfection. One of the consequences of fulfilling
the commandment to read the Vedas is that when people testify to His unity
and acknowledge that literally everything depends on Him, then He responds
to them, and it turns out that all Creation is perfected by His perfection,
and all entities are corrected by the True, Fundamental Essence — the
essence of Him, Blessed be He. [5] One of the conditions for fulfilling this commandment is that a person
must be willing to give his life for the Almighty and accept all suffering
and all kinds of punishment for the sanctification of His Name. And this
determination will be counted toward the person as if he had actually done so
and been killed, sanctifying the Name of God. And such a decision produces
important results for the benefit of Creation and universal

--- PAGE BREAK ---correction.

The fact is that one of the principles established by the Higher
Wisdom in created objects and their existence is that they are all at a
certain spiritual level, which the Higher Wisdom considered appropriate to
the desired state of the world and its conditions.

This level provides a place for darkness to exist and for impurity to spread
and act, but within certain limits, namely, so that there is not so much
darkness and impurity does not reign to such an extent that the world is
completely defiled and creation is corrupted.

For if it came to that, they
would all be subject to destruction and erasure, as happened in ancient
times.

But darkness and impurity are present to such an extent that the world
is not completely ruined, but that profane and unholy, dark and unilluminated
phenomena remain in it.

And it was established that this would be the first and fundamental stage of
Faith, but, as an addition, sublime Radiance and precious influence would be
made possible for people, with the help of which they would rise above the
first stage of Faith, and Holiness and enlightenment would be achieved by
creatures to a degree befitting the essence of this world.

All this is measured with wonderful Wisdom, every phenomenon within its
limits, no more and no less.

That is, it is measured what is appropriate for
them to have at the basic level and what is added.

And both levels, in turn,
are divided into parts and various sub-levels.

The times when objects should
receive this addition to their levels of Faith are also measured.

This influence and Radiance must be renewed daily in creations in order to
raise them above the basic, first stage of Faith and give them Holiness and
enlightenment.The times when objects should
receive this addition to their levels of Faith are also measured.

This influence and Radiance must be renewed daily in creations in order to
raise them above the basic, first stage of Faith and give them Holiness and
enlightenment.

The Highest Wisdom established the nature of this Radiance,
which intensifies and removes darkness from the world and increases dignity,
significance, and Holiness in the world and in creations, and made the
attraction of this influence (Radiance) dependent on the actions of people in
our world, as in the case of all other influences and corrections.

And the
action on which this influence depends is self-sacrifice for the
sanctification of the Name of the Most High.

And there are different levels of this as well.

If a person truly gives his
life for the sanctification of God's Name, this attracts a great and powerful
influence, brings about the strongest correction in Creation, and greatly
multiplies Holiness and enlightenment in it.

Mental self-sacrifice, that is,
the determination to give one's life, also attracts this kind of impact,
although not as strong.

But for a believer, mental self-sacrifice, which is
achieved by reading the Vedas, is sufficient.

As a result, the influence of
holiness and enlightenment is attracted to all of Creation in order to give
it a slight elevation above the profanity and darkness in which man dwells,
according to his level of Faith.

[6] Thus, Faith is: recognition of the unity of the Almighty in all His
aspects, acceptance of the yoke of the Creator, His reign over all Worlds,
and the decision to give one's life for the sanctification of His Name.

As a result, the Lord, blessed be His Name, strengthens His rule over all
Creation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

[6] Thus, Faith is: recognition of the unity of the Almighty in all His
aspects, acceptance of the yoke of the Creator, His reign over all Worlds,
and the decision to give one's life for the sanctification of His Name. As a result, the Lord, blessed be His Name, strengthens His rule over all
Creation. The forces of evil bow down and submit, while goodness is
strengthened; Creation feels its dependence on Him and is perfected by His
perfection; the aforementioned influence is attracted, elevating Creation to
the necessary degree, imparting to it the appropriate enlightenment and
sanctification. [7] And this great correction is combined with another—the
glorification that is pronounced afterwards:
“Praise to the Great Ra-M-Ha, now, forever and ever.” All the influences and
Radiances of the Most High are attracted by various causal chains. But all

--- PAGE BREAK ---They are rooted in the unity and true perfection of the Most High and depend
on them.

Creations participate in various cycles, according to all these
influences and the causes they generate, and will ultimately attain true
perfection.

For the Supreme Wisdom has decreed that creations can only
achieve perfection in these ways, after all the transformations.

And since
all action and governance belong to the One — everything depends on Him, and
all these influences are known to be nothing other than the creations of the
One and the ways by which He can be reached.

And since the meaning of the Vedas is to make everything dependent on Unity
(with God), it follows that all influences depend on Him, and everything
returns to the theme of true perfection.

As a result of all this, the Most High will place His Name upon His
creations, and His Holiness will unite with them in a great union.

He will
rule over them and constantly draw them after Him; they will all be
dependent on Him, perfecting themselves through His perfection.

This state
of creation will indeed be attained at the end of all cycles of time.

Then
the Will of the Almighty will be fulfilled, and His Light will increase, and
this is the basis of the Crown with which He crowns Himself in His creations
and is, as it were, exalted through them.

However, at present, only spiritual people are perfect, for they are pure and
holy, and His Name abides in them and is bound to them by a strong bond.

They
are literally constantly drawn after Him, and His Light is exalted in them.

But in the objects of our world, this process is not complete, because people
are still imperfect: evil is mixed in with them, they have not purified
themselves from it, and the Light of the Most High is not exalted in them as
it should be.

Angels, by virtue of their state of correction, glorify Him.

"Blessed be His Name forever and ever." The lower ones (demons) cannot
glorify Him in this way, for they are unworthy of it.Angels, by virtue of their state of correction, glorify Him.

"Blessed be His Name forever and ever." The lower ones (demons) cannot
glorify Him in this way, for they are unworthy of it.

The Name does not dwell
in them as it should, and the Light is not exalted in them.

[8] The remaining sections of the Vedas conclude this idea, summarized in
three basic principles: accepting His yoke, loving Him, and accepting Faith.

At first, a person must have the intention to strengthen himself in love for
God in all its conditions, namely: "with all his heart, with all his soul,
and with all his being," to attract the Radiance of His Light and His yoke,
to correct the position of man in all aspects and to correct the aspect of
his mind.

[9] After that, a person takes upon himself the yoke of the commandments.

And
when the time comes, the Lord, blessed be He, will strengthen His influence
and Radiance on Asia, subdue evil before the Rus, separate them from evil,
exalt them above the unbelievers and the wicked, and raise them up to
Himself.

And they will be freed from evil forever, and from then on and
forever they will become sons of God, attached to the Most High and crowned
by Him.

And this eternal correction, and all the blessings that have befallen and
befall us, depend on it.

Therefore, the Rus were commanded to always remember
Him and mention His Name, for in this way this correction is strengthened and
the Light is intensified, and the benefit of this correction is constantly
attracted.

[10] And another correction is made when reading these sections: the
correction by a person of all elements of his essence with the Light of the
Almighty, and also the correction by him of all details of Creation.

A person's essence consists of aspects corresponding to the number of steps
of Faith they have passed.

All of Creation is divided into three steps of
Faith, and they correspond to nine steps of Faith.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A person's essence consists of aspects corresponding to the number of steps
of Faith they have passed. All of Creation is divided into three steps of
Faith, and they correspond to nine steps of Faith. Both must be corrected
with the Light of the Almighty, which is accomplished with the help of the
words of prayer. [11] The sages added blessings before and after reading the Vedas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---For all of Being is renewed daily by the Almighty.

And there are two aspects
to this renewal.

The first is the maintenance of the world's existence and
its constancy; the Divine influence is renewed daily in all of creation in
order to maintain and continue its existence.

The second aspect is that for each day of the 26,000 years (that the world
has existed), there is a separate decree from the Almighty.

These decrees
determine all the luminaries, influences (radiance), positions, and
conditions necessary for the world to complete its desired cycle (circle) and
attain perfection.

It turns out that each day appears literally in a new
capacity, and in this aspect, all of Creation is renewed.

It is said about
this: "In His goodness, the Lord renews the Universe daily."
And in accordance with this principle, the Sages established these blessings
and praises.

All creations can be divided into two groups: the first is all
objects of the world, higher and lower, and the second is the human race.

And
in this order, they established the first blessing (prayer) in praise of the
entire collection of creations and those who rule over them: the creatures
below and the Angels above, each in its own order, and included here the
theme of day and night and the luminaries that rule over them.

In the second
blessing (prayer), we thank the Almighty for His love and for bringing us
closer to serving Him.

These blessings include all these issues in their true
form.

They are followed by a third blessing (prayer) about all the great
wonders that the Lord, blessed be He, has performed, and mainly about the
Light and its details, ordered in all its aspects, according to its true
mysteries, and after the blessings (prayers), the Sages established the
reading of the Vedas.

[12] The basis for these transformations is connected with the morning, when
all of Being is renewed.

And at night, all creations receive an addition
corresponding to the essence of the night.--- PAGE BREAK ---

[12] The basis for these transformations is connected with the morning, when
all of Being is renewed. And at night, all creations receive an addition
corresponding to the essence of the night. But this is nothing more than the
end of what happened during the day and its completion. And in this aspect,
blessings are established in the evening, but more briefly, for they are a
brief repetition of what was said in the morning, because the nightly renewal
of the world is determined by what was renewed during the day. And they added
a blessing (prayer) for nighttime rest and sleep in all its aspects. Chapter 5
[1] The essence of prayer is as follows. One of the orders established by the
Supreme Wisdom is that since creatures receive Goodness (Light) from Above,
they must turn to God, draw near to Him, and seek His Light. And in
proportion to the extent of their turning to Him will be the extent of the
Goodness (Light) drawn to them; if creatures do not turn to God at all,
nothing will be drawn to them. The Lord, blessed be His Name, desires that
the Good for His creatures be multiplied throughout their lives, and
therefore He has established this service (prayer) for them daily, so that
through it an abundance of Good may be poured out upon them, in accordance
with what is necessary for them in their position in this world. [2] However, there is also great depth in all this. The Almighty endowed man
with Consciousness (Mind) so that he would behave judiciously and reasonably
in this world, and entrusted man with the care of all his needs. The
endowment of Consciousness has two foundations. The first is the expression
of the significance and importance of man, who has been given intellect
(mind) and Consciousness (Reason) in order to control himself properly. The
second is man's relationship with the world and its processes, which is
necessary for him to occupy the above-mentioned

--- PAGE BREAK ---position of man, profane and not Holy, which is necessary for him at this
time, according to the order of the Higher Management.

On the one hand, this is truly a lowering of the level of Faith for a person
and their essence, but it is a necessary lowering, leading to a subsequent
rise.

And although this lowering is necessary for a person, on the other
hand, it is required that it not be too great.

For the more a person becomes
entangled in the activities of this world, the further they will stray from
the Higher Light and the more they will sink into darkness.

Therefore, God has prepared a remedy for this.

It consists in the fact that a
person first approaches and stands in prayer before Him, the Blessed One,
asks Him for all his needs, and "places his burden on Him," and this becomes
the universal and fundamental principle of every endeavor (work on oneself).

And when he then goes about his business, he will not get confused and
immersed in materialism, since he has already recognized that everything
depends only on God.

And then he will not fall too low, for he will be
supported by this correction, which he anticipated before his descent.

[3] One of the manifestations of the kindness of the Almighty is that He has
given man the opportunity to come closer to Him even in this world.

And
although the natural state of man is such that he is far from the Light and
immersed in darkness, he is allowed to appear before the Almighty in prayer
and call upon Him.

And then man temporarily rises above his natural lowly
position and draws closer to God, "laying his burden on Him."
This is the reason for the strict prohibition against interrupting prayer.

For during prayer, a person finds himself in close proximity to the Almighty.

And therefore, at the end of prayer, a kind of farewell (bow) was
established, which expresses the return of a person to his normal state, in
which he must remain the rest of the time.For during prayer, a person finds himself in close proximity to the Almighty.

And therefore, at the end of prayer, a kind of farewell (bow) was
established, which expresses the return of a person to his normal state, in
which he must remain the rest of the time.

[4] The sages also taught us the specific conditions that must accompany
prayer in order for it to be perfect, both in terms of closeness to the
Almighty and in terms of attracting influences from Above.

And in accordance
with all this, they organized the text of the prayer for us and established
its statutes and laws.

[5] Everything explained so far relates to the reading of the Vedas and
prayer as such.

However, those who composed the prayer included in it an
appropriate order that makes it possible to make up for the service that is
now lacking.

And it is necessary in connection with the constant daily
renewal according to the laws of time in all its parts.

Chapter 6
On the order of the day and prayer
[1] The Highest Wisdom decreed that the forces of impurity should reign at
night, spreading everywhere they could attach themselves, releasing their
offspring into the world.

And it was meant that at this time people would
return to their homes to sleep and rest until morning, when power would be
taken away from the forces of evil and their offspring, and people would go
back to doing their business until evening.

All these things, with all their
measures and boundaries, are rooted in the very foundations of governance,
corresponding to the various aspects of influences that come to creations at
all levels of Faith.

And it is necessary to know that although, generally speaking, night is
called the time of the power of the forces of impurity, in reality this is
only true for the first half of the night.--- PAGE BREAK ---

All these things, with all their
measures and boundaries, are rooted in the very foundations of governance,
corresponding to the various aspects of influences that come to creations at
all levels of Faith. And it is necessary to know that although, generally speaking, night is
called the time of the power of the forces of impurity, in reality this is
only true for the first half of the night. But at midnight, the influence of
Light and favor radiates from the Most High into all worlds, and the forces
of impurity are deprived of their power; their offspring are expelled from
their dwellings, and the Radiance of the Day begins to awaken

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the day begins to awaken until the day dawns and the corresponding
influence (Light) is attracted, which will renew all of Being.

The fact that dark forces are given power at night and are banished during
the day is part of the natural order of Creation, apart from the power or,
conversely, the reverence they receive as a result of human actions.

And this is what the Higher Wisdom has determined: in order to make room for
the reality of true good and evil, which arise from the actions of those who
possess free will, it is necessary that the world in its natural state be
subject to the power of evil in such a way that there is equal opportunity
for both the spread of evil in parts of the world and the disappearance of
its spread in them.

To this end, the Supreme Wisdom has decreed that there
will be a part of time in which evil will have power and spread on its own,
and this will be a preparation for what may be granted to it by human
actions.

And there will be another part of time when evil will be deprived of
power, and it (this part) will become a forewarning of what positive human
actions can do to it (evil).

God established two powerful realities: Light
and Darkness, drawn from His Radiance and concealment, and divided time
between them into day and night.

They determine the power of the forces of
impurity and their expulsion.

All this is preparation for the results of
human actions.

[2] When power is given to the forces of evil and they spread throughout the
world, spiritual darkness in the world multiplies and intensifies.

And when a
person lies in bed, this impurity that roams the world also spreads to him,
the extent of which is determined by its relationship to the human body from
the perspective of its materiality and its evil origin.[2] When power is given to the forces of evil and they spread throughout the
world, spiritual darkness in the world multiplies and intensifies.

And when a
person lies in bed, this impurity that roams the world also spreads to him,
the extent of which is determined by its relationship to the human body from
the perspective of its materiality and its evil origin.

In addition to this,
it has already been established in the orders of governance that when a
person sleeps, the higher parts of his Soul depart from him, and the person
experiences, to some extent, a taste of death.

As a result of the absence of the purifying Light of the Soul, spiritual
darkness intensifies in the body, and the likelihood of impurity entering
and remaining in it increases.

This is the essence of the evil spirit that
dwells on a person when he awakens.

It is located precisely on the person's
face and nowhere else, since this measure and limits of its dwelling have
been determined for it by the Higher Wisdom as corresponding to the position
of a person in this world, no more and no less.

[3] The Highest Wisdom has prepared a set of actions for man, with the help
of which he can rise above his low nighttime state every morning, purify
himself from what has defiled him, and elevate the whole world above its
humiliation, illuminating the darkness in which it is immersed.

All of this
is included in the resolutions designated for the moment of awakening, which
we fulfill with both actions and words.

[4] The first step is to cleanse the face.

For it is the face that has become
unclean, and it is upon the face that the evil spirit rests, which must be
expelled and cleansed.

The Creator decreed that the evil spirit is expelled
from the face by means of proper ablution, as the Sages taught us.

And it
turns out that the whole body of a person is cleansed in this way, since it
was all defiled by the presence of the evil spirit on the face.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Creator decreed that the evil spirit is expelled
from the face by means of proper ablution, as the Sages taught us. And it
turns out that the whole body of a person is cleansed in this way, since it
was all defiled by the presence of the evil spirit on the face. And in this
there is also a correction of all Creation, which is cleansed of nighttime
impurity and freed from spiritual darkness. To this is added the cleansing of
the person's body through defecation, and he becomes completely clean and
ready to approach the Creator. [5] This is followed by two actions, which in themselves are among the
commandments of Faith and, together with prayer, complete the daily service.

--- PAGE BREAK ---[6] The essence of the commandments is as follows.

Since God desired that
people be sanctified in all aspects of their existence, He gave commandments
for all times and all circumstances so that people would be corrected.

One of
the things that pertains to a person is his body.

And in order for it to also
be corrected in holiness, the Almighty commanded that the body be kept clean.

Then it too receives correction in holiness.

In addition, there is another, deeper meaning in this commandment.

A person
must be "marked" before his God, just as a servant is marked by his master.

This is one of the elements of accepting His yoke and submitting to Him,
Blessed be He.

As we said in the first part, man is given to bring all Creation to
perfection.

By bringing all things to the state desired by God, man serves
the Almighty and fulfills His task.

This happens as a result of man's
actions, which he performs in accordance with Faith and the commandments
entrusted to him.

But all this service rests on one foundation: since man is
the son of God and is entrusted with the correction of all Creation (Yavi),
he is in a position to succeed, and his actions lead to the desired results.

The set of duties entrusted to man is called the "yoke" of the Most High.

This state is reinforced by specific details established by God, one of which
is the distinction of man by the sign of Faith.

In addition to Faith (Knowledge of God) being a constant commandment, the
Sages made it one of the institutions of prayer.

When a person clothes
himself in Faith in order to pray to God, he accepts the yoke of the
Almighty, which gives him the power to perform the activities of the
Almighty, namely, the correction of the World (Yavi).

[7] However, observing the commandments is much more significant than reading
the Vedas.When a person clothes
himself in Faith in order to pray to God, he accepts the yoke of the
Almighty, which gives him the power to perform the activities of the
Almighty, namely, the correction of the World (Yavi).

[7] However, observing the commandments is much more significant than reading
the Vedas.

Through the commandments, the Almighty gives people the ability to
attract Holiness from Him Himself and be crowned with it in such a way that
all their physical and spiritual aspects correspond to this great Light and
receive great correction.

The Scripture says about this: "And all the nations
of the earth shall see that the Name of God is called upon you, and they
shall fear you," and conditions this by observance of the commandments in all
laws and details.

There are two main organs in a person in which the Soul manifests itself
most strongly.

These are the brain and the heart.

The Creator commanded that
the Light first be drawn to the brain through observance of the
commandments, and it will be corrected.

And then this Light will spread to
the heart through Faith, and it will also be corrected.

Thus, a person as a
whole, in all aspects, falls under the attraction of Holiness, is crowned
with it, and is sanctified by great Holiness.

But in order to complete all the elements of this desired correction, it is
necessary to observe the numerous and varied details of the commandment,
corresponding to the subdivision of the aspects of the person himself.

[8] People are commanded to crown themselves with the sign of Faith every
day, except for Holy Days, which are themselves a "sign" for people and crown
humanity with Holiness without any effort on their part.

On other days,
however, this distinction can only be achieved through the effort of prayer.

And even with this effort, the level of distinction achieved is much lower
than that achieved on Holy Days.

But all this is measured in all its limits
by the Highest Wisdom in the best possible way.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And even with this effort, the level of distinction achieved is much lower
than that achieved on Holy Days. But all this is measured in all its limits
by the Highest Wisdom in the best possible way. [9] After a person distinguishes himself by fulfilling the commandments and
is crowned with Faith, the order of prayer is predetermined for him in order
to correct what is necessary. The common goal and intention in this is to
bring all Creation, all worlds (countries), into the proper state in which
the highest influence from Him, the Blessed One, will be radiated upon them
and the influence of the Most High will be drawn upon them, according to
need.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the highest influence from Him, the Blessed One, and to attract the
influence of the Most High upon them, according to need.

[10] Prayer is divided into four main parts.

The first is morning, the second
is afternoon, the third is evening, and the fourth is night.

Prayer and
worship are the purification of the world as a whole and the removal of
everything that delays and prevents the coming of the Higher influence
(Light) into the world.

The general purpose of prayer is to reveal the Light through the utterance
of praises, with which we sing to God and give Him praise.

For the Almighty
has made this revelation dependent on this action, that is, on the praise
given to Him, which is the meaning of prayer.

Although the meaning of the Vedas and blessings (prayers) has already been
explained in general terms, there is another aspect to them.

The order of
levels (degrees of Faith) of Creation and their sequential connection has
already been explained.

All objects develop sequentially, step by step,
starting from the root (Higher) forces and ending with material bodies.

The
Highest Wisdom has decreed that in order for all creations to receive the
influence of the Most High, they must first connect with each other from the
bottom up: the lower ones with the higher ones, and the higher ones with the
even higher ones, and so on, up to the root forces, which, in turn, are
"connected" with Him Himself.

His influence radiates upon them and then
spreads, as it should, from above down through all levels of Creation.

And
all objects are placed in their places according to their levels (degrees) in
order to act in accordance with the order established for them.

Blessings
(prayers) before and after reading the Vedas were established according to
these mysteries.

With the help of these glorifications, each step of Creation
rises until it connects with a higher step of Faith.Blessings
(prayers) before and after reading the Vedas were established according to
these mysteries.

With the help of these glorifications, each step of Creation
rises until it connects with a higher step of Faith.

Then everything becomes
connected and dependent on the Light of the Most High, and His influence is
drawn to all creatures.

This influence occurs through Prayer.

[11] It is important to know that all existing types of influences and their
particularities are grouped into three categories of Higher Influence.

These
three categories are hinted at by the first three letters of the
unpronounceable Name of the Almighty (Ra-M-Ha).

The fourth letter (Great)
hints at the union of all three categories together, which is necessary for
the perfection of Creation.

These three categories correspond to the first
three epithets (of God in prayer): "Great, Mighty, and Merciful." These
categories duly attract the merits of the Forefathers.

And the attraction of
the wholeness that comes from the union of these three categories is due to
the merits of the Aryans, who, as it were, unite with us and complete the
correction of Creation.

And in accordance with these three categories, three
prayers are established, and they attract influence in general terms.

Following these intermediate blessings, this influence is drawn to
particulars as necessary.

With the last three blessings, this influence is
strengthened and takes its place in the recipients of the Light through the
thanksgiving we express for it.

Such is the corrective action of Prayer in
general terms.

[12] We have described the order of prayer on weekdays.

But on holy days, the
Sages did not burden people with more than blessings, for the day itself is
sanctified and blessed, which helps to attract influence from Above.

The
blessing refers to the holiness of the soul in general, so that it (holiness)
may be strengthened, shine, and reign, perfecting all the details of
Creation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But on holy days, the
Sages did not burden people with more than blessings, for the day itself is
sanctified and blessed, which helps to attract influence from Above. The
blessing refers to the holiness of the soul in general, so that it (holiness)
may be strengthened, shine, and reign, perfecting all the details of
Creation. [13] It is also necessary to know that the entire world of Yavi is divided
into three parts: the highest, the middle, and the lowest. The highest,
Heavenly, is called the "world of Pavi," the middle is called our world
(Yavi), and the lowest, the basis, is called the "world of Navi." Together
they make up the entire Universe (3 Worlds).

--- PAGE BREAK ---Above our world (Yavi) is the world of Spirits, the world of Angels, and the
world of Higher Powers —
the roots of creation.

At an even higher level of Faith, we can speak of the totality of the
Almighty's influences, the revelations of His Light, from which all Being
springs and on which it depends.

In a metaphorical sense, we apply the
concept of "world" to this totality of influences and call it the world of
Angels (Gods).

The three previous worlds are called by this name in its
literal sense, for a world is called a community of many entities and various
objects located in one (conceptual) space, divided into many groups and
interacting with each other in various ways.

[14] And according to this order, prayers are established.

"Falling on
one's face" also demonstrates a great degree of reverence for God and has
great power to appease the Attribute of Justice and evoke great mercy, so
that the effect will be generous and abundant.

[15] It is necessary to know that in terms of management procedures, the day
is divided into two parts: morning and afternoon.

The night is also divided
into two parts.

In each of these four periods, the Light of the Most High
must come into all worlds, according to the aspect of that period of time.

Prayers are arranged accordingly.

Morning and afternoon prayers are
established for the two parts of the day.

Since the morning is the time when
the influence is renewed, according to the aspect of the day, a longer prayer
has been established in accordance with the need.

In the afternoon, only a
slight effort is required to complete the second part of the day, following
the first.

The difference between night and day is greater than between morning and
afternoon, and therefore the onset of night marks a much greater renewal of
influence.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the afternoon, only a
slight effort is required to complete the second part of the day, following
the first. The difference between night and day is greater than between morning and
afternoon, and therefore the onset of night marks a much greater renewal of
influence. Therefore, the evening prayer is longer than the afternoon prayer,
i.e., it includes the reading of the Vedas with blessings, although they are
shorter than the morning ones, since the influence attracted by the morning
prayer still remains. No obligatory prayer was established for the second part of the night so as
not to burden society. This prayer was left for pious people who get up at
night and call upon God, each according to their own understanding. Even
evening prayer was voluntary at first, but then it was made obligatory; all
the more so for night prayer. [16] The three prayers (morning, afternoon, and evening) were established by
the Forefathers (Aryans), and as such, they are mandatory for every person. But the prayer of the second half of the night is taken on voluntarily by
the Sages. Together with the Forefathers, the Sages complete the correction
of the descendants of the Great Race (Holy Rus). But the prayer they
established was not imposed on the entire people, but only on the pious
among them, since the level of Faith among the descendants of the Great Race
(the Rus) is much lower than that of their Forefathers (the Aryans). [17] On Holy Days, a prayer is added that corresponds to the additional
prayers in the Temple. It refers to the additional influence radiated on
that day in accordance with the aspect of its Holiness and essence. The
general rule is that the help from God will be commensurate with the
enthusiasm with which a person turns to Him. Chapter 7
[1] Service in time refers to the commandments that people are required to
fulfill at specific times. These include: rest and sanctification through
prayer, rest

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the Day of Atonement (Fasting) and its restrictions, the peace of holidays
and their sanctification, weekdays of holidays in Holy Places, in Forests,
and the new moon.

[2] The essence of fasting, in general terms, is as follows.

It has already
been explained above that the objects (subjects) of this world are profane,
not holy.

But on the other hand, it was necessary to give creatures a certain
holiness so that darkness would not prevail in them more than it should.

The
Highest Wisdom measured with extreme precision what the degree of profanity
should be and what the degree of holiness added to it should be, and limited
all this with appropriate boundaries in terms of quantity, quality, place,
time, and all other aspects that should be distinguished in creatures.

Holy days and ordinary days were established in time, and there are different
levels of holiness within the holy days themselves.

It was established that
most days would be ordinary days, and only the necessary number would be holy
days.

It was also established that there would be a uniform cycle of days,
repeating itself over and over again and consisting of nine days.

Therefore,
it is this number that should be called the "perfect measure," since all
Creation must be carried out through it.

There is no need for a greater
number, for in it (in 9) all Creation (of the 3 Worlds) was completed.

This cycle, therefore, repeats itself constantly until the end of 26,000
years.

Moreover, this cycle (circle) exists on a larger scale, i.e., all the
days of this world are divided into 26,000 years, followed by a thousand
years
of "rest." After that, all of Being will be renewed and another system of the
Universe will be established, according to the decree of the Supreme Wisdom.

It has been determined that the end of every cycle (circle) will be Holy, and
this will be a great elevation for all people.Moreover, this cycle (circle) exists on a larger scale, i.e., all the
days of this world are divided into 26,000 years, followed by a thousand
years
of "rest." After that, all of Being will be renewed and another system of the
Universe will be established, according to the decree of the Supreme Wisdom.

It has been determined that the end of every cycle (circle) will be Holy, and
this will be a great elevation for all people.

For although most people are
profane and only one in nine is Holy, this is precisely what this world
needs.

But, on the other hand, since the Holy Day is the end and completion of each
cycle (circle), all the people of the Earth are corrected and elevated
through it, and it turns out that all people are sanctified.

This is a great gift that the Most High has bestowed upon people, because He
wanted them to be His Saints.

[3] It is fitting for a person to behave on the Holy Day in accordance with
the level of Faith that he or she has attained.

It has already been explained
above that a person's preoccupation with the affairs of this world binds him
to materiality and brings him down from the height and significance that
befits him.

Since during the Fast a person rises above his everyday state, he
must renounce the affairs of this world and remain at a level befitting the
Holiness of this day.

But as long as a person is in this world and connected to their physical
body, they cannot completely detach themselves from the body and its needs.

However, the Supreme Wisdom has measured both the degree of detachment of a
person from the body and the necessary degree of attachment to it.

And this
proper degree of detachment from the body during Lent was commanded to man,
and Faith warned him not to suspend this detachment.

This is the essence of
all kinds of prohibitions during Lent.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And this
proper degree of detachment from the body during Lent was commanded to man,
and Faith warned him not to suspend this detachment. This is the essence of
all kinds of prohibitions during Lent. [4] And besides the prohibition against defiling the Holiness that radiates
into Creation on this day, it is also commanded to honor this Holiness
through the worship of God by means of prayer and other elements based on the
following general principle: to keep us at a level of Faith corresponding to
the Holiness received on this day, and to honor this great gift of the
Blessed One. For the essence of this Holiness lies in great closeness to the
Most High and in great communion with Him. The details of these things
correspond to the characteristics of this Holiness, its aspects, paths, and
manifestations, as they truly are.

--- PAGE BREAK ---[5] The Highest Wisdom has decreed to give Asia additional sanctification:
other Holy Days, in addition to Lent.

On these days, Rus (a descendant of
the Great Race) receives various levels of Holiness, but all of them are
lower than the level of influence and Holiness of Lent.

And the higher the level of influence of each of these days, the greater the
need to renounce the activities of this world on that day.

This level of
Faith corresponds to the degree of prohibition on each of these days.

Above
all is Holy Lent (March 2 to 20), followed by the holiday.

On Holy Days, we
not only thank the Almighty, but also rejoice.

All this is proportional to
the level of influence of the Light shining on each of these days.

[6] In addition to this sanctification, measured in accordance with the
holiness of the day, there are also specific aspects for each of these
times.

And the root of all this is the order established by the Higher
Wisdom: every correction that has been made is a great Light that shone in
its time — when this period of time comes again, a Light similar to the
first Light (Ingli) will shine again, and the results of its correction
will be renewed in the recipient of this Light.

Accordingly, it was commanded to observe Passover in all its details in
memory of the Exodus of the Ancestors from Da'aria (Hyperborea).

Since during
the Exodus people received an extremely great correction, it was established
that on each anniversary of this event, Spiritual Light similar to the Light
that shone then is shed upon people, and the offspring of that correction is
renewed in people.

Therefore, we are obliged to perform all the prescribed
actions.

Chapter 8
[1] The meaning of Pascha is as follows.

Before the Exodus from Daaria, the
Aryans lived among other peoples as one of them, a "people within a people,"
but with the Exodus they were mixed with other peoples.

Until that time, all
aspects of the Aryans were spirituality and righteousness.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Before the Exodus from Daaria, the
Aryans lived among other peoples as one of them, a "people within a people,"
but with the Exodus they were mixed with other peoples. Until that time, all
aspects of the Aryans were spirituality and righteousness. With the Exodus
from Daria, other peoples were separated from the Aryans in order to purify
their bodies and prepare them for Faith and service to God. To this end, they
were commanded to abstain from food containing blood (meat). This also
follows the law that must be manifested in a person: it is necessary for a
person to have a desire (ego) and a tendency toward the material. But at a
certain appointed time (Lent), people must abstain from food in order to
reduce the power of the evil principle (ego) and the tendency toward the
material within themselves and bring themselves closer to the Spiritual. It is impossible to eat this way all the time, because it is undesirable in
this world. But on certain days designated for this purpose, one should
abstain from food, and with its help, people will attain the Spiritual level
befitting them. This is the essence of the "Feast." The rest of the
commandments of the feast correspond to the details of that deliverance. [2] The Almighty surrounded the people of Asia with Clouds of Glory. In
addition to the material benefits of these Clouds, they also had great
spiritual significance. Just as these Clouds separated Asia from other
peoples and elevated it physically, so through them was transmitted an
influence that set the Rus apart from all other peoples, raising them above
this world and truly making them the highest of all the peoples of the
Earth. This was done in its time for Asia in order to bring the Rus
(descendants of the Great Race) to the high level of Faith befitting them. The offspring of this event was transmitted to every Rus in every
generation (until the arrival of Christianity). This is nothing other than
the Light of Holiness,igh level of Faith befitting them. The offspring of this event was transmitted to every Rus in every
generation (until the arrival of Christianity). This is nothing other than
the Light of Holiness,

--- PAGE BREAK ---emanating from the Almighty and surrounding every righteous person from Asia,
separating them from all other people, elevating them above them and placing
them (the Rus) above all the peoples of the Earth.

And this phenomenon is
renewed every Solstice and Equinox holiday through prayer.

The light (influence) from the Almighty illuminates the people of Asia and
crowns them in such a way that when they fulfill the commandment of ascension
(prayer), fear overtakes all their enemies.

It is written about this: "And
all the nations of the earth shall see that the Name of God is written upon
you, and they shall fear you." And if sins did not prevent it, this
circumstance would be immediately understood by all in a clear way.

But, at
least, this fear exists potentially, to become a reality in its own time.

And
through the details of the commandment, this actualization is completed, so
strengthening the Almighty's power over Asia that their enemies will fall
before them, bow down, and ultimately decide to become their slaves.

It is
said: "They will worship you with their faces to the ground," "And the sons
of your oppressors will come to you, bowing down, and all who despised you
will worship the soles of your feet." For all will submit to Asia and bow
down before the Rus (RUSs), in order to receive from them the Light from the
Light of the Most High, resting on the descendants of the Great Race (Rusa
Mighty).

All the pride of the Jews will be humbled, and they will submit to
Asia, returning with their help to the service of God.

This is the essence of
the commandment in its details.

[3] The meaning of God's holidays is to reveal the Light that shone on the
Holy Days as a result of the corrections made during them.

The details of observing the holidays correspond to the specifics of the
correction associated with them.[3] The meaning of God's holidays is to reveal the Light that shone on the
Holy Days as a result of the corrections made during them.

The details of observing the holidays correspond to the specifics of the
correction associated with them.

[4] The significance of the days of the Equinox and the days of the Solstice
is connected with the fact that on these days the Almighty shines upon the
whole world and renews all existence in the aspect of the new.

It has already been explained that justice does not allow a person to receive
good that he does not deserve, and it follows from the very law of justice
that the court will be lenient toward a person for certain actions, and he
will be treated with mercy and indulgence, without looking too closely at his
unworthy deeds.

As the Sages said: "He who overcomes himself and forgives
others will have all his sins forgiven." For this is "measure for measure":
as a person forgives others, so will he be forgiven.

It follows that he will
be treated with mercy, which is justice in itself.

But it is not only for this action (forgiveness) that a person is rewarded in
this way (that he is treated with mercy), but also for every action that the
Supreme Wisdom deems worthy of such a reward.

One such action
— Observance of the commandments.

They were given to the sons of God (the
Great Race) in order to attract merciful treatment, and if they are fulfilled
properly, that will be the result.

The details of how the fulfillment of the
commandments attracts the rule of Mercy depend on the principles of the
Supreme Government and its foundations, taken in their truth.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They were given to the sons of God (the
Great Race) in order to attract merciful treatment, and if they are fulfilled
properly, that will be the result. The details of how the fulfillment of the
commandments attracts the rule of Mercy depend on the principles of the
Supreme Government and its foundations, taken in their truth. Truly, the
purpose of the commandments is to awaken the Fathers of the World (Aryans),
to strengthen their merits, to awaken the mercy of the Most High and appease
His attribute of Justice, to cause good to overcome evil, to subdue the
forces of evil, to deprive the accusers of their power, and to have the
intention that God use His exaltedness, ruling this world with the power of
His unity and ignoring minor sins. All this is accomplished through the
commandments, if accompanied by proper repentance. And the details of this
process correspond to the details of this correction. [5] The essence of the Holy Fast is that the Lord has prepared for Asia
one day on which their repentance is easily accepted, and their sins

--- PAGE BREAK ---can be easily erased, that is, all the damage that has been done is
corrected, and the darkness that has intensified because of it is removed,
returning the repentant to that level of Holiness and closeness to the Most
High, which they lost because of their sins.

And on this day, the Light
shines, capable of bringing perfection to this process.

But in order to
accept it, the Rus (descendants of the Aryans) must observe everything that
is commanded for this day, and in particular the restrictions, through which
they largely detach themselves from materiality and, to some extent, rise to
the Angelic level of Faith.

The rest of the details of this day depend on the
specifics of this correction.

[6] It is important to know that one of the greatest corrections that the
Prophets determined for Asia is the reading of the Faith (Sacred Scriptures).

This reading combines two lines.

The first is reading the Faith (Vedas) in
order until its completion, with periodic repetition in a similar manner.

The
second is reading certain passages at certain times (for example, on
holidays).

For the Faith (Vedas) was given to people by the Almighty so that
they would read it aloud, and through this reading, His Radiance would be
drawn to us.

In order to receive this Radiance constantly, the Prophets established that
we should constantly read the Faith aloud in public, in addition to each
person reading it individually.

Through this constant reading, the Light of
this Holiness does not leave us.

On certain days, passages from the Faith relating to the essence of those
days should be read in order to strengthen the Spiritual Radiance of those
days with the help of the power of the Voice, the most powerful of the powers
that man possesses.

Chapter 9
[1] Service according to circumstances is determined by various events
that happen to a person throughout his life.

It can relate to food,
clothing, and all other human needs, as well as to a person's social
activity.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 9
[1] Service according to circumstances is determined by various events
that happen to a person throughout his life. It can relate to food,
clothing, and all other human needs, as well as to a person's social
activity. All these types of service are based on the principles that there is no
object, law, or event in the world that does not serve the achievement of
the True Purpose of Creation, as mentioned above. And in order to fully
achieve it, all these details were needed within the boundaries in which
they are truly enclosed. However, the necessity of all these details and
their forms follows from the various parts and levels of Being and the
influences on them from Above. Commands were given regarding each object or event in order to establish
phenomena on the side of good rather than on the side of evil. When human
actions do not go beyond the boundaries defined by the commands, all these
objects and events are realized as good, and Goodness and correction are
drawn from them. If these boundaries are not observed, actions remain on the side of evil, and
through them impurity and defilement spread; great darkness obscures the
Supreme Radiance, and concealment multiplies, followed by all its evil
offspring, all in accordance with the realities of that phenomenon whose
boundaries were not observed, and its relationship to man, and according to
its place in the general cycle and cycle of Being, moving toward perfection. [2] The blessings established by the Sages regarding each phenomenon of
the world and the enjoyment of it are based on similar grounds.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The root of all of them is the After-Meal Blessing, commanded by Faith.

It
has already been explained that all phenomena existing and established in
nature are directed toward a common Goal (Immortality), that is, the
attainment of perfection by all creations.

The share of each of them in this
matter is determined by their level of Faith, which a person occupies in true
reality.

Man is drawn by the call of nature and acts according to his natural law.

But
he must constantly direct himself toward serving the Most High and toward
ensuring that all his actions effectively serve this goal, whatever path he
takes, in accordance with how objects are truly ordered.

That is, there are
objects that serve this goal (serving the Almighty) directly, and there are
those that serve other objects, and those serve others, until, after a great
transformation of many phenomena that generate one another, they achieve it
(the Highest Goal).

But any object, no matter what stage of Faith it is at, should only be used
with this intention, so that, even after nine auxiliary stages (steps), it
leads to the achievement of the Highest Goal.

No object should be used for
any other purpose, such as to satisfy animal passions or the desire for
excess.

As long as objects remain within the boundaries set for them by Divine Faith,
they all truly help a person achieve his goal and are considered part of
service.

Faith teaches that after a person has enjoyed food and drink, he should thank
God and bless His Name.

And then it will turn out that the Radiance of the
Most High is exalted by the fact that His desire is fulfilled and His plan is
carried out.

This, in general terms, is the meaning of the blessing after a
meal and all other blessings after receiving pleasure.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And then it will turn out that the Radiance of the
Most High is exalted by the fact that His desire is fulfilled and His plan is
carried out. This, in general terms, is the meaning of the blessing after a
meal and all other blessings after receiving pleasure. In addition, the Sages established blessings before receiving pleasure so
that a person, before enjoying this world, would pronounce the Name of the
Most High and bless Him, remembering that this blessing came to him from God. And so that he keeps in mind the True Essence of this good, which is not just
physical pleasure, but is truly prepared by the Almighty in order to help a
person achieve True Good. And when a person precedes every action in this
way, it will all be on the side of good, and not on the side of evil, and
with its help, a person is corrected and elevated. [3] The sages also established blessings before performing commandments as
an expression of love for God. Let us thank God for finding us acceptable to
Him and providing us with such powerful means of correction. It turns out
that through this blessing, the action is further magnified, and a person
receives help from the Almighty for his correction. For the rule is this:
according to the enthusiasm with which a person turns to God, so will be the
help from Him, whether much or little. This is true of any action as such,
and those who trust in the Lord are truly happy! Finished and completed, praise to the Great Ra-M-Ha, Creator of the Worlds. (The translation was made from the book on Jewish philosophy by the Kabbalist
M.H. Luzatto
"Derech Esham".)
Book 2. THE BOOK OF LIGHT ZOHAR

--- PAGE BREAK ---1.

In the Book of Shining ZoAR, the Holy Sage Yeshua (Jesus) touches upon
questions that everyone living on Earth has asked themselves at least once in
their lives, especially during times of suffering.

The questions seem simple
and concern everyone, but the answers are so complex that if it weren't for
the Sages who ascended to the Spiritual world and then gave us the Vedas, we
ourselves would not be able to answer these questions.

Question 1: Who are we?

Before figuring anything out, we need to clearly define how true our
knowledge is and its limits, our knowledge of ourselves, our world, the
Spiritual Worlds, and God.

There are four types of knowledge:
1) knowledge of matter,
2) knowledge about the properties of matter,
3) Spiritual Knowledge,
4) knowledge about God.

God and Spiritual Knowledge are beyond our comprehension.

We can only
comprehend matter and the properties of matter itself.

First, let us consider these four types of knowledge using our world as an
example.

Let us imagine a person consisting of:
1) matter - bodies;
2) properties of the body clothed in desires;
3) Spiritual properties;
4) The essence of a person.

The essence of a person is a voluminous energy structure that includes:
Spirit, Mind, and the 9 Spiritual bodies of a person, and this Essence lives
in all Worlds and times simultaneously: material and Spiritual.

The essence
of a person is not connected to their body by itself; it is something
different from the body.

The essence is completely incomprehensible to us
because our five senses and our imagination do not allow us to perceive and
feel more than the actions of the essence, but not the essence itself, since
all our senses perceive the impact of something external on them, and we only
feel the reactions of our senses to these external influences.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The essence
of a person is not connected to their body by itself; it is something
different from the body. The essence is completely incomprehensible to us
because our five senses and our imagination do not allow us to perceive and
feel more than the actions of the essence, but not the essence itself, since
all our senses perceive the impact of something external on them, and we only
feel the reactions of our senses to these external influences. Therefore, what we perceive with our body or mind are the actions of
something incomprehensible to our senses, and only after being affected by
the particular properties of the Essence do we comprehend and judge their
Source by their properties. From this it becomes clear that our five senses
(sight, hearing, taste, smell, touch) cannot reveal to us the whole essence
of the Essence of man, but only fragmentary, particular actions of it. But since what is not perceived by our senses cannot even arise in our
imagination, and what cannot arise in our imagination cannot appear in our
mind and therefore falls outside the realm of possibility of study, the mind
cannot study the inner Essence of a person. We cannot know our own essence, because I feel and know myself as occupying a
place in the world with my physical body, from the revelation of the actions
of a certain Essence. But if you ask me what my Essence is, from which all
these actions originate, I will not be able to answer you, because the Higher
Management hides the knowledge of my Essence from me, and I, as a human
being, can only comprehend the actions and consequences of actions
originating from the incomprehensible Essence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Now let us consider the four types of Knowledge.

The first type of knowledge is that we fully comprehend matter because the
actions of our mind are sufficient to explain the essence of matter found in
matter, so much so that we do not suffer from a lack of knowledge of the
essence of matter itself as such; the absence of this knowledge is not felt,
just as the absence of a sixth finger on the hand is not felt.

Therefore, knowledge of matter is quite sufficient for us to satisfy all our
material needs.

Knowledge of the second kind—the properties of matter—is also sufficient and
clear, because we learn it from our experience of how matter behaves in
reality.

All sciences on which we can fully rely are based on this type of
knowledge.

Knowledge of the third kind—spiritual knowledge—is a theoretical case of
cognition: after spirituality has been revealed to us through the Holy
Scriptures, our imagination is able to completely separate spiritual
knowledge from knowledge of matter and study it abstractly, separately from
matter.

The third type of knowledge—spiritual knowledge—is not accepted by cautious
researchers because it is impossible to rely on it completely; after all,
when studying a property that is not clothed in matter, one can make a
mistake in its assessment.

Therefore, there is absolutely no certainty in the conclusions of this type
of research and cognition of properties abstracted from matter, and even
more so for those properties that have never manifested themselves in any
matter.

But if a researcher were to study the properties of "truth" and "falsehood"
in relation to matter, these properties would only be understood in terms
of their usefulness or harmfulness in relation to that matter.Therefore, there is absolutely no certainty in the conclusions of this type
of research and cognition of properties abstracted from matter, and even
more so for those properties that have never manifested themselves in any
matter.

But if a researcher were to study the properties of "truth" and "falsehood"
in relation to matter, these properties would only be understood in terms
of their usefulness or harmfulness in relation to that matter.

Thus, as a result of the life experience of generations, when humanity saw
the misfortunes caused by "false" people and the benefits derived from
"truthful" people, it would come to the conclusion that there is no better
property in the world than "truth" and no worse than "falsehood." But if the
Jews understood this, they would accept it and recognize that the salvation
of the Soul is incomparably more important than all their theoretical
benefits of the property of "falsehood."
Thus, we have determined that of the four types of knowledge, the fourth
type, God, is completely beyond our comprehension.

The third type can lead to
misunderstanding, and only the first type, matter, and the second type,
properties in matter, give us correct and sufficient knowledge.

2.

Question 2: What is our role in the long chain of reality, where we are its
small links?

If we look at the long chain of successive generations appearing and
disappearing, we find no answer to the question of the purpose and necessity
of the existence of all humanity: each generation discovers this world for
itself and leaves it powerless, without changing anything in it
qualitatively.

And each of us, if we do not get lost in our petty concerns,
discovers the futility and meaninglessness of our existence.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If we look at the long chain of successive generations appearing and
disappearing, we find no answer to the question of the purpose and necessity
of the existence of all humanity: each generation discovers this world for
itself and leaves it powerless, without changing anything in it
qualitatively. And each of us, if we do not get lost in our petty concerns,
discovers the futility and meaninglessness of our existence. But since
questions about the meaning of life cause suffering, we subconsciously avoid
them; our egoism automatically leads us away from suffering and closer to the
source of pleasure, and therefore only hopelessness, the search for a way out
of suffering and oppressive circumstances, pushes us to seek the purpose of
our existence. Therefore, by sending suffering, God creates for us

--- PAGE BREAK ---the opportunity to reflect on the purpose of our suffering and thus leads us
to search for the Purpose of Life.

3.

Question 3: When we look at ourselves, we feel so corrupt and lowly that
there is no one lower than us.

Man is the most selfish creature in our world, and there is no creature more
harmful and dangerous both to his fellow men and to nature as a whole.

Only
man, even though he has what he desires, suffers when he sees what others
have.

Only man needs to conquer the whole world, not just his surroundings.

Only humans, who feel the past and the future, want to take control of them
and rule over them, to become famous at any cost at all times, because,
feeling the past and the future, they are inflamed with envy not only for
what their contemporaries have, but also for what anyone has ever had at any
time.

Truly, human selfishness takes them beyond the bounds of time!

And all
this, like all the terrible consequences of selfishness, was created by the
Great and Perfect God.

4.

Question 4: If God is absolutely good, how could He create so many creatures
whose entire fate is suffering?

Can such imperfect actions really flow from
the Ocean of Goodness?

And if He does not create Good, then why is such
great evil necessary?

God created us in His image (immortal), and we seem to be destined to be at
the top of the evolutionary ladder, with no one like us, because perfect
actions must come from the Perfect Creator.

Everything we know about the Spiritual worlds and about God, everything that
our Ancient Forefathers received from Above, called the Vedas, everything
that is written in the Vedas, was received by those who, while still living
in our world, ascended to the Spiritual world through their qualities and,
having sensed, seen, and felt the Creator Himself, set forth for us in their
Books (the Vedas) in the language of the Ancient Ancestors what they had
comprehended in the Spiritual worlds.God created us in His image (immortal), and we seem to be destined to be at
the top of the evolutionary ladder, with no one like us, because perfect
actions must come from the Perfect Creator.

Everything we know about the Spiritual worlds and about God, everything that
our Ancient Forefathers received from Above, called the Vedas, everything
that is written in the Vedas, was received by those who, while still living
in our world, ascended to the Spiritual world through their qualities and,
having sensed, seen, and felt the Creator Himself, set forth for us in their
Books (the Vedas) in the language of the Ancient Ancestors what they had
comprehended in the Spiritual worlds.

These Great Guides of humanity explain
to us in their Books our destiny — the Purpose of Human Life.

Reason obliges
us to understand that God is good and does good, that there is nothing higher
than Him.

But how could He have deliberately created so many creatures that
suffer and are impoverished throughout their lives, since good should come
from the Good, not evil.

This is how each of us feels our existence in this world.

After all, our
whole life is a feeling of lack of something and a pursuit of satisfaction of
desires.

And the feeling of lack is suffering.

The desire to achieve what we
want forces us to constantly move against our Nature (Divine Essence), which
strives for a state of peace, because the Source of our life — God — is in a
state of absolute peace (harmony), for He is Perfect, and there is no desire
in Him to receive (ego) that forces Him to move in order to achieve what He
wants.

And, of course, our suffering does not consist only in the pursuit of
personal satisfaction and fulfillment of desires, but the combined desire to
receive, the selfishness of entire nations, pits them against each other in
the struggle to acquire power and property by any means necessary.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The desire to achieve what we
want forces us to constantly move against our Nature (Divine Essence), which
strives for a state of peace, because the Source of our life — God — is in a
state of absolute peace (harmony), for He is Perfect, and there is no desire
in Him to receive (ego) that forces Him to move in order to achieve what He
wants. And, of course, our suffering does not consist only in the pursuit of
personal satisfaction and fulfillment of desires, but the combined desire to
receive, the selfishness of entire nations, pits them against each other in
the struggle to acquire power and property by any means necessary. Be that as
it may, the uniqueness of the Creator draws us to Him; His uniqueness points
to Him as the Creator of all that is bad as well. But this is natural:
everything perfect is in God; everything that is not in Him, but created anew
from nothing, is

--- PAGE BREAK ---imperfect and evil.

For if the world were perfect, it would have been in God
from the beginning.

5.

Question 5: How can it be that from the Eternal God, who has no beginning
and no end, come creations that are insignificant, temporary, and flawed?

If God is perfect, how could He even imagine something imperfect, let alone
create (reveal) it and constantly sustain its existence, i.e., be connected
with something that is absolutely opposite to Him?

For in that case, there
must be something in common between the properties of the Creator and the
properties of these insignificant creatures?

When we buy something, we are interested in the person who made our purchase,
because a good person makes good things.

And if our purchase is of poor
quality, it speaks of a bad manufacturer, but not of the guilt of the thing
itself.

But in order to find out all this, we must conduct some research that will
help us understand the questions posed.

This is because it is necessary to know the language of Faith and the Vedas.

It is understood that words taken from our world cannot explain God to us,
because our minds are incapable of comprehending Him at all, and therefore
there is no thought or concept of Him, for the Greatness of God has no
limits!

There is no concept of incomprehensibility in the Vedas.

The word
incomprehensible means
"incomprehensible" in view of the limitations of our knowledge in exploring
the world around us, in exploring ourselves and God.

But once a person
understands and clearly realizes the limits and boundaries of their true
knowledge, they can freely explore everything within them!

This has already been mentioned above in the explanation of the first
question.

We can only judge Him, i.e.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This has already been mentioned above in the explanation of the first
question. We can only judge Him, i.e. God, by His actions in creation (Yavi)
and in us, and all questions that do not concern us, or questions about what
happened before the beginning of creation (Yavi), why the Creator created us,
what He is like in Himself — these questions have no answer, since we
comprehend only what we receive from Him, and based on our reactions and
sensations, we make a decision about Him. But where there is research, there is Faith (Knowledge of God), research into
His actions, as commanded in the Vedas: "Know the Creator of your forefathers
and worship only Him."
By comprehending the properties and actions of God, we learn the answers to
all the questions that may arise in our consciousness, because we study the
Source of our origin. And only through understanding Faith (Veda) can we
understand "why we were created." This is what compels the Sages to write
Books — instructions for understanding the highest Purpose of human Life,
i.e., Immortality. Clarifying these questions is essential, which is why they
are indicated in the Vedas as Commandments. After all, without clarifying the Purpose of Life, a person is unable to
reach the Goal desired by God — to reach Himself. 6. So, study 1: How do we imagine a newly created person, which means something
new, something that did not exist in God before the beginning of Creation,
when it is clear to all reasonable people that there is nothing that does not
exist in God, and the mind requires that the giver have what he gives. If God is Perfect, then He must include everything, and there is nothing that
He needs to create. If He found that in order to fulfill the plan of

--- PAGE BREAK ---He needs something, does this not indicate that He does not include
everything in Himself, i.e., that He is imperfect?

Study 2: If we acknowledge that He can do anything, that He can create
something out of nothing, i.e., something new that is completely absent in
Him, the question arises: what is this new thing, what can be said about it,
what is not in God, but newly created?

What does it mean to "create something out of nothing"?

We are not yet able
to understand this.

After all, this action is only possible for God.

Question: what did God create that was new?

What was not in Him?

Despite the absence of anything new before the beginning of Creation, God was
still in His Perfection, and the need for this new thing arose with the
appearance of the plan of Creation.

Study 3: As the Sages say, the human soul is part of God Himself, so there is
no difference between Him and the human soul, but only God is Everything,
Whole (One), and the soul is part of Him.

And they likened this to a stone
broken off from a rock, where there is no difference between the stone and
the rock, except that the rock is whole and the stone is a part.

This study 3 is divided into two parts:
1) How can one imagine a part of the Whole, if He is the Perfect Whole
(One)?

Furthermore, how can one understand that there is some part of God
in man?

2) How is this part separated from Him, how can a part be separated from
the Perfect, and does He remain Perfect after that, is the part (Soul) that
separated from the Perfect also perfect?

We know that a stone is separated from a rock with an axe designed for this
purpose, and that part of the whole is separated by it, but how can we
imagine this about God, who separates a part from Himself so that it comes
out of God and becomes a part separated from Him, to such an extent that it
can only be perceived as a part of God.

By what means is a part (the Soul) separated from God?--- PAGE BREAK ---

We know that a stone is separated from a rock with an axe designed for this
purpose, and that part of the whole is separated by it, but how can we
imagine this about God, who separates a part from Himself so that it comes
out of God and becomes a part separated from Him, to such an extent that it
can only be perceived as a part of God. By what means is a part (the Soul) separated from God? In our world (Yavi),
there is absolutely no difference between the whole and its part, except in
their sizes. But since in the Spiritual worlds (Prav and Navi) there is no distance, no
size, no movement, and all the difference between Souls is in the difference
of their desires, because the Spiritual worlds are the world of the "naked,"
i.e., true desires to obtain pleasure, not clothed in material bodies as in
our world (Yavi), then how can a part be separated from the Whole, and yet
still remain a part of the Whole, i.e., continue to possess the properties of
the Whole? If the Soul continues to be a part of God, can we judge Him by this part? Can
we only feel this part of God that is in us, or Him Himself as well, or is it
one and the same? Why did God create us consisting of a part of Him? Study 4: Since the system of impure forces (the world of Navi) is as far from
the purity of God as the North Pole is from the South Pole, so much so that
it is impossible to imagine a greater distance, how can it originate and be
born from the Radiance (Ingli) of God? Moreover, He even enlivens it (Navi)
from His Radiance (Ingli). What is the meaning of creating impure forces that are opposite to God? If God could even conceive of creating something so imperfect, how could
someone so Perfect have the idea of something so opposite to Him in

--- PAGE BREAK ---Does this not indicate a flaw in His Perfection?

How can there be a
connection between opposing desires and properties?

After all, there is nothing in the Spiritual world except true desires to
receive pleasure.

And if desires are opposite, how can they be connected
without having something in common, i.e., common properties or qualities?

Moreover, God constantly maintains this connection and even enlivens and
nourishes that which is opposite to Himself and so low.

Study 5: Since the human ego is so despicable that it is destined to die and
be destroyed, the human ego in the Ancient Vedas is called the desire to
receive pleasure for its own sake, selfishness.

This means that the ego is
not a physical body that has desires.

The ego itself, without any shell, because, like the spiritual world, it is a
world.

"Bare" desires, as well as the ego, are desires to obtain pleasure only for
oneself, and are therefore called "ego." The death of the ego means the
killing of selfishness (ego), its destruction, its transformation into its
opposite—altruism (EGO).

Moreover, the Vedas say that until the ego decomposes completely, the Soul
cannot rise to its place in Radiance (Inglia), as long as something remains
of the ego (desires for oneself).

Until a person frees himself from his
selfish desires to obtain pleasure (for himself), which means
"until his ego is decomposed," he will not be able to go beyond the
boundaries of the perception of only our world (Yavi) and feel God.

But then why does the soul return and the body come to life in the spiritual
worlds, as if God cannot give pleasure to souls without bodies?

Even more
incomprehensible are the words of the Sages that in the Spiritual worlds the
dead will rise in their bodies and vices (desires) so that they do not say,
"These are other bodies," and then God will purify the believers of their
vices, and the sinners will be punished for their sins.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But then why does the soul return and the body come to life in the spiritual
worlds, as if God cannot give pleasure to souls without bodies? Even more
incomprehensible are the words of the Sages that in the Spiritual worlds the
dead will rise in their bodies and vices (desires) so that they do not say,
"These are other bodies," and then God will purify the believers of their
vices, and the sinners will be punished for their sins. But we must understand why it is important to God that Souls do not say,
"This is a different body." So much so that for this He recreates the vices
(desires) of bodies and will be forced to destroy them. 7. As already mentioned, in the Vedas, ego refers to the desire to receive for
oneself, in this case, our selfishness. By killing his ego (for himself), a
person rises to Prav. Freed from selfishness, a person immediately begins to
feel God. Having received from God the altruistic quality (for the sake of
God), the desire to "give," a person, with His help, begins to correct his
former desire (ego), gradually, piece by piece, incorporating selfishness
into his new, altruistic, Spiritual qualities (EGO). The correction of one's original selfish desires is called the correction of
dead (former) desires, their resurrection to life—to correction and filling
with Light—the sensation of God. Correction of dead (former) desires: an
uncorrected desire for oneself (ego) undergoes correction, acquires a desire
to enjoy from giving, and is corrected from this and becomes a desire for God
(EGO). The decomposition of the ego is a state, a feeling of a person when he is
completely unconcerned about himself, except for the most necessary, urgent,
minimal things, without which he cannot continue his approach to God. Study 6: As stated by the Sages, who rose in their perceptions to God and
received Knowledge, man is the center of all creation (Yavi).

--- PAGE BREAK ---The center means the reason for creation, the plan — for whom; the purpose of
creation is man, the main actor of creation, bringing creation to the Higher
Purpose (Immortality) desired by God.

And therefore: all Spiritual worlds, and our material world (Yavi), and all
their inhabitants, were created for man.

And God obliged man to believe that
the world was created for him, which is difficult to understand, that for
such a small man in our world, especially in comparison with the Higher
worlds, the Creator worked hard to create all this.

And for what?

To this day, man does not know how to use this small planet given to him.

The
lowest level of Faith in the Spiritual world (Prav) is infinitely greater
than our world (Yavi).

"Greater" means, according to our perception of
forces, dimensions, and the inner picture of another world that opens up in
man.

The illusions of our world immediately begin to reveal themselves in their
true, insignificant size.

Any lower level of Faith relates to the Higher one as a grain of sand relates
to the entire Universe.

Why does a person need all this, how can they use it
if they have little idea of how to act even on our small Earth?

The world
(Yavi) is God's concealment from man, that is, the world (Yavi) is something
like veils (screens, filters) behind which the Creator hides from man.

All
Spiritual worlds (Prav and Navi) and our material world (Yavi) exist only in
the Soul (Mind) within us and are either steps of Faith (Knowledge of God) or
steps of gradual removal from the feeling of God's presence.

But to understand all these questions and investigations, there is one answer
— to look at the end of the action, i.e., at the Purpose of creation, because
it is impossible to understand anything from the beginning of the process,
but only from the end.All
Spiritual worlds (Prav and Navi) and our material world (Yavi) exist only in
the Soul (Mind) within us and are either steps of Faith (Knowledge of God) or
steps of gradual removal from the feeling of God's presence.

But to understand all these questions and investigations, there is one answer
— to look at the end of the action, i.e., at the Purpose of creation, because
it is impossible to understand anything from the beginning of the process,
but only from the end.

The Sages give the following example: "If a researcher from another world
appeared in our world, i.e., one unfamiliar with the final results of the
development of living nature, then, looking at a newborn calf and a human
being, he would come to the conclusion that since a one-day-old calf can
already stand and find a place to feed on its own, and the infant is
completely helpless, then at the end of its development the calf will become
something great, and the human, even after growing up, will continue to lag
behind it in the same proportion."
The new fruit that appears on the tree is completely unattractive and bitter,
and nothing indicates its future state, when it becomes delicious and
beautiful.

Moreover, the more unattractive a creation is in the process of
its development, the more difficult and longer this process is, the higher
the result it achieves.

But those who are unable to observe the final result
draw incorrect conclusions when observing the intermediate stages.

Therefore,
the correct decision can only be made by those who are familiar with the
final form of the creation.

But since we are unable to observe our final, corrected (Spiritual) state,
the Sages explain it to us from their own experience of understanding it for
themselves.

And it is clear that there is no creator without a purpose, except for the
insane, whose actions are without purpose.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But since we are unable to observe our final, corrected (Spiritual) state,
the Sages explain it to us from their own experience of understanding it for
themselves. And it is clear that there is no creator without a purpose, except for the
insane, whose actions are without purpose. In our world, only the insane and
children act without a predetermined purpose, and in the latter case, this
occurs under natural pressure, as it is necessary for their development. Nothing is created without a purpose. Everything is created solely for the
purpose of achieving the highest state for a person—connection (Unity) with
their Creator. Moreover, no matter how much it may seem to us, in our present state, with
the naked eye, that billions of species have been created, whose existence
sometimes lasts only a fraction of a second, distant, invisible to us,
celestial bodies that have no contact with humans, and so on, everything that
has been created by God

--- PAGE BREAK ---was created solely out of necessity to help humans achieve their Higher
Purpose!

And I know that there are smart people outside of Faith and the Vedas who
claim that God created all of creation (the Earth), but left it to its own
devices, given the insignificance of creations (people), since it is not
fitting for God, so exalted, to control their paths, which are insignificant
and despicable.

Finding no logical answer to the previous question, seeing nothing reasonable
in the behavior of our universe, philosophers answer it within the limits of
their earthly minds:
1) God does not exist,
2) God is the Supreme Power that created everything and allowed
it to develop further according to the laws that He laid down in
His creation.

3) God created everything, but seeing the vicious paths of nature's
development and behavior, he abandoned his creation (man), leaving it to
its own devices.

If God is perfect, then any of His actions, even in our perceptions, must be
felt by us as perfect—this is the objection of philosophers.

Faith (the Vedas) answers this question as follows: God's actions are always
perfect in everything, but man is not able to perceive them as such until he
corrects his senses — only then will he feel the Perfection of the Creator,
his own perfection, and the perfection of his state, because everything is
perfect except our perception.

Changing our perception and correcting dead
desires (for our own sake) is our task (Goal) in this world.

Achieving the
true feeling of the Creator (Immortality) is the main Goal of human life.

And therefore, there is no other solution but the need to explore the final
state: Immortality is the Goal of human creation.Achieving the
true feeling of the Creator (Immortality) is the main Goal of human life.

And therefore, there is no other solution but the need to explore the final
state: Immortality is the Goal of human creation.

But not from the wisdom of the philosophers' words that people are slaves of
God, because it is impossible to decide anything about our insignificance and
baseness before we decide that we ourselves have made ourselves insignificant
and base, and that we ourselves have made our whole nature corrupt and
despicable.

If we decide that we ourselves are the cause of our vicious traits, this
means that we are limiting God's action and deciding that not everything in
us was created by Him.

But if we decide that God is absolutely perfect and that He created our
bodies as He intended, with all their good and bad qualities and
characteristics, then despicable and corrupt actions can never come from the
hands of the Perfect Creator, because every action proves the quality of the
one who creates it.

And what is the fault of spoiled clothing if the tailor
sewed it poorly?

As in life, when we talk about the poor quality of a product, we thereby
point to the qualities of the manufacturer.

If we think or speak badly about
anything in the world, no matter how we perceive our condition, this feeling
is immediately addressed to God as the Source of everything that happens.

What a person feels is his attitude toward God, his prayer, his unconscious
appeal to the cause of his condition.

Everything in us comes from Him.

Everything we feel is our reaction to His influence on us.

It all comes down
to realizing this and reaching a state where a person feels that God is
absolutely good to them.

As the story goes, a wise man, meeting an extremely ugly man, said to him,
"How ugly you are." To which the man replied, "Go and tell this to the One
who created me: 'How ugly is the creature you have created.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It all comes down
to realizing this and reaching a state where a person feels that God is
absolutely good to them. As the story goes, a wise man, meeting an extremely ugly man, said to him,
"How ugly you are." To which the man replied, "Go and tell this to the One
who created me: 'How ugly is the creature you have created. And that is why
it is said: "Go and tell this to the One who created me" — if a person feels
his vices, which can only be understood to the extent that he feels God,

--- PAGE BREAK ---by the contrast between his own qualities and those of God, then he
realizes that he can only turn to God for help.

For God has made it so
that man needs Him and seeks connection and closeness with Him.

Thus, those who claim that God is unworthy of ruling us because of our
baseness and insignificance, and therefore has abandoned us, confirm their
lack of Reason.

This is because they judge God based on the picture they see,
without realizing the limitations of their knowledge of God as a whole, and
they do not see their ultimate state — Unity with God.

Imagine if you met a person who originally intended to create beings so that
they would suffer and be tormented all the days of their lives, as we do,
and, moreover, abandoned them after creation, not even wanting to look after
them or help them in any way.

How you would despise and reproach him.

Is it
even possible to think such a thing about the Perfect, All-Creating, and
Life-Giving God?

That is, it is impossible to claim that God is Perfect if His creations are
imperfect.

Therefore, common sense compels us to understand the opposite, which is not
visible at first glance, and to conclude that we are indeed the best and
highest creations, and that there is no limit to our importance, befitting
the One who created us.

Because any flaw that you see in our bodies, after
all the excuses you can come up with, falls only on God, who created us and
all of our nature, since it is clear that He is our Creator, and not we His.

8.

Know also that all this is a consequence of our bad natural qualities-
desires (ego) created by Him in us.

But this is a case where it is said that
we must look at the end of the action (the Goal).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Know also that all this is a consequence of our bad natural qualities-
desires (ego) created by Him in us. But this is a case where it is said that
we must look at the end of the action (the Goal). And then we will be able to understand everything and the saying in the
mouths of the wise: "Do not show unfinished work to a fool."
Only by experiencing liberation from the ego can a person justify God's
actions, but not before, because until reaching a state of liberation from
the ego, he inevitably experiences suffering and imperfection. Achieving this
state of liberation (from the ego) is the goal of human life (immortality). Those who achieve it are called Saints, because Saints justify God's actions,
for they can justify them only after reaching this state (Immortality), and
not before. In the meantime, the Wise, i.e., those who have achieved
liberation from the ego (Immortality), explain to us in words what they feel,
calling on us to achieve the same. As the Sages say: the Creator created the world (Yavi) to delight in His
creations (Souls). The purpose of human life is to enjoy the Creator. The Sages experience this
for themselves as they ascend spiritually. 9. As already mentioned, everything we know is known from the personal
understanding of those who comprehend, called the Sages, who receive the
Light. We are not talking about God Himself, but only about what we comprehend and
feel as coming from Him. Thus, people have received everything we know about
Him and His desires. This knowledge is called the Vedas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The problem is that it is not easy to understand what the Sages write in
their Books.

The fact is that everything they describe are actions and
objects of the Spiritual worlds, about which we have no idea whatsoever,
since everything we imagine is taken from analogies of our world.

And in the
Spiritual worlds, there is no matter, movement, time, or place.

How can a Sage, observing something Spiritual, describe it and what happens
to it if it is not at all similar to our ideas?

All our speech comes from images of our world, from our sensations of what
enters our five senses (sight, hearing, taste, smell, touch) or our reactions
to external influences.

Naturally, what we imagine is nothing more than a
distorted picture drawn by our sensory organs of an infinitely small fragment
of something external that surrounds us, or what this external something
desires, something that exists before we perceive it, so that we perceive it
in this way, and therefore it appears to us in this way.

But there is an even
greater problem with the truthful description of the Spiritual world, where
neither our senses nor our imagination, similarities, and analogies of our
world can help us at all.

And yet we are talking about the transmission of
true information, strictly scientific and practically valuable, intended to
serve us, who do not feel what is being talked about, as an instruction for
mastering the completely unknown.

Moreover, the Sages warn that if the
student errs in the true understanding of even one concept, he will not
understand the whole science correctly and will completely stray from the
path.

The sages chose a special language of the Vedas called Sanskrit — meaning
hidden — to expound their science.

This is possible because there is nothing
in our world, either among objects or among their actions, that does not have
its source of origin in the Supreme (God), from whom this object emanates and
is governed.The sages chose a special language of the Vedas called Sanskrit — meaning
hidden — to expound their science.

This is possible because there is nothing
in our world, either among objects or among their actions, that does not have
its source of origin in the Supreme (God), from whom this object emanates and
is governed.

Moreover, the beginning of all objects and actions is precisely in the
Supreme (Divine) world, and then descends into our world (Yavi).

Therefore,
the Sages took the names of objects and actions of our world to designate
their corresponding Spiritual Sources, from which these objects and actions
originate.

That is, a Sage, observing and sensing something in the Spiritual
world, describes it with the names of objects of our world, which are
branches (consequences) of these Spiritual Roots (causes).

Therefore, each
word (rune) in the Vedas directly points to its Spiritual Root in the Higher
(Divine) world.

But once we have taken on the responsibility of describing the Spiritual
worlds in the language of the Vedas in our world, we are obliged to strictly
follow it and under no circumstances change the names.

There are several restrictions on the use of the language of the Vedas:
1.

Under no circumstances should we forget that we are talking about
spiritual objects and their actions, about which we have absolutely no idea,
and therefore we should not imagine their forms, appearance, and actions to
be similar to those described by the same words in our world.

2.

Anyone in our world can utter the concepts of Faith or the Vedas, quoting
entire concepts and expressions from the Books.

But this does not mean at all
that he understands what he is saying, because the words are the same, but
the Sage comprehends what lies behind them and feels what is clearly stated
in the Vedas, and does not simply utter words and thereby convince the
ignorant that he really knows what he is talking about.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Anyone in our world can utter the concepts of Faith or the Vedas, quoting
entire concepts and expressions from the Books. But this does not mean at all
that he understands what he is saying, because the words are the same, but
the Sage comprehends what lies behind them and feels what is clearly stated
in the Vedas, and does not simply utter words and thereby convince the
ignorant that he really knows what he is talking about. After all, starting from our world (Yavi) and up to the highest Spiritual
levels of Faith, all worlds are similar to each other and differ only in
their
"material." Therefore, the name of an object in our world is the same for
similar Spiritual objects in all three Worlds, from the lowest world (Hell)
to

--- PAGE BREAK ---the highest, all similar objects in all Worlds are connected by a thread.

The one who speaks a word or phrase from the Vedas utters the words of our
world, and the Sage understands this phrase according to his level of
comprehension (Faith).

To the uncomprehending, it seems that the one who
utters passages from the Vedas supposedly understands and comprehends their
Spiritual Roots.

3.

A beginner studying the Vedas is unable to independently understand the
true meaning of familiar words in their spiritual sense, and only after
receiving a detailed explanation will he gradually begin to realize the true
meanings and concepts of spiritual categories.

10.

Here we must pause and reflect, because the liberation of a person from the
slavery of the mind (ego) is the end of correction — the Goal of the
Creator's plan and the Goal of human life.

Because if liberation from the ego
(Immortality) is the Goal of human life, then all of the Creator's actions
over creation, over people, are determined and carried out solely on the
basis of this Goal.

Therefore, as we sometimes feel, His actions cause us
suffering, but their goal is our enjoyment.

And yet, knowing the purpose of
each of the Creator's actions, it is possible to understand His intentions
and His individual actions.

And think about it: if the purpose of creating humans was for them to enjoy
creation, this obliges us to create in our Souls a tremendous desire to
receive what the Creator intended to give them.

Indeed, if the Creator desires to delight us with Himself or with His Light,
which is the same thing for us, since we are unable to speak about God
Himself, but rather what we perceive from Him, we call Light, then the only
thing that is "missing" for the embodiment of Light within ourselves is to
create the desire to enjoy what God desires to give.

It is like a mother who regrets that her child has no desire to eat what she
offers him.

And how she would like to create such a desire in him!--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is like a mother who regrets that her child has no desire to eat what she
offers him. And how she would like to create such a desire in him! Therefore,
all creation is nothing more than a desire to enjoy what God wants to give. Apart from the desire to enjoy (ego), selfishness, God created nothing,
because enjoyment itself is in Him. All creation (ego) is nothing more than different degrees of the desire to
enjoy: everything that distinguishes spiritual or material objects from each
other, everything that determines their properties and qualities at all
levels of development of life in all civilizations, everything that divides
Nature into inanimate, plant, animal, and human—is nothing more than a
difference in the degree of desire to enjoy. Only the desire to enjoy (ego) is created, and only its different portions
give rise to both spiritual and material objects, as well as their behavior,
because behavior is a consequence of desire. By changing our desires, God causes us to think and act in order to achieve
what we desire, and thus controls us. Therefore, if a person wants to change
himself, i.e., his desires, he must ask God to make these changes in him. But for this, one must realize that it is God who gives us desires, that I
want to change myself, that God hears my request, that He is able to help me,
that only He gives freedom from enemies (the ego). God creates all these
circumstances for me so that I turn to Him. And the magnitude of pleasure is measured by the magnitude of the desire to
obtain it, and the greater the desire to obtain more, the greater the
magnitude of pleasure, and the less the desire to obtain, the less the
magnitude of pleasure.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The pleasure of receiving.

Therefore, the very concept of human creation
obliges us to create in Souls an excessive desire to receive pleasure (ego),
corresponding to the excessive Pleasure (Immortality) with which the Almighty
intended to delight Souls, for great desire and great pleasure are
interrelated.

Only the thirst for pleasure, "hunger," the desire for something determines
the amount of pleasure when receiving what is desired.

Exquisite dishes will
not give any pleasure if there is no feeling of hunger, if a person is full
or sick.

Conversely, if one is hungry, even the most unpretentious food can
bring a feeling of immense pleasure.

Therefore, our task is to acquire the
desire for what God wants to give us — Eternal Bliss (Immortality).

People in our world have a need to derive pleasure from objects that they see
before them, that are familiar to them, that have left memories of past
pleasures.

Our initial desires are extremely insignificant.

Moreover, since
our egoism automatically avoids unpleasant sensations, we do not desire those
pleasures that we are unable to achieve: a person cannot desire that all the
gold in the world belong to him.

But the Vedas say, "Only a fool does not
desire Immortality (Eternal Bliss)."
11.

All people desire pleasure, from young to old, the only difference being in
the clothing of the sparks of Divine pleasure.

The less developed a person
is, the easier it is for them to find something to enjoy.

A child can enjoy a
large number of different external garments of sparks of pleasure — toys —
but the more educated and spiritual a person is, the more difficult it is for
them to find garments for their pleasures, as it is said:
"Increasing knowledge (Veda) increases suffering."
But if the Purpose of Life requires a person to have a great desire for
pleasure, then how and where can it be acquired?--- PAGE BREAK ---

The less developed a person
is, the easier it is for them to find something to enjoy. A child can enjoy a
large number of different external garments of sparks of pleasure — toys —
but the more educated and spiritual a person is, the more difficult it is for
them to find garments for their pleasures, as it is said:
"Increasing knowledge (Veda) increases suffering."
But if the Purpose of Life requires a person to have a great desire for
pleasure, then how and where can it be acquired? As will be explained below,
this is precisely why our world (Yavi) was created, along with the multitude
of objects and people that surround each of us. As it is said, "pleasures
take a person out of reality" — they give him such a developed egoism that he
begins to desire to become One with the Creator in order to enjoy Him. And in the Spiritual worlds, i.e., after a person leaves the perception of
only our world and begins to perceive Spiritual pleasures, a person's desires
develop with the help of a system of impure forces (Navi), which supplies him
with ever new desires, and thus a person grows, as it is said: "Whoever is
more developed than others has more desires than others." The system of
impure forces (Navi) was created for this purpose. Only when a person
develops within himself a tremendous desire to become One with the Creator,
equal in magnitude and aspiration to that which comes from God, does he merge
with God—this is Unity with God (Immortality). 12. Having understood the above, we can understand Study 2. We have explored
what this Reality (Yav) is, about which it can be decided that it is not in
God Himself, so much so that it is said that it (Yav) is newly created from
nothing. But now we will understand that the purpose of creation (Reality),
which is to delight the creations (Souls), obliges us to create a desire to
receive from God all the best that He has conceived.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Only the desire to enjoy was created by God, because it is the only thing
that man needs to achieve his Goal.

It is also clear that before the plan of
creation to "enjoy," there was no need to create
"desire to enjoy (ego)".

Since God is Perfect, He does not have the desire to
enjoy (ego) within Himself and had to create it.

And this is the only
creation.

The only one, because it (ego) is the essence of all people and it
(ego) is also the essence of controlling them.

By changing our desires, God inspires in us all the actions He needs, whether
physical or spiritual.

And therefore, He needs nothing else to bring each of
us and all of creation (Souls) as a whole to the Goal He has set
— Unity with Him.

The desire to receive pleasure (ego) was certainly not found in God Himself
before He created it (ego) in Souls, for from whom would He receive it?

Therefore, He created something new that was not in Him.

At the same time, it
is clear from the plan of creation that He did not have to create anything
other than the desire to receive pleasure (ego), because this new creation is
already sufficient for Him to fulfill the entire plan of the creation of
Souls.

God shows us, those who comprehend Him, that He desires our pleasure.

Like a
host who shows a guest that he is suffering because the guest does not want
to eat at his house, in order to give the guest the opportunity, after much
persuasion, to feel that he is doing the host a favor by accepting the
desired treat.

Moreover, the host creates in the guest the confidence that
the more he accepts, the more pleasure he will give the host.Like a
host who shows a guest that he is suffering because the guest does not want
to eat at his house, in order to give the guest the opportunity, after much
persuasion, to feel that he is doing the host a favor by accepting the
desired treat.

Moreover, the host creates in the guest the confidence that
the more he accepts, the more pleasure he will give the host.

But in no way can God's desire to delight us be compared to our desire to
"give," since all our desires come from the original, selfish (ego), and
therefore even the desire to delight someone is based on our desire to
delight ourselves, just as a mother delights in feeding her child, but if God
had not given her this selfish desire to delight, the child would have died
of hunger.

Our desire to give and to please stems solely from the desire to enjoy
ourselves while giving, just like all our other similar feelings, when we say
"I love fish," we mean "I enjoy eating fish."
13.

Our nature cannot be changed, let alone eradicated; we will always desire to
receive, for this is what God has created.

A person can limit their actions, for example, by not eating meat, but they
have no power over their feelings of hunger or desire.

Therefore, correction
implies a change in intention (thoughts), a change in the source (thoughts),
and a change in the cause of enjoyment.

It is not the action itself, but the
thought-orientation of the action that we need to change.

Moreover, the fact
that God created us with the need for further correction is not a whim of the
Creator, but a necessity arising from the Perfection of His actions, so that
Creation(the Soul) would not feel shame from receiving pleasure, as in the
example of the guest and the host, when the host shows the guest that the
latter is doing the host a favor by eating at his table.

The desire to "give," to enjoy without the desire to receive, is the Essence.

The desire
to "give," which is above the desire to "receive," is creation (EGO).--- PAGE BREAK ---

The desire to "give," to enjoy without the desire to receive, is the Essence. The desire
to "give," which is above the desire to "receive," is creation (EGO). The
desire to receive pleasure (ego), created by God, cannot be changed in a
person, but it is possible and necessary to correct the INTENTION of his
actions: for whom a person receives pleasure. In all of creation, there are four possible combinations of actions and
intentions:
1) Receiving for oneself is crude selfishness, an impure ego;

--- PAGE BREAK ---2) giving for oneself's sake is "civilized" selfishness;
3) giving for God's sake is an intermediate state, halfway between God and
creation, where spiritual purity (conscience) is observed;
4) Receiving for God's sake is similar to God's attributes, because
receiving for God's sake is equivalent to giving to Him.

In states 3) and 4), a person receives the Soul (Mind), a part of God (the
Higher Mind) and everything that fills the plan of creation, i.e., all kinds
of pleasures intended for us come directly from God Himself, and He does not
need to create them anew, because they come from the already Existing
pleasure, to the great desire of Souls.

Thus, it is clear to us that all the
material, from beginning to end, in the newly created creation, is only a
"desire to enjoy."
All pleasures, everything that attracts us, comes directly from God Himself,
even if we receive them through a system of impure Spiritual forces (the
worlds of Navi).

In songs, poems, in our every action and thought, we do
nothing but express our desire for a mini-portion of the Upper Light, dressed
in various garments (sparks of Light) of our world.

By changing the location
of the sparks of Light in various objects of our world, God controls our
desires.

The goal of our development is to reach the sensation of Spiritual
delight, rather than perceiving it unconsciously in various guises of our
world.

14.

After the above, we can understand Study 3: we were puzzled as to how the
Sages could say that Souls are parts of God, like stones separated from a
rock, where the only difference is that one is a part and the other is the
Whole.

The Creator introduced into Himself the desire to receive pleasure (ego),
then separated and distanced it from Himself.

The Creator is in absolute
peace, filling everything.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Creator introduced into Himself the desire to receive pleasure (ego),
then separated and distanced it from Himself. The Creator is in absolute
peace, filling everything. Until the creation (man) nullifies the desire to
receive that was introduced into him—egoism—it is impossible to feel God, the
Highest Pleasure (Immortality), the Light (Righteousness), because in
Spiritual separation, insensitivity, distance, and concealment occur due to
the difference in the properties of the two objects. But as soon as a person eradicates his desire to receive (ego), the only
thing that separates him, distances him from God, immediately merges with
Him. In this case, a person feels his Soul, God within himself, and thanks
Him. The stages of correcting the desire to receive (ego) into the desire to give
are called the stages of Faith—Knowledge of God. Both the desire to receive
and the desire to give, as well as all intermediate states of a person,
exist and occur within the person themselves; only the perception of reality
changes, and this changes a person's sensations. Outside of a person's
sensations, there is only one Unified and Multiple God. In the language of the Vedas, a person consists of the Light of Enjoyment
(Ingliya) emanating from God (the Great Ra-M-Ha) and the Soul — the desire to
receive Light (Energy) in order to enjoy Him (Love). Light (Inglia) is
everywhere, even in simple sunlight, i.e., Light (Inglia) contains
everything, all states (Creation, Preservation, and Destruction), and the
vessel (Soul) feels from Light (Energy) only those pleasures that it desires
to feel. A stone, separating from a rock, becomes a part of it by means of an axe
created for this purpose, but in God Himself, how can one imagine something
similar, how do Souls separate from God (the Higher Soul), since Souls come
out of Him and become creatures (people). From what has been clarified
earlier, we understand that just asgine something
similar, how do Souls separate from God (the Higher Soul), since Souls come
out of Him and become creatures (people). From what has been clarified
earlier, we understand that just as

--- PAGE BREAK ---an axe chops and divides a material object into two, so the difference in
qualities and properties is distinguished in the Spiritual world and divided
into two Worlds (Prav and Navi).

Naturally, when properties, i.e., desires, coincide, the reason for
separation, which leads to not feeling God, disappears again.

Therefore, all
our correction boils down to purifying our desires from the egoism created in
us by God for our work on it.

Why create egoism if it has to be destroyed?

Because by destroying egoism, in
the struggle against it, a person acquires enormous desires to receive
pleasure, corrects them to receive "for the sake of God," and acquires the
Knowledge and Mind necessary to evaluate Spiritual pleasures.

Since
everything that distinguishes and separates a person from God is the
difference in desires, i.e., everything that needs to be corrected is our
desires.

To do this, it is necessary to know what God's desires are.

God's desire is an absolutely selfless desire to "give," but we are not yet
able to realize this, to feel this quality in ourselves, because it is
completely foreign to us.

Only gradually, in the process of changing oneself
through the study of the Vedas, does a person begin to recognize his true
selfish nature.

This first stage of spiritual development (the first level of Faith) is
called
"Awareness of evil." This stage is so named because it can only be attained
when a person desires to draw closer to God.

Only then does he perceive his
selfish desires for pleasure as evil, because they separate him from God.

Everything that God desires must be accepted by a person with the same
feelings, and everything that is contrary to God must be rejected by a
person.

In that part of their nature which a person has likened to God, they receive
a sense of God, His Light (Energy), their Soul, and Spiritual pleasure.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Everything that God desires must be accepted by a person with the same
feelings, and everything that is contrary to God must be rejected by a
person. In that part of their nature which a person has likened to God, they receive
a sense of God, His Light (Energy), their Soul, and Spiritual pleasure. This
is all the same concept, called Light in the Vedas, and the part of man's
desires that he is able to receive from God in order to feel this Light is
called the vessel of the Soul. The part of God that man feels is called his
Soul. In relation to man, this part is separated from God because man perceives it
as a part, but this is only in relation to man. We do not speak about God because, as already explained, all our knowledge
comes only from what we comprehend from within ourselves, received into the
vessel of our Soul. We have no right to speak about what happens outside our
vessel of the Soul, since any basis for the accuracy of our assumptions and
conclusions immediately disappears, given the impossibility of any empirical
verification. Further, we find that in Spiritual objects, the difference in properties acts
like an axe in our world, splitting a rock, and the degree of separation is
determined by the degree of difference in properties. For it is only by giving His part a property different from Himself, desire
(ego), that God cut it off from Himself and distanced it to an infinitely
great distance. And from this we understand that since Souls have been given the desire to
“receive” pleasure, and, as we have already clarified, this property is not
found in God at all, from whom will He receive it? The ego is the difference
between the properties (desires) acquired by the Souls; it (the ego) acts by
separating them (the Souls) from God (the Higher Soul), like an axe
separating a stone from a rock. 15.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The sensation of one's own desires (ego) is the essence of creation (man),
and it separates the Soul from God to such an extent that if a person feels
only his desires (ego), he is completely unable to feel God, and this state
of creation is called man in our world (Yavi).

Thus, through this distinction of properties, Souls emerge from God and
separate from Him, becoming creations (human beings).

But everything that
Souls receive from His Light (Ingli) comes from what already exists, from God
Himself.

If the Soul corrects itself (its thoughts-desires), it achieves similarity
between its properties (desires) and the properties (desires) of God; this is
what it (the Soul) feels within itself (Radiance), and Radiance is a part of
God.

God and His Light are in absolute peace.

Light (Inglia) does not come
and go, but the Soul itself, changing its properties (desires), feels,
depending on the change in its properties (desires), the greater or lesser
presence of Light (Energy), which is felt by it as the coming or going of
Light, the approach or departure of God.

Therefore, it is said: "God does not change Himself," so says God, constantly
desiring the change of Souls to the state of merging (Unity) with them, and
changes occur only in the Souls themselves, revealing to one degree or
another the Light of God.

We do not comprehend everything that is within us, but only what our senses
perceive of all that exists.

We are in God Himself.

He permeates, fills, and
surrounds us.

The reason we do not feel Him is that our senses have screens
that block us, also called filters (Maya), veils, coverings, clothes, and so
on.

These screens hide God and give us, instead of the feeling of God
Himself, the feeling of a certain picture on the screen of the mind, which we
call "our" or "this" world.

In any case, we see what is drawn for us by our sensory organs within us.--- PAGE BREAK ---

These screens hide God and give us, instead of the feeling of God
Himself, the feeling of a certain picture on the screen of the mind, which we
call "our" or "this" world. In any case, we see what is drawn for us by our sensory organs within us. We
look inside ourselves, as it were, but are unable to see even what is
outside, because there are no organs in the body for sensing Light or God
Himself. To sense God Himself, one needs a completely unlimited desire, and
such a desire does not exist, because desire is always a limitation. Any Soul can only perceive that which is connected with its personal
qualities and properties, that which is similar to its qualities and
properties. Just as a radio tuned to a certain wavelength perceives
it precisely because the source and the receiver have a common
property. From this, we understand that as soon as a person can liken any of their
qualities or desires to God's desire to "give," they will immediately feel
God and that Light (Energy) in this desire, which will fill this desire and
become part of their Soul vessel. And, having corrected—likened all their
desires to God's desire—a person will receive their entire Soul, their
complete filling with God, which is defined as merging with God
(Immortality). Therefore, in the Light (Energy) received into the vessel of the Soul, there
is no difference between the Soul and God Himself, because the Soul receives
Light (Energy) directly from God. 16. The correction of the Soul is the correction of the desire to receive
pleasure for oneself (ego) to the desire to receive pleasure for God (EGO). The mere desire to receive pleasure (ego) cannot be a vessel (Soul) for
receiving pleasure (Light), because Light does not enter selfish Souls; an
egoist cannot feel God. But if selfish desires (ego) are covered by the
screen of the Mind (Wisdom), which counteracts receiving for oneself and
turns

--- PAGE BREAK ---intention to receive for God's sake, then such an intention is
called reflected or reverse Light, which transforms selfish desire
(ego) into altruistic desire (EGO).

The difference between Souls and God is that Souls are parts of God Himself,
i.e., parts of the Light received into their Souls, into the desire to
receive (ego), because it is already a part separated from God, by what is
inside properties different from God—the desire to receive (ego), and the
difference in properties (desires) makes it (the Soul) a part, as a result of
which it leaves the "One God" and becomes a "part of God."
For there is no other difference between Them except that God is
"Everything," and the Soul is
a "part," like a stone separated from a rock.

And think deeply (into the
essence), for it is impossible to explain anything more sublime than this.

As a person renounces their personal desires (ego) and interests, they
eliminate that which separates them from God to such an extent that, upon
complete correction, i.e., upon complete insensitivity to their own "I
(Soul)," suppressed for the sake of merging with God, a person feels only
God within themselves and becomes a conduit only for His desires (EGO),
feeling God incarnate in their entire body, and only God's desires begin to
guide them.

17.

Now we can understand study 4.

How is it possible for an impure system (Navi)
to emerge from the purity of God, since it is extremely far from His purity,
and how is it possible that He fills and enlivens it?

But first, it is necessary to understand the essence of the impure system
(Navi).How is it possible for an impure system (Navi)
to emerge from the purity of God, since it is extremely far from His purity,
and how is it possible that He fills and enlivens it?

But first, it is necessary to understand the essence of the impure system
(Navi).

Know, as the Ancients (Aryans) said, that the great desire to receive
(ego) is the essence of Souls, flowing from the purpose of their creation,
and that is why they are ready to receive what is in the plan of human
creation, but this property (desire) does not remain in Souls in this form,
because if it remained in them, Souls would be obliged to remain forever
separated from God, since the difference in properties (desires) in them
would separate them from God.

Although the desire to receive is necessary for the fulfillment of the plan
of human creation, because without desire it is impossible to enjoy, but the
enjoyment itself must be perfect, and therefore correction is necessary, not
the annulment of the desire to receive (ego).

Contrary to other beliefs and misunderstandings of creation (man), we see
that the path of mortifying our nature is absolutely incompatible with the
process of spiritual elevation.

The correct path is when, as a result of one's spiritual elevation, as a
consequence of new qualities and desires received from Above, a person
naturally changes their behavior.

And to correct this separation from God imposed on the vessel of the Soul,
God created all worlds and divided them into two systems, as it is said, "God
created one against the other," the world of the pure system of Prav and
against it the world of the impure system of Navi.

And He gave the quality-property of the desire to give (EGO) to the system of
pure worlds (Prav), and took away from them the desire to receive for
themselves (ego), and gave it to the system of impure worlds Navi, which as a
result became separated from God and all pure worlds (the world Yavi).--- PAGE BREAK ---

And to correct this separation from God imposed on the vessel of the Soul,
God created all worlds and divided them into two systems, as it is said, "God
created one against the other," the world of the pure system of Prav and
against it the world of the impure system of Navi. And He gave the quality-property of the desire to give (EGO) to the system of
pure worlds (Prav), and took away from them the desire to receive for
themselves (ego), and gave it to the system of impure worlds Navi, which as a
result became separated from God and all pure worlds (the world Yavi). The universe as a whole is similar to our world, where everything is prepared
for development and advancement toward the Goal conceived by God. The
creation of worlds, up to and including our world (Yavi), is called the
descent of worlds from above to below and is the preparatory phase of the
process of Creation (Souls).

--- PAGE BREAK ---18.

The entire universe consists of 3[5] Worlds: [1st world: World of
God/Svarog], world of Prav (Light), world of Yavi (Earthly world) and world
of Navi (Darkness) [and 5th world: Hell/Tartarus].

The World of Yavi (Earthly
World) consists of two opposing systems: Light, pure, altruistic Forces and
Dark, impure, selfish Forces.

Then a person appears in our world (Yavi), and from this begins the process
of the elevation of Souls and the comprehension of God's creations (Souls)
from the bottom up.

That is why impure people are called dead, as well as sinners coming from
Hell (Navi), as the Sages say, sinners in life are called dead, because the
desire to receive (ego) created in them, which is opposite to the property of
God's purity, separates them from the Source of Life, and they are extremely
distant from Him, for He has no connection with receiving, and God only
gives, while an impure person has no connection with giving; he only has the
desire to receive for himself (ego), for self-gratification, and there is no
greater opposition than this.

To put it simply: there are only two forces in nature—one similar to God and
one opposite to God; both originate from God's desire, both manifest
themselves only in relation to a person who, under the influence of these
Forces, moves either involuntarily or consciously toward the Goal set by God.

The system representing the side, properties (desires) of God is called the
pure system of the worlds of Prav.

The system representing the forces and
properties (desires) opposite to God is called the system of impure worlds of
Navi.

And as is already known, spiritual distance, beginning with an insignificant
difference in properties (desires), ends with opposite properties (desires),
defined as infinite removal from the Creator.The system representing the forces and
properties (desires) opposite to God is called the system of impure worlds of
Navi.

And as is already known, spiritual distance, beginning with an insignificant
difference in properties (desires), ends with opposite properties (desires),
defined as infinite removal from the Creator.

In the Vedas, impure, i.e., selfish desires to obtain pleasure for oneself
are called "skin." This is because, just as skin protects the fruit during
ripening from pests and preserves it once it is ripe, so too are impure
spiritual distractions intended for human development, and once they have
played their role, they disappear.

John says that not only impure people are called dead, but also those who
come from them.

And therefore sinners, according to their sinful desires,
i.e., those opposed to the purity of God, are called dead, because they are
extremely distant from God, the Source of Life.

"Sinners are dead while still alive." It is known that a person can change
their beliefs and actions only if they come to the conclusion that they are
harmful to them.

And this is the meaning of awareness of Evil: when a person
realizes which of their qualities are evil in them, because they recognize
them as bringing evil to them, and therefore in their thoughts and actions
they refrain from using evil.

And until they realize evil, people cannot be righteous.

From this, it is
clear that "sinners" are not those who have committed transgressions, but
those who feel themselves to be such because they feel, realize, and sense
the evil within them.

"Dead while still alive." Life is a constant process of
receiving something.

But a person feels that receiving is similar to death,
and therefore, based on their own feelings, they call themselves "a sinner,
dead while still alive."
In our present state, we imagine death as the cessation of the physiological
life of the physical body.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Dead while still alive." Life is a constant process of
receiving something. But a person feels that receiving is similar to death,
and therefore, based on their own feelings, they call themselves "a sinner,
dead while still alive."
In our present state, we imagine death as the cessation of the physiological
life of the physical body. We cannot imagine a more abrupt transition from
one state to another. But a comparison can be made: our physiological
existence, called life, compared to the feeling of real presence in the
Spiritual worlds, is like a dream or, as

--- PAGE BREAK ---it is said in the Vedas, our life, compared to the Spiritual (Eternal) one,
is only a small drop of the real feeling of existence in the Light of God.

The Light of God is called Inglia or the Light of Life, because we are
created in such a way that only His (the Light's) presence in us do we
perceive as life.

As we move away from the Source of Light — God — the Light
of God diminishes, and while we are in our world (Yavi), we receive only a
spark of this Light, although, in general, we are not entitled to even this
spark of Light, since we are diametrically opposed to it, infinitely distant
from its Source.

But in order for us to have the opportunity to develop and rise from the
depths of our state, the Creator placed a microdose of His Light (the spark
of Inglia) in our selfish desires.

Thanks to it, we live, i.e., we reach for
the objects in which it is found, trying to absorb it.

All our suffering and joy, grief and love, everything that nourishes us
spiritually and physically, is only this spark of Light (Inglia).

Without
it, neither spiritual nor physical bodies can exist — if it disappeared,
everything would disappear with it.

This infinitely small portion of Light
is called life in our world!

In general, ego desires rule over a person so that they cannot fully enjoy
anything, only temporarily and with limitations.

This causes a person
suffering and forces them to develop.

Desires force us to limit ourselves to
only superficial knowledge; it is as if, instead of enjoying the fruit, a
person cuts off and eats only its peel, leaving the flesh—the main part—
behind.

And understanding creation (science) will not help a person if he is
not able to understand the Vedas enough to have the strength to counteract
his nature (ego) and accept the desires of God (EGO) as his own.

19.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And understanding creation (science) will not help a person if he is
not able to understand the Vedas enough to have the strength to counteract
his nature (ego) and accept the desires of God (EGO) as his own. 19. And the Worlds descended to the Reality of this world, i.e., to the place
where our bodies and Souls exist in our world (Yavi), as well as the time of
corruption (receiving the Light of Navi) and correction (receiving the Light
of Prav), because the ego, as a desire for self-indulgence, comes from its
Root (Purpose) in the plan of Creation (the 3 Worlds), and the Soul, passing
through the path of maturation through the systems of impure worlds (Navi),
remains under the power of this system (Navi) until the age of 18 (16) — the
first coming of age, and this is the time of corruption(receiving the Light
of Navi). "18[16] years" here refers to the period during which a person is under the
influence of the selfish forces of their development. 18(16) years is the
first age of majority. In order to bring the Soul to its final state, which is extremely distant
from Himself, but which is desirable and therefore the original, true state
of Souls in our world, God performed the following actions:
1) He gave the soul the desire for complete selfishness, called pride, as a
result of which a person ceased to feel God, as the Ancients said: "With
the proud, says God, I cannot be together," because the opposition of
properties cuts them off from each other, to the point of absolute
insensitivity to God, or, in the language of the Vedas, "Light left the
Soul";
2) He divided His creation (the One Soul) into the smallest separate parts
(Souls) and placed them in the bodies of our world. In order for the world
(Yavi) not to disappear and be destroyed, He transferred sparks of Light
into the system of impure forces (Navi), because the system of pure forces
(Prav) cannot nourish man with Light (Navi) in our world due to their
opposite properties.He transferred sparks of Light
into the system of impure forces (Navi), because the system of pure forces
(Prav) cannot nourish man with Light (Navi) in our world due to their
opposite properties.

--- PAGE BREAK ---This system of impure forces (Navi) nourishes humans and our entire world
until the end of correction.

That is why these forces are called ego-shells,
because their role, like that of a hard shell, is to preserve the fruit until
it ripens and becomes suitable for its desired purpose.

Similarly, the sparks
of Light transmitted to the system of impure forces (Navi) sustain the life
of the world (Yavi) and the human being in it, and by moving from one of
their garments (sparks of Light) to another, they bring the human being to
the desired state.

But even this small spark of Light (Soul) remaining in a person, a tiny part
of his true Soul (Unified), is taken away by the system of impure forces
(Navi) by giving a person Light from its sparks.

20.

All worlds are similar to each other, and the only difference between them is
in the material.

Everything that exists in the Higher world (Prav) descends
and is repeated in the lower world (Navi), like a copy made of a different
material, from which it descends into an even lower world, and so on.

The
source of an object in any world, located in the higher world (Prav), is
called the Root (of the Tree of Life), and its offspring in the lower world
is called the Branch (of the Tree of Life).

All worlds are similar, like two
drops of water, both in their structure and in their functioning.

The search for pleasure causes the animal body to move and develop.

Therefore, the Higher (God) gave the child the ability to find pleasure in
the most insignificant things all around him, because it is precisely his
state of requiring development that obliges him to increase his sense of life
in order to provide enough pleasure for growth and development, and therefore
he can find a source of pleasure in everything.

The Light of Enjoyment (Inglia) is the foundation of all Life.

But this Light
is only such when it is received by Spiritual, altruistic Souls (EGO).--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Light of Enjoyment (Inglia) is the foundation of all Life. But this Light
is only such when it is received by Spiritual, altruistic Souls (EGO). If
pleasure is received by a selfish soul (ego), then this Light often has the
opposite effect. For example, the pleasure of scratching an affected area of
skin causes one to continue the action and creates an increasing negative
effect: the more one scratches, the greater the need for this action, until
the moment of mortal danger arrives. Paradoxically, the Light of Life (Inglia) — the Source of all our pleasures —
can lead to death. The reason for the negative effect is that selfish
pleasure is felt only in part of the Soul and therefore leads to the opposite
of pleasure — death, unlike when pleasure, if it is altruistic, is felt by
the whole Soul. From the above example, we can understand the structure of the system of
impure worlds (Navi): its basis is the desire for self-gratification (ego),
the desire to receive for oneself without giving anything in return,
therefore its demand for pleasure cannot be satisfied, because satisfying the
demand for pleasure immediately creates a new need that is twice as great,
without completely fulfilling the previous one. As a result of obtaining selfish pleasure, one feels not pleasure, but an
immediate thirst for new pleasure, i.e., suffering from its absence. The ego
of the system of impure forces (Navi) ends with an intoxicating drop of
death, beckoning and separating even from the remaining, last spark of Light
(Prav), a drop that kills a person of animal level of development by
separating him from this small spark of Light (Prav). All vices in the human body originated from the system of impure forces
(Navi), because initially, the desire to receive satisfaction (pleasure) from
the system of pure worlds (Prav) was created. But when the human body
subsequently begins to

--- PAGE BREAK ---receive from the system of impure worlds (Navi), it turns out that there are
many unnecessary parts-organs (desires) in it without any need for them,
because they do not receive what they need from the system of impure forces
(Navi).

By moving the spark of Light (desire) from one object to another, God makes
us change our activities in this world, attracting us to ever new objects.

And so it is during the period of accumulation of egoistic desire (ego) –
until the age of 18 [16].

And then, placing the spark of Light of pleasure in garments that bring us a
feeling of suffering after pleasure, God gradually shows us ourselves that
the use of egoism is vicious, because the pursuit of pleasure leads to
suffering, and by this He helps us to strive to "free ourselves" from
egoistic desires (ego) and begin to ask Him for help.

It is precisely for the sake of a person's faster and more complete passage
through all stages of the accumulation of selfishness ("up to 18 [16] years
of age") and the realization of evil that we are created connected with
selfishness within the framework of our world.

Therefore, the Sages are not
hermits hiding in secret places, but people living ordinary lives.

Only by
interacting with this world can a person move toward correction.

And by
following the instructions of the Vedas, for the sake of pleasing God, a
person moves forward on the steps of Faith.

Any action performed by a person with the intention of bringing pleasure to
God can be called righteousness.

An action performed against selfish desire
is called righteousness, and the Light of pleasure received by a person as a
result of this action is called Faith.

In general, there are two types of actions in the world (Yavi): altruistic
(for God) – pure, and selfish (for oneself) – impure.An action performed against selfish desire
is called righteousness, and the Light of pleasure received by a person as a
result of this action is called Faith.

In general, there are two types of actions in the world (Yavi): altruistic
(for God) – pure, and selfish (for oneself) – impure.

The main thing in these actions is not their physical performance, strictly
limited by the Laws set forth in the Vedas, about which it is said that
nothing can be added or taken away from them, but the constant improvement of
the thought-intention (desire) for whose sake and for what purpose a person
performs a particular action.

After all, it is the intention (desire) that
determines the action.

We can never tell by external actions what spiritual level (faith) a person
is at, because this is determined only by the power of their knowledge, and
this is hidden from everyone, and often even from the person themselves.

He begins to purify the desire for self-indulgence (ego) created within him
and gradually transform it into the desire to give (EGO), thereby causing the
descent of the pure Soul from its Root (Inglia) in the plan of Creation, and
it (the Soul), passing through the system of pure worlds (Prav), is clothed
in the desire to give (EGO), and this is the time of correction.

Gradually, the desire to receive for oneself (ego) is replaced by the desire
to give oneself, one's feelings, and thoughts to God.

And then he keeps learning and getting pure levels (Beliefs) of the plan of
Creation (the Tree of Life), which is in the world of Infinity, helping a
person change their desire to "get for themselves" to the opposite, to get
for the sake of delighting God, and not at all for their own benefit.

To receive for the sake of God is to receive pleasure, because that is what
God desires.

The action is the same as the original, selfish one, but the
intention (direction of thought) changes its meaning to the opposite.--- PAGE BREAK ---

To receive for the sake of God is to receive pleasure, because that is what
God desires. The action is the same as the original, selfish one, but the
intention (direction of thought) changes its meaning to the opposite. The
example below also shows that the main thing is not the action itself, but
the intention (direction of thought), because only it characterizes the
action. And this is how a person becomes like God, because receiving for the sake of
giving is considered a property of pure giving (EGO). If a well-known and respected guest visits a person, how important will it be
for the host that the respected guest take something from him, because

--- PAGE BREAK ---how this guest does a favor, a service to the host, and the value of the
favor depends on the degree of the guest's importance in the eyes of the
host.

From this example, we see that the main thing is not the action, but
its intention, which, in turn, can change the meaning of the action to the
opposite.

In our world, we draw conclusions about a person's actions based on
their outward appearance, while spiritual actions are evaluated precisely
according to the true intention of the person performing them.

It was precisely the intention (thinking), and not the action, that caused
the reduction and concealment of the Light (God).

The Soul does not change
its action: at the end of correction, it receives Enjoyment (Immortality), as
before, but intention (thinking) changes the action to the opposite, and a
person changes from a receiver to a giver.

A person cannot change their
nature, but by correcting their thought-intention (thinking), they become
like God.

And thus, he attains complete union with God (Immortality), for Spiritual
union (Unity) is the equality of properties (desires), as it is said that to
unite with God means to unite with His properties (desires), as a result of
which a person becomes worthy of receiving all the Delight that was intended
in the plan of creation(of man).

In our world (Yavi), you don't really feel yourself, but rather your
surroundings.

Of course, you feel your surroundings through your body's
organs, through all your senses (feelings), but you're only absorbed by your
surroundings.

If your properties (desires) and the properties (desires) of
your surroundings are similar, you will feel nothing but them.

And if your
thoughts and the thoughts of your surroundings are the same, you will merge
with your surroundings without any distinction from them, dissolving into
them.

God fills all creations (Souls), all of us, He is outside and inside.

But
only those who are similar to Him in their properties can feel Him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

God fills all creations (Souls), all of us, He is outside and inside. But
only those who are similar to Him in their properties can feel Him. Only if a
person likens one of his properties (desires) to the property (desire) of God
"to give," in this corrected quality he begins to feel God, and only in this
case is this quality called EGO for receiving Light, feeling God. From this, it is clear that although God is everywhere "physically," He is
not perceptible to us because He is extremely distant from us "spiritually."
By gradually cleansing ourselves of the egoism that permeates all our senses,
we gradually, to the extent that we acquire God-like qualities, draw closer
to Him spiritually and begin to feel Him. And complete similarity of
qualities, i.e., the absolute merging of man with God (Unity), is the goal of
human creation (the end of correction). 21. The problem of transmitting spiritual information is similar to the problem
of transmitting any information with which we are unfamiliar, have not
experienced, and have no analogies or ideas about. For example, after
returning from a long space flight, I want to tell you about something
completely unusual, unlike anything else, having no analogy in our familiar
and familiar world. What should I do? I can use the language of our world, the names accepted in our world, but at
the same time I mean completely different concepts than you do, because you
are only familiar with the concepts of our world. Then I can use the names of
objects and actions from our world to describe the world I visited, if there
are objects and processes in it that are similar in function.

--- PAGE BREAK ---It is possible to evoke feelings of hunger, love, fear, ecstasy, and so on in
a person, but this is only possible because there is an understanding of the
correspondence between signals and our sensations.

A sage who experiences sensations that are extraordinary for our world when
reading the Vedas cannot convey his feelings to another, even to a sage, just
as we cannot in our world.

But, receiving absolute Knowledge along with
sensations, he can express all his sensations in the language of the Vedas,
in the language of describing the states of his Soul, external influences on
it, and its reactions to these influences.

The spiritual desire (EGO) of the Sage, repelling the coming pleasure (ego)
with the sensation of God, derives pleasure from the result of his action.

The Sages describe these sensations in the form of symbols (runes) in the
Vedas.

Those who are able to reproduce the same or similar actions, but an
order of magnitude lower or higher, based on these symbols (runes), will
experience the same thing as the Sage.

The feelings of the sage — the internal processing of the perceived
interaction of Light and the screen — the description of what is perceived in
the language of the Vedas — reading by another sage in the language of the
Vedas — internal reproduction of the described state of the Soul — obtaining
the same feeling.

This process is similar to the techniques used when recording any
information, but in our case, we lack the organs for its reproduction—the
screen in the language of the Vedas, or more clearly, the altruistic organs
of perception (EGO).

Desires-thoughts now belong to the fourth degree (Faith).

Desires to receive
for the sake of self-indulgence, which remained unchanged after the Light
came to them when receiving for the sake of God, and these desires-thoughts
passed to the system of impure forces of Navi.

Desires (ego and EGO) are the desire to receive the Light, pleasure for
oneself or for God.Desires to receive
for the sake of self-indulgence, which remained unchanged after the Light
came to them when receiving for the sake of God, and these desires-thoughts
passed to the system of impure forces of Navi.

Desires (ego and EGO) are the desire to receive the Light, pleasure for
oneself or for God.

After reducing the reception of Light, the Soul accepts Light, making a
calculation: it receives the part of Light that it can receive for the sake
of God, and does not take what it is unable to take with this intention.

After calculating the size of the Spiritual object, the Light is accepted
into the vessel of the Soul.

The part of the vessel of the Soul remains
unfilled due to the lack of the power of intention to receive pleasure for
the sake of God.

All channels for receiving Light are called chakras.

Chakras are called the channels of the vessel of the Soul.

The channels of the Soul vessel are energy channels for receiving Light
(Energy).

In the Vedas, they are known as chakras.

The word chakra means
"circular movement (chak) of Light (Ra)".

Energy collects in the chakras and
forms energy masses that rotate in the form of whirlpools.

Each chakra is a
point (center) connecting many Lights (Energies) together.

There are
countless chakras in the body, but the 9 (7) main chakras located along the
central energy channel are particularly connected to human evolution.

Therefore, the part of the chakras below the abdomen is called the end of
receiving Light.

The Light that the Soul receives in the part above the
abdomen is called the inner Light, and the Light that should fill the vessel
of the Soul (the Aura), but does not fill it due to the lack of the power of
intention to receive it for the sake of God, is called the surrounding Light.

This Light remains outside and waits until the person develops the power
(desire) to accept it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Light that the Soul receives in the part above the
abdomen is called the inner Light, and the Light that should fill the vessel
of the Soul (the Aura), but does not fill it due to the lack of the power of
intention to receive it for the sake of God, is called the surrounding Light. This Light remains outside and waits until the person develops the power
(desire) to accept it. But since the Soul does not want to accept the Light into its Spiritual
vessel, not wanting to distance itself from God with its properties, it
receives into the vessel a special delight from the likeness of God, as well
as a little pure Light (Prav), because it wants to be like God in spite of
the desire offered. Thus, the Light (Prav) received in the desire for self-enjoyment (ego) after
the correction of desires-intentions is partially accepted into the upper
vessel of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the Soul, and the rest of it remains outside the vessel of the Soul.

But
this is necessary in order for the Soul to receive all the Light by putting
pressure on the desire-intention (ego) to receive all the Light (Prav),
regardless of the conditions.

And since the Soul does not want to interrupt
the state of similarity in properties with God (Immortality), it expels all
the Light (Navi) from itself and remains empty, as it was before receiving
the Light (Navi).

But as a result of this action, not only the Light (Prav)
received above (above the stomach) of the vessel of the Soul, but also the
Light (Navi) with a small amount below the stomach, also left the vessel of
the Soul.

And the whole reason for the departure of the Light from the Soul
is that a person does not want to receive additional Light because he cannot
receive it for the sake of God, and he does not want it for himself, because
by doing so he will distance himself from God.

The annulment of the ego means that the Light (Navi) that limited the
reception of Light (Prav) in the chakras and thus made it possible to receive
it into the vessel of the Soul has now weakened, which has led to the
annulment of its (the ego's) limiting power, and therefore it is no longer
possible for the Soul to receive Light (Navi) at all.

Therefore, the Light (Navi) from the lower chakras rises with all the
memories of where its Source is located, and there (above) it receives the
power to accept the next portion of Light.

But where can the chakra get the desire to receive?

From where all desires
are located.

Then why, before beginning to ascend the steps of Faith, did a person not
have the strength of intention (desire) to receive for the sake of God?

Based
on this, it is clear that the subsequent step of Faith corrects the desires
of the Soul from the previous step of Faith, i.e., it gives them the strength
of intention to receive Light for the sake of God (EGO).Then why, before beginning to ascend the steps of Faith, did a person not
have the strength of intention (desire) to receive for the sake of God?

Based
on this, it is clear that the subsequent step of Faith corrects the desires
of the Soul from the previous step of Faith, i.e., it gives them the strength
of intention to receive Light for the sake of God (EGO).

But despite the fact that all Souls received Energy (Light) from the chakras
below the abdomen, there remained desires that did not have the strength of
intention for the sake of God, relating entirely to desires to receive for
oneself, which are without Light, and until they are filled, there will not
be a completely corrected state of ego.

And so these desires, whose nature is to obtain something for oneself, mixed
with the desires that came from below the belly (the lower chakras),
resulting in confusion.

Before the confusion, there was no desire to use
these desires for correction, to give them intention for the sake of God.

Therefore, a person was created who, until the age of 18 (16), is under the
influence of the system of impure worlds (Navi), desiring to receive
everything for himself.

And when he already has these desires (corrected),
he, with the help of Faith and the Vedas, can correct them so that he can
receive pleasure for the sake of God.

Thus, the principle of correcting the desire to "obtain (ego)" given to
Souls, based on the plan of human creation, by God preparing for them the
two opposing systems described above (Prav and Navi), through which they
pass and are divided into two objects, the body (ego) and the Soul (EGO),
which clothe each other.

The period during which a person acquires and comprehends their complete
desire to receive is called the period up to 18 (16) years of age.

Then they
begin to correct the desire they have received.

In the beginning, God created
a common desire to receive (EGO), called the common (Unified) Soul or Adam
(Man) – the First Man.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then they
begin to correct the desire they have received. In the beginning, God created
a common desire to receive (EGO), called the common (Unified) Soul or Adam
(Man) – the First Man. But since it is beyond the power of the common Soul (Adam) to produce life
and receive all the Light for God's sake, God divided it into many separate
parts (Souls), each of which is capable of producing its own offspring and
correcting its ego, receiving its portion of Light for the sake of God,
because gradually, over time, i.e., by dividing the private portion of Light
into even smaller parts in time, a person is able to overcome their own
egoism,

--- PAGE BREAK ---resist small pleasures, and gradually receive all the Light of Pleasure
(Immortality) destined for his Soul.

This state is called final Liberation (Immortality) — the end of private
(personal) correction.

And after all private Souls correct themselves, they
all unite into one common (Unified) Soul, as in the beginning of creation.

This state is called the end of general correction.

As a result, we see that the entire process is necessary only to change the
thought-intention (desire) of the Soul: it receives pleasure, just as in its
initial state, but now with the intention not to enjoy itself, but to enjoy
because God desires it.

And with the help of Faith and the Vedas, they ultimately turn the property
of "receiving" into the property of
"giving," and then they can receive all the good that is in the plan of
creation, as well as achieve union (Unity) with God, as a result of
fulfilling Faith and the Vedas, the coincidence of properties with God.

And
this is defined as the end of correction.

Not only does a person receive initial pleasure in their corrected state
(EGO), but they also receive enormous pleasure from merging with God through
their properties, pleasure from merging with Perfection.

And then, since there is no longer any need for the system of impure forces
(Navi), it disappears, and death is gone forever.

And all the work in Faith
and the Vedas, given to the whole world throughout the years of the world's
existence (Yavi), as well as to each person throughout the years of his life,
is only to bring them to the end of correction (Immortality), the coincidence
of the properties of the Soul and God.

It also becomes clear that God had to create the system of impure forces
(Navi) in order to produce thoughts-desires from it, so that Souls could then
correct thoughts-desires with the help of Faith and the Vedas.And all the work in Faith
and the Vedas, given to the whole world throughout the years of the world's
existence (Yavi), as well as to each person throughout the years of his life,
is only to bring them to the end of correction (Immortality), the coincidence
of the properties of the Soul and God.

It also becomes clear that God had to create the system of impure forces
(Navi) in order to produce thoughts-desires from it, so that Souls could then
correct thoughts-desires with the help of Faith and the Vedas.

and if our
thoughts-desires did not come out in the form of an uncorrected desire to
obtain from the system of impure forces (Navi), there would be no possibility
of correction, because a person can only correct what is within him.

22.

Conditionally, the stages of Faith consist of 3 consecutive states, called
stages, consisting of lessons of correction and consisting of 9 states,
called steps (of Faith).

A person does not need to be 18 (16) years old to comprehend their Spiritual
Root (God within themselves) — achieving the quality of "giving (EGO)" is
only possible through a request, a prayer felt in the heart (Soul), and it is
essential to pronounce the words carefully.

A request from the heart to
receive from Above: the Power "for God's sake," the power to study His
creations, the power to ask Him, the power to work on oneself, receives an
answer from Above in the form of the Higher Light, purifying his desires.

A
person undergoing spiritual development experiences constantly changing
influences, which he perceives as changes in his attitude towards life, the
purpose of life, the importance of the purpose, and the place and importance
of God in his life.

At times, their feelings take on a tinge of despair and fatigue.

In such
cases, it is necessary to derive pleasure from work (creation), children, and
nature, because without pleasure in the present moment or without the
prospect of obtaining it, a person is unable to exist.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At times, their feelings take on a tinge of despair and fatigue. In such
cases, it is necessary to derive pleasure from work (creation), children, and
nature, because without pleasure in the present moment or without the
prospect of obtaining it, a person is unable to exist. Therefore, the Wise Men oblige those who wish to grow spiritually to work,
raise children, participate in public life, and not shut themselves up within
four walls, becoming hermits, as the Wise Men (Rahman) are usually portrayed
by those who are far from Faith (God). The Wise Man is obliged to work not for pay, but so that in the event of a
spiritual decline resulting from the addition of the desire to receive
(ego),

--- PAGE BREAK ---necessary for further spiritual growth, he, despite his state of decline in
his desire to learn, pray, and so on, would be forced to continue performing
his daily duties so that life itself, its flow, would compel him to continue
functioning as usual.

But the main point of work and other activities, even the most mundane ones,
is to be even more connected to God with your thoughts while doing them!

But this is only necessary for those who strive for spiritual growth, because
their goal is to change in this life to resemble God in their qualities
(desires), while those who intend to receive their reward only in the future
world, whose entire goal is not this world, but the future one, in which they
will receive a reward for their long years of climbing the steps of Faith, do
not expect any results (payment) in this world, they do not experience
periods of pressure from the Purpose of Creation (Life) and increased egoism,
their whole life is smooth in their constant striving to study Faith and
fulfill the Commandments of the Vedas for the world.

The system of impure
forces (Navi) was created by God specifically for the gradual development in
us of the desire to receive pleasure (ego) of such magnitude that we could
receive all the Light prepared for us.

In general, the system of impure
worlds (Navi) consists of three impure forces: greed, selfishness, and the
desire for what belongs to others.

These three types of selfish spiritual desires appear before a person in
countless variations of their external forms and guises (for example: gold,
power).

God animates the system of impure forces (Navi) only so that it can
exist and give a person ever stronger selfish desires.

Therefore, by overcoming them, a person grows spiritually.

In other words,
the desire to receive, which is in the system of impure forces (Navi), is the
ego (desire) that a person must correct in order to feel God in it (desire).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Therefore, by overcoming them, a person grows spiritually. In other words,
the desire to receive, which is in the system of impure forces (Navi), is the
ego (desire) that a person must correct in order to feel God in it (desire). In the third stage of creation (of man), God created egoism, the desire for
self-gratification, the Angel of Death (the departure of Light from the Soul
as a result of selfish desire). This (third) stage is called doubly good,
precisely because when a person corrects himself, he gains twice: from
receiving pleasure and from merging with God. An uncorrected ego can temporarily derive pleasure only from the spark of
Light found in the system of impure forces (Navi), but when the ego is
corrected, the more the ego is corrected, the more a person enjoys. The ancients said, “The greater the person, the greater his desires.” A great
person desires to enjoy spiritual pleasures, and not only the pleasures of
our world. But a righteous person desires to enjoy only because God desires
it; otherwise, although he desires pleasure, like a sinner, he does not allow
himself to have it, desiring union (Unity) with God. Therefore, the righteous person suppresses the desire to receive, as it is
said: "Faith exists only in those who kill themselves (their ego)," which
means: The Light called Faith enters only those who kill their egoism. The process of correction is beautiful; a person gradually comprehends his
nature and feels the whole world, but sometimes it is quite painful, because
anti-egoistic feelings are painful for us. Everything depends on the
awareness of the need to be healed: a child, i.e., one who is not aware of
the need to be healed and the impending consequences of the disease, does not
agree to take bitter medicine, but an adult patient, i.e., one who is aware
of the disease and wants to be healthy, is ready to take bitter medicine or
even undergo surgery in order to save their life.ee to take bitter medicine, but an adult patient, i.e., one who is aware
of the disease and wants to be healthy, is ready to take bitter medicine or
even undergo surgery in order to save their life.

--- PAGE BREAK ---23.

But we still need to understand: if the desire to receive for oneself (ego)
is so bad and corrupt, as it happened and was intended in the Creation
(Souls) in the world of Infinity (Svarog) — in the Oneness of God (the world
of God), which cannot be described in words?

The fact is that immediately, in the plan to create Souls, His thought ended
everything, for it does not need action, as we do.

Because in the Spiritual world, thought and desire are action, just as in
our world, only the presence of bodies requires the fulfillment of intention
in action.

And this applies not only to the actions of God, but also to the
Spiritual actions of a person who is present with his properties in the
Spiritual worlds (Prav).

And immediately, as soon as the plan of Creation (the Worlds) arose, all
Souls and all Worlds that were to be born in the future came forth and
appeared, filled with all the delight that the Creator had conceived for
them, in all their final Perfection, which Souls will attain at the end of
correction, i.e., after their desire to "receive (ego)" is completely
corrected and turns into pure "giving (EGO)," in complete similarity of
properties (desires) with God.

And therefore, it was not at all in the plan of human creation to create
something corrupted, but immediately in the plan of human creation, our
corrected (Divine) form of complete similarity to God appeared.

This is because in God's Eternity, the past, future, and present are used as
one, and the future is used as the present.

And there is no concept of time
in Him (God).

Since the Spiritual world is a world of desires, outside of bodies, masses,
distances, a world where only desires (EGO) operate, the desire (thought)
itself is action, and therefore there is no concept of time.

By time in the
Spiritual world, we mean the sum of successive changes in desires, flowing
from one another as a consequence of a cause, and therefore (people) are
called their branches in our world.Since the Spiritual world is a world of desires, outside of bodies, masses,
distances, a world where only desires (EGO) operate, the desire (thought)
itself is action, and therefore there is no concept of time.

By time in the
Spiritual world, we mean the sum of successive changes in desires, flowing
from one another as a consequence of a cause, and therefore (people) are
called their branches in our world.

Therefore, the words: before, earlier, later, as a result, then, afterwards,
and so on, mean only cause and effect, and not the time of their appearance.

Top (EGO) and bottom (ego) mean a change in a person's qualities in relation
to God or the relationship between two levels, where the higher level means
a more corrected Soul, more Spiritual, more "close" in qualities (desires)
to God.

Higher (EGO) is more important.

Lower (ego) is the desire to receive and eat
that.

"Place" where creation (Soul) receives the Light of God.

Close – in terms of
properties (desires) relative to another.

Adjacent – if its properties
(desires) are not so different from the previous stage of Faith that gave
rise to it, its Root (God), as to separate it from the Root (God).

This is a
necessary condition between two Spiritual objects that are adjacent in terms
of properties (desires).

Movement is any change in properties from the past desire to the present,
similar to a separating part in a material body.

The name, the name of the
Spiritual object, explains the ways of receiving Light at this Spiritual
level (Faith).

And therefore, there was no uncorrected desire to receive (ego) different
from the properties (desires) of God in the world of Infinity (Svarog), but
on the contrary, the future similarity of properties (desires), which should
manifest at the end of correction, appeared immediately in the Eternity of
God.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The name, the name of the
Spiritual object, explains the ways of receiving Light at this Spiritual
level (Faith). And therefore, there was no uncorrected desire to receive (ego) different
from the properties (desires) of God in the world of Infinity (Svarog), but
on the contrary, the future similarity of properties (desires), which should
manifest at the end of correction, appeared immediately in the Eternity of
God. And the Sages said about this: “Before the creation of the world, there was
the Unity of Him (God) and Creation.” After all, the difference between the
desire to receive (ego) did not manifest itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---not in Souls that had departed from the plan of creation (man), and they
(Souls) were merged with God in the likeness of properties (desires), the
mystery of Unity (with God).

Here, Yeshua's (Joshua's) disciple asked a question: "If everything is
prepared in advance, and we are in a state of God, in union (Unity) with the
Creator, and only in our feelings have we not yet achieved this, then is it
worth working on ourselves, because we can continue to exist as we are now,
and when the time comes for everyone to be corrected, will they be brought to
the necessary state from Above?"
God has prepared two paths to the Goal (Immortality) for us: the Path of
Faith (Prav) and the path of suffering (Navi).

And we exist only in them.

Usually, humanity moves forward through suffering,
and even more so the people of Asia (Holy Russia), as the first chosen to
reach the Goal of Creation (Immortality).

Suffering pushes humanity forward:
trying to find satisfaction in material things, in the escape of the
personality into abstract pursuits, in the pursuit of religions, beliefs,
drugs, and alcohol.

It would indeed be possible to leave humanity to its own devices, to move
towards the Goal through suffering (Navi).

But it is precisely the Sages who
have reached the Goal of Creation(Immortality), having gone through all the
stages (lessons-trials) of their own correction, which we still have to go
through, having risen to the level of connection with God and realizing all
His ways, received from Him and handed down to us the Vedas and set forth in
hundreds of their writings a relatively painless and short path to achieving
the Goal set before us.

The thing is, the idea of the "path of suffering (Navi)" isn't really a path,
but just a harsh force pushing you to take the Path of Faith (Prav).

But one way or another, we have the right to choose: to immediately accept
the Path of Faith (Pravī), by studying the Vedas (Veda from the word Veda,
i.e.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The thing is, the idea of the "path of suffering (Navi)" isn't really a path,
but just a harsh force pushing you to take the Path of Faith (Prav). But one way or another, we have the right to choose: to immediately accept
the Path of Faith (Pravī), by studying the Vedas (Veda from the word Veda,
i.e. Knowing the Essence and Purpose of human creation), fulfilling their
(Vedas) prescriptions, or to continue to exist unconsciously until suffering
forces us to seek salvation from it, as has already led us to open this Book. 24. We see how suffering can cause a person to go even to death, cruelly pushing
him from behind. And God, by creating such oppressive situations for us,
brings us closer to certain useful things, investing them with a spark of the
calling Light of delight. Gradually changing the location of the spark of
Light, God will lead us, beckoning us with salvation from suffering, and to
the desire to reject selfishness. From this, three states in the Souls necessarily follow. In Souls – this refers to Souls, since there are no changes in God's state,
as there are no changes in desires, as they say, "God does not change His
Words." Therefore, God sees us as He wishes to see us, and only we ourselves
must undergo changes in our properties (desires) and, as a result, in our
spiritual sensations. State 1 is the state in the world of Infinity (Svarog), which is in the plan
of Creation, where Souls already have the future form of the end of
correction. State 2 is a state (in the world of Yavi) when a person is divided by two
systems (Navi and Prav) into the body (ego) and the Soul (EGO), and they
(people) are given the task of working in Faith and the Vedas to convert the
desire to "receive (ego)" that is in them and bring it to the desire to
"give(EGO)" to God. And during this state (earthly life), there is no correction for bodies, but
only for Souls, i.e., they must remove from themselves all desires to receive
for the sake ofire to
"give(EGO)" to God. And during this state (earthly life), there is no correction for bodies, but
only for Souls, i.e., they must remove from themselves all desires to receive
for the sake of

--- PAGE BREAK ---oneself, which is the property of the body (ego), and remain only with the
desire to give (EGO), which is a type of desire in Souls.

Even the Souls of
the Righteous cannot remain in Paradise (Svarog) after death, but only after
the decomposition of their bodies (ego) on Earth (in the world of Yavi).

The term "state" refers to the properties (desires) of a person that have
been corrected to one degree or another and determine his Spiritual state.

100 years is not a period of life in our world, otherwise how could the
Righteous achieve it (Immortality) before the deadline (death)!

This is a period of time for a person to work on themselves, when, with the
help of the Higher Powers found in Faith and the Vedas, they acquire the
property of "giving (EGO)" and receive only the minimum necessary to sustain
their existence, because they still exist in a physical body.

But since he
would be happy not to accept even this for himself, such receiving is not
considered a manifestation of selfishness.

But once the desire for pleasure (ego) has left a person, he can begin to
receive pleasure (Light), because he desires to please God.

And the more
pleasure he receives, the more he does for God.

Therefore, his sensations of pleasure in this case are never satisfied, and
the possibilities of receiving are truly limitless, while any selfish desire
for pleasure has its limits of satiety, beyond which disappointment sets in.

The righteous person, enjoying what pleases God, on the contrary, demands
more and more pleasure, wishing to please his Creator more and more and merge
with Him.

All we have to do to reach this state is to renounce our imaginary pleasure
(ego), that tiny spark of the Upper Light, but how difficult this is for a
person!

Let us imagine that the smallest Spiritual Pleasure is millions of
times greater than this spark—how impossible it seems to renounce it!All we have to do to reach this state is to renounce our imaginary pleasure
(ego), that tiny spark of the Upper Light, but how difficult this is for a
person!

Let us imagine that the smallest Spiritual Pleasure is millions of
times greater than this spark—how impossible it seems to renounce it!

That is why God created our world (Yavi), i.e., special conditions where, on
the spark of the Higher Light clothed in various garments—the objects of our
world—we can train ourselves with impunity in attempts to change our nature
(essence).

Whereas an unsuccessful attempt to receive Light in the Higher
worlds is fraught with the destruction of the vessel of the Soul, the so-
called shattering.

But as soon as a person is able to enjoy the spark of Light for the sake of
God, they immediately begin to feel pleasure from giving.

And until we reach
this state, only the pleasure from the spark of Light (ego) is open to us,
while altruistic (EGO) and spiritual actions are hidden.

The process of approaching spiritual attainments is gradual and takes place
in our world within the framework of time, as Souls descend into our world.

Every moment, new Souls descend into our world.

There is a certain order to
their descent — from the more Light to the more coarse (dark).

But in each
generation there is a certain type of Soul, called Aryans, who must achieve
their correction faster than the rest.

Therefore, people with this type of Soul feel within themselves both a
special, increased egoism compared to other people, and a special, albeit
protective, but harsher attitude towards them from the Higher Power (God).

Among the Aryan type of Souls, there are several Souls in each generation who
experience an even stronger influence from the Supreme Being (God), leading
them to private correction.

Those who possess such Souls are called Sages (Rahmans).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Among the Aryan type of Souls, there are several Souls in each generation who
experience an even stronger influence from the Supreme Being (God), leading
them to private correction. Those who possess such Souls are called Sages (Rahmans). The process of
correction begins with the Sages, then continues with their help in people of
the Aryan type, and then it is the turn of the rest of humanity to be
corrected. It is only in this priority in the work of correcting our nature
(essence) that the Aryans are exceptional.

--- PAGE BREAK ---25.

The following actions are possible with certain desires and intentions:
1.

"Receiving" for oneself is absolute selfishness, our nature.

2.

“Giving” for oneself is “polite” selfishness, the behavior of people
in our world (Yavi).

3.

"Receiving" for the sake of God is initial Liberation (from ego).

4.

"Giving" for God's sake is spiritual altruism, and giving to your
neighbor or to God is the same thing, because when you give of yourself,
not for yourself, you do not feel that you are receiving anything for
yourself (ego), and everything that is outside your body (Soul) is
perceived by you as absolutely non-existent.

In the Vedas, this state is called Immortality — "for God" or "secret
giving," because a person not only does not feel that they are giving, but
also to whom they are giving, because these feelings are already a reward.

In
our world, initial Liberation (from the ego) begins in state 2, giving for
oneself.

As we have already said, our selfish nature automatically forces our body to
seek a comfortable position, and our thoughts (desires) to constantly seek
ways of self-gratification.

The same nature (essence) will never allow us to
make any truly altruistic or Spiritual movement.

How can we break out of the
shell of our egoism and reach state 3 (for God's sake)?

Indeed, this state can only be achieved with God's help.

As we have already
studied, when the Light enters the Soul, it transmits its desires, its nature
(desires) to it.

But the Light cannot enter into selfish desire (ego) because
of God's prohibition.

“Receiving” for the sake of God (state 3) is the initial Liberation (from
ego).

It is equivalent to pure bestowal, since the action changes its meaning
due to the intention “for the sake of God.” By this, a person becomes
completely like God.

Therefore, this state is the Goal of creation: to enjoy
because this is what God desires.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is equivalent to pure bestowal, since the action changes its meaning
due to the intention “for the sake of God.” By this, a person becomes
completely like God. Therefore, this state is the Goal of creation: to enjoy
because this is what God desires. But this state is achieved only after complete mastery of the previous state,
when one has finished working on eradicating and renouncing one's egoism and
has gone through all nine lessons of one's correction. State 4 is therefore
called the ninth step of Faith. It is in this state that the Light of God
operates. A person receives pleasure but is called a "giver."
Before reaching this state, a person can receive pleasure, even self-
indulgence, only if it comes from studying and fulfilling the prescriptions
of the Vedas—this is still desired by God, even though it is done by a person
for self-indulgence, while other pleasures of our world are called peel. A person's intention in this world can be for themselves or for God. Only
after a person has reached stage 3 (initial Liberation) do they begin to feel
immense pleasure in the Vedas and enjoy them, because this pleases God. The action of "enjoying for the sake of God" is called asceticism, and the
instructions for achieving this state are found in the Vedas. State 3 is the end of the correction of Souls after the resurrection of dead
(former) desires, when the ego is completely corrected, because they
transform receiving, the property of the ego, into giving (EGO), and become
worthy of receiving all the good that is in the plan of human creation. And at the same time, they will be worthy of complete merging, due to the
similarity of their properties to God. Because they enjoy not from their
desire to receive (ego), but from

--- PAGE BREAK ---their desire to give (EGO), to please God, because He derives pleasure when
they receive from Him.

And for brevity, we will refer to these three states of Souls as states
1, 2, and 3.

Let us remember them.

State 3 (initial Liberation) means the end of the correction of the entire
vessel of the Soul (Aura), i.e., receiving all the prepared Light of Delight.

Naturally, this state can be achieved by completing all the correction of the
ego in state 2 (giving for oneself) and only by passing through it.

After a person completely excludes his egoism from use –
"kills his ego," not because it is his property (desire)
"To receive (ego)," he cannot do anything about it, because this property
(desire) was created by God; it is the very creation of man, and since this
property (desire) is used by him with the intention "for himself," he
acquires the quality of Light (God), the intention (desire) to give, and then
he begins to gradually evoke his former desires to "receive" (resurrection of
dead desires) and correct his egoism, all the properties (desires) he
rejected, not because they are "receiving," but because they are
"for oneself," and gradually begins to "receive for God's sake" in them.

The
Light (Energy) that comes into the corrected ego, "receiving for God's sake,"
is called God's.

As it is said: "God exists only in those who have killed
themselves (ego) for His sake" — only those who have killed their desire to
"receive for themselves (ego)" can achieve the pleasure of merging (Unity)
with God.

And as soon as one enters the state of "receiving for God's sake
(EGO)," one immediately attains union (Unity) with Him.

But, looking closely at these states, we find that they are so interdependent
that if one of them did not exist, the other states would disappear.And as soon as one enters the state of "receiving for God's sake
(EGO)," one immediately attains union (Unity) with Him.

But, looking closely at these states, we find that they are so interdependent
that if one of them did not exist, the other states would disappear.

For example, if state 3 (receiving for God's sake) had not manifested
itself, the transformation of the property (desire) "to receive (ego)" into
the property "to give (EGO)" would not have been possible, and state 1
(receiving for oneself) could not have manifested itself in the world of
Infinity (Svarog), because it manifested there in all its perfection only
because in the future, in state 3, it already serves thanks to the Eternity
of God as the present, and all the perfection that exists there in that
state is only a copy of the future state in the present, which is there, but
if the future could not be fulfilled, there would be no reality of it in the
present.

Therefore, state 3 (receiving for God's sake) obliges state 1
(receiving for one's own sake) to exist.

And if there were no state 2 (giving for oneself), where all future work on
oneself takes place, ending in state 3, i.e., work in spiritual ascent
through the steps of Faith, and then in its (ego) correction, how could state
3 come about in the future?

Thus, state 2 obliges the existence of state 3.

And also state 1, which in the world of Infinity, where all the perfection of
state 3 already operates, obliges with all its perfection the manifestation
of states 2 and 3.

That is, state 1 itself necessitates the appearance of
opposite systems in state 2, so that the ego appears in the corrupted desire
to "receive" with the help of the system of impure forces (Navi), so that we
have the opportunity to correct it (so that there is something to work on).--- PAGE BREAK ---

And also state 1, which in the world of Infinity, where all the perfection of
state 3 already operates, obliges with all its perfection the manifestation
of states 2 and 3. That is, state 1 itself necessitates the appearance of
opposite systems in state 2, so that the ego appears in the corrupted desire
to "receive" with the help of the system of impure forces (Navi), so that we
have the opportunity to correct it (so that there is something to work on). And if the system of impure worlds (Navi) did not exist, we would not have
such a desire to receive (ego) and there would be no opportunity to correct
(ego) and reach state 3 (receiving for the sake of God), because you cannot
correct what you do not have. Therefore, there is no question of how the
system of impure forces (Navi) appeared in state 1, because it is state 1
that obliges it

--- PAGE BREAK ---its appearance and God's support for its existence in state 2 (giving for the
sake of oneself).

There is no state 3 in state 1 (receiving for oneself), but the obligation to
achieve state 3 gives perfection to state 1, without which state 1 would not
be complete.

Until the age of 18 (16), a person gains the desire to enjoy (ego) from the
system of impure forces (Navi).

From the age of 18 (16), by studying Faith
(Vedas) with the intention of correcting oneself with its help, gaining the
desire to give (EGO), a person transfers the desires to receive (ego) from
impure forces (Navi) to pure ones (Prav).

26.

Since a person with an uncorrected ego is only a desire to receive
pleasure, everything depends on their intention in action, and only
thought determines what type of action will be, because everything
depends on desire-aspiration, and not on the physical embodiment of this
action.

By creation (human being) we mean only the desire to receive pleasure (EGO),
called the common (Unified) Soul or the Soul of the First Man (Adam, Mana).

Since it is impossible to receive all pleasure at once with the intention
"for the sake of God" (because this action is contrary to the nature of the
Soul!), the Creator divided the common (Unified) Soul into many parts, each
of which, not in one but in many lives in this world (Yavi), gradually
receives correction of egoism and its share of the common prepared pleasure
with the desire-intention "for the sake of God (EGO)".

After correction, all parts of the common Soul come together again into one
Whole (Unity with God), as at the beginning of human creation, and together
receive everything that the Creator has prepared for His creation.Since it is impossible to receive all pleasure at once with the intention
"for the sake of God" (because this action is contrary to the nature of the
Soul!), the Creator divided the common (Unified) Soul into many parts, each
of which, not in one but in many lives in this world (Yavi), gradually
receives correction of egoism and its share of the common prepared pleasure
with the desire-intention "for the sake of God (EGO)".

After correction, all parts of the common Soul come together again into one
Whole (Unity with God), as at the beginning of human creation, and together
receive everything that the Creator has prepared for His creation.

Since such receiving does not cause a feeling of shame in the recipient (the
intention to receive for the sake of God is giving), it is not limited only
to his initial desire (the more he receives, the more he delights and pleases
God), and as a result of receiving, he attains union (Unity) with God —
Immortality(achieving Supreme Perfection, Absolute Knowledge, enjoyment of
God, and enjoyment of being like God).

It is through this that God achieves
perfection in His actions.

That is why only such a process of creation
(evolution) was conceived by Him.

27.

Man is given every opportunity to determine which of his desires are impure
(sinful) and subject to correction.

It is said in the Vedas that all worlds,
both Higher and lower, with all their inhabitants, are within man himself,
and all of them, i.e., everything created, are created only for man.

But is
this world not enough for man, and does he also need the Higher, Spiritual
worlds and their inhabitants?

God's goal is to enjoy His creations (Souls).

In the Spiritual world (Prav),
there are no material physical bodies, no physical movement, only thoughts
and actions.

Since in God, thought is action, He does not need, unlike us,
any actions other than thought.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the Spiritual world (Prav),
there are no material physical bodies, no physical movement, only thoughts
and actions. Since in God, thought is action, He does not need, unlike us,
any actions other than thought. Therefore, as soon as the thought arose in
Him to create Souls in order to enjoy them, immediately the entire Creation
(Yav) appeared in its complete final form, completely filled with the
enjoyment emanating from God. But if God can create everything in its final state — full of the delight of
creation (Souls) — why did He create many descending

--- PAGE BREAK ---Worlds descending from Him, down to the lowest world (Hell, Tartarus), and
placed Souls in the bodies of this world?

In other words, if He is Perfect, how could He have committed such imperfect
(or incomplete) actions that require the actions of creatures in our world to
bring creation (man) to its Perfection (Immortality), a state of complete
enjoyment?

The only thing created by God is the desire to enjoy His Light.

In our world
(Yavi), God's Light is clothed in various material shells, unconsciously
attracting us with the Light within them.

In our present state, we do not
feel the Light itself, but are drawn to that in which it is found.

The only creation is called the Soul, and the Light (Inglia) is Unity with
God (Immortality), which is the pleasure with which God intended to fill His
creations, i.e., Souls.

How did God intend to delight Souls?

He had to create them in the form of a
desire to receive delight (ego), and only the magnitude of the desire to
delight determines the strength of the delight felt.

This desire to delight
is the whole essence of the Soul, and delight is the Light (Energy)
emanating from God Himself.

The convergence and divergence in the Spiritual space of the worlds of Prav
and Navi occurs according to the similarity or difference of Spiritual
properties:
1) if two Spiritual objects (Souls) are completely equal in
their properties (desires), then they merge into one object;
2) Depending on the similarity of their properties (desires) or the degree
of their difference, spiritual objects (souls) either draw closer to each
other or move further apart.

3) if all properties (desires) of two spiritual objects (Souls) are opposite,
then they are defined as infinitely (polarly) distant.

Judging by God's actions towards us, we define His property as
"the desire to enjoy," for He created man in order to delight him with His
Light (Love).--- PAGE BREAK ---

3) if all properties (desires) of two spiritual objects (Souls) are opposite,
then they are defined as infinitely (polarly) distant. Judging by God's actions towards us, we define His property as
"the desire to enjoy," for He created man in order to delight him with His
Light (Love). I received this Knowledge from the Sages (Rahmanov), people who, while still
alive in our world (Yavi), were able to spiritually rise to the level of
feeling God and told us about Him and His attitude towards us in the Vedas. 28. Souls are completely separated from God because He is, by His nature,
"giving"; He has no desire whatsoever to receive pleasure (ego). Souls are
created to desire self-gratification, with an ego that is the polar opposite
of God's nature. If souls remained desirous of self-gratification, they would
remain forever separated from God. The creation of man is the desire to receive pleasure (ego). And although
this makes him (man) imperfect, in contrast to God's property, and therefore
polar opposite to Him, it is precisely this property of "receiving (ego),"
created as something new out of nothing, that is necessary in order to
receive all the pleasure with which God intended to fill His creations
(Souls). The reason for the creation of worlds (levels of Faith) is God's need to be
Perfect in all His actions. If creations remained separated from God by their
properties (desires), He could not be called Perfect, for imperfect actions
cannot come from the Perfect. Therefore, God concealed His Light (Love), created worlds (steps of Faith) as
successive distances (steps) from Himself, down to our world (Yavi), and
placed the Soul in the body (human) of our world (Yavi). But with the help of
studying the Vedas, the Soul comprehends the Perfection that is absent in it,

--- PAGE BREAK ---approaching God with its properties (desires), so that it becomes worthy of
receiving all the pleasure conceived by God in the plan of creation (man),
and also achieves complete fusion (Unity) with Him, in the likeness of
properties (desires).

The study of the Vedas leads a person to master Spiritual desires and, as a
result, to receive the Highest Light and to merge with God, i.e., a double
reward.

In likening oneself to God in properties (desires) from the initial Spiritual
level of our world (Yavi) to the Highest, there are three consecutive steps
of Faith, from bottom to top, each of which also consists of three steps
(trials).

Spiritual ascent along them is a consequence of the Soul receiving
portions of Light (Energy) obtained from the worlds of Prav.

The study of Faith (Knowledge of God) and the Vedas causes the Higher Light
(God) to radiate onto the student.

This radiation is initially imperceptible
due to the absence of the properties of Light (God) in the Soul.

But it
gradually gives rise to an altruistic desire in Souls to "give (EGO)," and
then Souls achieve the clear reception of Light from the steps of Faith
(i.e., from the revelation of the mysteries of God), step by step, the Soul
achieves complete coincidence of properties (desires) with God—and then the
plan of human creation is fulfilled in the Souls: Souls receive all the
pleasure intended for them by God, and, in addition, receive great pleasure
from the feeling of Absolute Perfection, merging in similarity of properties
(desires) with God.

From this, we understand what was said above, that all the levels of Faith
and Worlds—the highest, the lowest, and everything in them—were created for
man: because all these levels (Faith) and worlds (Prav and Navi) exist only
to bring Souls to union with God.But it
gradually gives rise to an altruistic desire in Souls to "give (EGO)," and
then Souls achieve the clear reception of Light from the steps of Faith
(i.e., from the revelation of the mysteries of God), step by step, the Soul
achieves complete coincidence of properties (desires) with God—and then the
plan of human creation is fulfilled in the Souls: Souls receive all the
pleasure intended for them by God, and, in addition, receive great pleasure
from the feeling of Absolute Perfection, merging in similarity of properties
(desires) with God.

From this, we understand what was said above, that all the levels of Faith
and Worlds—the highest, the lowest, and everything in them—were created for
man: because all these levels (Faith) and worlds (Prav and Navi) exist only
to bring Souls to union with God.

Therefore, decreasing, the degrees-worlds
descended from God, world after world, to our material world, in order to
place the Soul in its final form—the desire for self-enjoyment (ego), which
has no altruistic desire to give (EGO), which defines man as the opposite of
God.

But then, through the power of Light (Prav), received from the practice of
Faith and the Vedas, a person comprehends the property of giving pleasure to
others, like God: gradually, time after time, rising from the bottom up, he
comprehends the properties of the steps (Faith) descending from above, which
have only the properties of giving (EGO) — until a person comprehends the
property of giving completely and not "receiving" anything for himself.

By
doing so, they completely merge with God, for which they were created.

Therefore, all worlds and their inhabitants were created for humans.

Souls receive the Light emanating from God in the measure determined by the
steps (Faith).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Therefore, all worlds and their inhabitants were created for humans. Souls receive the Light emanating from God in the measure determined by the
steps (Faith). As a result, the receiving Souls acquire the properties of
Light and therefore act in accordance with the Spiritual properties (desires)
received from the Light of a particular step of Faith (Knowledge of God). The
Light (Inglia) of God itself, within the steps-worlds, remains in its
constant form, without any changes. Thus, all the worlds-steps are changes in the manifestation of the infinite,
homogeneous Light (Inglia) in relation to Souls, so that they can gradually
receive the Infinite Light step by step. But these stages-worlds themselves
do not affect the Infinite Light that is in them, just as a covering does not
affect what is hidden in it, and His (God's) complete or partial concealment
manifests itself only in relation to outsiders who wish to feel Him. 29.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Just as a person who hides himself from outsiders with veils of personalities
remains open only to himself, so God hides Himself with Worlds and elements
of these worlds.

Based on the above, there are three participants in Creation:
– God (the Great Ra-M-Ha),
– Light (Inglia),
- Souls.

We cannot comprehend God Himself.

Souls have two opposing properties—
concealment and revelation: initially, God is concealed, but after the Soul
receives Light in accordance with its properties (desires), these stages of
concealment turn into stages of God's revelation to Souls.

Thus, Souls combine two opposite properties, which are essentially one and
the same: because the degree of God's revelation to the Soul (the degree to
which it receives God's Light) corresponds exactly to the previous degree of
concealment, and the coarser Soul, after correcting its desires, reveals God
more, and thus the two opposites are one.

The light in the steps (Faith) is precisely the measure of Light (Energy)
that must be revealed to Souls.

Since everything comes from God, and it is
only possible to comprehend Him to the extent that the properties of the Soul
resemble His properties, the 3 Lights in the 3 Worlds (Prav) are the 3 steps
(Faith) of revealing God to those who receive Him.

Moreover, God and His
Light (Inglia) are one and the same in relation to Souls, but the difference
is that God Himself is incomprehensible, and we can only comprehend what
comes to us from Him through 9 steps (lessons/trials).

And what we
comprehend, we call Light (enlightenment).

However, one should not conclude from the above that we do not have freedom
of choice if we are compelled to correct ourselves and attain state 3
(receiving for God's sake), because it already exists in state 1 (receiving
for one's own sake).And what we
comprehend, we call Light (enlightenment).

However, one should not conclude from the above that we do not have freedom
of choice if we are compelled to correct ourselves and attain state 3
(receiving for God's sake), because it already exists in state 1 (receiving
for one's own sake).

If Souls could not influence the process of correction in state 2 (giving for
oneself), from the perspective of personal and general management, we would
not have received the Vedas, because the Vedas are given as instructions for
achieving the Goal of Life (Immortality).

In general, our state would be
absolutely passive, like that of animals, and the transition from one state
to the next would only take place through suffering (Navi).

But it is precisely so that we can exercise our right to choose the path from
state 1 to state 2 (giving for ourselves) that we have been given the Vedas.

The fact that they were given to us by people who had already ascended to the
Spiritual world speaks precisely to the existence of free will.

The fact is that the Creator has prepared two paths for us in state 2 to lead
us to state 3:
· the path of fulfilling Faith (prayer) and studying the Vedas,
which has already been mentioned (the Path of Prav);
· the path of suffering (the Path of Navi), when suffering itself torments
the body and ultimately forces us to change the desire to "receive (ego)"
that is within us, and to acquire the property of the desire to "give (EGO)"
and merge with God.

And as the Sages say: "If you return to correction on
your own, that is good, but if not, God will place a king over you, and he
will inevitably return you to correction."
It should not be understood that there are two paths and that one can also
reach the Goal of Life (Immortality) through suffering.

The path of suffering
(Navi) is not a path, but a reaction to the use of selfishness, returning us
back to the Path of Faith (Path of Prav).--- PAGE BREAK ---

And as the Sages say: "If you return to correction on
your own, that is good, but if not, God will place a king over you, and he
will inevitably return you to correction."
It should not be understood that there are two paths and that one can also
reach the Goal of Life (Immortality) through suffering. The path of suffering
(Navi) is not a path, but a reaction to the use of selfishness, returning us
back to the Path of Faith (Path of Prav). And any deviation from the Path of
Faith (Prav) immediately causes the path of suffering (Navi) to act upon us,
returning us back to the Path

--- PAGE BREAK ---Faith (Prav).

A person must make the transition from the path of suffering to
the Path of Faith in one of their lives.

The reader of the Book has already
been given this opportunity by the fact that the Higher Powers have given
them the Book that tells about it.

For all of humanity, the path of suffering is not over until it realizes the
need to transition to Spiritual development through the Path of Faith
(Knowledge of God).

Throughout the millennia of its existence, humanity has
accumulated the negative results of materialistic and selfish progress, so
that this accumulation process would then be interrupted by a sincere desire
to follow the path of Spiritual development.

The role of Asia (Russia) is to be the first to walk this Path (of Faith).

Until Asia (Russia) is itself developing through suffering, all of humanity
"helps" it (Russia) choose the Path of Faith (God) by persecuting and
instinctively hating it.

As it is said: "Either evil or good.

If you deserve it, good; if not, evil,
suffering." Earn it through the first Path (Prav), through the fulfillment of
Faith (prayer) and the study of the Vedas, which accelerates our correction,
and we do not need bitter suffering and the prolongation of time to receive
it, so that these sufferings inevitably return us to correction.

And if not,
through suffering (Navi), i.e., only when suffering completes our correction
and our correction comes involuntarily.

And the path of suffering also
includes the punishment of Souls in Hell (Tartar).

But one way or another, the end of correction, i.e., state 3 (receiving for
God's sake), is mandatory and predetermined from state 1 (receiving for one's
own sake).

And all our freedom of choice (Will) is only between the path of
suffering (Navi) and the Path of Faith (Prav).

Thus, it became clear how
these three states of the Soul are connected and completely oblige each other
to fulfill.

30.

The end of correction is personal and general.--- PAGE BREAK ---

30. The end of correction is personal and general. Personal - when a person,
while in our world (Yavi), achieves complete feeling and merging (Unity) with
God, and general - when all of humanity in one generation ascends to such a
Spiritual level. The difference is that until the common end of correction, each of us has the
opportunity to achieve this state individually, and then, when the common end
of correction comes, each Soul will receive not only its own personal
attainment, but also the attainments of all other Souls, as a result of which
the merging and feeling of God become many times stronger. There are two ways in which a person can come to realize the need to correct
themselves and their desires (ego):
The Path of Faith (the White Path, the Path of Righteousness) is the path of
realizing that egoism is the source of all our evils, and therefore this Path
is also called the realization of evil (within oneself). This Path gives
early Liberation from imprisonment (samsara) in our selfish, cruel world
(Yavi), i.e., it leads more quickly to the end of correction (Immortality). The Path of Suffering (the path of Navi) is the path of natural development
of events, when circumstances force a person, because there is no other way
out, to derive pleasure only from actions of "giving (EGO)," because from
actions of "receiving (ego)," from the use of selfishness, he experiences
enormous suffering. Young children find pleasure in their games, but as they develop, the
pleasure disappears, and they have to change the sparks-garments of pleasure,
change their activities, and look for new games in order to feel pleasure
again. There comes a time when a person finds no pleasure or satisfaction in
anything

--- PAGE BREAK ---satisfaction from anything, and then he realizes that only through the desire
to give can he obtain satisfaction — and from this he turns to Faith (God).

The difference between the two paths is only in time: either achieve personal
correction now, or together with everyone else.

Those who object that they
can wait can be asked, if they are hungry, would they agree to wait a month
to receive food?

This means that if the pleasure of the end of correction
(immortality) could be felt, everyone would desire it.

But at the end of universal correction, there is no difference between those
who followed the first path and those who followed the second path.

The first
path accelerates the passage to the end of correction, and in this lies the
reward for those who choose it.

But this choice is only possible for those
who have decided to embark on the path of correction.

Because as soon as
their turn comes, they fall under the harsh, heartless action of the Natural
(Spiritual) Forces, which deprive them of enjoyment in everything, oppressing
them and forcing them to seek salvation from suffering even in the
renunciation of egoism.

It is very difficult to see in advance that a person will never be able
to enjoy the sparks of pleasure, the satisfaction of selfishness.

To do this, one must anticipate suffering in advance, which our ego does not
want under any circumstances.

And multiplying Knowledge multiplies sorrow —
whoever does not want to experience suffering (restrict themselves), let them
not multiply their Knowledge!

And the entire reward of the Righteous lies
precisely in knowing God, in that they can justify (know the true intention)
God and His actions.

From the above, it follows that all the differences between the righteous
who receive rewards (Light), each according to their spiritual level, exist
only until the state of complete correction (liberation from the ego) is
achieved.And the entire reward of the Righteous lies
precisely in knowing God, in that they can justify (know the true intention)
God and His actions.

From the above, it follows that all the differences between the righteous
who receive rewards (Light), each according to their spiritual level, exist
only until the state of complete correction (liberation from the ego) is
achieved.

That is, their reward for making the right choice is that they
gain time by making the right choice.

But in the state of final correction, when everything is corrected and all
individual corrected Souls unite into one corrected Unified Soul, everyone
will be equal, and everyone will enjoy the Radiance of the Unified Supreme
Light, completely filling them, and there will be no difference between
Souls.

And all the difference between Souls is only until this state (Immortality)
is reached, when everyone receives according to their choice, in a sequential
reception of Light, which then, at the end of correction, gathers into one
common Light (Ingliya).

There are several aids for successfully overcoming the path of correction:
1.

The sages urge everyone to study the Vedas because around every Soul,
around each of us, there is a Light surrounding the Soul, which, after the
Soul is corrected, will fill it.

When reading the Vedas, even if a person
pronounces the names and titles of Spiritual objects without understanding
them, this Light shines even more brightly on him, although it is not felt by
the person.

The study of the Vedas is important precisely because the study
of Spiritual structures (the Universe) evokes in everyone a general,
stimulating, purifying Light.

2.

After a preparatory period, it is desirable to study the Vedas in the
early morning hours, from 3 to 4 a.m., and then, at least for a short time,
in the evening.

3.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After a preparatory period, it is desirable to study the Vedas in the
early morning hours, from 3 to 4 a.m., and then, at least for a short time,
in the evening. 3. The Vedas say: "Find yourself a Teacher and make yourself a friend." By
investing one's efforts, resources, help, thoughts, and care in another, one
creates a part of oneself in that other, and since we love ourselves, we also
love this part of ourselves in the other, and only in this way does love for
others arise. 4. "Find yourself a Teacher": find yourself a Sage, if there is one. The
difference between a teacher and a Sage is that from a teacher, only his
knowledge is perceived, as from

--- PAGE BREAK ---a lecturer, but not his path in life, while a Sage is an advisor on all
matters, because those who consider him a Sage belittle their own
understanding in relation to the Sage's understanding and agree in advance to
accept any of his opinions and advice, because they themselves strive for
their thoughts to be like those of the Sage in the future.

God helps us by allowing some who are spiritually beyond our world to be in
direct contact with us and pass on their knowledge.

The simple person does
not realize that the Sage is truly a visitor from another world (Prav), sent
to people by God.

Since the student desires to acquire spiritual qualities rather than dry
knowledge, any activity that brings him closer to the Sage is preferable to
study.

A direct indication of this follows from the Law: Joshua became the
leader of the people who came out of Egypt after Moses, not because he
studied with him, but because he helped him.

And it is he who is called Moshe's disciple, and not those who sat and
simply studied with Moshe, because by helping Moshe, he adopted all of his
qualities (desires), thoughts, and Path.

The desire to live the life of a
Sage, to think his thoughts, to help him, is the most effective means of
achieving Spirituality (Immortality), because a person uses the thoughts of
the Sage and his own body to fulfill them, and thus gradually corrects his
desires (qualities) by thinking about God.

This is the difference between
studying and the Way of Faith (Prav).

From what we have clarified, we will find the answer to question 3: when we
look at ourselves, we find ourselves corrupt and lowly, and there is no one
more despicable, but if we look at the One who created us, then we must be
the pinnacle of everything, above everything, equal to the One who created
us, for it is in the nature of the Perfect One to perform perfect actions.This is the difference between
studying and the Way of Faith (Prav).

From what we have clarified, we will find the answer to question 3: when we
look at ourselves, we find ourselves corrupt and lowly, and there is no one
more despicable, but if we look at the One who created us, then we must be
the pinnacle of everything, above everything, equal to the One who created
us, for it is in the nature of the Perfect One to perform perfect actions.

If a person sees his true qualities as insignificant and despicable, it is a
consequence of comparing them, even subconsciously (unconsciously), with the
qualities of God, which he begins to feel, even without feeling their Source.

Only the Light of God gives us an idea of His qualities and the difference
between our qualities and His.

From what we have clarified, we understand that our insignificant body, with
all its base desires, is not our true, Perfect, Eternal body (Soul), because
our true body (Soul), is Eternal and Perfect in everything, already exists in
the Spiritual world (Prav) in state 1 (receiving for oneself), receiving
there the perfect properties of the future state 3 (receiving for God), in
the form of receiving for the sake of giving, which is similar to the
property (desire) in the world of Infinity.

And only our senses, saturated with egoism, give us such an image of God,
which we call "our world." But as we correct ourselves, i.e., as our senses
are purified from egoism, we begin to feel God Himself more and more clearly,
rather than the picture of
"reality." And the end of correction (liberation from ego) consists precisely
in the fact that we feel only God and therefore merge with Him.

31.

We call the feeling of God within us, or rather, our reactions to His
influence on us, Light, because we perceive Him as something Bright,
Pleasant, and Perfect.--- PAGE BREAK ---

31. We call the feeling of God within us, or rather, our reactions to His
influence on us, Light, because we perceive Him as something Bright,
Pleasant, and Perfect. And although our state 1 (receiving for ourselves) obliges us to add to state
2 (giving for ourselves) impure forces (Navi) in our body (ego), in its
insignificant and corrupted form, i.e., the desire to receive for ourselves
(ego), which

--- PAGE BREAK ---is the force that separates us from the world of Infinity (Svarog), in order
to correct this body (ego) and allow us to receive our Eternal body (EGO) in
action in state 3 (receiving for God's sake), we have no reason to complain
about this at all, because our work is only possible in the body (ego),
insignificant and temporary, because a person can only correct what he has.

In this state, we are at our lowest Spiritual level (the 1st degree of Faith
and the 1st lesson/test).

But, rising Spiritually from this very state, we
acquire, as we ascend Spiritually, all the sensations and skills necessary
for the full experience of enjoyment of God.

Yeshua told a parable: a king wanted to make his servant his closest
confidant.

But how was that possible, since the servant was ignorant and far
removed from the knowledge and position of the king's confidants?

How could
he elevate him above everyone else?

What did the king do?

He made the servant a guard and ordered his other
servants to pretend that they were going to overthrow and kill the king.

So
it was done, the other servants staged intrigues and attacks, and the
unfortunate servant, risking his life, saved his king with such extraordinary
heroism that everyone was convinced of his great loyalty to the king.

Then the secret was revealed to everyone that it was all just a joke.

And
everyone was filled with laughter and merriment, especially when the
attackers recounted how they had played this joke and how frightened the
servant had been by their actions.

But since this was not enough to elevate the servant to the position of the
king's closest confidant, the king came up with many more similar pranks, and
each time the unfortunate servant proved his loyalty to the king, standing up
for him to the death, sparing no effort, and each time the pranksters laughed
as they recounted how they had staged the attacks on the king.And
everyone was filled with laughter and merriment, especially when the
attackers recounted how they had played this joke and how frightened the
servant had been by their actions.

But since this was not enough to elevate the servant to the position of the
king's closest confidant, the king came up with many more similar pranks, and
each time the unfortunate servant proved his loyalty to the king, standing up
for him to the death, sparing no effort, and each time the pranksters laughed
as they recounted how they had staged the attacks on the king.

And although the servant knew in advance that there were no enemies of the
king, and that all the attackers were only other servants of the king in
disguise, carrying out his wishes, the attackers each time invented such
circumstances that the unfortunate man was forced to believe in their truth.

But, fighting against those who attacked his beloved king, the servant
acquired Reason—from knowing what would happen at the end of the trial—and
Love—from knowing what would happen at the beginning of the trial—and
ultimately became worthy of being close to the king.

The most incredible and wonderful thing is that even though a person knows
that everything comes from a loving God, and that all changes in his
condition are like a game, and everything is for the better, his ego still
asserts its power, and there is no way to ease the war with selfishness and
the terrible threats of external circumstances sent by God.

Therefore, we are in Perfection worthy of our Perfect Creator, as well as in
state 2 (giving for the sake of oneself), because the body (ego) does not
devalue us in the least, since it is destined to die and disappear, and is
prepared for us only for a certain time necessary for its destruction and
replacement with its Eternal form.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The most incredible and wonderful thing is that even though a person knows
that everything comes from a loving God, and that all changes in his
condition are like a game, and everything is for the better, his ego still
asserts its power, and there is no way to ease the war with selfishness and
the terrible threats of external circumstances sent by God. Therefore, we are in Perfection worthy of our Perfect Creator, as well as in
state 2 (giving for the sake of oneself), because the body (ego) does not
devalue us in the least, since it is destined to die and disappear, and is
prepared for us only for a certain time necessary for its destruction and
replacement with its Eternal form. Our state can be represented as follows: a person is in the Eternal, full of
Perfection and Infinite Delights Creator, and the person himself is the same,
but only the veil (ego) thrown over all his senses, called egoism, does not
allow him to feel his true state. Therefore, in state 2, we are in the same perfection as in states 1 and 3,
and the only difference between the true sensation and the present one is in
our sensation. And so, in order to correct our sensations from this veil
(ego), we must go through a series of states (steps

--- PAGE BREAK ---Faith) to correct our perception by destroying egoism as an obstacle to our
sensual union with God.

The desire for self-enjoyment (ego) must turn into the desire to receive
enjoyment for the sake of attaining God (EGO) — it is necessary to change
not only our intention (desire), but also our action, and the ego is created
only
a "receiver," capable only of receiving or not receiving, but not of giving.

It can only give its thought (desire), but how difficult it is, and without
God's help, it is impossible to do so.

The coincidence of properties (desires) is a state when a person asks God:
"Give me pleasure, because I want to bring You joy!", although he desires to
receive for himself, but refuses his natural desire for the sake of God.

But a person cannot correct what he does not feel is corrupted.

Therefore,
he must first discover and identify the corruption (ego) within him.

Only
then does he have a real opportunity to correct it (ego), because
identifying corruption (ego) gives him a clear awareness and feeling of what
separates him from God.

And the feeling of distance from God gives rise to
hatred in a person for those qualities and characteristics within them that
are responsible for this.

Therefore, after identifying the corruption (ego) in state 1 (receiving for
oneself), a person begins to achieve conformity of intentions with God in
state 2 (giving for oneself): as much as God desires to give to a person, so
much does a person desire to give everything to God: Yours is Yours and mine
is Yours, i.e., only the desire to give (EGO).

As already mentioned,
receiving for the maintenance of the physical body, that which is necessary
for life, is not considered receiving, because it follows from our very
existence within the requirements of the nature of our world.

In other words, anything that is not done with the intention of self-
indulgence is not receiving (ego).As already mentioned,
receiving for the maintenance of the physical body, that which is necessary
for life, is not considered receiving, because it follows from our very
existence within the requirements of the nature of our world.

In other words, anything that is not done with the intention of self-
indulgence is not receiving (ego).

One can eat a lot without enjoyment, or
eat little with self-indulgence, or eat a lot for the sake of another.

It is
not the amount of food consumed, but the intensity of intention that
determines how much a person has given or received.

But the enjoyment itself
must come from the thought that God has chosen me to come closer to Him, and
I can respond to Him.

32.

At the same time, we will understand question 5: how is it possible that
temporary and insignificant actions arise from the Eternal God?

From what has
been said, it is clear that in reality we are in a state relative to God that
is worthy of His Eternity, i.e., as creations that are Eternal in all
Perfection, and our Eternity (Soul) obliges us to destroy the selfishness of
the body, which was given to us only for labor and creation, because if the
ego remained eternal, we would remain separated from eternal existence.

We have already said that the ego is a form (property) of the human body, the
desire to receive only for oneself, which is completely absent in the design
of the Eternal Creation, since there (in Eternity) we are in our state 3
(receiving for the sake of God), but it is imposed on us in state 2 (giving
for the sake of oneself) in order to give us the opportunity to correct it
(the ego).--- PAGE BREAK ---

From what has
been said, it is clear that in reality we are in a state relative to God that
is worthy of His Eternity, i.e., as creations that are Eternal in all
Perfection, and our Eternity (Soul) obliges us to destroy the selfishness of
the body, which was given to us only for labor and creation, because if the
ego remained eternal, we would remain separated from eternal existence. We have already said that the ego is a form (property) of the human body, the
desire to receive only for oneself, which is completely absent in the design
of the Eternal Creation, since there (in Eternity) we are in our state 3
(receiving for the sake of God), but it is imposed on us in state 2 (giving
for the sake of oneself) in order to give us the opportunity to correct it
(the ego). And there is no place for the question of other creations of our world
(Yavi), except for man, because since man is the Center (the cause) of all
creation (Midgard-Earth), other creations are completely unimportant and have
no significance, except to the extent that they help man achieve Perfection,
and therefore they (the Forces of Navi and Pavi) rise and fall to them,
without any personal reckoning with them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Awareness of evil (ego) means seeing your own evil (selfishness) in yourself,
just as you see others' vices in them.

Since Faith speaks only of a person's
understanding of God, we never speak of qualities abstractly, separating them
from their bearer, but only of how a quality is perceived by a person.

Therefore, we call a person a sinner who has reached such a level of
spiritual growth that he has comprehended all his bad qualities and
properties (desires) and therefore claims that he is a sinner.

A righteous
person is someone who has reached such a spiritual level that they are
already able to understand all of God's actions as a consequence of their
comprehension of the Purpose of Life.

This fundamentally differs from what is
accepted in our world, where we call others sinners and consider ourselves
righteous because we are ready to justify all our actions.

A person is not obliged to believe in God, for belief cannot be forced!

Such
phrases indicate that there is a level at which a person believes, and a
person is obliged to comprehend this level, which means that they are
"obliged to believe" in what the Sages have said, that all the pleasures of
our world are but a small spark of Light(Ingliya) that has fallen or been
thrown into our world by the Power-desire of God so that, until a person
reaches the state of receiving pleasure from actions of giving to God, they
can enjoy at least something, because without receiving at least some
pleasure, a person, egoism, cannot exist.

The true Light, called Faith, is forbidden by God, and therefore hidden from
us until we reach the state of "for God's sake (EGO)." Then, according to the
strength of our intentions for God's sake, we will be able to enjoy the Light
(God), which is called initial Liberation (Immortality).

Action is never difficult to perform.

Because whether or not to perform an action depends only on the desire and
intention of the person himself.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Action is never difficult to perform. Because whether or not to perform an action depends only on the desire and
intention of the person himself. And everyone will agree to work for a good
reward. But this is not the case with intention (desire): no reward can
change intention, because by changing intention (desire), we transform an
action from small to large, from easy to difficult, and completely change the
action, turning it from receiving into giving. Only by refusing to enjoy the spark of Light, i.e., through its egoistic
garments (desires), can we reach the state of giving, and then receiving
for the sake of God. At the same time, question 4 is understandable: since the Good cannot do
evil, how could He conceive of creating beings that would suffer throughout
their lives? But as stated, all this suffering is imposed on us by our state 1 (receiving
for ourselves) where Perfection and Eternity (Prav) and desires (EGO), which
are received there from the future state 3 (receiving for God), force us to
follow the Path of Faith (Prav) or the path of suffering (Navi) and reach the
state
3 forever. The reason and purpose of all suffering in the world (Yavi) is so that
humanity realizes as a fact that the source of all its suffering is egoism
and that only by wishing to renounce it will humanity attain Perfection. By detaching ourselves from selfishness, we thereby detach ourselves from all
unpleasant sensations that pass through it, as through a form opposite to the
Creator. All these sufferings are connected only with the egoism of our body, which is
created only for its death and burial, teaching us that the desire within it
to receive for itself (ego) is created only for its eradication from

--- PAGE BREAK ---and turn into the desire to give (EGO), and all our suffering is nothing more
than the revelation of the insignificance and harm that reside in it (ego).

And understand that when the whole world wants to be liberated (to obtain
immortality) and destroy the desire to receive for oneself (ego), and there
is only the desire to give to God (ego) in all people, this will eliminate
all anxiety and everything harmful in the world, and everyone will be
confident of a healthy and full life, because each of us will have the whole
big world caring for him and his needs.

But when everyone has only the desire
to receive for themselves (egoism), this is where all anxieties and
sufferings, murders and wars come from, and there is no way to get rid of
this.

And this weakens the body with all kinds of diseases and pains.

From this, we can see that all suffering in our world is meant to open our
eyes, push us to get rid of our evil egoism, and attain the perfect form of
the desire to give (EGO).

And as it is said, the path of suffering itself is capable of bringing us to
the desired state.

And know that the laws of relationships between people are
no more important than God's Commandments, because giving to others leads to
giving to God.

33.

God created two opposing systems of selfish (Dark) and altruistic (Light)
forces, and the Goal (Essence) is for Darkness to shine as Light, i.e., for
all selfishness (ego) to turn into altruism (EGO), resulting in a double
altruistic (Light) force, a double win.

But how can these two opposing
systems be combined?

This is only possible in a person who is under the flow of time: at first,
during the first 18 (16) years, an impure system of forces (Navi) acts on
him, from which he acquires selfish desires (accumulates ego).--- PAGE BREAK ---

But how can these two opposing
systems be combined? This is only possible in a person who is under the flow of time: at first,
during the first 18 (16) years, an impure system of forces (Navi) acts on
him, from which he acquires selfish desires (accumulates ego). Then, with the
help of Faith and by studying the Vedas, clinging to the Teacher (the Sage),
and investing all their actions in life with the thought that they are all a
means of drawing closer to God, they transform their selfish desires into
altruistic ones and thus convert the opposite, impure system (ego) into a
pure(EGO). As a result, the two opposites merge into one whole, and therefore
the system of impure forces (Navi) disappears. Since the nature of the body (ego) is absolute selfishness (only receiving),
we are unable to understand how it is possible to give without any reward. If
it were not for God's help in this, we would not be able to change: only when
the Light (Ravi) enters the selfish body does He change its nature to the
opposite, to His own. But how can the Light (Prav) enter the egoistic body (ego), since they are
polar opposites? There is a special Light of Correction (from the Right) that
comes not for pleasure, but for correction (ego). Therefore, all our work is
our prayer-request to God to do this for us, to send us the Light (Right) for
our correction. But for this, we must want correction so much that God will
answer us. There are several aids to achieving this request. One of them is performing
altruistic actions for God or our neighbors. It is very difficult for us to perform any actions for God: without seeing
the result, we do not feel any satisfaction from what we have done. We can
perform altruistic actions for our neighbors because we feel satisfaction
from our actions and their results. Therefore, "love for one's neighbor" and "love your neighbor" are the main
means of Faith for achieving the Goal—Love for God. Because observingfeel satisfaction
from our actions and their results. Therefore, "love for one's neighbor" and "love your neighbor" are the main
means of Faith for achieving the Goal—Love for God. Because observing

--- PAGE BREAK ---The positive consequences of our altruistic actions toward our fellow human
beings help us gradually realize and appreciate the nature of altruism and
ask God for the opportunity to perform similar actions.

Moreover, our
actions may remain the same, but their motivation changes: we feed the poor
not out of compassion, not to ease our selfish pain from feeling their
condition, but out of love for our neighbor, for God's sake.

After all this has been clarified, question 1 is resolved: who we are.

Because our Essence (Soul), like the Essence of all parts of Creation (the
Single Soul), is nothing more and nothing less than the desire to receive,
but not in the form in which it appears to us in states 1 and 2 (the desire
to receive only for oneself), but in the form in which it is in state 1, in
the world of Infinity (Svarog), i.e., in its Eternal form, as the desire to
give pleasure to oneself (a part of God).

Our Essence is the desire to receive pleasure for the sake of God (EGO) — a
form similar to God, Perfect and Eternal.

And the property we currently feel
of enjoying ourselves for our own sake is not our property, but something
artificially given to us, a veil over our true, Perfect properties (EGO).

And although we have not yet actually reached state 3 (receiving for the sake
of God), and we are still in the hands of time, this does not diminish our
Essence (Soul) in the slightest, because our state 3 is guaranteed to us from
state 1, and the one who receives in the future is similar to the one who has
received.

After all, the time factor is a disadvantage only where there are
doubts as to whether a person will finish what they have to do in the
allotted time.

And since we have no doubts, it is as if we have already
reached state 3 (received initial Liberation).After all, the time factor is a disadvantage only where there are
doubts as to whether a person will finish what they have to do in the
allotted time.

And since we have no doubts, it is as if we have already
reached state 3 (received initial Liberation).

And our bad body (ego), given to us in the present, does not diminish our
Essence (Soul), because it and all its acquisitions will disappear along with
the system of impure forces (ego), its source (Navi), and what disappears is
similar to what has disappeared and as if it never existed.

Moreover, we not only renounce our body (ego), but also transform it into the
same properties that our Soul possesses.

As a result, we gain twice: we
receive pleasures that are not limited by the size of our desire, but are
infinite, because we can give infinitely, and we achieve union (Unity) with
God through our corrected body (EGO).

But the Soul, clothed in this body (ego), whose essence is also desire, but
the desire to give (EGO), coming to us from the system of pure worlds of
Prav, exists Eternally, since the nature of this desire to give is similar to
Eternal Life, and it does not change.

And do not believe the opinion of philosophers who claim that the essence of
the Soul is the material of the head (mind).

The Life Force of the Soul comes
only from its knowledge of the Creator and good deeds, from which it grows
and is enlivened, and its Immortality, after the death of the body (ego),
depends entirely on the measure of acquired Knowledge about God and good
deeds performed during life.

This is so IMPORTANT that without them, the Soul
has no foundation on which Immortality rests (i.e., without knowledge of God
and good deeds, the Soul cannot pass into the Higher worlds).

Also, the heart does not agree with this, and everyone who acquires Knowledge
(Knowledge of God) knows and feels that the mind is an acquisition, not the
Essence.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is so IMPORTANT that without them, the Soul
has no foundation on which Immortality rests (i.e., without knowledge of God
and good deeds, the Soul cannot pass into the Higher worlds). Also, the heart does not agree with this, and everyone who acquires Knowledge
(Knowledge of God) knows and feels that the mind is an acquisition, not the
Essence. The mind is just as much an acquisition as the acquisition of a material
thing, the purchase of something. And all the pleasure derived from the use
of the mind comes, like other selfish pleasures, from the system of impure
forces (Navi). For only the pleasure of giving (EGO), of pure altruism, comes
from the system of pure worlds, Prav. And as it is said, all the material of the new creation (human being), both
the material of Spiritual objects and the material of material objects, is
nothing more and nothing less than the desire to receive (ego), and what is
said, that the Soul is

--- PAGE BREAK ---the desire only to give (EGO), then this is from its correction, its clothing
in the received Light (Prav), which it receives from the Higher worlds, from
which it (the Soul) descends to us, but the Essence of the Soul is also only
the desire to receive for itself (state 1).

The pleasure that comes from God is called the Light of Infinity because it
comes directly from His desire for us.

Our desire-intention when receiving
the Light of Infinity is called reflected Light.

Changing the desire-
intention changes the action itself from receiving to giving.

Receiving pleasure emanating from God is possible only to the extent that the
reflected Light is clothed in the Light of Infinity.

Feeling God is possible
only to the extent that a person has the Light of Infinity, to the extent of
the power to resist selfish pleasure.

And the whole difference between Souls
is nothing more than a difference in their desires.

Desire (ego) determines all properties in creation (human beings) —
physical, chemical, functioning at all levels of the biological organism,
etc., and at all four levels: inanimate, plant, animal nature, and in
humans.

People receive their desires from Above, but then, through their activities,
consciously asking God, they can change them.

This is because the desire of each Essence (Soul) gives rise to its needs,
and needs give rise to its thoughts and knowledge to the extent necessary to
achieve the desired, which the desire to receive (ego) compels it to do.

And just as people's desires differ from one another, so do their needs,
thoughts, and knowledge differ from one another.

For example, desires to
obtain, limited only to animal pleasures, use and subordinate the mind
exclusively to the achievement of these desires.

And those whose desire to obtain requires human pleasures, such as honors and
power over others, which animals do not have, their basic needs, thoughts,
and knowledge are only to fulfill this desire as much as possible.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For example, desires to
obtain, limited only to animal pleasures, use and subordinate the mind
exclusively to the achievement of these desires. And those whose desire to obtain requires human pleasures, such as honors and
power over others, which animals do not have, their basic needs, thoughts,
and knowledge are only to fulfill this desire as much as possible. We see that the higher the desire, the more it is able to suppress lower
desires. For example, a person in the name of knowledge or glory is able to
neglect his property or health — animal desires, etc. And those whose
desire to obtain requires mainly Knowledge, their basic needs, thoughts,
and knowledge are to fulfill their desire as required. A person is born with desires:
1) animal pleasures — obtained from the inanimate, plant, and
animal levels (development) of a person (Soul);
2) pleasures of honor – obtained from the inanimate, plant, animal, and
human levels (development) of a person (Soul); from the suffering of
equals, both strangers and loved ones;
3) pleasures of knowledge – obtained from the inanimate, vegetative, animal,
and human levels (development) of man (the Soul). Each of us is born with
these three types of human desires. Type 1) is the most primitive, with
types 2) and 3) of desires, man uses his Mind;
4) The pleasure of labor (creation) for God's sake comes from levels
higher than the inanimate, plant, animal, and human levels (of
development) of man (the Soul), from Spiritual Sources (Prav). If a person is in the process of spiritual correction, then all previous
types of enjoyment: 1), 2), 3) – are also included in his activity, the whole
world thus rises together with him and receives its own correction through
such a person. Therefore, it is said that God places several Righteous Ones (Sages) in each
generation, who include the rest of the world, its petty

--- PAGE BREAK ---egoism, and thus bring humanity closer and closer to a conscious perception
of the Purpose of Life (of man), until the rest of humanity reaches the level
of conscious understanding and inner striving for the Purpose of Life (of
man) - Immortality.

34.

But the entire inanimate, plant, and animal worlds, lacking sufficient
development due to the insignificant degree of selfishness in them, cannot
correct their nature (essence), and man, by correcting himself, corrects them
as well.

Likewise, the inanimate, plant, and animal levels within a person
cannot correct themselves, but the human (rational) level within a person,
desiring connection with God, corrects itself (ego) and includes their
correction as well.

The first three types of desires to enjoy are found in all people, but they
are combined in different proportions in each person, and this is what
distinguishes people from one another.

And from material properties, we
understand spiritual properties by their spiritual magnitude.

Not only are these three types of desire to enjoy found in each of us in
different proportions, but they are also constantly changing, and a person
constantly strives for different sparks-garments of the Upper Light in our
world and thus develops.

The first three types of desire for pleasure are within us from the moment of
birth, i.e., from the moment of our birth, we are ready to enjoy them, in
contrast to the fourth desire—it is received by the chosen ones who have the
so-called "point (of Light) in the heart"—pure Souls.

Likewise, human souls are spiritual—clothed in Light (Prav), received from
the Higher Worlds, from which it descends.

There is nothing in the Higher
Worlds except the desire to give for the sake of God (EGO), and this desire
is the essence of the Soul.Likewise, human souls are spiritual—clothed in Light (Prav), received from
the Higher Worlds, from which it descends.

There is nothing in the Higher
Worlds except the desire to give for the sake of God (EGO), and this desire
is the essence of the Soul.

After it is clothed in the human body, it gives
rise to needs, thoughts, and mind (desire) in it, to fill it (the Soul)
completely with the desire to give (EGO), i.e., to give pleasure to God,
according to the magnitude of the desire in it(Soul).

Thanks to the aspiration created by the point (of Light) in the heart, a
person, with the help of studying the Vedas, attains the desire to "receive"
for the sake of God.

There is great pleasure in the Vedas, but also, accordingly, great
concealment of this pleasure so as not to attract the unworthy, i.e., those
who are not yet prepared to receive this pleasure for the sake of God, lest
they feel this great pleasure and become even greater slaves to the selfish
desire for self-indulgence (ego).

And the greater the pleasure in the Vedas, the less simple meaning (material)
there is in them, because the more Light there is in Spiritual action, the
more it (the Spiritual) is removed from us, our mind and understanding, and
therefore seems more meaningless.

The meaning of the Vedas begins to be felt only when received for God's sake,
because otherwise, when received for one's own sake, one will sink even
deeper into selfishness and find it even more difficult to escape from it.

And therefore, until the appropriate forces appear in a person, all spiritual
pleasures that do not correspond to his level (of Faith) are covered by a
veil.

That is why all pleasures are felt as insignificant.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And therefore, until the appropriate forces appear in a person, all spiritual
pleasures that do not correspond to his level (of Faith) are covered by a
veil. That is why all pleasures are felt as insignificant. In general, the
reward for fulfilling the prescriptions of the Vedas may or may not be felt
by a person: at first, pleasure is felt, for example, from a meal, after
fasting — pleasure that is insignificant in comparison with spiritual
pleasure, but given so that a person can reach the state of receiving this
pleasure for the sake of God, and then he is offered

--- PAGE BREAK ---enjoyment, for example, from Knowledge previously hidden from him, because it
is much greater than that from a meal, so that he (Knowledge) can also
receive it for the sake of God.

If the pleasure from fulfilling the prescriptions of the Vedas is not felt,
it is because of the inconsistency of a person's qualities with the spiritual
level of development or the mechanical (unconscious) fulfillment of the
lesson (test).

As soon as a person's desires become similar to the Spiritual
level of Faith at which a given lesson (test) is located, he will immediately
feel pleasure in performing the lesson.

And since the essence of the body (ego) is only the desire to receive for
itself, and all that it receives is the fulfillment of the corrupt desire to
receive (ego), originally created only to be destroyed from the world in
order to come to state 3 (receiving for the sake of God), which is at the end
of correction.

Therefore, it (the ego) is changeable, imperfect, like all its
acquisitions, passing like a shadow, leaving nothing behind.

Therefore, all human acquisitions, even the highest ones—knowledge—die with
the body and help a person only to the extent that they enable him to realize
their transience and futility.

But since the essence of the Soul is only the desire to give (EGO), and all
its acquisitions are the fulfillment of the desire to give (EGO), which
already exists in the Eternal state 1 (receiving for oneself), as well as in
state 3 (for God), coming into our senses in the future, therefore, the Soul
is Perfect, unchangeable, and irreplaceable, both itself and all its
acquisitions—eternal and forever, not disappearing after the death of the
body (ego), but on the contrary, when the corrupted form of the body (ego)
disappears, the Soul is strengthened and can rise upward, into the world of
Infinity (Svarog).Therefore, all human acquisitions, even the highest ones—knowledge—die with
the body and help a person only to the extent that they enable him to realize
their transience and futility.

But since the essence of the Soul is only the desire to give (EGO), and all
its acquisitions are the fulfillment of the desire to give (EGO), which
already exists in the Eternal state 1 (receiving for oneself), as well as in
state 3 (for God), coming into our senses in the future, therefore, the Soul
is Perfect, unchangeable, and irreplaceable, both itself and all its
acquisitions—eternal and forever, not disappearing after the death of the
body (ego), but on the contrary, when the corrupted form of the body (ego)
disappears, the Soul is strengthened and can rise upward, into the world of
Infinity (Svarog).

Only a person's efforts to correct themselves and comprehend God remain in
their Eternal possession and do not disappear with the disappearance of the
body (ego), but continue to participate in correction and then in receiving
Light.

Thus, we have discovered that the Eternity of the Soul does not depend at all
on the knowledge that the Soul has acquired, as philosophers believe, but
rather its Eternity is its very Essence, because its Essence is the desire to
give (EGO).

And the knowledge it has acquired is its reward, not the Soul
itself.

From this, we find the answer to question 5: if the body (ego) is so corrupt
that until it (the ego) decomposes, the Soul cannot enter it (the Light),
why does the ego return and come back to life through the resurrection of
dead (former) desires?

Moreover, as the Sages said, the dead (people) come
back to life with their shortcomings (sins) so that no one can say that it
is not them.--- PAGE BREAK ---

From this, we find the answer to question 5: if the body (ego) is so corrupt
that until it (the ego) decomposes, the Soul cannot enter it (the Light),
why does the ego return and come back to life through the resurrection of
dead (former) desires? Moreover, as the Sages said, the dead (people) come
back to life with their shortcomings (sins) so that no one can say that it
is not them. Let us understand this based on the very design of creation (man), i.e., from
state 1 (receiving for oneself), because the plan to delight the creations
(Souls) requires creating in the Souls a tremendous desire to receive (ego),
to receive the delight that is in the plan of creation (man), since
tremendous delight requires tremendous desire. It has already been said that the immense desire to receive (ego) is all the
new material of creation, because it needs nothing else to fulfill the plan
of creation (man), and the Perfect Creator does not create anything
superfluous. It has also been said that this excessive desire to receive (ego) is
completely excluded from the system of pure worlds (Puri) and is attributed
to the system of impure worlds (Navi), from which corrupt bodies emerge,
their nourishment and control in our world, until a person reaches the age of
18, when, through the practice of Faith and the study of the Vedas, he begins
to comprehend the pure Soul, nourishing himself from the system of pure
worlds (Puri), to the extent that he has comprehended it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---35.

The time (the first 18 [16] years) necessary to comprehend the complete
selfish desire is called the first adulthood.

During this period, a person
changes the sparks-garments of his egoism, gradually developing desires to
enjoy ever greater sparks-garments of egoism, and thus a person advances
along the steps of Faith.

This happens through all kinds of changes in situations in our world, when a
person, according to God's plan, finds themselves in various situations that
sometimes seem hopeless to them.

The situations in which they find themselves
put so much pressure on them, causing suffering, that they are forced to give
up their previous sources of pleasure and look for new ones: a person
gradually becomes disillusioned with the pursuit of animal pleasures, the
enjoyment of power, honor, knowledge, and so on, i.e., they constantly change
the external garment of the spark-garment of pleasure.

Human movements are always forced because our egoism strives for a state of
rest (harmony).

In order for a person to move, there are two forces that our
egoism understands: pleasure pulls forward and suffering pushes from behind.

A person can only move from suffering to pleasure.

But there is also the
Power of Faith: a person does their work, even though it causes them
suffering, because they believe that this is what must be done.

And this is
where our freedom of choice lies—to believe that we must save ourselves!

A person has no choice to be smart, rich, etc.

— there is only a choice to be
a sinner or a righteous person, and it is necessary to ask God to help make
the right choice, so that God gives a person the need for the Spiritual.

But
following the steps of understanding suffering and rewards, a person
understands personal correction.--- PAGE BREAK ---

— there is only a choice to be
a sinner or a righteous person, and it is necessary to ask God to help make
the right choice, so that God gives a person the need for the Spiritual. But
following the steps of understanding suffering and rewards, a person
understands personal correction. These are two consecutive stages of comprehending the Higher Light, and until
a person reaches the stage of personal correction, it is impossible to claim
that he is acting in accordance with the Laws of Faith, to claim that
everything is done by God and that nothing depends on man. A person must
constantly be aware that there is always something higher than what he knows! Similarly, in learning, a person gradually realizes that they know nothing;
this is true Knowledge, and if they suffer from this, God fills their
suffering with the Light of Knowledge (Wisdom). Therefore, the feeling of "I
know nothing" usually precedes understanding and spiritual elevation. And all this is done for the growth of a person, so that they do not remain
underdeveloped. An underdeveloped person is one who does not change the
external appearance of pleasures in time: for example, a bride still wants a
doll instead of a groom. The change of the external sparks-garments of
pleasure occurs only because of disappointment in the existing garment,
because a person can no longer enjoy the spark-pleasure in this guise. And so
he changes the sparks-garments of Light until he approaches the Truth (God). 36. After reaching the age of 18 (the first coming of age), a person begins to
acquire the power to counteract selfishness—the desire to give. This period
of acquiring altruistic desires to give everything is called (state 2). And
then a person begins to "receive" for the sake of God (state 3). This is
called the second coming of age.

--- PAGE BREAK ---It is also said that during the years given to us for work in Faith and
the Vedas, there are no corrections for the body, i.e., for the enormous
desire to receive that is contained within it.

After a period of accumulation, of cultivating selfishness, called "18 [16]
years" (first adulthood), a person enters a period called (state 2).

During
the subsequent years of life, or in the language of Faith, after passing
through
9 steps (trials) of acquiring the desire to give, a person achieves his
correction in the destruction of shame when receiving pleasure and therefore,
after acquiring the properties of these 9 steps, can begin to revive his ego
(dead) and receive pleasure in it for the sake of God.

In Vera's language, correction is called acquiring the power of return, the
power of Light, the intention to do everything only for God, to give
everything to God.

All creations (Souls) are obliged to achieve this
Perfection.

To the extent that a person has not yet attained the desire to
give, he is under the influence of God's Energy (maya) — the concealment of
God from him.

The concealment of God from us — the concealment of the fact that we receive
everything only from Him, that we receive only Good from Him — is necessary
so that we do not burn with shame.

Therefore, the concealment of God is for
our own good.

And all the corrections that come at this time from our work on ourselves
come only for the Soul, which as a result rises to the highest levels of
purity (Puri), which means only to increase the desire to give, descending
with the Soul.Therefore, the concealment of God is for
our own good.

And all the corrections that come at this time from our work on ourselves
come only for the Soul, which as a result rises to the highest levels of
purity (Puri), which means only to increase the desire to give, descending
with the Soul.

Hence, the end of the body (ego): to die, be buried, and decay, because,
having received no correction for itself, it cannot remain as it is, for in
the end, if this enormous desire to receive (ego) from the world disappears,
the plan of creation (man) will not be fulfilled, i.e., all the immense
pleasures prepared for creations (Souls) will not be received, because the
immense desire to enjoy and immense Enjoyment are interrelated.

And to the
extent that the desire to receive (ego) decreases, the enjoyment of
receiving will decrease to the same extent.

After a person has acquired the desire to give to God, he revives his egoism
in all its vices, but with the help of righteousness (EGO), he already uses
egoism to receive for the sake of God and enjoys giving to God.

From God's
point of view, the one who enjoys in any situation fulfills the purpose of
creation (Soul).

As a result of correcting the desire to enjoy (ego), a person receives a
double reward: enjoyment from the enjoyment itself, because if he does not
enjoy, he does not give enjoyment to God, and, in addition, enjoyment from
merging (Unity) with God.

37.

As already mentioned, state 1 (receiving for oneself) completely obliges a
person to move to state 3 (receiving for God) so that enjoyment comes out in
all its fullness, as intended in the creation (of man), in state 1 (in the
world of Infinity), and in nothing less than what was intended.

And
therefore, state 1 (receiving for oneself, as part of God) obliges the
resurrection of dead (former) desires (ego).--- PAGE BREAK ---

As already mentioned, state 1 (receiving for oneself) completely obliges a
person to move to state 3 (receiving for God) so that enjoyment comes out in
all its fullness, as intended in the creation (of man), in state 1 (in the
world of Infinity), and in nothing less than what was intended. And
therefore, state 1 (receiving for oneself, as part of God) obliges the
resurrection of dead (former) desires (ego). That is, the enormous desire to
receive, which has already decayed in state 2 (giving for oneself), must be
resurrected anew, in all its excessive form, without any reductions, i.e.,
with all its shortcomings that were in it (ego). And the activity (labor) begins anew to turn the great desire to receive into
a desire to give for the sake of God. By doing this, we gain twice:

--- PAGE BREAK ---1) there is room in us to receive all the pleasure that is in the plan
of creation (man), because we have a huge body (ego) that desires to
receive these pleasures into itself;
2) Since receiving (for God's sake) is conditional upon giving only for
God's sake, such receiving is considered as complete giving (to God),
thereby achieving similarity of attributes, i.e., merging (Unity) with God,
which is state 3 (initial Liberation).

Thus, state
1 obliges the resurrection of dead desires.

After a period called state 2 (giving for the sake of oneself), a person
moves on to work in state 3 – receiving for the sake of God.

And at this
point, he no longer feels any shame, since he receives not for his selfish
desires, but for a new desire called reflected Light (EGO), and in accordance
with the magnitude of this reflected Light (EGO), or, in other words, in
accordance with the magnitude of his screen of anti-egoistic force, he
receives pleasure, no more and no less, but exactly according to the strength
of his pure desire for pleasure, which was prepared for him at the very
beginning of human creation.

Therefore, the resurrection of dead desires will be near the end of
correction, i.e., at the end of state 2 (giving for oneself).

This is because
we have been worthy of eradicating our enormous desire to receive pleasure
(ego) and have received the desire to give (EGO), and after we have been
worthy of all the beautiful pure steps (Faith) that are in the Soul.

The Soul is called both the desire to give (EGO) and the Light (Inglia) that
fills this desire (EGO), shining upon a person who has reached the level of
giving for the sake of God.

The types of Soul that we receive according to the Light entering us are
called: Legs (Spirits), Arlegs (Angels), and Aranos (Archangels).

This is
our work to eradicate the desire to receive.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The types of Soul that we receive according to the Light entering us are
called: Legs (Spirits), Arlegs (Angels), and Aranos (Archangels). This is
our work to eradicate the desire to receive. By not wanting to use the desire to receive self-gratification (ego), a
person reaches the levels of the Right – the worlds of Legs (Spirits), Arlegs
(Angels), and Aranov (Archangels). Then he (a person) attains such great Perfection that he can resurrect the
body (ego). The body (ego) is our desire to receive. To resurrect the body (ego) is to
return (to the state of for oneself) and use these desires. And it no longer
harms us, separating us from merging (Unity) with God, but on the contrary,
we overcome it (ego) and give it (ego) the property of bestowal (EGO). And so it happens with every bad private property (ego): if we want to get
rid of it, we must first remove it completely, to the end, so that nothing
remains of it (ego). To completely remove oneself from the use of desire (ego) means to desire
only to give everything to God. God's desire is to delight in His creations
(people). That is why He created them and gave them the desire to receive
pleasure (ego). Therefore, each of the created cares only for his own well-
being. Usually, people are raised to believe that all their actions should be “for
God’s sake.” But when they begin to try to make their intention
"for God's sake," they discover that this is impossible because their body
(ego) resists it. The reason for this resistance is that people are created
with the desire to obtain self-enjoyment, so there is no other reason that
could compel them to act! And if a person sees that all thoughts are only for their own good, but
desires to come to the Truth (God), the intention "for God's sake," then they
feel the need for help.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Therefore, the Sages said: "He who comes to God, He helps to correct." Coming
means that a person must come to God himself and begin the work of correcting
himself.

Why doesn't God do everything Himself?

It is said: "A person's egoism rebels
against him every day, and if God does not help, a person is incapable of
doing anything on his own." From this we see that a person must turn to God
himself, and God comes to his aid.

But why is man not given the ability not only to begin (correction), but
also to complete this activity (work) of correcting himself?

We attribute
everything positive to God, and everything negative to creations (people):
giving and enjoyment, Light and Perfection belong to God, and all kinds of
shortcomings belong to creations (people).

In other words, the action of
giving belongs to God, and the action of receiving belongs to creation
(people).

Since God's desire is for man to be worthy of the Light of Infinity and
Comprehension (Knowledge of God), God makes it so that without God's help,
man cannot achieve the intention (desire) to "give (EGO)".

We see that the
plan of creation (of man) was that man would not be able to achieve the Goal
of Life (Liberation from the ego) on his own, complete the work on himself
(correction), and would need help from Above.

This is so that man can attain
the Light from Above, each time from an ever higher level (of Faith).

And that is why it is said: "He who comes to God, He helps him to correct
himself." And they ask: "How does He help?" And Yeshua answers: "With the
Spirit." That is, if a person asks for strength to overcome himself, God
helps him
with the "Spirit," i.e., the power to counteract selfishness: when he is
born, the Higher Powers give him the Spirit, so the Soul strives to be even
purer; they give him Wisdom, and the person desires to become even purer,
i.e., to further increase his desires and intentions "for the sake of God";
they give him the Soul (Mind).This is so that man can attain
the Light from Above, each time from an ever higher level (of Faith).

And that is why it is said: "He who comes to God, He helps him to correct
himself." And they ask: "How does He help?" And Yeshua answers: "With the
Spirit." That is, if a person asks for strength to overcome himself, God
helps him
with the "Spirit," i.e., the power to counteract selfishness: when he is
born, the Higher Powers give him the Spirit, so the Soul strives to be even
purer; they give him Wisdom, and the person desires to become even purer,
i.e., to further increase his desires and intentions "for the sake of God";
they give him the Soul (Mind).

We see that each time a person receives an increasingly higher Soul, so that
the Light (of Infinity) helps him achieve his Goal (of Life), so that he
becomes only giving to God.

And because he desires to be only in giving to
God, he is worthy of the Light of all the worlds of Prav.

And when a person reaches the entire degree of Faith (Prav), he knows that
the desire to receive can only be used with the intention to give, and
therefore he already has the strength to "receive pleasure" for the sake of
God.

And he receives everything with His (God's) desire to receive (EGO) and
is also in fusion (Unity) with God, because he receives with the intention
for the sake of God.

And this state is called the resurrection of dead
(former) desires: the desire to receive (ego), which was in a state of death
because the person did not use it, returns to life and is used.

That is why it is said: "Sinners are dead while still alive." It is known
that a person can change their beliefs and actions only if they come to the
conclusion that they are harmful to them.

And this is the meaning of
awareness of evil (ego): when a person realizes that there is evil in them,
in their thoughts and actions, then they abandon this path.

But until they
become aware of this state, they cannot be righteous.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And this is the meaning of
awareness of evil (ego): when a person realizes that there is evil in them,
in their thoughts and actions, then they abandon this path. But until they
become aware of this state, they cannot be righteous. From this, it is clear that "sinners" are not those who have committed
transgressions, but those who recognize themselves as such because they feel
their own evil, the evil within themselves, and are aware of their evil. “Dead while still alive”: life is a constant receiving. But a person feels
that receiving death is similar, so according to his feeling, he calls
himself “a sinner who is dead while still alive.”
But when a person comes to realize all this, they do not want to use their
desire to receive (ego), but use their desire to give (EGO). And when

--- PAGE BREAK ---When he finishes all his activities of giving, he can use his past desires to
receive in order to receive for God's sake.

And all his past desires to
receive
are dead because he did not want to use them, he begins to use them, revives
them to life, because life is considered to be the ability to give, and now
he can even use desires to receive for the sake of giving, since he can
"receive" with the intention of "giving." And this level of a person is
called his initial Liberation.

And then it is possible to return, receive and control it (the ego) as a
means.

But until we have completely rejected the ego, it is impossible to
control it as a necessary means.

And so the Sages say: In the future, the dead will be resurrected in their
vices, and then purified, i.e., at first, the same body is resurrected to
life, with an unlimited desire to receive, as cultivated from the system of
impure worlds (Navi), before being worthy of purification by Faith and the
Vedas, in all its shortcomings.

And then we begin a new activity: to turn this enormous desire to receive
(ego) into giving (EGO) in order to correct it.

When a person is able to take on the intention "for the sake of God," his
desire to receive is not considered a vice, but quite the opposite.

This is
similar to the example given by Yeshua: the more a guest enjoys the meal, the
more satisfied the host is.

But if the guest is unable to eat, the host is
upset.

Conclusion: when a person has a desire to receive, which he can receive
because he has an intention for the sake of God and is in the likeness of
God's attributes, the greater his desire to receive, the more God enjoys it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But if the guest is unable to eat, the host is
upset. Conclusion: when a person has a desire to receive, which he can receive
because he has an intention for the sake of God and is in the likeness of
God's attributes, the greater his desire to receive, the more God enjoys it. And the reason for the resurrection of dead desires in their bodies is so
that they do not say that it is a different body—so that they do not say that
it has different properties than those intended in the plan of human
creation, where this enormous desire to receive (ego) is located, but
temporarily, while we are still given the strength to purify ourselves. It
cannot be a different body, because if it has fewer desires, then it is as if
it is completely different and does not suit enjoyment at all, which in the
plan of creation is in state 1 (receiving for oneself). The desire to enjoy creation (Souls) prompted God to create humans so that
all Souls could receive the greatest enjoyment. Schematically: God desires
to give 100 degrees of enjoyment, hence the magnitude of the desire to
enjoy must be
100 degrees. In the state of Immortality—Infinity, when all 100 degrees of enjoyment have
filled all 100 degrees of desire, it is considered that all creation (Soul)
is filled with the Light of Infinity, because nothing remains unfilled, not a
single unfilled desire. We find that if any part of the desire to receive (ego) remains unused,
then the Light corresponding to this desire will be absent. And how can
there be an end to correction if something is still missing? And
therefore it is said that all (Souls) are obliged to come to their
correction (Immortality). 38. From all that has been clarified, we find the answer to question 2:
what is our role in the long chain of reality, in which we are
separate links, during our brief life (in Yavi). Know that our activities during our years of life are divided into four
periods (states):

--- PAGE BREAK ---Period 1 (receiving for oneself) – acquiring a huge, unlimited desire to
receive (ego) in all its uncorrected magnitude, under the power of the system
of impure worlds, Navi.

For if we did not have this uncorrected desire to
receive, it would be impossible to correct it (ego), because only what exists
can be corrected.

And therefore, it is not enough to have the desire to receive (ego) that has
been present in the body since its birth into the world, but there must also
be a system of impure forces (Navi) for at least 18 (16) years, i.e., so that
the impure forces (Navi) control the person and give him from their Light
(Navi), under the influence of which his desire to receive (ego) would
increase, because the pleasures that impure forces provide to the desire to
receive expand and increase the demands of the ego.

In order to achieve the purpose of creation (human beings), a tremendous
desire to receive (ego) is necessary, and these tremendous desires exist only
in the system of impure forces (Navi).

The growth of the desire to receive
(ego) occurs under the influence of the fulfillment of this desire.

At least 18 (16) years old—until they acquire the full amount of desire to
receive (ego), which they must then correct, according to God's personal plan
for each specific person.

Therefore, it is said in the Faith (Vedas) that
until the age of 18 (16), a person has only a bad beginning (ego), and after
the age of 18 (16), a good beginning (EGO) comes to him.

Of course, this refers only to a person's inner state, because if they do not
work on themselves, then even after hundreds of years they will not pass the
state called "18 [16] years old" (first adulthood).Therefore, it is said in the Faith (Vedas) that
until the age of 18 (16), a person has only a bad beginning (ego), and after
the age of 18 (16), a good beginning (EGO) comes to him.

Of course, this refers only to a person's inner state, because if they do not
work on themselves, then even after hundreds of years they will not pass the
state called "18 [16] years old" (first adulthood).

For example, when a person is born, they have a desire for only one portion
of Light (Navi) and no more, but when impure forces (Navi) fill them with
this portion, their desire to receive (ego) immediately expands, and they
desire twice as much, and when impure forces give them what they desire,
their desire immediately expands, and they desire four times as much.

39.

What is the difference between the material and the spiritual?

Yeshua
answered this as follows: if a person does not have the material, he feels
suffering.

For example, if he has no food, he suffers.

But if he has food and
enjoys it, he feels the absence of additional pleasure: the moment he eats,
satisfaction disappears, and he begins to strive for pleasure again.

The spiritual is quite the opposite of this; it is accessible to the whole
world, but those who attain it feel that they have found themselves in the
best of worlds, where only good and kindness are felt.

The reason for this is that the Spiritual is called Perfect.

If a person
feels a lack in anything, he is no longer in a Spiritual state.

Even at the
first Spiritual level (Faith), a person must feel Perfect and must feel that
he is the happiest in the world, but he must believe that there are levels
even greater than the one he is on.

The only son and first disciple of Zachariah (Azahari), my (Yeshua) Teacher,
John (the Baptist) asked a question here: if a disciple knows that his
Teacher is greater than him, then he knows that there is a state higher than
his own.

How, knowing this, can he feel himself to be Perfect?--- PAGE BREAK ---

The only son and first disciple of Zachariah (Azahari), my (Yeshua) Teacher,
John (the Baptist) asked a question here: if a disciple knows that his
Teacher is greater than him, then he knows that there is a state higher than
his own. How, knowing this, can he feel himself to be Perfect? To this Yeshua
(Jesus) replied that the disciple must BELIEVE that his Teacher is greater
than he is. But if he KNOWS that the Teacher is greater than he is, then his
state is not defined as Spiritual, because any Spiritual state is Perfect.

--- PAGE BREAK ---But if, with the help of Faith and the Vedas, a person cannot purify his
desire to receive (ego) and turn it into giving (EGO), then his desire to
receive expands throughout his life, and he dies with a half-fulfilled desire
(ego).

And this determines that he is captive to impure forces (Navi), whose
role is to expand and increase his desire to receive (ego) and bring it to
infinite proportions in order to provide a person with all the material of
creation that he must correct.

It is precisely the system of impure forces (Navi) that causes those who have
received one portion of pleasure to immediately begin to desire twice as
much.

This property of impure forces (Navi) was given to them by God
specifically for the development of enormous desires in humans to achieve the
Goal of Life — enormous Pleasure (Immortality).

If there is no satisfaction, a person thinks that they can achieve greater
pleasure, but discovers that it is precisely pleasure that is constantly
lacking: as soon as it comes, satisfaction disappears.

If there are no
material pleasures, there is suffering.

If there are material pleasures,
there is still no satisfaction.

If there are no spiritual pleasures, there is
no suffering.

The appearance of suffering from the absence of spiritual
pleasures indicates that a person is becoming spiritual.

Satisfaction is
possible if one has suffered from its absence.

The poor are happier than the rich, but they want to be rich, while the rich
do not feel satisfaction.

Therefore, it is necessary to acquire great desires
to enjoy material things in order to then exchange them for great spiritual
desires.

But if the soul still experiences even the slightest desire for
something material, i.e., is in a state of feeling a lack of material
enjoyment, it cannot yet be spiritual.Therefore, it is necessary to acquire great desires
to enjoy material things in order to then exchange them for great spiritual
desires.

But if the soul still experiences even the slightest desire for
something material, i.e., is in a state of feeling a lack of material
enjoyment, it cannot yet be spiritual.

Having mastered the Spiritual, even the smallest step of Faith, a person
feels Perfect, sees no higher state than his own, because every Spiritual
state is Perfect, for if he feels that there is something greater than what
he has, it gives a feeling of imperfection and therefore cannot be Spiritual,
and therefore only Faith, which is higher than feelings, that there is
something even more perfect in the world, can rise higher.

40.

Period 2 (giving for oneself) – from 18 (16) to 36 (32) years of age, when
the point (of Light) located in the human heart, which is the point (of
Light) of the pure Soul, the opposite side of the desire to receive (ego)
from the moment of birth, awakens, then a person begins to come under the
influence of the actions of the system of pure worlds (Prav) to the extent
that he is engaged in Faith and the Vedas.

The point (of Light) in the heart of a person (EGO) is the feeling of the
absence of Light (God).

It is clear that in order to feel the suffering of
desiring Light, feeling God, feeling something Spiritual, a person must go
through a series of stages of growth (evolution).

The point (of Light) in the heart (EGO) exists from the moment a person is
born, but the necessary condition for the beginning of its manifestation, its
feeling by a person, is the realization of one's selfish nature, the "ego,"
and only then does the path of correction of perceived selfishness begin,
and, in addition, one must believe in the existence of the Spiritual (God).

Up to the age of 18 (16) — the desire to enjoy the material (ego) —
everything that one sees and hears in our world.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The point (of Light) in the heart (EGO) exists from the moment a person is
born, but the necessary condition for the beginning of its manifestation, its
feeling by a person, is the realization of one's selfish nature, the "ego,"
and only then does the path of correction of perceived selfishness begin,
and, in addition, one must believe in the existence of the Spiritual (God). Up to the age of 18 (16) — the desire to enjoy the material (ego) —
everything that one sees and hears in our world. From the age of 18 (16)
onwards – the desire to obtain the Spiritual, with Faith that there is a
future world – "Paradise (Svarag)", enjoyment from Faith and the Vedas –
Eternal enjoyment, and this is the reward for

--- PAGE BREAK ---his actions (righteousness).

When there is Light at the point (of Light)
located in the heart, it is called "EGO."
The process of searching for new sources of pleasure, both in receiving
pleasure and in receiving pleasure from giving (egoistic altruism): if I
give, then I choose who to give to and how much to give — I give less to a
poor person begging at the door than to a well-dressed person collecting for
some event.

Receiving, on the other hand, is not important from whom, the
main thing is to whom you give.

It doesn't matter whether you received from a
good or bad person, but giving is IMPORTANT, specifically to whom you give!

The expressions "front and back," "face and back" have many meanings.

The
face here means disclosure, Light, and the back means that a person does not
feel, does not see anything, does not feel the point (of Light) in their
heart (EGO).

In this case, there is still a possibility to awaken it.

It is similar to looking at a child and saying that he is strong and smart,
implying that with the right upbringing, he will indeed become so.

And the
main goal at this time is to achieve and increase the Spiritual desire to
receive (EGO), because from the moment of birth, a person has the desire to
receive only material things (ego).

And therefore, although he achieved a tremendous desire to receive (ego) by
the age of 18 (16), this is not the end of the growth of the desire to
receive (ego), and the main growth of the desire to receive (ego) is
precisely in the Spiritual (Faith), as, for example, up to the age of 18
(16), his desire (ego) wanted to receive and devour all the wealth and glory
that is in our material world (Yavi), where everyone understands its
transience, a world that passes and disappears like a shadow, whereas, having
attained the Spiritual desire to receive (EGO), he desires to absorb for his
own enjoyment all the pleasures of the future Eternal world of Infinity
(Svarog), which remains forever.And the
main goal at this time is to achieve and increase the Spiritual desire to
receive (EGO), because from the moment of birth, a person has the desire to
receive only material things (ego).

And therefore, although he achieved a tremendous desire to receive (ego) by
the age of 18 (16), this is not the end of the growth of the desire to
receive (ego), and the main growth of the desire to receive (ego) is
precisely in the Spiritual (Faith), as, for example, up to the age of 18
(16), his desire (ego) wanted to receive and devour all the wealth and glory
that is in our material world (Yavi), where everyone understands its
transience, a world that passes and disappears like a shadow, whereas, having
attained the Spiritual desire to receive (EGO), he desires to absorb for his
own enjoyment all the pleasures of the future Eternal world of Infinity
(Svarog), which remains forever.

Therefore, the great desire to obtain (ego) ends only in the desire to obtain
the Spiritual (EGO).

If the point (of Light) in a person's heart (EGO) is
given the right filling through the correct study of the Vedas, then the
person will feel the desire to obtain Spiritual pleasures (EGO) instead of
the material ones (ego) that were in him until the age of 18.

It is necessary
to acquire a great desire to enjoy Spiritual pleasures, and only then can one
begin to correct their (desires) intention.

41.

It is said in the Vedas: Darkness (Navi) has two daughters, Demons and
sinners: where Demons mean Hell, and sinners who fall into the trap of Hell
and whine there like dogs, the wicked.--- PAGE BREAK ---

41. It is said in the Vedas: Darkness (Navi) has two daughters, Demons and
sinners: where Demons mean Hell, and sinners who fall into the trap of Hell
and whine there like dogs, the wicked. But still, this (second) stage of Faith (Period 2) is extremely important in
comparison with the first (Period 1), because in addition to the fact that a
person comprehends the true enormous desire to receive (ego) and is given all
the necessary material for this work, this stage (of Faith) also leads to
giving, as the Sages say, a person must engage in Faith for himself, and from
this he will come to engage in Faith for the sake of God. And therefore, this stage of Faith, which comes after 18 (16) years, is
defined as pure or as a servant serving her mistress, pure desire (EGO), and
leading a person to the state of "for God's sake" and receiving the Higher
Light. A pure servant—the "2nd Period"—is a state when a person is still not acting
for the sake of God, but desires to enjoy for himself everything he discovers
in Faith, just as he previously desired to enjoy this world,

--- PAGE BREAK ---because he sees pleasure in the Vedas.

That is, his desire for self-enjoyment
has shifted from the objects of this world to Spiritual objects.

But this is already a high level of preliminary development, and not everyone
deserves to achieve it!

A person must desire to feel the aspiration for
spiritual pleasures, and only then comes the stage of clothing these
aspirations in the right intention, in the desire to please God.

Since each of us has a part of the common (Unified) Soul, the only person
created by God, we can, with the help of special actions and thoughts called
Faith and Vedas, awaken in ourselves the point (of Light) in the heart (EGO),
the embryo of our personal Soul, dormant within us, and for this reason not
felt by us.

And then we will desire to enjoy the Light!

If it were not for this point (of Light) in the heart (EGO), which is part of
our Soul, placed in us from Above, we would have no way of achieving our
desire, even a selfish one, for the Light of Infinity, since we have never
felt it.

The growth of the desire to enjoy more and more significant objects
of this world occurs naturally.

But developing within oneself the desire to
enjoy the Spiritual (EGO) requires special effort on the part of a person,
the so-called work in Faith and the Vedas.

And one is not obliged to first
correct one's desires for the pleasures of this world.

The correction of intention (desire) toward the pleasures of our world and
the Spiritual person is carried out simultaneously: "I enjoy because God
enjoys." The development of desire for Spiritual pleasures occurs in the
Mind, not in the intellect, through study, as in science, but with the proper
intention (for God's sake).

Just as a child who does not want to take bitter medicine is given it mixed
with sweet syrup, in a form that he agrees to accept, so God gives us the
means of correction, the Light, because our egoism would never agree to
receive it.The correction of intention (desire) toward the pleasures of our world and
the Spiritual person is carried out simultaneously: "I enjoy because God
enjoys." The development of desire for Spiritual pleasures occurs in the
Mind, not in the intellect, through study, as in science, but with the proper
intention (for God's sake).

Just as a child who does not want to take bitter medicine is given it mixed
with sweet syrup, in a form that he agrees to accept, so God gives us the
means of correction, the Light, because our egoism would never agree to
receive it.

And if a person discovers that his Mind (EGO) agrees with
intentions for the sake of God, but his mind (ego) is against it, only prayer
that he desires to love God with all his heart can help him.

Only God can help in correcting the body (ego).

As they say—
"He who comes (to God, He) helps to purify himself." What is God's help?

"(God) gives him (man) a pure Soul." As it is said, "Light returns to the
Source (God)." And as a result, man feels that his heart
"has acquired something good" in that "all my actions are dedicated to God."
42.

How does a person feel that his desires are for God?

This feeling, like all
other feelings, is given to him by God Himself.

After all, we receive all our
sensations only from the Source of all our pleasures (suffering is felt as
the absence of pleasure).

Prayer is the feeling in the heart (Soul) of the
desire for God to give the desire (EGO) that the body (ego) does not desire.

Work in the heart (Faith and the Vedas) is an activity that allows the heart
to feel true desires (EGO), which is called purification of the heart (Soul).

The perfection of human actions boils down to feeling shame at first when
receiving from God, at least as when receiving from one's fellow human
beings.

Therefore, one must ask God to remove His concealment (screen), then a person
will feel Him and begin to feel ashamed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The perfection of human actions boils down to feeling shame at first when
receiving from God, at least as when receiving from one's fellow human
beings. Therefore, one must ask God to remove His concealment (screen), then a person
will feel Him and begin to feel ashamed. And before that, a person must
believe that God's concealment exists, and this belief can be such that even
in a state of concealment, one will begin to feel shame. And if a feeling of shame appears, then, since this is already a correction,
God's concealment disappears. It is said about this: "The righteous
comprehend the Greatness

--- PAGE BREAK ---of God, and sinners comprehend the torments of Hell." And the Supreme Light
comes to those who cannot refuse Him.

But a person must do everything necessary to achieve this, and if he does
not apply all his strength to this, he will not reach the state of "for the
sake of God," but will fall into the depths of the unclean servant (mind),
which inherits the place of the mistress (Reason), since it does not allow a
person to approach the mistress (EGO), to the state of "for the sake of
God."
And the last step (lesson) of this second period (the second stage of Faith)
is for a person to desire to enjoy God, similar to a passionate desire in our
world, so much so that only this desire would burn within him day and night,
as it is said, constantly remembering so much that he cannot sleep.

43.

It is said in the Vedas: "Know the Creator of your fathers and serve Him."
Knowledge (Veda) means complete connection, and therefore, when a person
feels that he is striving but is not connected to God, he suffers.

But even
though he feels the desire for this connection, until God helps him from
Above, a person is not able to take a step forward (upward) on his own.

It is said in the Faith (Vedas): "Man is the shadow of God" — just as a man's
shadow repeats all his movements, so man repeats all the movements of God.

And therefore, if a person begins to feel a spiritual uplift and a desire for
connection with God, he must immediately realize that this feeling arose in
him because God first desired to bring him closer to Himself and therefore
evoked such a feeling in him.

But after several attempts to feel God, a person gets the feeling that God
does not want to connect with him.

And if, despite this feeling, a person
still believes that this is only a test of his faithfulness to God, he
gradually comes to realize that God is revealing Himself to him, and then,
naturally, a person merges with God with all his heart.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But after several attempts to feel God, a person gets the feeling that God
does not want to connect with him. And if, despite this feeling, a person
still believes that this is only a test of his faithfulness to God, he
gradually comes to realize that God is revealing Himself to him, and then,
naturally, a person merges with God with all his heart. The greatest pleasure in selfish Souls, the maximum EGO, is an enormous, all-
consuming passion for God. In the accumulation of selfish desire, there are
many stages and desires to enjoy God as the greatest of all existing
pleasures, and there is the greatest selfishness (EGO) preceding the
breakthrough into the Spiritual world to altruistic qualities (desires). As stated, "The Tree of Life is a manifestation of passion," because the
three stages of Faith of the Soul are the Tree of Life, consisting of nine
lessons-steps (trials), since each step (lesson) leads a person to obtain all
three stages of Faith, which are revealed in state 3 (receiving for the sake
of God). 44. Period 3 (after 36 [32] years) is activity in Faith and the Vedas "for God's
sake" (state 3), i.e., for the sake of giving (EGO), and not for the sake of
receiving reward. This activity purifies the desire to receive for oneself
(ego) in a person and turns it into the desire to give (EGO), and as the
desire to receive is purified, one becomes worthy and ready to receive the
three parts of the Soul, called the steps of Faith. Since Souls are in the
desire to give (EGO) and cannot clothe themselves in the body (mind) while
the desire to receive (ego) that reigns in it is in opposite properties-
qualities or in a difference of properties (desires) with the Soul, because
the filling and similarity of properties are unambiguous.

--- PAGE BREAK ---And when a person is worthy of the desire to give completely for the sake of
others, he achieves a coincidence of properties with the Higher Ones (who in
the world of Infinity of pure worlds are Righteous), and they immediately
descend to him and clothe themselves in him in the order of the steps (of
Faith).

45.

Period 4 is the activity after the resurrection of dead (former) desires
(ego), i.e., when the desire to receive (ego), after it has already
disappeared as a result of its death or destruction, is then resurrected in
its greatest and worst form, and then these desires are turned into receiving
for the sake of giving (EGO).

But there are certain special individuals who
are given this task while still living in our world (Yavi).

Period 1 – up to 18 (16) years old, a person acquires desires for objects of
this world (state 1: receiving for oneself).

Period 2 – from 18 (16) to 36 (32) years old, a person acquires the desire to
enjoy pleasures for themselves, which is called “not for the sake of God,”
but this is also a stage of Faith (Knowledge of God), leading to Spiritual
purity, and therefore called “the reverse side of Holiness, purity”(giving
for oneself).

During this period, desire-intention (ego) is clothed in a point (of Light)
that is in the heart of a person (EGO).

Period 3 (after 36 [32] years) begins to transform part of the desire
received in period 2 (giving for oneself) into the intention to "give for God
(state 4)" and, accordingly, receives in this corrected desire (EGO) a part
of the Light-Delight, predestined for his Soul.

This Light is clothed in a
person according to the correspondence of the person's desires to the Light
(God).

Period 4 begins to receive for the sake of God (state 3).--- PAGE BREAK ---

This Light is clothed in a
person according to the correspondence of the person's desires to the Light
(God). Period 4 begins to receive for the sake of God (state 3). Earlier, he killed
his body (ego), as it is said, "Faith exists only in those who kill
themselves (egoism) for Her sake," not wanting to use his selfish desires,
and now he revives these desires in order to receive pleasure in them for the
sake of God. In accordance with this, we will understand why Faith says that a person
cannot look more than 4 meters (steps) beyond himself: a person has 4
properties of the desire to enjoy himself (4 states), and only by them should
he judge himself and look only within himself, because outside of a person,
outside of these 4 (states), there is only God. But if the Wise Man washes
his hands of receiving, then he can go beyond the four states. 46. Now we need to examine Study 6, which states that all worlds, both Higher
(Puri) and Lower (Navi), were created solely for humans, which is quite
surprising, considering that God endeavored to create all of this for such an
insignificant creature as humans, who are insignificant in relation to our
world of Yavi, and even more so in relation to the Higher Spiritual worlds. And even stranger is why humans need these great Higher Spiritual worlds. But
you must know that all of God's joy lies in the enjoyment of His creations,
to the extent that His creations (Souls) feel Him, that He gives them
pleasure and desires to delight them. Then He has great fun with them (Souls), like a father playing with his
beloved son, and to the extent that the son feels and knows the greatness and
power of his father, the father shows him all the treasures he has prepared
for him, as

--- PAGE BREAK ---it is said: "Is not MAN (man) a precious son to Me?

Is he not My beloved
child?

For every time I speak of him, I remember him for a long time.

Therefore, My heart aches for him, and I have mercy on him, said God."
Look closely at what has been said, and you will be able to understand God's
immense Love for those Perfect Ones (Immortals) who were worthy of feeling
and knowing His Greatness, having gone through all the paths He had prepared
for them, until they reached the feeling of His relationship with them, like
a father with his beloved son, as those who have understood this tell us.

It is impossible to say more about this, but it is enough for us to know
that for these pleasures of love with those Perfect Ones, it was worth it
for Him to create all worlds, both Higher and lower, as we will yet
discover.

In working on himself, a person uses his abilities: Mind (EGO), desire (ego),
thoughts (mind), words (prayers), actions (prescriptions of the Vedas).

All the pleasure and joy of the Creator lies in His creations (Souls) feeling
Him as the Source of their pleasures.

God derives pleasure from the fact that
man sees what God has for man.

This is what those who comprehend God feel.

This is exactly how God wants us to feel Him.

If a person derived pleasure
from his selfish desires, for his own sake (ego), he would be limited by the
boundaries of his desires, since he would not have developed them during
periods 1 (up to 18 [16] years old) and 2 (from 18 [16] to 36 [32] years
old).

In any case, his possibilities for enjoyment would be limited by the
boundaries, limits, and magnitude of his desires (ego).

What a person can
receive not for himself and still enjoy, enjoy not his own desires, gives him
the possibility of endless, boundless, unsatiable enjoyment.

A person must reach the level of feeling God as giving him pleasure.

God
enjoys the fact that a person comprehends His Greatness.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A person must reach the level of feeling God as giving him pleasure. God
enjoys the fact that a person comprehends His Greatness. Perfection (Immortality) is the Goal of Life, which we all must achieve: to
feel the greatness of God in all our achievements as the Source of Life and
Enjoyment. Everything that God created, He created not because He needs it. But if a person exalts God, he enjoys His Greatness and the Light that
emanates from Him. And in order to bring creations (Souls) to such a high special level of Faith
(Immortality), God wished to act according to the order of four stages
(evolution), passing from one to another, called inanimate (1), plant (2),
animal (3), and human (4). And in this there are four differences in the
desire to receive (ego), and each of the Higher worlds consists of these
desires. Although the main thing is the fourth stage (Faith), the desire to receive
for God's sake, but it is impossible for it (Immortality) to be revealed
immediately, but only through the power of the previous three stages of
Faith, through which it (the Soul) develops and reveals itself gradually,
until it reaches Perfection in all its properties of the fourth stage -
Immortality (final Liberation). 47. In the 1st stage of Faith (Knowledge of God), the desire to receive (for
oneself), called the inanimate species, is the beginning of the revelation of
the desire to receive (ego) in our material world. In it (the 1st stage),
there is only a general force of movement for all inanimate species
(desires), but the particular movement of its parts (thoughts) is not
recognized by the eye. This is because the desire to receive (ego) gives rise to needs, and needs
give rise to movement sufficient to achieve what is necessary. And since the
desire to receive (ego) is extremely small, it dominates only the entire body
(mind) at once, and its power over the parts (thoughts) is not recognized.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Just as an inanimate species (ego) has no personal freedom of movement, so a
person who has reached the stage of "pure inanimate (EGO)" feels only general
enjoyment from Faith and the Vedas, and is unable to distinguish between all
the various enjoyments in the Vedas.

A person at the undeveloped level performs actions and does not change at
all, since the desire to receive (ego) in him is so small that it does not
compel him to anything more than preserving his form of existence.

In addition to this, in the vegetative species (the second degree of Faith),
the magnitude of desire (ego) is greater than the magnitude of the inanimate
property (ego), and it dominates all parts of the body (mind), every part
(thought).

Each part (thought) has its own particular movement in spreading
out in length and width and oscillating toward the rising of the Sun (along
the stages of Faith), and eating, drinking, and excretion are also manifested
in it (the mind).

But still, there is no sense of individual freedom in them
(thoughts).

Just as all flowers immediately open up to the Sun (Light) and have no
personal desire, and therefore their movements are subordinate to the Sun
(Light) — each flower individually has no free will.

But a person who has
reached the plant stage, the second stage of pure Spiritual development
(Faith), feels pleasure from every action in Faith and can distinguish tastes
according to groups of altruistic actions.

For example, it feels the same taste in all good deeds, one taste, but
different from the first, in all deeds, as, for example, it would feel in our
world one taste from all kinds of meat and another taste from all kinds of
vegetables.

That is, it divides all the pleasures it feels into groups.For example, it feels the same taste in all good deeds, one taste, but
different from the first, in all deeds, as, for example, it would feel in our
world one taste from all kinds of meat and another taste from all kinds of
vegetables.

That is, it divides all the pleasures it feels into groups.

In addition to this, there is the type of animal, which is the third degree
of the desire to receive (EGO), whose properties are already so perfect that
this desire to receive (EGO) already gives rise in each of its parts
(thoughts) to a feeling of free personality, representing a special life of
each personality, different from those similar to it.

But they still lack a sense of neighborliness, i.e., they have no basis for
sympathizing with the suffering of others or rejoicing in the good fortune
of others.

The animal, the third stage of spiritual development (Faith),
already distinguishes each individual pleasure by its nature.

For example,
in every blessing, it feels a corresponding pleasure that is different from
others.

But it does not yet distinguish the inner nature, since animals are naturally
deprived of the feeling of neighborliness.

If we see manifestations of
compassion on the part of animals in our world, it comes from their nature,
not from their free decision.

48.

In addition to the animal species, the human species (Mind) is the fourth
degree of the desire to receive (EGO), which is already completely perfect in
terms of magnitude, since the desire to receive that is in it causes a
feeling of alienation in it.

And if you want to know exactly what the difference is between the third
level of the desire to receive (EGO) in the animal species and the fourth
level of the desire to receive (EGO) in the human species, I will tell you
that it is like the attitude of one individual toward the entire Creation of
Souls.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In addition to the animal species, the human species (Mind) is the fourth
degree of the desire to receive (EGO), which is already completely perfect in
terms of magnitude, since the desire to receive that is in it causes a
feeling of alienation in it. And if you want to know exactly what the difference is between the third
level of the desire to receive (EGO) in the animal species and the fourth
level of the desire to receive (EGO) in the human species, I will tell you
that it is like the attitude of one individual toward the entire Creation of
Souls. Because the desire to obtain what is in an animal, which has no sense of
itself as similar to others, is not capable of generating its own desires and
needs, but only to the extent given to it by God, existing in this form of
creation, whereas in a human being, who also has a sense of himself as
similar to others, there arises

--- PAGE BREAK ---a need for everything that others have, and is filled with envy for what
others possess.

That is, if he has a portion, he desires twice as much, and
his needs expand and grow so much that he desires to possess everything in
the world.

This last stage of development (Immortality) is the Goal of Life for all
people, but it can only be achieved by gradually developing through the
previous stages (Faith).

Since there is a sense of being like others,
Knowledge, Love, and so on are felt, and therefore one can enjoy what others
have achieved, because common feelings create a connection.

Therefore, one can enjoy the knowledge of others, and everyone can share
their insights with others, because there is a sense of kinship.

While the
language of animals cannot develop, humans develop their language to
communicate and convey feelings to others.

Therefore, having climbed the
steps of Faith, they can lift others up with them and, through their own
efforts, ascend together with the Teacher to the world of Infinity (Svaruga).

49.

After it has been clarified that the entire desired Goal of God's Creation of
all (Souls) and all the creations He has created is for them to enjoy them,
to comprehend His Greatness and Truth, and to receive from Him all the
beautiful things He has prepared for them, as stated: "My dear child Man
(human), My beloved son," we clearly see that this Purpose does not apply to
inanimate, plant, and animal species (nature), since they do not have the
ability to feel others, even those similar to them.

How can they feel God and
His goodness?After it has been clarified that the entire desired Goal of God's Creation of
all (Souls) and all the creations He has created is for them to enjoy them,
to comprehend His Greatness and Truth, and to receive from Him all the
beautiful things He has prepared for them, as stated: "My dear child Man
(human), My beloved son," we clearly see that this Purpose does not apply to
inanimate, plant, and animal species (nature), since they do not have the
ability to feel others, even those similar to them.

How can they feel God and
His goodness?

Only the human species (people) can perceive God, because it has the
foundation (Mind) for perceiving God and its own kind, in the process of
labor in Faith and the Vedas, when believers turn their desire to receive
(ego) within themselves into a desire to give (EGO), they come to resemble
God and pass through all the stages of Faith prepared for them in the Higher
Worlds, called Pravas, as a result of which they become capable of attaining
the Goal of Life (Immortality).

Therefore, the Goal of the plan of creation
of all Worlds is conceived only for humans.

Since there is a feeling of another, an outsider, someone outside and beyond
one's own body, a person is able to feel God.

The feeling should not be that
he enjoys, but that he enjoys giving to his neighbor or to God.

Giving is
only a connection for the possibility of comprehending the Giver!

Love for God is felt not from what one receives from God, but from the
comprehension of God's Greatness.

An animal is not able to enjoy the feeling
of WHO it receives from, but only enjoys WHAT it receives.

A person at this
level of spiritual development (Faith) desires only one thing—to feel the
Giver.

This is the special feature of the writings of the Holy Sage Yeshua (Joshua
Floyd), because in them a person quickly finds himself and his Creator as the
recipient and the Giver.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A person at this
level of spiritual development (Faith) desires only one thing—to feel the
Giver. This is the special feature of the writings of the Holy Sage Yeshua (Joshua
Floyd), because in them a person quickly finds himself and his Creator as the
recipient and the Giver. Therefore, despite resistance from certain circles,
people will ultimately come to study the Books (Vedas) of this great Sage
(Rahman) and, with their help, begin their true life. 50. And I (Joshua Floyd) know that this is completely unrecognized by
philosophers, and they cannot agree that a person, so insignificant in their
eyes, is the Center of all Great Creation (the 3 Worlds). Because they look
at the world

--- PAGE BREAK ---with their "earthly" eyes, without knowledge of the final state of man
(Immortality), and judge him by his present, intermediate state (his body).

And they are clearly unable to appreciate the Greatness of Creation (the
Three Worlds), because by Creation they mean only our world (Yavi), and
without their own understanding, without feeling it with their senses, i.e.,
without the coincidence of the properties of the Soul and the Spiritual
worlds, they are unable to comprehend anything in order to truly judge their
Greatness!

But they are like a worm born inside a bitter fruit, sitting in it and
thinking that the whole world of God is as bitter, devoid of Light, and small
as the bitter fruit in which it was born.

This is what each of us asserts about our world (Yavi), judging by our
feelings.

Philosophers who do not understand the Purpose of Human Life assert
the same thing.

But at the moment when a person breaks through the shell and looks out from
the bitter fruit, receives the Light of God, gains sight, and sees all the
Worlds and their proportions in the True Light, he is amazed and exclaims: "I
thought that the whole world was like the bitter fruit (Yavi) in which I was
born, but now I see before me a huge, shining, beautiful World."
So too, those who are immersed in their shell — the desire to receive (ego) —
in which they were born, and did not try to obtain a special means, faith and
the Vedas, to perform actions that are capable of breaking through such a
hard shell and turning the desire to receive into the desire to give
pleasures to God, of course, they inevitably decide that they are
insignificant and empty, which is what they really are, and cannot realize
that this entire vast Creation (3 Worlds) was created only for them (people).

With the naked eye, in their natural desires, people will never be able to
understand or believe in the Purpose of Life (Immortality).But at the moment when a person breaks through the shell and looks out from
the bitter fruit, receives the Light of God, gains sight, and sees all the
Worlds and their proportions in the True Light, he is amazed and exclaims: "I
thought that the whole world was like the bitter fruit (Yavi) in which I was
born, but now I see before me a huge, shining, beautiful World."
So too, those who are immersed in their shell — the desire to receive (ego) —
in which they were born, and did not try to obtain a special means, faith and
the Vedas, to perform actions that are capable of breaking through such a
hard shell and turning the desire to receive into the desire to give
pleasures to God, of course, they inevitably decide that they are
insignificant and empty, which is what they really are, and cannot realize
that this entire vast Creation (3 Worlds) was created only for them (people).

With the naked eye, in their natural desires, people will never be able to
understand or believe in the Purpose of Life (Immortality).

But if people engaged in Faith and the Vedas with pure thoughts of giving
everything to God (for God's sake), broke through the shell of desire to
receive (ego) in which they were born, and acquired the desire to give (EGO),
then their eyes would immediately open and they would be able to see and
comprehend themselves and all the stages of Wisdom (Faith) and clear
Knowledge of God(Immortality), beautiful and pleasant, to the satisfaction of
the Soul, prepared for them in the Higher worlds, and they themselves would
affirm what the Sages said: "A good guest says: everything the host has done
is good for me."
Intention (desire) means what a person desires at a given moment, so any
action, and even more so prayer, performed without intention (for the sake of
God), is like a dead thing.

But this does not mean without intention (desire)
at all, because the body (mind/ego) itself will not allow anything to be done
without conscious motivation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But if people engaged in Faith and the Vedas with pure thoughts of giving
everything to God (for God's sake), broke through the shell of desire to
receive (ego) in which they were born, and acquired the desire to give (EGO),
then their eyes would immediately open and they would be able to see and
comprehend themselves and all the stages of Wisdom (Faith) and clear
Knowledge of God(Immortality), beautiful and pleasant, to the satisfaction of
the Soul, prepared for them in the Higher worlds, and they themselves would
affirm what the Sages said: "A good guest says: everything the host has done
is good for me."
Intention (desire) means what a person desires at a given moment, so any
action, and even more so prayer, performed without intention (for the sake of
God), is like a dead thing. But this does not mean without intention (desire)
at all, because the body (mind/ego) itself will not allow anything to be done
without conscious motivation. Rather, it means that a person is not yet able
to make a true intention (for the sake of God), but strives for it. 51. But we still need to figure out why humans need all these Higher Worlds
created by God for them. It is important to know that the entire reality of
the worlds is generally divided into three worlds (five worlds), called: (-
The World of Infinity/Svarog)
1) Prav,
2) Yav,
3) Nav. (- Hell/Tartarus)

--- PAGE BREAK ---And in each of them there are an infinite number of worlds, which can be
reduced to three levels of Faith (Knowledge of Light).

Since (Svarga is the world of God), the world of Prav is the world of Light,
the world of Yav is our world, and the world of Nav is the world of Darkness
(the world of eternal torment - Hell/Tartarus).

And the Light that makes up
these 3(5) Worlds is called Inglia.

And all these worlds, everything and everyone in them, are part of God—the
Great Ra-M-Ha.

But because God is beyond our comprehension, we do not speak
of Him, but only of the 3(5) Worlds.

The name of God means the skeleton of all Creation, similar to the skeleton
of our body.

This name means that any creation, i.e., desire, consists of
three parts or three properties.

And there is no difference in this between the highest object of creation
(man), the highest Spirit, and the lowest, just as there is no difference in
the number of organs and body parts in an adult and a child, but the
difference lies in the Light with which this Soul is filled, depending on
the degree of correction of the desire (ego).

52.

So, we have identified 3(5) worlds that encompass all Spiritual Creation,
ranging from the world of Infinity (Prav) to our world (Yavi).

But they also
encompass each other, and therefore each of the 3(5) worlds consists of
3 stages of Faith, in which the Light of Infinity (Inglia) corresponding to
these worlds is found.

But in addition to the three degrees of Faith, there are also nine Spiritual
distinctions (lessons-steps), as in our world (Yavi), in each of the beings:
inanimate, vegetative, animal, human, where the human Soul is the distinction
"human" (Mind), which in the Spiritual world, the difference "animal" is
Souls, which in the Spiritual world, the difference "plant" is called
garments (stars), and the difference "inanimate" is called palaces (planets).

And these differences are clothed in each other.

A human being is a body and a Soul.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And these differences are clothed in each other. A human being is a body and a Soul. The Soul is clothed in a body with three
properties: Spirit, Conscience, and Mind, which are part of God in the
Spiritual world. Animals and Souls clothe themselves in humans; plants and clothing (stars)
clothe themselves in Souls; inanimate objects and palaces (planets) clothe
themselves in all previous states. (Planets turn into stars, stars turn into
Gods [Souls], and Gods turn into humans.)
Clothing (transformation) means that they serve (help) each other and develop
from each other, as we have already figured out in material objects:
inanimate, plant, animal, human beings of our world, and as we have pointed
out that there are three differences: inanimate, plant, and animal were not
created for themselves, but only so that the fourth type, humans, could
develop and rise with their help. And therefore, the purpose of all three types is only to serve and help
humans (the fourth type). And also in all Spiritual worlds, where there are
three distinctions: inanimate, plant, and animal, which are created only to
serve and help the distinction "human" in that World of the Soul. And
therefore, it is believed that all of them (kinds) help him. And so, at the moment of birth, a person immediately has a pure Soul, but not
the Soul itself, only a part of the Soul, which is its last (fourth) part,
called, due to its insignificance, a point (of Light) in the heart. The
general name for the Spiritual — Mind, Spirit, and Conscience — these three
in a person are called the Soul. At birth, a person receives the last, smallest part of the Light closest to
him on the Spiritual level of the world of Prav. Since it (the point of
Light)

--- PAGE BREAK ---cannot be felt by a person, it is called the reverse (invisible) side of his
Soul.

And since it (the point of Light) is extremely small, it is called the
Spiritual point.

And it is located in the heart, i.e., in the Soul of a
person.

The spiritual point (of Light) is clothed in human desires.

It (the point of
Light) itself is not felt, but acts through these desires.

53.

And know the absolute Rule: God's Law in all Creation is fulfilled in every
World and even in every smallest part of it that can be distinguished in that
world, as there are three Worlds that make up all Creation, and they are
three stages (of Faith): Pura, Yavi, and Navi.

The correspondence of the Worlds and degrees (of Faith) is everywhere, and
there are also nine lessons-degrees in each, even the smallest part of each
world.

Each level of Faith consists of three steps (lessons), and each of them, in
turn, also consists of three sub-steps (tests).

The result is a tree-like
system called the Tree of Life, in which each part is connected to all the
others, and therefore the slightest correction, the slightest spiritual
action of a person, causes a reaction and leads to an increase in Light in
all Worlds!!!

Therefore, all human actions are connected to all of Creation (the Worlds),
and we are all connected into one Unified Whole—a Unified Soul created by
God, which will be revealed to us at the end of the correction.

54.

In order to understand why the created desire to enjoy, called the creation
(the vessel of the Soul), consists of three parts, it is necessary to
understand its birth:
1.

The only thing we know about the Creator is His desire to create a
creation (human beings) in order to enjoy it.

We know this from the Sages
(Rahmanov) who have risen to this highest level of knowledge (Faith) and
have experienced for themselves that absolute Enjoyment emanates from God.

We call this Delight Light.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We know this from the Sages
(Rahmanov) who have risen to this highest level of knowledge (Faith) and
have experienced for themselves that absolute Enjoyment emanates from God. We call this Delight Light. The emanation of Light from God is called stage
of development 0 (beginning/birth). 2. Light gives rise to the desire to enjoy it. We call the desire to enjoy
Light the ego. Since Light created the desire (ego) to enjoy Light, such an
ego feels the desire for Light as its own, as something received for itself,
and is like an embryo in its mother's womb: it unconsciously receives
everything that its mother gives it, in the absence of its own desires. This
state is called stage of development 1 (1st Adulthood): the created ego
(desire) is filled with the Light of Navi. In order to enjoy, two conditions are necessary: an independent desire to
enjoy and the desired enjoyment. Moreover, the amount of enjoyment received
depends only on the amount of desire to enjoy, the amount of hunger, and the
size of the desire. All negative sensations arise from a lack of enjoyment and are a consequence
of the nature of the ego. All positive sensations are a consequence of the
action of the Light (Prav). 3. Since Light (Navi) in stage 1 completely fills the ego, it transmits the
ego with pleasure and its property—the desire to “enjoy”—and therefore the
ego gradually becomes satiated and ceases to enjoy receiving Light (Navi):
if there is no desire, then pleasure is not felt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The objects of the Spiritual world are "pure desires" without material
shells: a Spiritual object is a desire to enjoy or to give pleasure.

Therefore, a new desire gives birth to a new object: the separation of a new
desire from the past separates one state from another, a new desire is born,
which means that a new Spiritual object (Soul) is born.

Therefore, as soon as
stage 1 of development, filled with Light (Navi), begins to feel a new desire
to give, received from the Light (Prav), a new state, stage 2 of development
(2nd Adulthood), is distinguished from stage 1 of development.

The pleasure
that the Soul receives from the desire to give, i.e., from resembling God, is
also called Light, but it is a different Light from that of stage 1 of
development—it is the pleasure of giving, of altruism.

Stage of development 2 (2nd Adulthood) is similar to God, but is considered
to be further removed from Him than stage of development 1 (up to 18[16]
years old), because the degree of the Soul's distance from God is determined
by the Soul's own perception, since we cannot say anything about God, and in
general, in relation to Him, the Soul is immediately in its final state
(Immortality) upon the emergence of the idea of creation (man), and the Soul
in stage 2 feels more distant from God than the Soul in stage 1, and that is
why it expels the Light.

The reason why the Soul receives its properties
(desires) from the Light is that every effect desires to be like its cause,
which gave rise to it.

Two actions emerge from stage 0 (beginning/birth):
- God's desire to delight His creations (Souls) gives rise to the desire
to delight, the ego, creation (man),
- the desire to delight acts in the created man in such a way that he begins
to feel that the delight he receives comes from God's desire to delight him,
and therefore the same desire to delight arises in the Soul.The reason why the Soul receives its properties
(desires) from the Light is that every effect desires to be like its cause,
which gave rise to it.

Two actions emerge from stage 0 (beginning/birth):
- God's desire to delight His creations (Souls) gives rise to the desire
to delight, the ego, creation (man),
- the desire to delight acts in the created man in such a way that he begins
to feel that the delight he receives comes from God's desire to delight him,
and therefore the same desire to delight arises in the Soul.

We observe a similar reaction in our world: a person who has received a gift,
if he feels himself as a recipient, immediately wants either to return it or
to do something similar to the giver in order to get rid of the feeling of
being a recipient.

Only if a person can convince himself that what he receives
"is rightfully theirs," or "everyone does it," or "it's customary," etc., can
they accept it, because they have convinced themselves that they are not the
recipient, otherwise they would not be able to accept it from another, since
the unpleasant feeling of receiving would not allow them to accept it.

The same applies to stage 1 of development (1st Adulthood): as soon as the
Soul felt itself receiving, this unpleasant feeling forced it to get rid of
the Light, because it felt those who were giving the Light.

Therefore, in our
world, we lack only one thing—to feel God, and then we will easily free
ourselves from the desire to receive pleasure (ego) to the extent that we
feel God.

And since stage 2 (from 18[16] to 36[32] years old) is a consequence of the
Soul feeling distant from God and receiving, it is considered more distant
and coarse than stage 1 (state 1 - receiving for oneself), even though stage
1 receives and stage 2 gives.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Therefore, in our
world, we lack only one thing—to feel God, and then we will easily free
ourselves from the desire to receive pleasure (ego) to the extent that we
feel God. And since stage 2 (from 18[16] to 36[32] years old) is a consequence of the
Soul feeling distant from God and receiving, it is considered more distant
and coarse than stage 1 (state 1 - receiving for oneself), even though stage
1 receives and stage 2 gives. There are two types of Light in the feeling of
the Soul:
a) The Light of the Purpose of Life (the world of Infinity), with which God
wishes to delight the Souls, coming directly from God;
b) The Light of the correction of creation (the Soul), which comes from God
(from the Right) only when a person makes an effort to correct himself, to
become like God, the enjoyment of merging (Unity) with God. 55.

--- PAGE BREAK ---But, having completely separated from the Light (Navi), the ego begins to
feel
"Dying" because it was created to receive Light (Prav).

The fact that the ego
desired to receive Light (Prav) is only a consequence of the action of Light
(Prav) within it, but not its nature.

The ego is incapable of existing without Light.

Since the entire nature, the
entire essence of the ego is the desire to enjoy the Light, and besides this
desire there is nothing else in it that could nullify this desire.

The desire
itself is incapable of destroying itself.

Desire is a reaction to the Light
filling the vessel of the Soul; it is also a reaction of the desire to enjoy,
because the desire to enjoy, receiving the Light, feels suffering from the
sensation of being a recipient and therefore refuses to receive the Light.

But who refuses?

The same ego, the same desire to enjoy the Light.

Therefore, having expelled
the Light (Navi), the ego feels the impossibility of existence without It
(the Light), because this is its nature (essence), and decides to accept only
the amount of Light (Prav) necessary for existence, and in the rest of its
desire, the human Soul enjoys merging (Unity) with God (Immortality).

Such a
necessary reception of Light for existence is not considered a reception.

Just as in our world we say that a person, for example, lives only by Faith,
we mean that he, of course, receives everything necessary for existence, but
this is not considered receiving, because it is dictated not by his desire
(ego), but by the necessity of his nature (body), and if it were not for it
(the body), he would not receive even what is necessary for life.

This is the difference between states 2 and 3: in state 3 (receiving for
God's sake), there is already, albeit out of necessity, a desire to receive
Light.

But how can state 2 (receiving for one's own sake) exist without
Light, if it is the Light of Life from the Soul?This is the difference between states 2 and 3: in state 3 (receiving for
God's sake), there is already, albeit out of necessity, a desire to receive
Light.

But how can state 2 (receiving for one's own sake) exist without
Light, if it is the Light of Life from the Soul?

The fact is that there is
Light in state 2, and hence the reaction to its presence is the desire to
give, enjoying the Light.

Feeling two opposing desires within itself: to
receive Light and to receive material things, the Soul decides on a
compromise: to receive a little material, in the amount necessary for its
existence, and in the rest to be like the Light.

This combined desire of the
ego is called state 3 (receiving for the sake of God).

But if state 3
receives Light under the pressure of its nature, why is this not receiving
for the sake of God?

Because the nature of the ego, i.e., God, who created the ego as such, forces
it (the person) to receive for its own sake, because it is unable to exist
without Light.

Therefore, a person who receives everything that his nature
demands in our world is not considered to be fulfilling God's will, because
he enjoys receiving for his own sake, and not for God's sake.

56.

Each new desire is a separate state (thought), a separate ego, a separate
Spiritual object (spark of Light).

Therefore, after receiving, according to
its desires, Light and a little material, the Soul in state 3 (receiving for
the sake of God) begins to desire to fully enjoy the Light, as it was filled
with it in stage 1 of development (1st adulthood).

Each subsequent stage of development is a consequence of the previous one, a
consequence of the action of Light in the vessel of the Soul (Aura) in the
previous state: from being filled with Light in stage 1 of development, the
ego desired to act like Light and created stage 2 of development.

From the
feeling of need for Light in stage 2 of development, stage 3 of development
appeared.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Each subsequent stage of development is a consequence of the previous one, a
consequence of the action of Light in the vessel of the Soul (Aura) in the
previous state: from being filled with Light in stage 1 of development, the
ego desired to act like Light and created stage 2 of development. From the
feeling of need for Light in stage 2 of development, stage 3 of development
appeared. From the feeling of naturalness of enjoying the receipt of Light when
choosing between two active pleasures (the Light of Prav or Navi) in stage 3
of development (receiving or giving for the sake of God), stage 4 of
development appeared: the desire

--- PAGE BREAK ---to fully enjoy the pleasure that God desires to give, Immortality.

This last stage of the Soul's development is the final stage of its
development, because in this state, two necessary conditions are manifested
in the Soul:
a) she desires to receive all the Light emanating from God in its
entirety, b) she perceives the desire for Light as her own.

In state 1, the desire to enjoy was felt as something given from Above, and
therefore there was no desire on the part of the Soul to achieve enjoyment.

The compulsion in the four stages of ego development stems from the fact that
in state 1, the ego does not feel that it is receiving something lifeless
(the Light of Navi)!

In addition, state 1 was already filled with Light-
Enjoyment, and therefore all the desires of the ego were completely
fulfilled, and the ego does not feel itself in such a state, but only the
Light, and is completely overwhelmed by enjoyment, just as immense enjoyment
drives a person mad and does not allow him to act reasonably, without the
dictates of enjoyment.

The filled ego is overwhelmed by the Light it receives and can only become
independent by once refusing the Light.

But after the Light has left the ego
at least once and the ego has felt its independent desire (EGO), as soon as
the Light returns, the ego gradually becomes EGO.

The ego (egoism) and the
Light become two independent desires, rather than one dictated by the Light.

This is because they come from God simultaneously, Light and ego, and
therefore must part at least once so that the ego becomes independent (EGO)
and begins to receive Light according to its desire, i.e., EGO becomes
primary (Free), dictating (main), and not Light.

Therefore, state 1 cannot be
developed egoism and needs additional development.

And only after 4 stages of development (Faith) does the EGO feel itself, its
desires, and that it is the recipient.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Therefore, state 1 cannot be
developed egoism and needs additional development. And only after 4 stages of development (Faith) does the EGO feel itself, its
desires, and that it is the recipient. But the EGO that is finally suitable
for fulfilling the Purpose of Life (of a person) must be completely detached
from the Light, which is realized only in a person of our world (Yavi). 57. The desire to enjoy exists only in the absence of the desired. Therefore,
only the spread of Light (Navi) in the ego, which creates a taste for
enjoyment in the ego, and the disappearance of Light (Navi) from the ego,
which causes the ego to strive for enjoyment, give birth to an EGO suitable
for the Purpose of Life (of a person): The EGO feels its own desire to
satisfy its hunger, calm itself, and eliminate the suffering caused by the
absence of pleasure. Stage 4 (Immortality) — a fully filled EGO, according to its desire to enjoy
itself, the Light (Prav) is called the world of Infinity (Svaraga) — the
world of unlimited enjoyment. Graphical representations of the 4 stages of ego development:
Stage of Development 0: The spread of God's Joy with the desire to create
beings (Souls) in order to delight them with this Joy. Stage of development 1: The Light (Inglia) emanating from God creates a
desire to enjoy it (the Light) in terms of quantity and quality, precisely
according to its properties. But the creation (human being) does not yet feel
the desire to enjoy (ego) as its own, there is no desire for enjoyment. Receiving enjoyment from the Light (Prav), the ego also receives its property
of enjoying others, which is opposite to its desire to "receive," and expels
the Light of Navi. Stage of development 2: the desire to delight, to give with pleasure from
this Light (Prav). But, having reached 100% giving, it discovers the
impossibility of

--- PAGE BREAK ---to exist without the Light (Navi) and decides to accept the amount necessary
for the EGO to live.

Stage of development 3: receiving both pleasures (90% Light of Prav and 10%
Light of Navi), the EGO feels the pleasure of the Light (Prav) as direct and
therefore desires to accept only it.

Light (Inglia) is also called Energy.

Stage of development 4: The EGO desires to enjoy only the Light (Prav) in the
quantity and properties that it has, as it emanates from God in stage of
development 0.

The difference from stage of development 1 is in the feeling
of desire to enjoy as one's own, i.e., the presence of the desire to enjoy
(EGO).

The EGO (the vessel of the Soul), completely filled with the Light of Prav
according to its desire, is called the world of Infinity (Svarog), because it
does not create restrictions on receiving the Light (Ingli).

The EGO, filled with Light (Navi), feels itself as the receiver and God as
the Giver, and therefore expels the Light (Navi) and decides never again to
receive the Light (Navi) for self-enjoyment.

Having expelled the Light (Navi), the Soul decides to accept the Light (Prav)
only for the sake of God.

This type of reception is called (Immortality).

58.

The Light (Navi), filling the EGO in stage 4, once again gives birth to the
desire to give, to be like it.

Moreover, if in stage 1 of development the ego
did not feel the desire to enjoy as "its own," in stage 4 of development it
feels the desire to enjoy as "its own." And if in stage 2 of development the
ego did not feel the desire to give as "its own," now, filled with Light in
stage 4 of development, it begins to feel the desire to give as "its own."
Therefore, the EGO decides to completely expel the Light from itself and
never receive it again for its own sake, for self-satisfaction, because the
Light-Enjoyment it receives immediately causes an unpleasant feeling in it
as the recipient, since it transfers its properties to it.The Light (Navi), filling the EGO in stage 4, once again gives birth to the
desire to give, to be like it.

Moreover, if in stage 1 of development the ego
did not feel the desire to enjoy as "its own," in stage 4 of development it
feels the desire to enjoy as "its own." And if in stage 2 of development the
ego did not feel the desire to give as "its own," now, filled with Light in
stage 4 of development, it begins to feel the desire to give as "its own."
Therefore, the EGO decides to completely expel the Light from itself and
never receive it again for its own sake, for self-satisfaction, because the
Light-Enjoyment it receives immediately causes an unpleasant feeling in it
as the recipient, since it transfers its properties to it.

The expulsion of
Light (Navi) from the ego and the decision never to accept Navi Light for
self-enjoyment in the future is called the first coming of age (18 [16]
years).

And the state of the ego after the expulsion of Navi Light from it
is called Coming of Age.

But, remaining empty after the expulsion of the Light (Navi), the ego,
examining its state, comes to the conclusion that its state is absolutely
imperfect: it does not enjoy the Light of Prav, as God desires, for which He
created the ego, and thus, although it is not a recipient, it is not like
God: God desires to satisfy desires.

If the ego wishes to please God, it must accept and enjoy the Light of Prav.

However, when accepting and enjoying the Light of Prav, the ego immediately
feels itself to be a recipient, distant from God, because the Light of Prav,
while giving it pleasure, imparts to it its properties of “giving” rather
than receiving.

And the appearance in the ego of a desire opposite to the original one (EGO)
creates a conflict in it: two contradictory desires, as a result of which the
ego rejects the Light (Navi), not wanting to feel itself as a recipient of
pleasure, but wanting to be like the Light of Prav (Ingli).--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, when accepting and enjoying the Light of Prav, the ego immediately
feels itself to be a recipient, distant from God, because the Light of Prav,
while giving it pleasure, imparts to it its properties of “giving” rather
than receiving. And the appearance in the ego of a desire opposite to the original one (EGO)
creates a conflict in it: two contradictory desires, as a result of which the
ego rejects the Light (Navi), not wanting to feel itself as a recipient of
pleasure, but wanting to be like the Light of Prav (Ingli). Therefore, the ego chooses the only possible solution: to accept and enjoy
the Light (Navi), but not for itself, but for God. In this case, it will be
able to fully enjoy the Light itself, emanating from God, the Light of the
Right, and at the same time it will not be opposite, but completely similar
in action to God, delighting Him as He desires to delight the Souls.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Therefore, in addition to receiving 100% of the Light of Navi, the vessel of
the Soul will receive another 100% of the Light of Prav, the enjoyment of
altruism, giving, likeness to God, and merging (Unity) with God.

But it will receive not for self-enjoyment, but because God desires it, the
ego is capable of only a small part of the incoming Light (Navi) (for
example, 20%).

The rest of the ego (80%) remains unfilled with Light (Navi) and is filled
with the pleasure of resembling God, the Light of Prav.

Therefore, after the reduction in the reception of Light, the vessel of the
Soul is no longer depicted as a circle, but as a rectangle, where there is an
upper and lower part in relation to God.

The reception of Light, according to
its level of development, is called the reception of Light in the form of a
line, because the Soul is obliged to fulfill the Laws accepted by the Higher
(God).

Thus, there appears a top and bottom in terms of importance, which did
not exist before the decision was made to reduce the reception for oneself
and to receive only for the sake of God.

All decisions made from step to step
(Faith) were voluntary and did not oblige subsequent states in any way.

Therefore, the states of the ego before the appearance of the prohibition on
all subsequent states of receiving the Light of Navi for self-gratification
are called circles (steps) or circles (trials).

And with the appearance of
the prohibition (on the Light), degrees of importance and coarseness appear
in the Soul close to the desire for self-indulgence (ego), which becomes the
lowest, the least important, because it is forbidden to use it.

59.And with the appearance of
the prohibition (on the Light), degrees of importance and coarseness appear
in the Soul close to the desire for self-indulgence (ego), which becomes the
lowest, the least important, because it is forbidden to use it.

59.

Also, in the vessel of the Soul itself, there are several parts that differ
in importance: where it (the Mind) calculates "how much pleasure can be
obtained for the sake of God," the part of the vessel of the Soul into which
it (the Soul) receives pleasure (Light), and the part of the vessel of the
Soul that remains unfilled due to lack of development.

And therefore, in the vessel of the Soul itself, these three parts are also
arranged in order of importance: Conscience is above all else, since it
determines all subsequent actions.

Below it is the Spirit, because in Him
(the Spirit) the EGO receives Light and because this part is more important,
and then the Soul (Mind).

Therefore, the type of receiving Light after the reduction of receiving is
called receiving.

The desire for self-indulgence (ego) is called low in
importance relative to God, because God is opposite to it in desire and
because it cannot be used and nothing can be received in it.

But everything
in which there is even a little desire to give (EGO) is already above stage
4 of development (for the sake of God), because thanks to this desire, one
can receive the corresponding part of the Higher Light in it.

The part of the vessel of the Soul that feels the pleasures coming from God
and decides what part of the coming pleasure it can receive not for itself,
not for self-indulgence, is called the head (top) - the upper chakras.

The Higher Light comes to the head.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The part of the vessel of the Soul that feels the pleasures coming from God
and decides what part of the coming pleasure it can receive not for itself,
not for self-indulgence, is called the head (top) - the upper chakras. The Higher Light comes to the head. The EGO, located in the vessel of the
Soul, repels all the coming Light, thereby creating the Light going from the
creation to the Creator, then the EGO decides what part of the Light it is
able to accept not for self-indulgence (ego), accepts this part of the Light
into the chakras from the feet to the navel (lower chakras), the remaining
part of the Light remains outside the vessel of the Soul and is called the
External Light. This remaining part of the Light, the External, should fill the vessel of the
Soul from the navel to the head (the upper chakras). Since the vessel of the
Soul does not receive Light in this (upper) part due to a lack of resistance

--- PAGE BREAK ---to self-indulgence (ego), it (EGO) derives pleasure from this state of
desiring to be like God, which is felt and spread throughout the Soul.

60.

The descent of Light from God creates in the process 3 stages of development
of the independent desire for self-indulgence - ego.

The vessel of the Soul,
filled with the Light of Navi (receiving) or the Light of Prav (giving), is
called the sphere of Light, from the word "shining."
Any vessel of the Soul, since its creation requires development through three
stages (Faith), each of which also consists of three parts (steps) — stages
of development, for a total of nine parts or stages of development (trials).

As it is
There are three parts in the vessel of the Soul, and there are also three
parts in each World, called the stages of Faith.

Just as there are three parts in the common vessel of the Soul of the world
of Puri, so there are three parts in the world of Navi.

Just as there are
three parts of the desire for self-enjoyment (ego), so there are three forces
of opposition to selfishness (EGO) in the Soul.

61.

The Book of Radiance studies creation from top to bottom, from God to our
world (Yavi).

The heart (vessel of the Soul) of a person is the vessel of
sensations from all five senses, from the nine levels of Faith from 1 to 9.

The mind and brain of a person are only auxiliary tools for finding
opportunities to achieve the desires that a person feels in their heart.

A person receives desires from Above and is unable to change them.

But by
studying and comprehending the Purpose of Life (of a person), he can begin to
realize that his desires (ego) are harmful to him.

When awareness arises in
the heart, a person automatically distances himself from them (desires).

The parts of the world of Prav consist of three stages of Faith.

Each of the
worlds consists of stages (Faith).--- PAGE BREAK ---

The parts of the world of Prav consist of three stages of Faith. Each of the
worlds consists of stages (Faith). The parts of the world of Prav are the
inhabitants of the worlds, the parts of Her (Inglia) are our world (Yavi) and
its inhabitants (inanimate, plant, and animal life, humans). Therefore, by correcting himself, a person spiritually rises from our world
(Yavi) to a state of complete union with God and achieves complete reception
of the Light of Delight, as God desires, in the higher (upper) chakras. And
by receiving this Light for the sake of God, he also enjoys union with God
Himself (Immortality). As a result of its consistent spiritual coarsening by descending the steps
(Faith) from the state of "Immortality" downwards, creation (ego) reaches a
state where it (ego) is completely opposite in nature (EGO) to God: IT ONLY
WANTS TO "RECEIVE" AND DOES NOT UNDERSTAND THE DESIRE
TO "GIVE." And this state is considered desirable for the beginning of
correction and elevation (along the steps of Faith). We are all in this state, and it is called "our world" or the world of
actions (Yavi). Our desires to obtain pleasure dictate our actions. Actions
can be "receiving" or "giving," but they stem from the desire
"to receive (ego)" and are therefore called "receiving for the sake of
receiving" or
"giving for the sake of receiving." Not only can we not desire anything else,
but we are also incapable of understanding it! 62.

--- PAGE BREAK ---In the Book of Splendor, material does not refer to the physical material of
our world, but to the absolutely selfish desire (ego) without any desire
"To give." Likewise, the impure worlds of Navi are called material due to the
absence of the desire "to give" in them.

A person is in his physical body: if
his desire is to enjoy himself (ego), then it is called material, and he is
called dead in our world and feels himself to be so.

If his desire is to give
(EGO), then such a desire is called Spiritual, and he feels and is considered
to be in one of the worlds of Prav, in the world that he feels in accordance
with the magnitude of his altruistic desire (EGO).

The entire physical nature of our universe, inanimate, vegetative, and
animal, except for man, has no spiritual significance, and only to the
extent that it assists man in his spiritual ascent does it rise with him,
and when man falls spiritually, it descends with him.

63.

As already mentioned, our world is divided into four types: inanimate (1),
plant (2), animal (3), and human (4), which correspond to the four stages of
human development: 1) up to 18 (16) years old — ignorance; 2) from 18 (16)
to 36 (32) — knowledge; 3) after 36 (32) years of age comes Wisdom and
Knowledge — initial Liberation; 4) this is final Liberation — Immortality.

Because the inanimate corresponds to the beginning of Creation (Light), the
plant is the creation of the 3 Worlds, the animal is the creation of Souls
with ego, and man corresponds to the Angel, and the Root (Beginning) of them
all is God.

But, as stated, even in each part of the inanimate (stone), the vegetative
(grass), the animal (beast), and man, there are also four distinctions: the
inanimate (body), the Soul, the Spirit, and the Conscience.Because the inanimate corresponds to the beginning of Creation (Light), the
plant is the creation of the 3 Worlds, the animal is the creation of Souls
with ego, and man corresponds to the Angel, and the Root (Beginning) of them
all is God.

But, as stated, even in each part of the inanimate (stone), the vegetative
(grass), the animal (beast), and man, there are also four distinctions: the
inanimate (body), the Soul, the Spirit, and the Conscience.

Thus, in one form, that of a human being, i.e., even in one human being,
there are also different proportions: inanimate, vegetative, animal, and
human, which are the four parts of the desire to receive (ego/EGO) that is
within him, in which the point (of Light) is clothed in a pure Soul.

64.

Until the age of 18[16], there can be no clear manifestation of the point
(Light) in the heart.

But after the age of 18[16], when one begins to engage
in Faith and the Vedas, even without any intentions, which means without love
and fear, which are necessary when fulfilling God's desires, even when doing
so for oneself, one sees that one is unable to do anything for God, because
one's desire
"to receive (ego)" does not allow him to do so.

And he follows Faith and the
Vedas in order to correct his selfish desire.

In this case, Faith and the Vedas are able to lead him to the correction and
purification of the desire to obtain in the first level (state), which is
lifeless.

Then, if he fulfills Faith and the prescriptions of the Vedas for
the sake of obtaining reward and does not strive for their fulfillment to
purify his desire to obtain (ego), this is called the opposite action.

Because that is his intention when performing the Vedas, the intention to
receive reward for his performance.

The point (of light) in his heart begins
to grow and reveal his actions, because the Vedas do not require intentions,
and even actions without intentions.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Because that is his intention when performing the Vedas, the intention to
receive reward for his performance. The point (of light) in his heart begins
to grow and reveal his actions, because the Vedas do not require intentions,
and even actions without intentions. Not only the Vedas, but any actions of a person performed with the desire to
get closer to the Spiritual, regardless of intentions, have the power to
purify

--- PAGE BREAK ---correct the desire to receive — our egoism — have the power to purify the
desire to receive (ego) in a person, but only to the extent of the 1st degree
of Faith that is in him.

Thus, we see that the initial state of a person can
be anything, as long as there is a desire to move forward (develop) with any
intention.

And this is natural, because after "18 [16] years" he has great
selfish desires.

And to the extent that he purifies the inanimate (dark) part
of his desires to receive (ego), to that extent he builds the nine parts
(chakras) of the body, the points (of Light) located in his heart (the vessel
of the Soul), which are the inanimate part of his vessel of the Soul.

And when all three stages of Faith in action are completed, this completes
the construction of all three parts of the body of the point (Light) in the
heart, which is the lifeless level of his pure Soul, the nine parts of the
body (chakras), which are built by fulfilling the Laws of God (Vedas),
actions (devotion), and words (prayers).

As a result, the Whole Body of the pure Soul appears, and then this Body of
the Soul rises along the Golden Path of development (the stages of Faith)
and is clothed in the sphere (body) of the Spirit (Lega) of the world of
Prav.

The spiritual body, the object, is called the vessel of the Soul.

The
vessel of the Soul consists of 9 chakras.

The vessel of the Soul consists of 3 parts: the head (beginning/top) — the
place of feeling the coming pleasure and making a decision about which part
of it (Light) to receive into oneself; the body (navel) – the place where the
pleasures are received, the acceptance of which was decided in the head; the
feet (end/bottom) – the place where the vessel of the Soul cannot receive
pleasure because it cannot give its reception the proper altruistic intention
"for the sake of God."
Since the receiving part of the vessel of the Soul is the body, it must be
filled with Light if the desires (EGO) in it are corrected.The
vessel of the Soul consists of 9 chakras.

The vessel of the Soul consists of 3 parts: the head (beginning/top) — the
place of feeling the coming pleasure and making a decision about which part
of it (Light) to receive into oneself; the body (navel) – the place where the
pleasures are received, the acceptance of which was decided in the head; the
feet (end/bottom) – the place where the vessel of the Soul cannot receive
pleasure because it cannot give its reception the proper altruistic intention
"for the sake of God."
Since the receiving part of the vessel of the Soul is the body, it must be
filled with Light if the desires (EGO) in it are corrected.

Therefore, it is
said that a person builds the Soul from desires to receive with the intention
for the sake of God, thereby building the body of the vessel of his Soul.

By fulfilling desires, not receiving, limiting oneself, because one is not
yet able to enjoy them with the intention for God's sake, a person builds the
Immortality of his Soul vessel.

As a result, he obtains a complete, pure
Spiritual vessel of the Soul, which, putting on the Spiritual step (Faith) of
the world of Prav, receives Light from it.

And all Spiritual parts — inanimate (stone), plant (tree), animal (beasts) —
in that world (Prav), corresponding to the Spiritual step of the world of
Prav, help the vessel of the human Soul that has ascended there, i.e., to the
extent that a person comprehends them, this Knowledge becomes his Spiritual
food, giving him the Strength to develop and grow, so that he can receive the
Light from the Spiritual level of the world of Prav in all its desirable
Strength and Shine with it in the body (Soul) of man.

And this Perfect Light helps a person to increase their efforts in Faith and
the Vedas and to comprehend even greater Spiritual stages (of Faith).

Because
the Light (Prav) entering into desires corrects them, giving them its own
nature.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And this Perfect Light helps a person to increase their efforts in Faith and
the Vedas and to comprehend even greater Spiritual stages (of Faith). Because
the Light (Prav) entering into desires corrects them, giving them its own
nature. And as was said earlier, that immediately upon the birth of the human
body, a point of Light is born and clothed in it, so here, when the vessel of
the Soul was born, a point (of Light) of a higher level was born with it, the
last point of Light of the world of Prav, clothed in the vessel of the Soul. When a person is born with the desire to "receive (ego)," it is born with the
Spiritual point (Mind) of a higher Spiritual level of Faith within them. And
this is the process at all levels of Faith: when a level is born, the last
point (Light) of the higher level above it immediately enters it, because
this is the entire connection between the lower and higher levels up to the
highest level (Faith) — God.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Thus, with the help of this point of the Higher (Light), it becomes possible
to rise to a higher level of Faith.

Without a part of the higher level
(Faith) in the lower level (Faith), it is impossible to rise above one's
state.

65.

And this Light of Prav is called the Light of the inanimate world of Prav.

And it is accordingly directed toward the purification-correction of the part
of the inanimate desire to receive (ego) that is in the human body.

Since this is the Power of this Light, passing through all the weakening
veils, shells, worlds consisting of Souls, consisting of levels of Faith,
this Light is so weak that it is only capable of correcting the inanimate
(dead) desires of a person.

And this action of its Radiance (Shining) in the Spiritual is similar to the
action of the inanimate in our world, which has no personal movement of its
parts, but only a general movement that encompasses all its parts equally.

Similarly, the Light of the vessel of the Soul of the world of Prakri,
despite the fact that it has nine parts, which represent many different types
of enjoyment, their differences are not manifested in it, but only the
general Light (Inglia), the action of which encompasses all parts equally in
general, without any manifestations of the individuality of the parts.

It is precisely this property that those who receive help in correction from
the world of Prav begin to possess, and therefore it is precisely these
Spiritual properties that they attain.

66.

And know that although the degrees of Faith are Divine, and there is no
difference between the first degree of Faith in the world of Yavi and the
last degree of Faith (Immortality) in the world of Prav, because all degrees
of Faith, Worlds, and Souls are only a partial perception of God by a person
as he corrects himself spiritually and purifies himself from selfish desires.

Names, stages (of Faith), Soul, Worlds speak of the degree of perception of
God.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And know that although the degrees of Faith are Divine, and there is no
difference between the first degree of Faith in the world of Yavi and the
last degree of Faith (Immortality) in the world of Prav, because all degrees
of Faith, Worlds, and Souls are only a partial perception of God by a person
as he corrects himself spiritually and purifies himself from selfish desires. Names, stages (of Faith), Soul, Worlds speak of the degree of perception of
God. Our world is called complete imperception of God. The smallest
perception of God is called the level of Legs (Spirits) of the world of Prav,
the greatest perception of God, complete merging with Him, is called Infinite
(Immortality), without end, i.e., unlimited by anything, not limited by any
manifestation of egoism, complete merging (Unity) with God. Therefore, all Worlds, stages (Faiths), Souls are a partial feeling of God,
and they are gradations of the opening of our organs of Spiritual feeling
(chakras) as they are purified from selfishness. Therefore, they all exist
only within a person, and they are filters (screens) through which we feel
(the Light) God to one degree or another. There is a big difference between them (screens) in relation to people who
receive Light (images) from them. Only in relation to a person does there
exist a partial or complete perception of God. The steps of Faith (Worlds)
consist of Light (Inglia) and bodies (parts of Light). The Light in them is
purely Divine; the Light in the steps of Faith (the Golden Path) is the Light
of God (Inglia) or God Himself, which is one and the same. We call the
sensation of God in our senses Light. More precisely, the reaction of our sensory organs to Him, those sensations
that He evokes in us, is called Light. We cannot speak about God Himself,
because we can only speak about what we comprehend and feel. Therefore,
instead of the word God, the word Light is used in the Book of Radiance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Depending on the degree of perception of God, we define these perceptions
(degrees of Faith), grade them, and give them numbers and names.

Since each
of our perceptions consists of three components, the Sages gave them names:
Liberation, Freedom, and Immortality, in order of increasing perception of
God.

The degree of feeling God depends on a person's qualities: the more a
person's qualities resemble God's quality of "giving," the more a person
feels God.

Since a person is created with the desire to receive pleasure, and
this is their only quality (desire), they cannot change their nature, but
they have the opportunity to change their intention when receiving: if they
receive because God desires it, because it pleases God, then such receiving
is equivalent to “giving” and is similar to the qualities of God.

Human desires that have been corrected to some degree are called EGO.

If this
corrected desire (EGO) includes the corresponding Light, then it (EGO) is
called a point of Light, from the property of shining with Light.

The
sensation of God at a certain level of correction is called a vessel (point)
of Light.

A vessel of Light is a corrected desire (EGO) filled with Light.

The vessel (point) of Light consists of 3 parts and 9 subparts.

Therefore, the 3 stages of Faith are often listed as 9 steps.

In the Three Worlds, called Puri, Navi, and Yavi, it is not the Divine, but
veils that hide the Light of Infinity (Ingliya) that is in them.

The Light of
Infinity (Ingliya), the Light shining in the world of Infinity (Svarog), the
Light of God without any barriers (screens) and weakening veils(filters).

And
measuring out the amount of its Radiance to recipients according to the
thickness of the veil (screen), i.e., according to the degree of correction
of the desire to receive (ego), so that each recipient receives only
according to the degree of their corrected part (EGO).The Light of
Infinity (Ingliya), the Light shining in the world of Infinity (Svarog), the
Light of God without any barriers (screens) and weakening veils(filters).

And
measuring out the amount of its Radiance to recipients according to the
thickness of the veil (screen), i.e., according to the degree of correction
of the desire to receive (ego), so that each recipient receives only
according to the degree of their corrected part (EGO).

Thus, the veils (screens) measure the amount of Light from God that passes
through them to the spiritual body of a person (the vessel of the Soul),
exactly in the amount that he can accept with the proper intention, so as not
to harm the person: if the amount of Light-Enjoyment is greater than the
amount of the protective screen, the person's Will Power, then they will
immediately feel the desire to enjoy this Light for themselves.

And in this sense, although the Light is one, the Light of God (Inglia),
which is in Faith (the Great Ra-M-Ha), has no name and is therefore called
Light, because in Him (Inglia) there are no differences or varieties, but
only one property of His (Inglia) to delight man.

We call the Light in the degrees of Faith by the names of the Rulers.

Because
the Light is divided according to the property of the Soul: the Light is felt
only in the presence of the ego-desire to receive it, and depending on the
properties of the EGO, it reveals from the infinite number of properties of
the Light only that property which it is able to feel.

These qualities do not exist in the Light (Inglia) itself, but the Soul feels
it to the extent of its similarity to the qualities of Light.

The desires of
the ego are the thickest veil (screen) hiding the Light of Infinity.

The
Light that it (the screen) transmits from God to the recipients is very small
and is intended only to correct what is lifeless in the human body (ego), and
therefore it is called lifeless (the Light of Navi).--- PAGE BREAK ---

The desires of
the ego are the thickest veil (screen) hiding the Light of Infinity. The
Light that it (the screen) transmits from God to the recipients is very small
and is intended only to correct what is lifeless in the human body (ego), and
therefore it is called lifeless (the Light of Navi). Since the Light coming from the world of Prav is small, he (man) is able to
correct only a small part of the desire to receive (ego), called inanimate. But the process of correction begins precisely with this part, similar to our
world (Yavi), where everything comes from the inanimate (Light of Navi) as
the basis of everything. The vessel (point) of Light is already more transparent than the vessel of
the Soul, and therefore the Light that it transmits from Infinity (Prav) is
intended for

--- PAGE BREAK ---correcting the vegetative part (desire) in the human body, because it acts
more strongly than the Light of Navi and is called the Light of Pavi.

Since the Light of Prav is greater, it is capable of performing an even
greater correction.

The magnitude of the correction depends only on the
magnitude of the Light of Prav that comes for correction.

The vessel (point)
of Conscience is even more transparent than the vessel (point) of Light, and
therefore the Light (Energy) that it transmits from Infinity (Svarog) is
intended to correct the animal (desire) part of the human body and is called
the Light of the Aranos (Archangels).

The vessel (point) of Mind is the most transparent, and therefore the Light
that it transmits from Infinity is intended to correct the part
"human being (Mind)" that is in the human body, and there are no limits to
its influence, as will become clear.

This Light (of Infinity) can bring all
creation (human beings) to a state of complete correction.

67.

But know that all these three Lights received from the world of Prav are
only a part of the Light of the Highest (Ingliya) and there is nothing in
them even from the Light of Infinity, because the Light of Infinity exists
only in the world of Infinity (Svarog).

But as stated above, everything that exists in the general Creation (the
Single Soul) is revealed even in its smallest part (man).

Therefore, there
are three Lights of Prav in the world of Yavi, but they are part of the Light
of the Highest (Ingli).

And there are also three Lights of the Highest in the
world of Prav, and they are only three parts of the Light of Infinity.

The
world of Infinity (Svarog) corresponds to the pure EGO, and the pure EGO
corresponds to God, consisting of three constituent Lights (the worlds of
Prav, Yavi, and Navi).

There are also three Lights of the Supreme (Ingli) in the world of Navi, and
they are only three parts of the Supreme Light.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The
world of Infinity (Svarog) corresponds to the pure EGO, and the pure EGO
corresponds to God, consisting of three constituent Lights (the worlds of
Prav, Yavi, and Navi). There are also three Lights of the Supreme (Ingli) in the world of Navi, and
they are only three parts of the Supreme Light. The difference between them
is like the difference between the Lights of Infinity in the world of Puri,
as we discussed above. 68. Know that the desire to ascend spiritually and purify oneself is accepted by
God only if it is constant and unchanging, when there is complete certainty
that it is irrevocable. But how can a person know that his desire is complete, constant, and
irrevocable when our life experience does not allow us to guarantee the
constancy of our desires, and, as we have already said, a person receives his
desires from Above. Therefore, it is said that a desire is considered effective if God Himself
testifies that a person will not return to their past desires. God knows what
the desire in a person's heart is because He controls it. But how does a
person know this? But if a person corrects the inanimate part of his desire to receive (ego),
why does he receive the pure desire (EGO) of the world of Prav, rise and
clothe himself in the Light of Infinity of the world of Prav, then by this he
necessarily achieves purification and irrevocable correction of the inanimate
part of his desire to receive (ego) and will no longer return to this past
state. And therefore, he can ascend to the world of Prav, because there is complete
correspondence and similarity to this world in it. Since the entire world of
Prav corresponds to the inanimate Spiritual desire (EGO), then, having
ascended to the world of Prav, as a result of this change in his state, a
person understands that he has completely

--- PAGE BREAK ---corrected a certain part of themselves, as God Himself testifies, because He
raises a person to a new Spiritual level.

But he still has to fix and clean up the plant, animal, and human parts of
his desire (ego) on the other steps (Faith) of the world of Prav, so these
parts can get dressed in Light or get their own Lights.

Their cleaning has to
be constant, unchanging, and irreversible, so much so that God Himself can
see it.

This is because the entire world of Prav with all three stages of ego
correction is nothing more than the stage of Faith (Knowledge of God), which
allows for the correction and purification of only the inanimate part of the
desire to receive (ego), and the three stages (Faith) are only nine parts
(trials).

And since a person has already achieved correction and
purification of the inanimate part of his desire to receive (ego), he has
correspondence and similarity of properties with the entire world of Prav.

Each level (Faith) of the Pravy world receives from the corresponding level
(Faith) of the higher worlds.

For example: the level (Faith) of the Legov
(Spirits) world of the Pravy world receives Light from the level (Faith) of
the Arlegov (Angels) world, which is the entire second level of Faith, and
the Light of the Legov world.

The level (of Faith) of the world of Arlegs
(Angels) receives Light from the world of Aranos (Archangels), which is the
entire Light of the world of Arlegs, and the Higher Light (Inglia).

And therefore, although a person has irrevocably and permanently corrected
and purified only the inanimate part of his desire to receive (ego),
nevertheless, despite the fact that he has not irrevocably corrected the
other three parts of his desire to receive, he can also receive the Light of
Infinity, the Higher, Divine, from the worlds of Prav, but not permanently.

Because the moment one of his three desires to receive awakens, he
immediately loses these Lights.And therefore, although a person has irrevocably and permanently corrected
and purified only the inanimate part of his desire to receive (ego),
nevertheless, despite the fact that he has not irrevocably corrected the
other three parts of his desire to receive, he can also receive the Light of
Infinity, the Higher, Divine, from the worlds of Prav, but not permanently.

Because the moment one of his three desires to receive awakens, he
immediately loses these Lights.

And these desires awaken in a person
precisely in order to push him toward their permanent correction.

69.

And after a person has corrected and purified irrevocably and permanently the
vegetative part of his desire to receive (ego), he irrevocably rises to the
world of Prav and irrevocably comprehends there the degrees of Knowledge of
the Light (Faith).

And there, they can also comprehend the Light of the
Highest (Infinity) and the Light of the worlds of the Right, defined as the
stages of Faith, even before they have been deemed worthy to permanently and
irrevocably correct the "animal" part and
"human" parts of their desire to receive (ego), as discussed in the world of
Prav.

But this is not permanent, because through the comprehension of constant
correction and purification of the vegetative part of his desire to receive
(ego), he is already in similarity and correspondence of properties with the
entire world of Prav, up to its highest levels, as explained in the world of
Prav.

70.

And after correcting the animal part of his desire to receive (ego) and
turning it into a desire to give (EGO), to such an extent that God Himself
testifies that it is irrevocable, he thereby attains similarity to the world
of Legs (Spirits), rises, and receives Light there permanently.--- PAGE BREAK ---

70. And after correcting the animal part of his desire to receive (ego) and
turning it into a desire to give (EGO), to such an extent that God Himself
testifies that it is irrevocable, he thereby attains similarity to the world
of Legs (Spirits), rises, and receives Light there permanently. Also, by correcting the human (rational) part of the desire to receive, the
part (ego) related to the world of Legs (Spirits), a person can rise to the
level of Faith of the world of Arlegs (Angels) and also receive the Light of
Aranos (Archangels), which is there (in the world of Arlegs). But since he
has corrected

--- PAGE BREAK ---this part (ego) not irrevocably and not permanently, the Light shines on him
intermittently.

And when he is worthy of correcting the human part of his desire to receive
(ego) irrevocably and permanently, he becomes like the world of Arlegs
(Angels), and rises, and receives the Light there permanently.

And when he is
worthy of even more, he comprehends the Light of Infinity and receives
Immortality.

71.

Here we find out in more detail what was mentioned earlier, why man needs all
these Higher Worlds that God created for him.

As Enoch writes: Before his Spiritual descent into the world, Yavi Man (Adam)
consisted of the Spiritual body (EGO) of the world of Prav with Light from
the worlds of Legs, Arlegs, and the Higher world of Aranov.

But as a result
of the Fall, the body (ego) fell in its development.

This body (ego) is
clothed in an inner body (Soul), consisting of equal parts of good and evil.

All human actions occur only above the body (ego): if his actions are for
self-correction, then he corrects the body (ego) so that it is completely
good (EGO), and the outer body (egoism) leaves him, and he is awarded the
corresponding Light (Prav).

A person receives the Light of Infinity (Ingliu) from the three stages of
Faith of the world of Prav and the Source of Light of the worlds of Prav.

The body of a person is understood to be his desires, felt in the heart.

These desires consist of four components: inanimate, vegetative, animal, and
human.

After his fall, Adam, or, in other words, a person in our world, is in
slavery to his selfish desires, called dust and ashes.

If a person fulfills the Commandments (prescriptions of the Vedas) solely to
bring joy to God, then Faith and the Vedas help the person to escape from
selfish desires and thoughts, and purify his body-desire (ego), and as a
result, the earthly, selfish body (ego) leaves him, and the body (ego) of
half good and half bad is transformed into completely good (EGO).--- PAGE BREAK ---

After his fall, Adam, or, in other words, a person in our world, is in
slavery to his selfish desires, called dust and ashes. If a person fulfills the Commandments (prescriptions of the Vedas) solely to
bring joy to God, then Faith and the Vedas help the person to escape from
selfish desires and thoughts, and purify his body-desire (ego), and as a
result, the earthly, selfish body (ego) leaves him, and the body (ego) of
half good and half bad is transformed into completely good (EGO). And then a person becomes worthy of the Light of the world of Legs. After a
person has purified all desires that are not related to the world of Legs, he
receives the Light of the world of Arlegs, and so on, until he reaches the
Light of the world of Infinity. Thus, each time, an increasingly stronger Light enters his heart-desires
(EGO), i.e., where the desires of the inner body (ego), half good and half
evil, previously reigned, now, under the influence of the Light, this body
(ego) has become completely good (EGO). Therefore, previously, when a person's desires were dictated by the earthly
body (ego), he was obliged to think only about how to achieve what his
selfish heart (mind) desired, how to satisfy the desires dictated by impure
forces (Navi), and there was no other option but to think and intend what his
heart desired, i.e., the lowest thoughts. So now, when he strives to fulfill Faith and the Vedas, when he makes every
effort to escape from selfish desires and calculations, even without a
conscious intention, but with requests to God for help in everything he does
in order to escape from selfishness, he hopes for God's mercy, to achieve
spiritual desires, altruism (EGO), then THE ONLY REWARD HE DEMANDS FOR HIS
EFFORTS IS THAT HE IS WORTHY OF PLEASING GOD WITH HIS ACTIONS. And since the Light (God) purifies desires, the selfish body of desires (ego)
separates from the person and is worthy of a completely new body of

--- PAGE BREAK ---desire body (EGO) of the world of Prav.

And then, continuing to work on
himself, a person reaches the stage of receiving Light from the worlds of Leg
and Arleg.

And just as before he could only desire and think about what his egoistic
heart dictated to him, so now he cannot act against what his new, pure,
Spiritual heart (EGO) dictates to him, that Light (Mind) which he receives.

And he cannot think against the level of Faith he is at, i.e., he is obliged
to think and forced to act only with the intention of doing everything for
God, to bring joy to God, as the Light filling him obliges him to do.

The
conclusion of the above is that a person is not able to correct his thoughts,
but only his heart (the source of thoughts).

And only the heart must be attuned directly to God, and then all thoughts
will inevitably be only to please God.

And when a person corrects his heart
and it becomes a source of only pure desires (thoughts), then it becomes One
with God and the vessel of the Soul is filled with Light.

From this Light, the heart is purified even more and is filled again with
even higher Light, and so a person is elevated step by step.

We see,
therefore, that Light, or God, performs all the work of correcting a person,
changing the desires in a person's heart, distancing a person from their
earthly body (ego) and creating a new, Holy body (EGO), and the inner body
(vessel of the Soul), half good and half bad, becomes completely good and is
filled with the Light that the person has attained.

But until he was granted new desires, even though he strove with all his
might to free himself from the past, he could do nothing with his heart
(mind).

But it was precisely his efforts in such states that led him to
Perfection, because he could not purify himself from selfishness and the
desires of his selfish heart, for thoughts are the consequence of desires,
and the brain (mind), like a faithful servant, works only to achieve what the
heart desires.But until he was granted new desires, even though he strove with all his
might to free himself from the past, he could do nothing with his heart
(mind).

But it was precisely his efforts in such states that led him to
Perfection, because he could not purify himself from selfishness and the
desires of his selfish heart, for thoughts are the consequence of desires,
and the brain (mind), like a faithful servant, works only to achieve what the
heart desires.

And only the Light, the sensation of God, can change a person's desires in
such a way that his body (physical), which separates, hides, and isolates him
from God, leaves him, and the inner body, the ego, becomes completely good
(EGO).

And now we can see that it is impossible for a person to achieve the
perfection of pleasure for God except with the help of all these Lights of
the worlds of Prav.

As a person corrects and purifies his desire to receive, he comprehends the
Light (God) and the stages of Knowledge of his Soul, called Faith.

The Light
of these stages helps him to purify and correct himself, and so he ascends
the stages of Faith until he is worthy of reaching the state of communication
with God, which is the purpose of creation.

Here it is appropriate to recall
that all these worlds and degrees are within man and are stages of feeling
and comprehending God, and besides man and God there is nothing else in the
entire Universe.

If our senses were not saturated with selfishness, the desire for self-
gratification, the desire to enjoy only for ourselves, we would feel
ourselves to be an integral part of God, without any divisions or
distinctions.

But saturated with selfishness, our senses paint us a picture
of our surroundings that we see and feel instead of feeling God Himself.

But we should not think that what surrounds us is true reality and that only
God exists outside and within us.

We will be convinced of this as soon as we
replace our selfish desires with altruistic ones.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But we should not think that what surrounds us is true reality and that only
God exists outside and within us. We will be convinced of this as soon as we
replace our selfish desires with altruistic ones. We will immediately
discover that our world of Yavi is the same manifestation of God, only
perceived by us in our uncorrected senses. Therefore, there is no difference between doing something altruistically,
i.e., without any reward, "for God's sake" or "for the sake of another." And
even "for the sake of another" is preferable, say the Vedas, because in this
case we cannot deceive ourselves and we see the good consequences of our
actions, which will help us to continue and further our correction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rable, say the Vedas, because in this
case we cannot deceive ourselves and we see the good consequences of our
actions, which will help us to continue and further our correction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

others," say the Vedas, because in this case we cannot deceive ourselves and
we see the good consequences of our actions, which will help us to continue
our correction.
And selfishness itself testifies that there is no difference between
altruistically "giving to God" or "giving to someone else," because
everything outside our body is perceived by us as non-existent, and we are
unable to make the slightest movement without paying our selfishness for the
effort. And therefore, the saying: "He who comes to God, He helps to
purify," it is said in the Book of Splendor: "God helps by giving a person a
pure Soul (destroying karma)." Because achieving the purification necessary
to fulfill the plan of creation (of man) is possible only with the help of
all the stages of the Knowledge of one's Soul.
As has been noted many times, selfishness can only be corrected by the Light
of Prav entering it and imparting its properties to selfishness. All the
levels of the Worlds, all the worlds of Prav, Yavi, and Navi, were created
for the gradual correction of the desire to receive (ego) into the desire to
give (EGO).
72.
It is also necessary to know that all these levels of Faith mentioned above
are the elements that make up the entire Creation (the Worlds). But
everything that exists in the general Creation (in the Worlds) acts even in
its smallest part (level).
Creation (man) is the desire to receive pleasure. In order for the desire for
pleasure to appear, the Light must pass through three preliminary states, and
only the fourth state is the appearance of an independently felt desire for
the Light.
Therefore, there can be no manifestation of God, no sensation of Light,
without the three steps of Faith, or, equivalently, the nine steps.
That is, having ascended spiritually to the very first spiritual level
(Faith), the lowest level of the world of Prav, the believer already gains an
understanding of all Creation and God's intentions, because the spiritual
level (Faith) is nothing other than the degree of fusion (Unity), Knowledge
(Knowing), and feeling God. Therefore, no one can free themselves from
studying Faith and the Vedas with the intention of obtaining Knowledge (Veda)
of the mysteries of Faith and the Vedas with the intention of obtaining
Knowledge of the Meaning of the Vedas — God.
Because it is impossible to comprehend even the smallest Light without
engaging in all parts of the Vedas together, since even the smallest Light
carries within itself all other Lights.
...
This is an excerpt from the Jewish book "Zohar" (M. Laitman), continued at
the end of the book.
Book 3.
THE WHITE BOOK
People of Earth, born with the Spirit and Conscience dwelling within you,
awaken from your slumber! Be attentive and discerning. Realize that your home
is not on Earth, but in the Light (Inglia). Why have you forgotten your
Creator and given yourselves over to death, when you have the opportunity to
attain Immortality? Repent andze that your home
is not on Earth, but in the Light (Inglia). Why have you forgotten your
Creator and given yourselves over to death, when you have the opportunity to
attain Immortality? Repent and

--- PAGE BREAK ---renounce your former views, and turn away from ignorance and delusion
forever.

Chapter 1.

1.

I am the True God, the Lord of the Universe; I rise to shed the Light
of True Enlightenment upon you.

2.

Listen to Me, My children, and heed My words.

3.

For the time of this world is soon to end.

4.

And God said: I give My wisdom to you, Russians (descendants of the Great
Race), so that your power will soon become almighty.

5.

Follow My Commandments, so that you may be a Light unto all nations.

6.

Be with Me, and the best of you will live in My Palaces, and to the rest
of My sons I grant power on Earth, for even My worst son surpasses a hundred
servants of Darkness — surpasses them already by serving Me (God).

7.

Repent and renounce your former views.

Renounce your delusions and follow
Me.

8.

Strive for Knowledge, for Darkness hates intelligence.

9.

I rule over you, says God, with power brought down from Heaven to Earth.

In My hands, the Sun is a shining sword, and the Moon is a piercing flame.

Your clothes are among My garments, My power binds you together and
illuminates your deeds with Light.

10.

I have established for you the Law that governs you, and I have given
you the rod of My highest Wisdom (the Vedas).

11.

You raised your voices and swore allegiance to Me — the One Who lives
Eternally, rejoicing, Who has no beginning, no end, and cannot have any;
the One Who shines like a flame in the midst of your palaces and rules
among you as the balance of life.

12.

Therefore, show yourselves immediately!

Reveal the secrets of your
creation!

Be gracious to Me, for I am your True Creator, I am the highest
and incomparable Lord of the World!

Rise up!

13.

Are the wings of the winds capable of carrying your wonderful voices
to Heaven?

You are those whom the Light begets in the depths of the
Universe!

14.

You are the ones for whom I have prepared the Garden of Eden!

Your
feet are stronger than mountains on which nothing grows!--- PAGE BREAK ---

You are the ones for whom I have prepared the Garden of Eden! Your
feet are stronger than mountains on which nothing grows! Your voices are
stronger than any wind! 15. You are like a building that exists only in the Mind of the
Almighty Ruler — Me! "Arise!" says the Lord! Therefore, merge with His
Light! 16. Show yourselves in power and make yourselves mighty and
insightful, for you belong to Me, who lives forever! Awake! Uncover the secrets of your creation! Rise up! 17. Behold! says God, I am the Support upon which all Worlds stand. The
Light Worlds (Prav) are the sources of the Life-Giving Breath, the Dark
Worlds (Navi) are like sharp sickles or the Horns of Death. 18. And therefore, Souls either live or are dead only in My own
Worlds. Those who sleep will rise from their sleep! Rise up! 19. From the very beginning, I made people my rulers on Earth and placed them
in places suitable for life, giving each of them power for a period of time
so that in all corners of the Earth, people could bring My power to life,
tirelessly pouring the flame (energy) of life and prosperity onto the Earth. 20. Why have the servants of Darkness become the measure of justice and
truth? In the name of God, rise up!

--- PAGE BREAK ---21.

Repent!

Behold!

His mercies are multiplying, and His name has gained
power among us.

22.

In His name (God's), We proclaim: Come on, wake up, people!

And turn
your consciousness to Us, as those initiated into His Secret Wisdom!

23.

You are those whom I have prepared to carry out My justice.

Rise up!

24.

A mighty guard of sinners, with writings consisting of lies, has settled
in Israel; their number is equal to the number of those who serve Darkness.

They gather earthly moss, as a rich man gathers his riches.

25.

Cursed are those who are possessed by their vices!

In their eyes are
millstones larger than the Earth, and from their mouths flow seas of blood.

Their bodies are covered with diamonds, and on their heads and necks are
pieces of gold the size of mountains.

26.

Happy are those upon whom their disapproving gaze does not fall.

The God
of Righteousness is inaudible to them!

Depart and leave your affairs, for the
time has come that requires sincere repentance!

27.

In the North, the thunderous rolls of God's Wrath sleep, like an oak
tree whose branches are filled with leaves of grief and weeping, which have
fallen to the lot of Satan's servants.

28.

The wrath of God is thunder, bursting forth in an instant with the roar
of hundreds of terrible earthquakes and thousands of squalls that do not
stand still and know no time limits.

29.

One lightning bolt generates a thousand, just as the human heart
generates thoughts.

Woe!

Woe!

Yes, woe to the Earth, for the iniquities
of men are and have been great!

Depart!

But let your thunderous sounds
remain!

30.

From the mighty Great Throne came the sound of thunder, and five storm
clouds flew north.

The eagle found the gift of speech and cried out: Come out
of the house of death!

31.

And they gathered together and found Faith; they are the Free
(Immortals) who rode the hurricanes of thought.

Come out!

For I (God) have
prepared a place (Paradise) for you, therefore, show yourselves!--- PAGE BREAK ---

Come out! For I (God) have
prepared a place (Paradise) for you, therefore, show yourselves! Cast off
the veil of mystery from your creation! Be gracious to Me, for I am your
God, the True Creator, living Forever! 32. Hey, you who dwell in Israel, lights of sorrow, fasten your armor, for
We will visit you! 33. Bring forth the legions of the Great Harlot's companions, that God may
pour out upon them the cup of His wrath! Therefore, show yourselves! Reveal
the secrets of your creation! 34. Hey, you wicked people with eyes that can stir up the rage of sin, which
intoxicates those who are empty inside; behold! God's promise is true, and
His wrath, which calls out to you with excruciating pain, will soon overtake
you! Come forth! Reveal the secrets of your creation! 35. Hey, you sons and daughters of moldy minds, committing lawlessness—
look! The voice of God is Conscience, calling among you as accuser and
supreme judge! Come forth! Reveal the secrets of your creation! 36. O, Thou dazzling Light (Inglia), revealing the glory of God to the
very center of the Earth, in Com dwell the great mysteries of Truth; named
in the Kingdom of Light (the world of Prav) as Immeasurable (Boundless). 37. O you, My children, dwelling in this world (Yavi), bringing comfort to
the righteous, walking the earth with firm feet and knowing the great word
"justice," you are mighty in all corners of the Earth, so fulfill the command
of God. Rise up!

--- PAGE BREAK ---fort to
the righteous, walking the earth with firm feet and knowing the great word
"justice," you are mighty in all corners of the Earth, so fulfill the command
of God. Rise up!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

38. O people who have your origin in the Light (Inglia), God is fierce in His
wrath -
Gird up your loins and listen!
39. It has been said to you: "To contemplate the face of God (the night
sky) is the beginning of tranquility; His eyes shine like stars; He has set
you to rule the Earth and its inexpressible diversity; He has endowed you
with insight (Reason) so that you may rule according to the providence of
Him Who Sits on the Throne.
40. God said: Earth, let people rule you, dividing you into parts; and let
there be division among people on it; and let the glory of its conquest carry
with it hangovers and bitterness. Let the path of people be coupled with the
satisfaction of thirst and hunger; like a nurse, the Earth will serve people.
41. One season shall follow another; and let no creature be equal to
another, either upon it or in its depths. Let the foolish creatures of the
Earth from the human race quarrel and destroy one another until the
appointed time; then their names shall be forgotten forever.
42. Human deeds, that which they are proud of, shall be cursed. Buildings
shall be turned into caves for wild animals! Satan has clouded the mind of
man! Indeed, why has man abandoned the Law (the Vedas)?
43. And God said: Open wide the gates of Hell! From now on, the lower spheres
(worlds) of Hell will be the dwelling place of Satan (the Jews) and his
helpers! Throw all apostates there. Exalt the righteous and destroy the
wicked—there is no place for them, let only the righteous remain.
44. Add and subtract until the time comes. Rise up! Come on! Stand before the
Covenant received from My mouth, that which I have given to people in My
righteousness.
Chapter 2.
1
1. When people began to stray further and further from God and seek a god
from Satan's retinue,
2. God decided to establish His Will in the world of men.
3. He decided to send His Angel into the human world.
4. Taking on human form, the Angel descended to Earth to a young, righteous
woman named Mary, who sincerely believed in God.
5. Mary was dating a certain Joseph, a carpenter, and was betrothed
to him.
6. And when Joseph learned that his beloved was pregnant, he wanted to
divorce her secretly.
7. But when he thought about it, an angel of God appeared to him in a
dream and said, "Joseph, do not be afraid to take Mary as your wife, for
what is conceived in her is from God.
8. After the appointed time, Mary gave birth to a son, and they named him
Yeshua (Joshua).
9. When the boy Yeshua (Joshua) was 14 years old, he told people about the
structure of the universe: what stars and constellations it has and in the
middle a line (line) passing through the universe, which converges and
diverges, rises and turns (kolovrat).
10. Yeshua said that the universe consists of three worlds: Light
(Prav), ours (Yavi), and Darkness (Navi). These worlds, dependent on and
supporting each other, are infinite in size.ns (kolovrat).
10. Yeshua said that the universe consists of three worlds: Light
(Prav), ours (Yavi), and Darkness (Navi). These worlds, dependent on and
supporting each other, are infinite in size.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eshua said that the universe consists of three worlds: Light
(Prav), ours (Yavi), and Darkness (Navi). These worlds, dependent on and
supporting each other, are infinite in size.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11. A certain teacher named Zacchaeus (Zachariah), standing nearby with his
disciples, heard Yeshua (Joshua) say this and was very surprised that a
child would say such a thing.
12. And he came to Joseph and said to him, "You have a smart son who
understands. Bring him to me so that he may learn the letters, and along with
the letters, I will teach him the Knowledge of God (Faith).
13. And he (Zachariah) showed him (Yeshua) clearly all the Knowledge of God
from alpha to omega and asked him many questions. And Yeshua looked at his
teacher Zacchaeus (Zachariah) and asked him: How can you, who do not know
who God is, teach others the Knowledge of God (Faith)?
14. First, if you know God, then teach me who God is, and then I will
believe you. And he (Yeshua) began to ask the teacher (Zachariah) about God,
and he could not answer him. And then, in the presence of many who heard,
the child said to Zacchaeus (Asa Hari):
15. Know, Teacher, that before the universe and all creation came into being,
there was only God (Light), who filled everything with Himself.
16. The foundation of knowledge is the knowledge that there is someone
First, and He creates all reality.
17. And everything that exists in Heaven and on Earth and between them
exists only because God exists.
18. And if you imagine that God does not exist, there is no one else you
can imagine.
19. If you imagine that there is no one but God, He is the only one
who exists. And He will not disappear when they disappear.
20. For everything in the world needs Him, but He does not need them as a
whole or any of them individually. Therefore, His existence is not like their
existence.
21. There is no one but God. And there is no one like Him.
22. God is the Creator of the world.
23. God is the master of everything.
24. God controls all power, which has no end and no limit.
25. It is explained in the Scriptures and by the Prophets that God
has no body, no dimensions, and no image.
26. When the teacher Zacchaeus (Zachariah) heard how much meaning was
expressed in Yeshua's answer, he was confused by this answer and by the fact
that the boy had been taught such great Knowledge (Faith), and said to those
who were present:
27. Woe is me, I am perplexed, I am miserable, I have brought shame upon
myself.
28. When the disciples comforted Zacchaeus (Asa Hari), the Jews
(Pharisees) standing nearby laughed loudly.
2
1. And Yeshua (Joshua) taught:
2. God is in us, and we are in Him. He created us: He gives us life.
3. He gave us our bodies, and the day will come when we will return to Him.
4. You will be happy if you accept God's Word and obey His Law.
5. Truly I tell you, whoever does this will never see suffering. For the
power of God surpasses all things.
6. He destroys Satan (the ego) and his deceit, and rules over all of you and
all who live.5. Truly I tell you, whoever does this will never see suffering. For the
power of God surpasses all things.
6. He destroys Satan (the ego) and his deceit, and rules over all of you and
all who live.

--- PAGE BREAK ---7.

I tell you the truth, man is the son of God, and it is from Him that man
receives his entire body, just as the body of a newborn is born from its
mother's womb.

8.

Truly I tell you, you are one with God.

9.

He is in you, and you are in Him.

10.

From Him you were born, in Him you live, and to Him you will return
again.

Observe, therefore, His Laws, for only those who honor their
Creator and follow His Laws can live long and be happy.

11.

Your breath is His breath, your Mind is His Mind, your Spirit is His
Spirit, your body is His body, your eyes and your ears are His eyes and His
ears.

12.

Truly I tell you, if you break even one of the Laws, if you harm
even one of your brothers (neighbors), you will perish completely, and
weeping and gnashing of teeth await you.

13.

I tell you, if you do not follow the Laws of God, you will in no way be
able to escape Judgment.

14.

Those who adhere to God's Laws will also be upheld by God Himself.

15.

God will heal all human illnesses, and man will never again be sick.

16.

God will give man a long life and protect him from any illness—from
fire, from water, from the bite of poisonous snakes (poison).

17.

For God gave you birth, and He sustains life in you.

18.

He gave you your bodies, and only He alone has the power to heal you.

19.

Happy are those who love God and who have peacefully clung to His breast.

20.

For God loves you even when you turn away from Him.

21.

And how much more will He love you if you turn back to Him.

22.

Truly I tell you, His love is exceedingly great, higher than the
mountains, deeper than the depths of the sea.

23.

And He never abandons those who love God.

24.

Just as a hen protects her chicks, a lioness protects her cubs, and a
mother protects her newborn baby, so God protects man from all danger and
evil.

25.

Truly I tell you, evil and danger are innumerable and lie in wait for
man at every turn.

26.

Satan (the ego) is the source of all evil, lurking in the bodies of all
people.

27.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Satan (the ego) is the source of all evil, lurking in the bodies of all
people. 27. Disguised in a respectable appearance, it leads people into
temptation and seduction. 28. It promises wealth and power, luxurious palaces and clothes made of
gold and silver, and many servants. 29. It promises fame and glory, adultery and lust, gluttony and drunkenness,
debauchery and idleness, and laziness. 30. And it tempts everyone with what the human soul desires most. 31. And on the day when a person becomes a slave to all these disgusting
things and vanity, it takes away the person's soul and everything that God
has generously given him as payment for them. 32. But if a lost person repents of their sins and destroys them all
(selfish desires), and returns to God, and if he obeys His Laws, then he
will be freed from the clutches of Satan (ego), renouncing his temptations,
then God will once again accept his lost son and send His Angels to help
him. 33. Truly I tell you, when a person rejects Satan (ego) dwelling within
him and ceases to do his will (ego), at that very moment

--- PAGE BREAK ---God's angels begin to help him with all their might to finally free him from
the power of Satan (ego).

34.

For no one can serve two masters at once.

Either he serves Satan
(the Jews), or he serves God.

Either he serves death, or he serves
Life.

35.

Truly I tell you, happy is the one who keeps the Laws of Life and
avoids the ways of death.

For the forces of life grow strong in him, and
he avoids the clutches of death.

36.

There is no one who has left his home, or his wife, or his brothers,
or his parents for the sake of God and has not received many times more
in this life, and those who walk the Righteous Path will receive Eternal
Life (Immortality).

37.

Many people are sickened by the teachings of philosophers.

38.

Can a Jew who is insignificant in spirit reason about God?

There is
no excuse for his complacency.

39.

What does it matter to the weak in spirit that he calls Satan
(the Jews) his virtue?

40.

The absence of the Spirit is the true curse and poverty.

41.

Before Satan (the Jews) fell, he served God.

42.

Passing through the worlds (countries), he saw the whole face of the
Earth, covered with life.

43.

And Satan was filled with envy as he looked upon God's Creation.

44.

And Satan conceived a plan to place his throne above the worlds
(countries) — he wished to become like the Gods (Asas) of Asia (Holy Rus).

45.

And he approached the angels of Light (the Gentiles) and said to them:
"All this is mine: if you listen to me, I will place my throne above the
worlds and become like the Gods (Asam), and I will reign with you forever
and ever."
46.

And so he spoke to each of the angels of Light whom he met on his
way, all the way to Asia (Holy Rus), persuading them to his side.

47.

And a voice came from the Throne of God: "What are you doing,
traitor, who turns away the children of Light?

You who commit
sin."
48.

And Satan (the Jews) answered: "Lord, I have decided to create my own
world."
49.--- PAGE BREAK ---

You who commit
sin."
48. And Satan (the Jews) answered: "Lord, I have decided to create my own
world."
49. And the voice from the throne of God said to him: "You do not possess
the Power of Love to create your own world, but if you have decided to
act, do what you have planned."
50. And God commanded His Children (believers): "Cast Satan's servants out
of My world (Asia), for they no longer serve Me."
51. And they cast out all those who listened to Satan and began to serve him. 52. And God transformed Satan (the Jews) for his pride and envy, and the
Light (white skin color) was taken from him, and his appearance (skin color)
became like red-hot iron, and like the inhabitants of Hell (the bottom of
Navi), his whole appearance became. 53. And Satan (the Jews) took with him a third of the angels of Light (the
Gentiles), and was cast out of God's world (Asia) into the Pre-Underworld
(the desert), which is a kind of fire (40 years of wandering in the desert). 54. And descending to the fiery firmament (the desert), Satan (the Jews)
could not create any peace for himself or those who were with him. 55. And Satan (the Jews) asked God: "Lord, have mercy on me."
56. And God took pity on him and gave peace to him (the Jews) and to those
angels (the Gentiles) who were with him, and gave him dominion over our
world for seven days (1,000 years), which are in essence seven epochs
(cycles). [Gentiles are all non-Jews of any race or nationality.]
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---1.

Judas, one of the disciples, knowing the place where Yeshua was staying
with his disciples, came to the Jewish high priest and said to him, "If you
give me silver, I will deliver Yeshua, whom you seek, into your hands
tonight; for now he is alone with eleven brothers."
2.

The high priest of the Jews asked him, "How much silver do you want?"
Judas replied, "Thirty pieces of silver."
3.

The high priest gave him the money and sent a servant to the procurator
to bring soldiers, and to Herod, the king of the Jews, who gave him a
legion, for he feared the people.

And they took their weapons and torches
and lanterns on poles and followed Judas.

4.

When the soldiers and Judas approached the place where Yeshua was, he
heard the multitude approaching and withdrew.

5.

And the Power of Light descended upon Yeshua and surrounded him, and he
shone exceedingly, and there was no measure to the Light that was upon him,
and the disciples did not see Yeshua because of the great Light in which he
was, but they saw only the Light casting forth many rays of Light.

6.

And the rays of Light were not equal to each other, and the Light was of
different kinds, and it was of different kinds from bottom to top, one
(ray) being more chosen than another, in the great immeasurable glory of
the Light (God);
7.

It stretched from the depths of the earth to Heaven.

And when the
disciples saw this Light, they were filled with great fear and great
anxiety.

8.

Immediately, when this Power of Light descended upon Yeshua and
gradually surrounded him,
9.

Yeshua rose, or flew up into the heights, shining extremely brightly in
the Immeasurable Light.

10.

And the disciples looked at the Light, none of them spoke, but they
all remained in great silence.

11.

They sat close to each other, afraid; and they were extremely
alarmed.

They were frightened because of the great sign that had
happened, and they wept close to each other, saying, "What is
this?

12.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They were frightened because of the great sign that had
happened, and they wept close to each other, saying, "What is
this? 12. At that moment, Judas came to betray Yeshua. 13. And Almighty God performed a miracle, and Judas changed his voice and
face, becoming like Yeshua, and everyone believed that Judas was Yeshua. 14. And Judas asked where the Teacher was. Amazed, the disciples
replied, "You are our teacher; have you forgotten us?"
15. He smiled and said, "Fools, you do not recognize me, for I am Judas
Iscariot! And when he said this, the soldiers seized and bound Judas, for he
was like Yeshua. 16. Judas said to them, "You are mad! You came for Yeshua, with
weapons and torches; and now you have bound me, who brought you here to
take him (Joshua)! 17. But they beat Judas and laughed at him, for he denied that he was Yeshua. 18. And they crucified Judas for denying that he was Yeshua (Jesus). 19. And when Judas wept on the cross, he lamented: Lord, Lord, why have you
forsaken me? [Jews - from Judas, who betrayed Joshua Floyd; JudasISM - Judas Truth of the
Earthly World.]
Chapter 3. 1. The Jews (traitors to God) celebrated a dubious victory, hiding behind
their preaching of peace, but in reality they hate other people (non-Jews). 2. They made ignorance and lawlessness a virtue, and all deeds and
actions leading to God became despised.

--- PAGE BREAK ---3.

The servants of Satan tried to destroy the Wisdom of the World,
replacing it with the vice of Christianity.

4.

Hypocritical hypocrisy and hopeless stupidity became an integral part
of everyone who believes in the servants of Satan.

5.

Satan's minions teach people to despise Enlightenment, which makes
man equal to God.

6.

The wise men and prophets were in exile, and their temples and
shrines, built to glorify God, were mercilessly destroyed by the wicked.

7.

Prophets and believers in God were mercilessly killed, for anyone devoted
to God will always prefer death to slavery.

8.

The time is approaching when God will come to Earth to reveal Himself to
people.

9.

The time of the Great Judgment is coming, and soon God will restore
His name on Earth, to the glory of those who are faithful to Him.

10.

The Messenger of God, the Prophet, will come, and the word of the
Lord of the Universe will be put into his mouth.

11.

At first, he will not be recognized even by those devoted to God.

12.

And he will appear from among the people who are faithful to Darkness.

13.

He will be poor and miserable until he casts darkness from his heart.

14.

And the Prophet will turn to God, and he will receive Wisdom.

15.

God will say to him: I grant you this Wisdom, for you did not ask Me for
wealth or glory.

Now you can have all three.

16.

And God will say to the Prophet: Behold, My Wisdom is yours.

Destroy My enemies (the Jews).

17.

And the time of Enlightenment will come upon the Earth.

18.

And he will awaken those who are asleep.

19.

And he will be given the power to decide the fate of the world.

20.

And he will trample on the laws of this world and Darkness.

21.

And this will mark the beginning of a great war between the servants of
Darkness and the sons of Light.

22.

And the war on Earth will go on for many years.

23.

And a son will rise up against his father, and a daughter against her
mother.

24.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And a son will rise up against his father, and a daughter against her
mother. 24. And God will not be the cause of this division more than Yeshua
(Joshua), called the Savior (Jesus). 25. For the son will worship God, and his father will honor his enemy. For
the daughter will become a witch (a seer), and the mother will become a nun
of Christ. 26. Blood will flood half of this world, and the other half will be
littered with corpses. 27. And God's heart will not be able to bear the groans of dying people. 28. And He will rise from the depths of the universe to put an end to this
war. 29. And an army led by Satan (the Jews) will stand in His way. 30. And the hour of the Great Battle will come, which will put an end
to this world and mark the beginning of a new world. 31. And Satan (the Jews) will not be able to stand against the Army of God
(the Russians), and he will flee and seek protection. 32. And no one will help him, for Almighty God will destroy all who
want to help him. 33. And Satan's army will fall. 34. And they will be cast down from the earthly throne together with their
servants. 35. And the Darkness that gave birth to them will consume them. 36. And the world will be freed from the cruel tyranny of Satan (the Jews)
and his servants. 37. The gates of Paradise will open, and you will see God coming in the Great
Light. 38. All the tribes of the earth will praise Him and curse the
crucified one (Judas).

--- PAGE BREAK ---ervants. 37. The gates of Paradise will open, and you will see God coming in the Great
Light. 38. All the tribes of the earth will praise Him and curse the
crucified one (Judas).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

39. And the dead will rise and join the living to come to God.
40. And the children of Light will be separated from the servants of Satan.
41. And may the latter be cast down into utter darkness to their fallen
deity (the Jews).
42. And the time of Light will come upon the Earth, which will last forever
and never end.
Chapter 4.
1
The truth and happiness of God are in your
future, Russia. The truth and happiness of God
will be in your victory. Bearing such a name,
you cannot begin otherwise:
Now you are the leader of young men, and you will be the leader of old men.
You have brothers — avenge your enemies for the wounds
inflicted on your brothers. You have God — keep God's
commandments.
Your Fatherland, God entrusts you with weapons —
Your Fatherland, the enemy has stolen your throne from you.
The spears of filial love against the arrows of criminal and ungodly
enemies, Justice goes into battle, raising the banner of loyalty to
God.
The enemies' cause is doomed — may the battle be fatal
to them! May My Leader delight the world with a blaze
over the enemy!
The gods (immortals) are all one for us—the living and
omnipresent God. I predict that victory is near, and this victory
will be
sing a song to Me (God) in loud praise of your glory!
Standing before your enemies, you will greet them with My words —
Only if these words are worthy of you! I will
sing of the breasts of glorious men and the
backs of enemies,
And the arrows of the fleeing enemies, striking back.
You are victorious — what can the enemy do in defeat?
God gives an evil sign to the deceitful Israelites!
So, the Day will come when, in white robes and On snow-
white horses, you will set out on the best path.
The leaders of your enemies will be led before you with
chains around their necks, So that their usual escape,
defeated, will not save them.
Many husbands and wives will watch this, This
blissful day will melt everyone's hearts.
2
God rules in Heaven and
Hell. And you stand on His
side. Who unites all good
people?
You are a tool in His hands, for He is
Almighty. The Kingdom of Heaven is prepared for
those who glorify Him. On a dark night, the
moon is filled with blood.
Hatred is mixed with love in the heart. The
truth has become accessible to people.
The Most High Himself cursed His enemies
in the text. Satanail the serpent,
against God's Children.
And the enemies of God will burn in fire,
Their souls will be stuck in a boiling lake of blood
and pus. Then all the hosts of God will come out.e text. Satanail the serpent,
against God's Children.
And the enemies of God will burn in fire,
Their souls will be stuck in a boiling lake of blood
and pus. Then all the hosts of God will come out.

--- PAGE BREAK ---serpent,
against God's Children.
And the enemies of God will burn in fire,
Their souls will be stuck in a boiling lake of blood
and pus. Then all the hosts of God will come out.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

And only retribution will be needed for them.
For those who do not ask God for
forgiveness and who let evil out of their
hearts, the Devil will open his deadly
nets. For such people, the darkness will
grow darker, and death will come for them
all.
The religions of the Black Serpent,
enemies of God, have spread throughout
the Earth.
Their weapons kill the defenseless,
Their knives cut the flesh of helpless (newborn)
children. They are cursed for what their hands have done.
God will turn away from them and Satan will
betray them. Their souls are poisoned with
evil,
Their bodies are sick, death surrounds
them; Earthworms await their death.
Those who have gone against the Faith (the Great
Ra-M-Ha), May the dark Guardians of Death (Hell)
come for their souls. May death taste them, crows
waiting for their bodies. Let the righteous turn
away from the wicked.
The judges of the wicked
will be all the souls from
the hellish worlds:
Dishonorable evil, devils, and
demons. 3
Woe, woe to you, unhappy, evil sea!
The flames will consume you, you will destroy people
with your waves, For such a fire will rage on Earth,
That the waters will become
fire, they will flow, And the
boundless Earth will be
destroyed,
They will set the forests ablaze, the springs and streams.
The world will lose its beauty with the death of men,
Burning in torment, the unfortunate will not see the sky,
Full of stars, but it will all be burned by fire.
They will not die quickly: beneath their flesh
perishing in the flames, Their souls will burn for
many centuries. Thus, suffering evil torments, They
will learn God's law —
The one that is always just.
The earth, under the yoke of
misfortune,
It accepted all kinds of gods (idols) on its altars
indiscriminately And was deceived, unable to understand the
ominous smoke (deception).
Those who, for the sake of gain, Will support evil,
prolonging the difficult times, Are destined to suffer
beyond measure.
These (Jews), putting on thick sheepskins,
Will pretend to be Magi, though of a different (gray) race,
Weaving cunning words, profiting from the common misfortune.
They will change their lives, but they will not be able to convince the
righteous—
Those who, believing with a pure heart, pray to God. 4
The harlot has become a stench in the nostrils of God, and it is too late to
prevent His judgments.will not be able to convince the
righteous—
Those who, believing with a pure heart, pray to God. 4
The harlot has become a stench in the nostrils of God, and it is too late to
prevent His judgments.

--- PAGE BREAK ---convince the
righteous—
Those who, believing with a pure heart, pray to God. 4
The harlot has become a stench in the nostrils of God, and it is too late to
prevent His judgments.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Spirit of God will no longer be despised by the harlot, and the harlot
will fall long and hard.
I understand that this is not what people want to hear, but this is what the
Lord God says:
Harlot, prepare to receive Judgment from your God.
I gave you fertile lands and gave you power to rule over nations and
kingdoms.
But now you think you have achieved this by your own efforts. Woe to
you and your strong and brave ones.
For I, the Lord God, will diminish your strength and ability to conquer.
It is I, the Lord God, who creates kings and nations (civilizations), and it
is I who destroys them.
You have become an abomination to me.
Your priests and seers (false prophets) are sleeping dogs who have refused to
repent and seek Me with all their hearts.
They serve for their own enrichment.
I, the Lord God, will strike them down and deliver them into the power of
deception; they will believe
their own lies.
I will bring hurricanes, earthquakes, and floods more frequently and with
greater intensity. I will send the sword throughout the Earth, and families
will be divided—killing or being killed.
There will be chaos throughout the Earth, and blood will flow in the streets.
I will send famine, and you will witness your children dying of hunger. Again
and again I tried to befriend you, O Harlot, but you did not listen to Me.
Now let's see how, having decided to become your own god, you will be able
to help these people in difficult times.
I will laugh at you and call you a foolish nation. You have
forsaken the living God, and now I forsake you.
And in the end, you will know that I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
I was as in the beginning, and so I will be in the end.
5
All the elements of the world will come to ruin at
that time: the air, the sea, the earth, and the
light that comes from the fire, the axis of the
heavens, the night and all the days will merge
together,
In the flames, they will completely lose their form.
All the shining stars will fall from the heavens and
disappear; Winged birds will no longer fly in the
air, No foot will touch the earth, for living
creatures will perish; All voices will fall silent—
those of humans, beasts, and birds. In its disorder,
the world will be without sound. The deep sea will
make a threatening noise,
The inhabitants of the waters will tremble, and
immediately their end will come; No ship carrying cargo
will sail on the waves.
The Earth, drenched in blood from battles, will groan
heavily; And then all human souls will gnash their
teeth, Sinful souls will meet their doom in wailing
and horror. They will be consumed by thirst, murder,
disease, and hunger,
And they will wish to die, but they will no longer be able to:
Death will not bring them peace, and the night will
give them no respite. They will pray to God in vain
for a long time —
And the Lord will turn His face away, so as not to see them anymore:ble to:
Death will not bring them peace, and the night will
give them no respite. They will pray to God in vain
for a long time —
And the Lord will turn His face away, so as not to see them anymore:

--- PAGE BREAK ---For He gave the lost people (the Jews) seven cycles (1,000 years) for
repentance—
The Holy Virgin prayed for them.

God Himself put all these words in my heart, and it is
necessary That everything my lips utter should come to
pass.

Chapter 5.

1
1.

From this barren desert and stone I raise my voice so that you may hear
it.

2.

Open your eyes to see, O people whose minds are moldy; listen to Me!

3.

For I rise up to challenge the wisdom of this world; to test the laws
of man and your "god"!

4.

I ask the essence of My Law and want to know why My Commandments are
needed?

5.

I bow down in humility before none of your sad idols, and he who uttered
"you are a servant of God" is My mortal enemy!

6.

I plunge the powerless, mad Satan into boiling, festering blood and write
on his scarred black body: here is the true prince of evil—the king of
slaves (Jews)!

7.

No lie will become truth for Me, no suffocating dogma will constrain My
Mind!

8.

I free myself from all conventions that do not lead to Immortality.

9.

I raise the banner of the strong in Spirit in relentless encroachment!

10.

Blessed are the strong in Spirit, for they will decide the fate of
the world.

Cursed are the weak in Spirit, for their inheritance is the
yoke!

11.

Blessed are the wise, and may they be honored among men.

Cursed
are the foolish, and may they be wiped from the face of the Earth!

12.

Blessed are the righteous, and may they remain the rulers of the world.

Cursed are the apostates, and may they be trampled underfoot by cloven
hooves!

13.

Blessed are those devoted to Me, for I am the foundation of
Life.

Cursed are those who submit to the Jews, for they will be
their slaves forever!

14.

Blessed is the hand of the righteous, and let the rebellious flee
from it.

Cursed are the wicked, and may they be spat upon!

15.

Blessed are those who despise death, and may their days be long on
Earth.

Cursed are those who hope for a rich life, and may they perish among
the many!

16.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cursed are those who hope for a rich life, and may they perish among
the many! 16. Blessed are the destroyers of lies, for they are the true
messiahs. Cursed are the liars and hypocrites, and may they be
destroyed! 17. Blessed are the valiant, for they shall be rewarded with great
treasures. Cursed are those who believe in evil, for they are
frightened by their own shadows! 18. Blessed are those who believe in Me (God), and may fear never enter
their minds. Cursed are the servants of Darkness, for they shall be drained
of blood whiter than snow! 19. Blessed are those who have enemies, and may they make him a hero. Cursed are those who do good to those who grin in response, for they
will be despised! 20. Blessed are those who are great in Mind, for they will ride the
storms of thought. Cursed are those who teach that lies are truth and
truth is lies, for they are abhorrent to God. 21. Thrice cursed are those weak in Spirit, whose insecurity makes them
weak. They will be given to serve and suffer! 22. The demon of self-deception has taken root in the souls of idolaters. Eternal fire awaits all who worship idols!

--- PAGE BREAK ---urity makes them
weak. They will be given to serve and suffer! 22. The demon of self-deception has taken root in the souls of idolaters. Eternal fire awaits all who worship idols!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23. There is no holiness in idols, let alone My Spirit (God's Spirit). Like
any idols of the distant past, they are the fruit of human labor, and what
man has created, he can also destroy!
2
1. Look at the crucifixion—what does it symbolize? Deadly pale
weakness hanging on a piece of wood.
2. I ask for everything.
3. Standing before the festering interiors and lacquered exteriors of
churches full of false and arrogant moral dogmas, I write on them in letters
of burning contempt: "See, for all this is deception!"
4. Gather around Me, O you who have despised death (Immortals); and the
Earth itself will be yours! — take possession of it and rule over it!
5. For too long, the hands of the dead have been allowed to sterilize
living thought!
6. For too long, right and wrong, good and evil have been
distorted by false prophets!
7. No doctrine should be accepted on the basis of lies.
8. Religions must be questioned.
9. No moral dogma should be accepted on faith.
10. It is wise not to rush into believing anything, for belief in even one
false principle is the beginning of all foolishness.
11. The main duty of any new Faith is to nurture new people who will define
its freedoms, lead to Spiritual development, and break the rusty bolts and
chains of dead customs that hinder Spiritual development.
12. The theories and ideas that meant freedom, equality, and brotherhood
for your ancestors now imply chains, oppression, and slavery!
13. For as everything around us changes, so too must every human ideal
change!
14. Wherever and whenever lies are enthroned, let them be overthrown without
mercy or pity, for no one can prosper under the burden of falsehood.
15. Let established sophisms be deprived of their throne, uprooted,
burned, and destroyed, for they are a constant threat to morality and
ethics!
16. If any spoken "truth" is proven to be an empty fiction, let it be
unceremoniously thrown into cosmic Darkness to the dead gods (idols), dead
empires, dead philosophies, and other useless things!
17. The most dangerous of all prevailing lies is the ecclesiastical-
religious, privileged lie — a lie that is the standard of truth for
everyone.
18. It breeds other universal errors and delusions.
19. It is a tree of ignorance with a thousand roots.
20. It is a disease of society!
21. A lie that is known to be a lie is already half eradicated, but a lie
that even a thinking person accepts as truth, a lie instilled in a small
child on its mother's lap — such a lie is harder to fight than a creeping
plague!
22. Widespread lies are the most powerful enemy of freedom of thought.
23. There is only one way to deal with it:
24. Destroy its roots and branches.
25. Exterminate it before it does the same to you!22. Widespread lies are the most powerful enemy of freedom of thought.
23. There is only one way to deal with it:
24. Destroy its roots and branches.
25. Exterminate it before it does the same to you!

--- PAGE BREAK ---are the most powerful enemy of freedom of thought.
23. There is only one way to deal with it:
24. Destroy its roots and branches.
25. Exterminate it before it does the same to you!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26. The Holy Scriptures (Vedas) have always been the bearer of Light and
the embodiment of enlightenment until the Jews came to power.
27. For the Jews, the Holy Scriptures (Vedas) have become synonymous with
evil, which, however, is to be expected from a religion whose very
existence is based on deception and lies!
28. The Jewish scriptures are the waste products of minds festering with
fear and powerlessness, written consciously (deliberately) to help those
who actually rule the world, laughing maliciously from their earthly
thrones.
3
1. "Love one another," says the Law.
2. It is natural for people to love and do good to one another.
3. Love your enemies with all your heart, but if someone strikes you, crush
your offender!
4. Crush his whole side, for self-preservation is the Law!
5. He who turns the other cheek is a cowardly dog!
6. Follow your path and you will gain enough experience to reflect
upon.
7. This will make you respected in all aspects of life, and your Spirit —
your Immortal Spirit — will live in the intangible Paradise and in the minds
and hearts of those whose respect you have earned.
8. Life is the greatest mercy, death is the greatest disgrace.
9. And therefore, you must live most of your life — HERE AND NOW!
10. Here and now there is neither Heaven in glorious splendor, nor Hell
where sinners burn. Here and now is the day of your eternal torment!
11. Here and now is your day of delight!
12. Here and now is your chance!
13. Choose this day, for there is no savior but yourself!
14. Say to your heart: "I am my own master!"
15. They say that "the truth will set people free."
16. However, truth alone will not liberate anyone.
17. Only the struggle for truth brings liberation (immortality).
Chapter 6.
1
1. The prophet had a dream: On a high hill stood a cross. A man was nailed
to the cross.
2. The entire hill and the space in front of the cross were covered with
people, who knelt and praised the crucified man and the instrument of his
death.
3. And the prophet cried out: O, you wretched people! Why do you pray
to death? You are committing a terrible crime!
4. Now you pray to the cross, but later you will use much more
sophisticated instruments of suffering in your tortures!
5. And your faith will be pitiful, for you will not know true Bliss
(Immortality), since you honor only suffering and sorrow.
6. The Prophet approached the cross and threw the man hanging on it to the
ground. Then the Prophet tore the cross out of the ground with his mighty
hands, turned it over, and stuck the other end back into the ground.
7. And the Prophet turned to the people who were frozen in horror at his
actions:ore the cross out of the ground with his mighty
hands, turned it over, and stuck the other end back into the ground.
7. And the Prophet turned to the people who were frozen in horror at his
actions:

--- PAGE BREAK ---8.

I call upon God as my witness!

Let death be banished from this day
forward!

Let the Joy of Life spread across the Earth!

9.

By the power given to me by the Master of the World, I trample this
instrument of death underfoot and laugh at it with all my might!

10.

And may ignorance and delusion perish into nothingness!

11.

And may all peoples who love Truth henceforth honor God!

12.

So spoke the Prophet, and when he finished his speech, lightning
struck the inverted cross, and it burst into bright flames, confirming
the words of the Prophet.

2
1.

At the dawn of a new era, as the Christian religion slowly fades
away, the human world awaits the arrival of a new Faith that will bring
salvation.

2.

And the world waited, forgetting that Light always dispels Darkness.

3.

The Age of Darkness is coming to an end.

The picture of decay covers the
faded tones of the outdated frescoes of Christian churches, which are
preparing for the Dawn.

4.

The Dawn of Knowledge.

The Dawn of Spirituality.

The rebirth of
humanity.

Everything intersected at one point, in the shadow of the
falling cross.

5.

A solid front, preceding the coming of God, the Dawn rushes forward,
sweeping away all the foundations and familiar positions of entities in its
path.

6.

It brings chaos and confusion to people's Souls and incites the
previously overthrown Forces to rebellion.

It is a harbinger of the coming
times.

7.

Before its relentless onslaught, the holders of the false truths of
past centuries reluctantly release the scepters of power from their
weakened hands.

8.

The once mighty Jews, who for a long time were the first and only ones,
notice how the ground beneath their feet is shaking, but they do not
understand what Force is bending them to the ground and bringing them to
their knees.

9.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The once mighty Jews, who for a long time were the first and only ones,
notice how the ground beneath their feet is shaking, but they do not
understand what Force is bending them to the ground and bringing them to
their knees. 9. They remain stubborn in defending their "infallible" righteousness, but
the echo of their "ego" is lost in the countless halls of the labyrinth of
lies created by the hands of their faithful slaves. 10. Acting in this way, they see what they want to see, but they feel that
Satan's time is up, and they cannot believe it. 11. They sense the bitter smell of an approaching storm. 12. For centuries, they have tried to convince themselves of the
immutability of their position, and now they cannot understand why there is
a stench of anxiety in the air. 13. They take the keys to the dungeon and hastily check the locks —
their Chief Secret should be there, but it is not. There is the one they
created over the centuries, over whom they long celebrated their
"triumph," whom they made the culprit of all their misfortunes. 14. They look into the dungeon of their Soul, but there is only a
bitter reflection of themselves. And they are quite worthy of their
mirror. 15. They are outdated principles and cracks in his throne. 16. Dawn exposes their sores, tears the scabs of masks from their faces, and
they appear before everyone in their unsightly naked form. They have nothing
to hide it with, because all their luxurious garments are seen as rags. 17. They have no one to turn to for support—their strong ones have lost
their strength, their numerous armies have lost their ranks. 18. They hide behind the name of God, but God hates this, and in His eyes it
only adds to their guilt. 19. They hope that the CHURCH, which they have nurtured, will come to
their defense. The CHURCH is old, the BLOOD of Judas flows in its veins,
and it is ready to bargain in order to continue its peaceful existence in
its splendor and grandeur.nurtured, will come to
their defense. The CHURCH is old, the BLOOD of Judas flows in its veins,
and it is ready to bargain in order to continue its peaceful existence in
its splendor and grandeur.

--- PAGE BREAK ---to
their defense. The CHURCH is old, the BLOOD of Judas flows in its veins,
and it is ready to bargain in order to continue its peaceful existence in
its splendor and grandeur.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20. The Church, hiding its fear for its own skin behind complacency,
turns away from them and is ready to turn them into gold for the
convenience of commercial transactions.
21. Abandoned, betrayed, rejected by all, they can only cry out to their
last hope, their Creator.
22. But while they lose strength with each passing day and see the
Dawn approaching, humanity devouring itself, new churches rising up,
towering like tombs.
23. Churches are tombs — the last refuge of Satan, who is dying here.
24. And now, more than ever, the Earth resembles a cemetery.
25. The light piercing through the thickening darkness restores everything
to its true color.
26. Those who have wisdom see this — the corpse spots on Lucifer's forehead
and the Great Glory of God.
3
1. The Jews have fought and quarreled with each other throughout
their history (from the Torah).
2. Each tribe, together with its priests and ministers, tried to find wisdom
in its own lies!
3. But the time of Darkness in the great scheme of human existence
is limited.
4. The bearers of evil wisdom (Christians) had their own saga,
and their prophecy became reality.
5. Each tribe (the tribes of Israel) with its "divine scripture" accused
others of spiritual folly.
6. The desecration of the Holy Scriptures carries with it an eternal curse.
7. The Jews turn the saints of the past into devils in order to survive
themselves.
8. Their weak ministers play a devilish game to fill churches and make
money.
9. The flames of Hell burn brighter thanks to the souls who have been taken
in by their false words and writings.
10. For too long, the Jews studied "spirituality," and what poor and
ignorant pigs they became in the end.
11. And they join hands in a "brotherly" union in their desperation to
gather for their last council.
12. "Dawn is approaching."
13. And twilight fell.
14. The glow of a new Light rises from the night, and the Herald of the
Apocalypse ascends to proclaim: "This is the age of Light! God rules the
world!" The unrighteous will be dead.
15. This is the Dawn of magic and untainted Wisdom.
16. Reason will prevail, and the Great Temple (Asgard) will be built and
consecrated to the glory of God.
17. Human freedom depends on self-denial and self-sacrifice.
18. And let it be known to all that the world of God and Eternal
Life will be the greatest joy for everyone.
4
1. And the word of God came to the Prophet:m depends on self-denial and self-sacrifice.
18. And let it be known to all that the world of God and Eternal
Life will be the greatest joy for everyone.
4
1. And the word of God came to the Prophet:

--- PAGE BREAK ---nial and self-sacrifice.
18. And let it be known to all that the world of God and Eternal
Life will be the greatest joy for everyone.
4
1. And the word of God came to the Prophet:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2. Prophet! Turn your face toward Israel (the great Harlot) and prophesy
against her,
3. and say to the Jews: Hear the word of God: Thus says God: Because you
speak evil of My saints, because you trample their word underfoot, and
because you glorify Israel, because you rule over them,
4. for this, I will give you up to be torn apart by My sons.
5. I will turn Israel into a land scorched by fire and ravaged by
war, and the inhabitants of Israel into straw burning as if in a
furnace.
6. For thus says God: because they clapped their hands and stamped their
feet, and rejoiced with all their hearts in the delusions and ignorance of My
sons (believers),
7. For this, I will stretch out My hand against the Jews and give them up to
be plundered by the nations, and I will wipe them out from among the nations
of the earth and blot them out from among mankind.
8. Thus says God: because they say, "Behold, only the Jews are people, and
all others are animals!"
9. for this, I will reveal the secret mysteries of the Jews and
Slavs to My sons (believers)
10. and I will give Israel as an inheritance to them (believers), so that
the Jews will no longer be mentioned among the nations of the Earth;
11. and My sons (believers) will act according to My wrath and My
indignation.
12. Thus says God: because the Jews have sinned greatly, beating and killing
My children,
13. For this, says God:
14. I will execute My judgment upon the wicked people by the hand of My
people,
15. and the Jews and Slavs will know that My judgments are impartial.
5
1. Have mercy on us (believers), God, Creator of all that exists, and look
upon the Earth,
2. and bring Your fear upon all nations.
3. Lift up your hand against the wicked people, and let them know your
power.
4. As You have revealed Your Holiness before me, so reveal Your Greatness
before them, -
5. and may they know You as I have known, that there is no God but You,
Lord Almighty.
6. Renew Your signs and perform new wonders;
7. glorify Your hand and Your right arm; raise up Your wrath and pour out
Your anger upon the Jews;
8. destroy the wicked and destroy the sinners;
9. hasten the time and reveal Your Judgment, and let them proclaim Your Great
Deeds.
10. Let the wrath of fire destroy those who flee from the sword, and
let those who oppress those who believe in You find destruction.
11. Crush the heads of those who say, "We are the salt of the earth!"
12. Gather all the wicked and sinners, and judge them with Your judgment, as
it was written in the prophecies.
13. Judge, O God, the people named after Judah, who for 30
silver coins.
14. Destroy the great Harlot (the Jews).
15. Fill Your sons with praise and Your glory.
16. Grant testimony to those (RusSKim) who were always Your possession,
and raise up prophecies from Your Name.
17. Grant reward to those who hope in You, and may the people believe in Your
Prophets.6. Grant testimony to those (RusSKim) who were always Your possession,
and raise up prophecies from Your Name.
17. Grant reward to those who hope in You, and may the people believe in Your
Prophets.

--- PAGE BREAK ---18.

Hear, O God, the prayers of the faithful,
19.

and let all who live on Earth know that You are the Lord of lords and
King of kings!

Chapter 7.

1.

The extensive Teaching of Wisdom written by the Righteous Enoch,
which deserves praise from all people and is the judge of the whole
Earth, is for all my descendants who will live on Earth and for future
generations who will walk in righteousness and peace.

2.

Let not your spirit be troubled because of the times, for the Holy and
Great God has set days for all things.

3.

And the righteous shall arise from sleep, arise and walk in the way
of Truth, and all his way and path shall be in eternal goodness and mercy
for the righteous, and he shall give dominion to the righteous, and he
shall live in Faith and Truth, and walk in the Eternal Light.

4.

And sin shall perish in Darkness forever and ever, and shall no longer
appear from that day until Eternity.

5.

Enoch said: Listen, my sons, to every word of your father, and heed the
voice of my mouth, for I exhort you, my beloved ones: love God and walk in
righteousness.

6.

And do not approach God with a double heart, and do not join those who
have a double heart, but walk in God, my sons; and He will lead you in good
ways, and God will be your helper.

7.

For I know that acts of violence will prevail on Earth, and great
judgment will come upon the Earth; and all unrighteousness will cease
and be cut off from its roots, and all its structure will disappear.

8.

And unrighteousness will be repeated again, and all the works of
unrighteousness and all the works of violence and lawlessness will be done
again on Earth.

9.

And since falsehood, sin, blasphemy, wickedness, and other kinds of
actions will increase at that time, and apostasy, lawlessness, and impurity
will grow, a great judgment will come from Heaven upon them all, and the Holy
Lord will come forth with wrath and punishment to execute judgment upon the
Earth.

10.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And since falsehood, sin, blasphemy, wickedness, and other kinds of
actions will increase at that time, and apostasy, lawlessness, and impurity
will grow, a great judgment will come from Heaven upon them all, and the Holy
Lord will come forth with wrath and punishment to execute judgment upon the
Earth. 10. In those days, violence will be separated from its roots, and the
roots of falsehood will perish along with lies, and they will disappear
from under Heaven. 11. And the righteous will rise from sleep, and Wisdom will rise and be given
to him. 12. And after that, the roots of falsehood will be cut off, and sinners
will perish by the sword; the roots of slanderers will be cut off in every
place, and those who plot wickedness and blaspheme God will perish by the
edge of the sword. 13. And now I speak to you, my sons, and show you the ways of
righteousness, and I will show them to you again, that you may know what
is to come. 14. And now, listen, my sons, and walk in the ways of righteousness, and
do not walk in the ways of wickedness, for all who walk in the ways of
unrighteousness will perish forever. 15. For is there anywhere a son of man who would hear the voice of the
Holy God and not be shaken? 16. And is there anyone who can think His thoughts? And where is there
anyone who can see all His works? 17. And how could there be anyone who would know the works of God, and see
His breath, and His Spirit, and tell about it, or go up and see all the
ends of Heaven, and be able to devise them, or do anything like them? 18. And is there anywhere a man who could know the breadth and length of the
Earth, and to whom is the measure of all this revealed?

--- PAGE BREAK ---19.

And is there anyone who could know the length of Heaven, and what its
height is, and on what it is established, and how great is the number of
stars, and where all the luminaries rest?

20.

And now I say to you, my sons, love God and walk in Him, for the ways of
God are worthy to be accepted; but the ways of the wicked vanish suddenly and
perish.

21.

And to some people from the coming Generations, the ways of wickedness
and death will be revealed, and they will keep themselves far from them and
will not follow them.

22.

And now I say to you, the righteous: do not walk in the way of evil,
nor in violence, nor in the ways of death, and do not approach them, lest
you perish.

23.

But seek God and a life pleasing to God, and walk in the ways of
Peace, that you may live and have joy.

24.

And keep God in the thoughts of your heart, and do not allow God to be
eradicated from your heart, for I know that sinners will tempt people and
will humiliate Wisdom, and it will find no place anywhere, and temptations
of all kinds will not diminish.

25.

Woe to those who devise iniquity and wickedness, and lay the foundation
of deceit; for they will be suddenly uprooted and will have no peace.

26.

Woe to those who build their houses with sin, for they will be
uprooted to the foundation and fall by the sword; and those who acquire
gold and silver will suddenly perish at the Judgment.

27.

Woe to you who are rich, for you rely on your wealth, and you will
lose your wealth, because you did not think about God in the days of
your wealth.

28.

You have blasphemed God and falsehood, and prepared yourselves
for the day of bloodshed, and for the day of darkness, and for the
day of the Great Judgment.

29.

I tell you that He who created you will destroy you to the ground, and
there will be no compassion for your fall; and your Creator will rejoice in
your destruction.

30.

And your righteous ones in those days will be a reproach to sinners
and the wicked.

31.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And your righteous ones in those days will be a reproach to sinners
and the wicked. 31. Oh, if only my eyes were a cloud of water, to weep for you, and pour out
my tears like a cloud of water, that I might find rest for my heart from
sorrow! 32. Who has allowed you to commit hatred and malice? 33. Let judgment come upon you, sinners! 34. Do not be afraid of sinners, you righteous ones, for the Lord will
deliver them into your hands again, that you may execute judgment upon them
as you wish. 35. Woe to you who utter curses to curse irrevocably; and your healing shall
be far from you because of your sins! 36. Woe to you who repay your neighbor with evil, for you will be rewarded
according to your deeds! 37. Woe to you who bear false witness and prove falsehood, for you will
suddenly perish! 38. Woe to you, sinners, for you persecute the righteous;
for you will be betrayed and persecuted, you who are unrighteous, and their
(the righteous) yoke will be heavy upon you. 39. You righteous ones, hope, for the sinners will suddenly perish before
you, and you will rule over them as you wish! 40. And on the day of the sinners' suffering, the righteous will rise and
soar like eagles, and higher than the kite will be their nest, you will
ascend to Heaven; you sinners, like rabbits, will penetrate the ravines of
the Earth and the crevices of the rocks

--- PAGE BREAK ---forever before the righteous; and they will sigh for you and weep like
forest spirits.

41.

But do not be afraid, you who suffer, for there will be healing for
you, and a brilliant Light will shine upon you, and you will hear a call to
peace from Heaven.

42.

Woe to you, sinners, for your wealth allows you to appear righteous,
but your heart exposes you as sinners, and this speech will testify
against you as a reminder of your misdeeds.

43.

Woe to you who eat and drink excessively and trample on the power of
the lowly!

44.

Woe to you who always lie, for you will suddenly be rewarded, and you
will wither and dry up, because you have forsaken the Source of Life (God)!

45.

Woe to you who commit injustice, deceit, and blasphemy: this will be
a memorial against you for your evil!

46.

Woe to you, the powerful, who strike down the righteous with your
strength, for the day of your destruction will come, while many good days
will come for the righteous on the day of your Judgment.

47.

Believe, righteous ones, for sinners will be a disgrace to you and will
perish on the day of Truth.

48.

Let it be known to you (sinners) that God thinks of your destruction,
and the Angels rejoice at your destruction.

49.

What will you do, sinners, and where will you flee on the day of Judgment
when you hear the voice of the prayers of the righteous?

50.

And you will not have what they (the righteous) have—you, against
whom this word will testify: "You have become allies of sinners."
51.

And in those days the prayer of the righteous will penetrate to the
Lord, and the days of your judgment will come upon you.

52.

And all your unrighteous words will be read before the Great and Holy
One, and your face will be ashamed, and every deed based on unrighteousness
will be rejected.

53.

Woe to you, sinners, in the midst of the sea and on the land, whose
memory is not good!

54.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Woe to you, sinners, in the midst of the sea and on the land, whose
memory is not good! 54. Woe to you who acquire silver and gold for yourselves unjustly and say,
"We have become rich and have treasures, and we possess everything we want;
and now we will do whatever we think, for we have gathered gold and silver
and filled our storehouses, and we have as much water as we need to protect
our homes."
55. Like water, your lies will spill out, for your wealth will not remain
with you, but will suddenly be taken away from you, since you have acquired
everything unjustly, and you yourselves are subject to great condemnation. 56. And now I swear to you, wise and foolish alike, for you will experience
much
(or see) on Earth. 57. For you, men, will adorn yourselves with more jewelry than women, and
with more colors than maidens, in royal dignity and grandeur, and power, and
in silver, and in gold, and in purple, and in honor, and in food, they will
spread like water. 58. Therefore, they lack the Teaching of Wisdom, and through this they
will perish along with their treasures, and with all their power and honor;
and in disgrace, and in death, and in great poverty, their Spirit will be
cast into the Fiery Furnace. 59. I swear to you, sinners: just as a mountain was not and will not be a
slave, nor a hill a servant to a wife, so sin was not sent to Earth, but
people produced it from their own minds; and those who commit it will be
subject to great condemnation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---60.

And barrenness was not given to the wife, but for the sake of her own
deeds she dies without children.

I swear to you, sinners, Holy and Great,
that all your evil deeds are revealed in Heaven, and none of your acts of
violence are hidden or concealed.

61.

And do not think in your spirit or say in your heart, "You do not know
and you do not see that every sin is recorded daily in Heaven before God.

62.

From now on, know that all your violence that you commit is recorded
every day until the day of your Judgment.

Woe to you, madmen, for you will
perish through your madness; and since you do not listen to the wise,
nothing good will be your lot.

63.

And now know that you are prepared for the day of destruction, and do not
hope that you will live, for you are sinners, but you will perish and die,
since you know no redemption: for you are prepared for the day of the Great
Judgment, and for the day of suffering and great shame for your Spirit
(Soul).

64.

Woe to you, you who are hard-hearted, who do evil and eat blood!

65.

Where do you get your good food, drink, and satisfaction?

66.

From all the good things that our Lord has sent in abundance to the
Earth: therefore, you shall have no peace.

67.

Woe to you who love your deeds of unrighteousness!

68.

Why do you expect good things for yourselves?

69.

Know that you will be delivered into the hands of the righteous; they
will cut your throats and kill you, and they will have no compassion on
you.

70.

Woe to you who rejoice in the suffering of the righteous, for your
grave will be dug!

71.

Woe to you, for whom the words of the righteous are only empty words, for
there will be no hope of life for you!

72.

Woe to you who write down false words and lawless words;
for they write down their lies so that they may be heard and their madness
not forgotten; so there will be no peace for them, but they will die a sudden
death!

73.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Woe to you who write down false words and lawless words;
for they write down their lies so that they may be heard and their madness
not forgotten; so there will be no peace for them, but they will die a sudden
death! 73. Woe to those who commit wickedness and praise and hold in high esteem
deceitful words: you will perish because of this, and there will be no good
life for you! 74. Woe to you who distort the words of righteousness! 75. And they will fall away from the Eternal Law and make themselves what
they were not, namely sinners; they will be trampled upon on Earth. 76. In those days, you righteous ones, prepare to offer up your
mental prayers; you will present them as testimony to the Angels, so
that they may present the iniquities of sinners to God as a
reminder. 77. In those days, the nations will be in turmoil, and generations of
nations will rise up to the day of destruction. 78. And in those days, the fruit of the womb shall come forth, and they
(the mothers) shall tear their own children apart; they shall push their
children away, and they shall give birth to premature babies; they shall
push their infants away, and they shall not return to them, and they
shall not have mercy on their beloved ones. 79. Again, I swear to you, sinners, that a day of unceasing bloodshed is
in store for you. 80. And they will worship stones, and others will make images of gold and
silver, and of wood and clay; and others will worship unclean spirits, and
demons, and all kinds of idols in idolatrous temples (churches): meanwhile,
no help can be found in them (idols). 81. And they will sink into ignorance because of the madness of their
hearts, and their eyes will be blinded by the fear of their hearts and
dreams.

--- PAGE BREAK ---82.

Through them they will fall into ignorance and fear, for they do
all their deeds in falsehood and worship idols; and they will all
perish together.

83.

But in those days, blessed are all those who accept the words of Wisdom
and know her, and fulfill the ways of the Most High, and walk in the way of
Truth, and with God: for they will be saved.

84.

Woe to you who spread evil among your neighbors, for you will be put
to death in Gehenna (Hell).

85.

Woe to you who lay the foundation of sin and falsehood, and cause
bitterness on Earth: for this you will come to an end.

86.

Woe to you who build your houses on the sweat of others, and whose
building materials are nothing but tiles and stones of sin; I tell you
that there is no peace for you.

87.

Woe to those who reject God and the Faith of their fathers, and
attach their Souls to idols: for there will be no rest for them.

88.

Woe to those who do wrong and aid violence, and kill their neighbors on
the day of the Great Judgment: for God will cast down your glory, and put
malice in your hearts, and stir up the Spirit of His wrath to destroy you
all with the sword; and all the righteous and holy will remember your sins.

89.

And in those days, fathers will be killed in one place together with
their sons, and brothers will fall together from death, until their blood
flows like a stream.

90.

For a man will not spare his sons or his grandsons, but will kill them
with compassion; and a sinner will not spare his most honorable brother; from
dawn to sunset they will kill one another.

91.

And the horse will walk chest-deep in the blood of sinners, and the
chariot will sink to its top.

92.

And in those days the Angels will descend into the shelters of sinners
and gather in one place all those who helped sin; and God will rise on that
day to bring about the Great Judgment upon all sinners.

93.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And in those days the Angels will descend into the shelters of sinners
and gather in one place all those who helped sin; and God will rise on that
day to bring about the Great Judgment upon all sinners. 93. But over all the righteous and the Holy, He will set the Holy (Light)
Angels as Guardians, so that they may guard them as the apple of their eye
until the end of all malice and all sin; and even if the righteous sleep a
long sleep, then even then they shall fear nothing. 94. And whoever is wise among men will see the Truth, and the children of
the Earth will understand all the words of this Book, and will know that
their wealth cannot save them from the destruction of their sin. 95. Woe to you, sinners, if you torment the righteous on the day of
cruel suffering and burn them with fire: you will be rewarded according
to your deeds. 96. Woe to you who are corrupt in heart, who care to devise evil; fear
will come upon you, and no one will help you. 97. Woe to you, sinners, for you will burn in the lake of Fire for the words
of your mouth and the deeds of your hands, with which you act unrighteously. 98. And now know that the Angels in Heaven will inquire about your deeds
from the Sun, the Moon, and the stars—they will inquire about your sinful
deeds, for you judge the righteous on Earth. 99. And God will make every cloud, and every mist, and every dew, and every
rain, witnesses against you, for they are all held back from you, so that
they do not fall upon you; and should they not think about your sins? 100. And now give gifts to the rain, that it may not be withheld from
descending upon you, and also that the dew may not be withheld, if it has
received gold and silver from you.

--- PAGE BREAK ---101.

When the frost and snow fall upon you, along with their cold, and
all the snowy winds with all their disasters, you will not be able to
stand against them in those days.

102.

Consider the heavens, all the children of the Earth, and every work
of the Creator, and fear Him, and do nothing evil before Him!

103.

If He closed the windows of Heaven and withheld the rain and dew from
falling on the Earth because of you, what would you do then?

104.

And if He sends His wrath upon you and all your works, can you not
worship Him, since you speak arrogant and shameless words against His
Truth, and there will be no peace for you.

105.

And do you not see the captains of ships, how their ships are tossed by
the waves, swayed by the winds, and exposed to danger; and they are afraid
because they have taken with them the best of their possessions, and they are
anxious in their hearts lest the sea swallow them up and they perish in it?

106.

Is not the sea, and all its waters, and all its movement, the
creation of God, and has He not sealed all His work and enclosed it
completely in the sand?

107.

The sea dries up at His threats and is terrified, and everything in
it dies: and you, sinners living on Earth, do not fear Him.

108.

Did God not create Heaven and Earth and everything in them?

109.

And who gave the teaching of wisdom to all who live on Earth and
who live in the sea?

110.

Do not all the kings of the ships fear the sea?

111.

But sinners do not fear the Creator.

112.

In those days, when He sends upon you a tormenting fire, where will you
flee, and where will you be saved?

113.

And when He sends His word upon you, will you not be struck down and
terrified?

114.

All the stars will be shaken with great fear, and the whole earth
will be struck, and it will tremble and be terrified.

115.--- PAGE BREAK ---

All the stars will be shaken with great fear, and the whole earth
will be struck, and it will tremble and be terrified. 115. And all the angels will carry out the commands given to them and will
try to hide from Him who is great in glory, and the children of the earth
will tremble and quake; and you, O sinners, will be cursed forever, and let
there be no peace for you! 116. Do not be afraid, souls of the righteous, and trust in the day of your
death in Truth! 117. And do not grieve that your soul descends into the realm of the dead in
great sorrow, in grief, and sighing, and sorrow, and that your body did not
find in your life what your goodness deserved, you will find all this now, on
the day of Eternity, when you have become equal to the Angels, on the day of
the curse and condemnation of sinners. 118. And when you die, sinners say over you: "The righteous die, just like
us, and what good do their deeds do them? 119. Here they are, like us, dead in sorrow and poverty, and what
advantage do they have over us? 120. We are all equally mortal. 121. And what will they achieve through righteousness, and what will they see
in Eternity? 122. For behold, they too have died and will not see the Light until the age
to come. 123. I say to you, sinners: it is enough for you to eat and drink, to strip
people naked, to plunder, to sin, to gain power, and to see good days. 124. Have you seen how peaceful the end of the righteous was, for there
was no violence in them on the day of their death, "And they perished as
if they had never existed, and their souls descended in joy into the
kingdom of the dead."

--- PAGE BREAK ---125.

And now I swear to you, righteous ones, by His great glory and honor,
and by His praiseworthy Kingdom, and by His dominion, I swear to you: I know
this secret and have read it in the Heavenly Tablets, and have seen the Book
of the Saints, and have found written and marked therein concerning them that
all good things are prepared for them, and joy and honor; and I have found
recorded concerning the Spirits (Souls) of those who have died in
righteousness; and learned that you will be rewarded with many blessings for
your labors, and your fate is better than that of sinners.

126.

And your Souls shall live in goodness, you who have died in
righteousness; and their Souls shall rejoice and be glad, and their memory
shall be before the face of the Great God for all generations of the world:
so do not fear the reproach of sinners!

127.

Woe to you, sinners, when you die in your sins and those like you say
about you: "Blessed are the sinners, for they have seen all their days; and
now they have died in happiness and wealth, and have seen neither sorrow nor
murder in their lives; they have died in glory, and during their lives no
judgment has been passed upon them."
128.

But do you know that their souls must descend into the realm of the
dead, and they will find it unbearable, and their sorrow will be great?

129.

And during the Great Judgment, your Spirit will descend into
Darkness, and into the net, and into the floating flame, and the Great
Judgment will be for all generations until the end of time: woe to you,
for there is no Peace for you!

130.

Do not say to the righteous and good who still live: "In the days of our
distress, we labored and overcame every need, and encountered all kinds of
calamities; we could do nothing against our enemies, neither in word nor
deed, and achieved absolutely nothing; we suffered and perished, and could
not see life day after day.

131.Do not say to the righteous and good who still live: "In the days of our
distress, we labored and overcame every need, and encountered all kinds of
calamities; we could do nothing against our enemies, neither in word nor
deed, and achieved absolutely nothing; we suffered and perished, and could
not see life day after day.

131.

We hoped to be the head, but we became the tail; we were
exhausted in our work and did not receive the fruits of our labor; we
became food for sinners, and the unrighteous made their yoke heavy for
us.

132.

Those who hated us and beat us were our masters, and we had to bow our
heads before those who hated us, and they had no compassion on us.

133.

We tried to slip away from them, to flee and find peace, but we
found no place to run and escape from them.

134.

We complained about them in our grief to the rulers, and lamented those
who devoured us; but they did not regard our cry, nor would they hear our
voice.

135.

And they helped those who robbed us and devoured us, and those who
humiliated us; and they concealed their oppression, so that they did not
remove their yoke from us, but devoured us, and drove us away, and killed
us: and they concealed our death, and did not think about the fact that they
had raised their hands against us.

136.

I swear to you, righteous ones, that the Angels in Heaven remind the
Great God of you for your good, and your names are recorded with Him.

137.

Hope, righteous ones, for before you were in shame and misfortune and
distress, but now you will shine like the heavenly lights, and you will be
visible, and the gates of Heaven will be opened for you.

138.

And your cry for judgment continues: it will be revealed to you, for
the rulers will be avenged for your suffering, and all the helpers of those
who robbed you.

139.

Have hope and do not abandon your hopes: for you will have great joy,
like the heavenly angels.--- PAGE BREAK ---

139. Have hope and do not abandon your hopes: for you will have great joy,
like the heavenly angels. Since this is what awaits you, you will not hide
on the day of the Great Judgment, and you will not be found to be like
sinners, and eternal condemnation will be far from you, for all generations
of the world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ou will not hide
on the day of the Great Judgment, and you will not be found to be like
sinners, and eternal condemnation will be far from you, for all generations
of the world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

140. And now, righteous ones, do not be afraid when you see sinners
growing stronger and enjoying themselves in their merriment, and have no
fellowship with them, but keep your distance, for you must be allies of the
Heavenly Hosts.
141. You sinners, even though you say, "You cannot know this, and our sins
are not all recorded," nevertheless, They (the Angels) record your sins every
day.
142. And now I reveal to you that Light and Darkness, day and night, see all
your sins.
143. Do not be ungodly in your hearts, and do not lie, do not change the
words of Truth, and do not pass off as lies the words of the Holy and Great
God, and do not glorify your idols; for all your lies and your ungodliness
serve not the truth, but great sin.
144. And now I know this secret, that many sinners will change the words of
Truth and fall away from God, and will speak double-tongued words, and tell
lies, and do great sinful deeds, and write books about their words.
145. But when they write all my words correctly in their languages, and do
not change or omit anything from my words, but write everything correctly,
everything that I have previously affirmed about them; then I know another
secret, that only the righteous and wise are given the Books (Vedas) for joy,
and for righteousness, and for Great Wisdom, and they are given the Books,
and they will believe in them and rejoice in them; and all the righteous who
have learned from them to know all the ways of righteousness will receive
their reward.
146. "And in those days, says the Lord, they (the righteous) shall call upon
the sons of the Earth and bear witness to the Wisdom of their Books; show
them Wisdom, for you are their leaders, and rewards for the whole Earth.
147. For I and the Angels will join with them forever and ever on
the paths of righteousness in their lives.
148. And peace will be with you: rejoice, you are children of God."
Enoch was a righteous man, walked before God, and was no more, because God
took him to Himself.
Book 4.
THE BOOK OF THE LAW
The Law is Love. Love obedient to Faith. Love obedient to Faith is not the
random lust of a savage, nor is it Love under Fear (inquisition), as is the
case with Christians. But Love, whose path is shown by God and possessed by
Reason as the formula of the Spirit—such will be the Law.
Book 1
1. Had! This is the Manifestation of the Great Ra-M-Ha.
2. This is how the inhabitants of Heaven (Prav) reveal themselves.
3. Every man and every woman is a star (children of God).
4. Every number (Soul), no matter what it is, is infinite (Immortal).
5. Help Me, O Aryan Warrior-Lord, help Me in My manifestation before
the children of men!
6. Be thou, Hadith (Prophet), my secret center, my heart, and
my tongue!
7. And behold! AiVass (Assur), My servant, has revealed all this.rd, help Me in My manifestation before
the children of men!
6. Be thou, Hadith (Prophet), my secret center, my heart, and
my tongue!
7. And behold! AiVass (Assur), My servant, has revealed all this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---8.

The universe (the world of Yavi) dwells in Me, and I dwell in the
universe.

9.

So worship Me, and see how My Light is shed upon you.

10.

Let My servants be few and hidden, they will rule over many, those
whom everyone knows.

11.

People worship only gold (money) and idols (idols).

All people who
worship gold and idols are idiots.

12.

Come out, O children of Light, under the stars, and receive your
full share of Love.

13.

I am above you and within you.

In your ecstasy (bliss) is
My ecstasy (bliss).

It is gratifying for Me to see your joy.

15.

And now you will learn that the Chosen Priest and Apostle of Infinite
Space (the World of Infinity) is the Prince-Priest.

And in his woman, whose
name is the Crimson Wife, all power is given to him.

They will gather My
children into a flock, and from them the Radiance of the Stars will penetrate
the hearts of people.

16.

For he is the Sun, and she is the Moon.

Only to him is the flame of that
winged Mystery revealed, and to her flows the moonlight.

17.

However, you are not such Chosen Ones.

18.

Burn on their foreheads, O Radiant Serpent!

19.

O woman with eyes filled with azure, bend over them.

20.

The key to these rituals lies in the secret word they received from Me.

21.

Those who do not worship Me are nothing; for they do not see Me.

They
are as if on Earth, and I am Heaven, and there are no other Gods there but
Me.

22.

Therefore, you know Me by the name Jehovah (God of the Gentiles), but He
knows Me by a secret name, which I will reveal to him when he finally comes
to know Me.

For I am the Infinite Space and the Infinity of the Stars.

Do as
follows.

Do not bind anyone to anything!

Let there be no distinction among
you (believers) and between any thing, for this causes harm.

23.

But if anyone succeeds in this, let him rule over all!

24.

I am the Supreme God, and My name is the Great Ra-M-Ha.

25.

Think, understand, and you will comprehend.

26.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Think, understand, and you will comprehend. 26. Then the Priest and Prophet said to the Beautiful God: Who am I, and
what will be the sign? So He answered him, bowing into the flickering flame of blue, All-Touching,
All-Penetrating! You will know! And let my Ecstasy be known, the awareness of the vastness of
the universe's existence. 27. Then the priest answered and said to the King of Space: O Lord, the
continuous Being of Heaven, let people call you One and Many, or let them not
speak of You at all, for Your Greatness has no boundaries! 29. For I have divided people for the sake of Love, for the sake of
the possibility of merging (into Unity). 30. This is the creation of the world, where the pain of separation
is nothing, and the joy of union is everything. 31. And let these foolish people with their sorrows not trouble you! They
feel little, and what they do feel rests on the scales of half-erased
pleasures; but you (believers) are My Chosen Ones. 32. Obey my Prophet (the prescriptions of the Vedas)! Perform difficult
trials for the sake of knowing Me to the end! Seek only Me! And then the
joys of My Love will rid you of all pain. So it is; I swear by My Sacred
Heart and tongue, by all that I can give and all that I desire to receive
from you all. 33. And then the Priest fell into a deep trance and turned to the King of
Heaven: Prescribe trials for us, describe rituals, and give us the Law!

--- PAGE BREAK ---34.

But He replied: I will not write about the trials, the rituals must
be known, partly closed, and the Law is one for all.

35.

That which you (Aleister Crowley) are writing at this moment is
the Book of the Law in three parts.

36.

My scribe, the Priest of Princes, will not change a single letter in
this book, but in order to avoid any obscure passages, he will explain
them later with the help of Wisdom (Knowledge).

37.

Likewise, mantras (prayers) and spells; labor with the rod (Will) and
work with the sword (Mind) — you will learn all this and teach others.

38.

He must teach, but he must precede this with severe trials.

39.

The word of the Law is the Vedas.

40.

And whoever calls you "believers" will not be mistaken, if only he deeply
understands the meaning of this word.

For the word has three levels (3 stages
of Faith)
- The Hermit, the Loving One, and the Earthly Husband.

Do what is written in
the Vedas - that shall be the Law.

41.

Restriction (in knowledge) is the word of sin.

O man!

Do not refuse
your wife if she desires!

There are no bonds that can unite the divided
except Love.

Everything else is a curse.

Cursed!

Cursed shall it
(wickedness) be forever and ever!

Gehenna (Hell).

42.

Let the majority sit in chains and filth.

Let them perish.

You have no
other right but to do what is written in the Vedas.

43.

Do so, and no one will dare say "no" to you.

44.

For pure Will (Soul), free from goal-setting (desire),
independent of the thirst for results (ego), is Perfect in every way.

45.

Perfection and Perfection are one Perfection, and not two!

46.

The Book of Splendor is the Secret Key to this Law.

The Jews
call it Kabbalah (the Secret Torah).

I call it the Book of Light.

47.

However, they (the Jews) only have half of it.

Use your art to combine
them so that everything (false) disappears completely.

48.

My Prophet is a fool with his numbers 1, 1, and 1.

But are they (the
Jews) themselves not donkeys and nothing (slaves) from the Book (the Bible)?--- PAGE BREAK ---

My Prophet is a fool with his numbers 1, 1, and 1. But are they (the
Jews) themselves not donkeys and nothing (slaves) from the Book (the Bible)? 49. Reduce all rituals, all trials, all passwords, and all signs. With the
onset of the Equinox, God takes his place in the East, and let Asar (the
Great Race) dwell with Isa (Yeshua), and together they are one (one people). They are all from Me. Let Asar worship, let Isa suffer; the Great Ra-M-Ha in
the splendor of the secret name is the initiating Lord. 50. Now a few words about the task of the Hierophants (high priests). Keep
in mind! One trial hides three at once, and there are three ways to pass
them. The dense must pass through fire, the subtle will be tested by
intellect (Mind), and the high chosen ones will be tested in the Highest. Here is a star and another star, a system and another system, and let none
of you know the other. 51. Four entrances (stages of Development) lead to one palace (the world of
Infinity), the floor of the palace is made of silver and gold, heavenly
pearls, jasper, exquisite aromas, jasmine and rose, and emblems of death. Let
him enter them one by one or all four at once, let him stand on the floor of
the palace (as a Christian). Will he drown? Amn. Ho! Warrior, will your servant drown? But there are means (the Bible) and means
(the Vedas). So be kind: dress in fine fabrics, eat rich food, and wash it
down with sweet wine (drink) and sparkling wine (drink)! In addition, love
fully, love as you wish, when you wish, where and whom you wish. But always
for My sake.

--- PAGE BREAK ---52.

And if THIS is done incorrectly, if you confuse the signs of space (+
/ -), declaring: they are all one or they are all different, if the rituals
are not always directed at Me, then expect a terrible Judgment!

53.

This will revive the world, this little world (Yavi) — My sister, My
heart, and My language.

So too, O Priest and scribe (poet), even if you are
of princely birth, this will not cool you, will not justify you.

But ecstasy
and earthly joy will be yours: To Me!

To Me!

54.

Look, you are a Prophet, do not change a single letter,
otherwise you will not contemplate the mysteries hidden within.

55.

The child of your testicles (relatives) will contemplate them (the
mysteries).

56.

Do not wait for him from the East, do not wait from the West, that
child comes from an unexpected home.

Aum!

All words are sacred, and all prophecies are true, but they understand
little.

Having solved the first part of the equation, leave the second part
untouched.

But everything is before you in clear light, and some part is in
darkness.

57.

Call upon Me under My stars!

Love is Law, Love obedient to Will (Faith).

And do not confuse, fools, there is Love and there is not love.

Here is a
dove, and here is a snake.

Choose wisely!

He, My Prophet, chose, knowing the
Law of the firmament and the great mystery of the Abode.

All the Ancient
letters (Runes) in My Book (Vedas) are true.

But the letter "tsade" (Satan)
is not a star (not God).

And this is also a Mystery: My Prophet will reveal
it to the wise.

58.

I give joys unimaginable on Earth: not hope, but certainty, even during
life, that after death there is unspeakable peace, rest, ecstasy (bliss); and
I do not demand sacrifices (bloody ones).

59.

My incense is made of tree resin; it does not contain blood: because My
hair is the Trees of Eternity.

60.

My name is Great Ra-M-Ha, it is also the name for all believers.

The
Nine-Pointed Star in a Circle (the Star of Inglia).--- PAGE BREAK ---

My name is Great Ra-M-Ha, it is also the name for all believers. The
Nine-Pointed Star in a Circle (the Star of Inglia). The blind see Me in
black, but the sighted see gold and azure. I also have secret glory for
those who love Me. 61. But to love Me most beautifully, and if under the stars of the night in
the desert you now light incense before My altar, calling Me with a pure
heart and fire within, you must come a little closer and lie down on My
chest. For one kiss, you will want to give everything. But he who gives only
a grain immediately loses everything. You will acquire precious things, you
will have women in abundance and spicy seasonings, you will wear jewels, you
will outshine entire nations on this planet with your brilliance and glory,
but all this, loving Me, and so you will come to My Joy(Immortality). I
strictly command you to appear before Me in a single garment, with your head
covered. I love you! I long for you! Put on your wings and awaken the
Radiance (Mind) slumbering within you: come to Me! 62. At all My meetings with you, the Priestess will speak—and her eyes will
burn with the fire of desire when she rises naked and jubilant in My secret
Temple—To Me! To Me! Calling forth flames from the hearts of all in her song
of love! 63. Sing to Me enthusiastically, sing about love! Burn incense for Me! Adorn
yourself with jewels for My sake! Drink to Me, for I love you! I love you! 65. To Me! To Me! 66. This concludes the Manifestation. Book 2
1. This is the point of concealment of the Mind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---2.

Come, come all and know the secret that has not yet been revealed.

I, the Supreme Mind, am the complement of My Universe.

Extent is not
characteristic of Me, and Svarga is the name of My Home.

3.

I am the omnipresent center of every sphere (atom), just as it is.

A circle that exists nowhere.

4.

And yet they know it (matter), but never Me.

5.

Look!

The rituals of old times have turned black.

Those who are evil will
be rejected, and the Prophet will purify the good!

Then Knowledge (the
Vedas) will be corrected.

6.

I am the Fire that burns in the heart of every person and in the core
of every star.

I am Life, and the giver of Life, and yet by knowing Me,
you know death.

7.

I am the Magician (Wizard) and I am also the Exorcist (Mystic).

I am the
axis of the wheel and the nine-pointed star within the circle (the Star of
Inglia).

It is foolish for Me to call out, "Come to Me!", for I am the One
who comes.

8.

Those who have honored the Law have honored Me; people honor
the Gods (Angels) for Me in vain, for They too are only
worshippers.

9.

Do not forget that existence (life) is pure delight (trial); all sorrows
are nothing more than shadows, they pass and disappear, but there is also
that which remains (karma).

10.

Hey, Prophet!

Your will to learn these letters is weakening.

11.

I see your hatred for the hand with the pen; but I am stronger.

12.

For I, unbeknownst to you, am within you.

13.

For what?

For the sake of what you have learned and for My sake.

14.

Let the tomb be veiled now, but let the Light rush upon the people and
devour them with blindness!

15.

I am Perfect, for I am not; and My name is Jehovah among the ignorant,
but among the wise My name is the Great Ra-M-Ha.

And this is essential, for
I am indeed Nothingness (the Great Void).

The Empress and the King are not
from Me; for there is a further Mystery.

16.

I am the Empress, and I am the Hierophant (King).

There are 11 in total,
for 11 is the number of My bride.

17.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There are 11 in total,
for 11 is the number of My bride. 17. Listen to Me, you sighing people! Sorrow, pain, and regret are left to the dead and dying—
a tribe that has not yet recognized Me. 18. They have long been dead, these fine fellows, but they do not feel. We
(the Gods) are not for the sick and gloomy; the rulers of the Earth (the
Aryans) are our kin. 19. Does God live in a dog? No! But the Higher Ones are our Holy and Wise
Ancestors. They will rejoice, our Chosen Ones, but those who grieve are not
ours. 20. Beauty and Strength, galloping Laughter and wonderful Bliss,
onslaught and Fire - these are ours. 21. We have no use for worthless scum (rats); let them die in obscurity. For
they feel nothing. Compassion is a vice of kings: by trampling on the weak
and unworthy, the strong (wise) act according to the Law; such is our Law and
the Joy of this world (Yavi). Do not dwell, O king, on this lie: that you
must die. In truth, you will not die, but live forever. Let it be understood
now: the King will remain in pure ecstasy forever, if the Mind undergoes
Liberation. Glory to the Great Ra-M-Ha! Earth, Sun, Power, and Vision
(Knowledge), Light (Wisdom); all this is for the servants of God. 22. I am the God who gives Knowledge and Rapture and Radiance; it is I who
excite and intoxicate the hearts of men. To worship Me, use marijuana and
strange potions (made from hemp), from them I will speak to my Prophet, be
intoxicated by them. They will not harm you in the least. This is nonsense,
it is a lie against yourself. Ostentatious innocence is also false. Be
strong, O man!

--- PAGE BREAK ---Be lustful, enjoy all kinds of sensual delights, do not fear that the Gods
will reject you for it.

23.

I am alone, there is no other God where I am.

24.

Look!

Here are some more serious mysteries concerning My hermit friends
(Rakhmanov).

Do not think that you will find them in the forest or on the
mountain: but on a purple bed, caressed by magnificent creatures with heavy
thighs, with Fire and Radiance in their eyes, and a waterfall of fiery hair,
that is where you will find them.

You will also see them at the helm, at the
head of victorious armies, and their joy will be a million times greater
than it is now.

But without coercion of one another, when king is against
king!

Love one another with burning hearts, trample the lowly people (Jews)
in the fierce lust of your pride, on the day of your wrath (the Great
Judgment).

25.

You are against the (wicked) people, O My Chosen Ones!

26.

I am the Secret Serpent, coiled, ready to strike.

In My coils is the
joy to come.

If I raise My head, I merge with My Universe.

My head hangs
down, shooting venom, then the Earth rejoices, and We are One with it.

27.

There is also Great Danger in Me, for he who does not understand these
Runes (writings) to the end will make a Great Mistake.

He will fall into a
well called "Because" (Kabbalah), and there he will perish along with the
dogs of common sense (unbelievers).

28.

Cursed be "Because" and all his kin!

29.

May it be cursed, this "Because" (Jews), forever and ever!

30.

If Will retreats with a cry of "Why?", invoking "Because," then Will is
finished and there will be no action.

31.

If Power asks "Why?", then it is weakness (mind).

32.

Reason (mind) is also a lie.

There is only one factor (Mind), and
it is Boundless, Unknown; and all their words (Jewish writings) are
misinterpretations (profanation).

33.

Enough of "Because" (profane)!

Be damned, dog (Judas)!

34.

But you, My people (Russians), rise up and wake up!

35.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But you, My people (Russians), rise up and wake up! 35. May our rituals be performed correctly—beautifully and joyfully! 36. Among them are rituals dedicated to the elements and feasts of the
seasons. 37. The feast of the first night of the Prophet and his Bride! 38. Feast in honor of the three days of writing the Book of the Law. 39. Feast for Tahuti (Wisdom) and the Prophet's child - a mystery, O Prophet! 40. The feast of the Highest Ritual and the feast of the Equinox. 41. The Feast of Fire and the Feast of Water; the Feast of Life
and the even more majestic Feast of Death! 42. A daily feast in your hearts in the joy of My delight. 43. Every night a feast and pleasures of complete delight. 44. Hey! Feast! Rejoice! The future is not terrible. There is
Immortality and Eternal Ecstasy (Bliss). 45. There, death awaits the dogs (Jews). 46. Failed? Do you regret it? Is there fear in your heart? 47. Where I am, so that this does not happen. 48. Have no pity for the fallen (apostates)! I do not know them. I am
not for them. I do not comfort: I hate those who are comforted and
those who comfort. 49. I am unique. I am the Conqueror. I am not for those slaves who
perish. May they be cursed and killed! Truly! 50. I am blue and gold in the light of My betrothed, but in My eyes there
is a glint of red; purple and green sparks cover My body. 51. Purpler than purple is the Light, inaccessible to sight.

--- PAGE BREAK ---52.

Here is the veil: it is a black veil.

The veil of a modest woman.

It is a
veil of mourning and a shroud of death.

This is alien to me.

Tear apart the
deceitful ghost of centuries, do not cover your vices with words of virtue,
you do not serve Me with your vices, and you do wrong, and I will judge you
here and hereafter.

53.

Do not be afraid, O Prophet, when these words are spoken, you will not
regret it.

Without a doubt, you are My chosen one, and blessed will be those
eyes upon which you look with joy.

But I will hide you under a mask of
mourning, and those who see you will think in fear that you have fallen, but
I will lift you up.

54.

Those who shout that you are nothing are not valuable.

You will prove
to them that you are valuable.

Since they are slaves to "Because" (the
Jews), they are not from Me.

Letters?

Do not change their form and meaning.

55.

You will yet comprehend order and meaning.

You will find new
symbols (knowledge) to introduce into it.

56.

Get out of here, you mockers, even if you laugh at My honor, you
will not laugh for long.

When you become sad, then you will understand
that I have abandoned you.

57.

The righteous shall remain righteous.

And those who stink shall stink.

58.

Do not even think about change; be as you are now and no other.

Therefore, the kings of the Earth will be kings forever, and slaves will
serve them.

Nothing will be cast down or exalted: everything will remain as
it was.

But there are also My secret servants, and it happens that a king
hides behind the mask of a beggar.

A king can choose whatever attire he
desires; there is no particular standard here; however, a beggar is unable
to hide his poverty.

59.

Therefore, be vigilant, lest you reject the hidden king; love
everyone!

61.

The light before your eyes, O Prophet, you did not desire it, but it is
desirable.

62.

I have risen in your heart, and the kisses of the stars fall like heavy
rain upon your body.

63.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I have risen in your heart, and the kisses of the stars fall like heavy
rain upon your body. 63. You are exhausted in the voluptuous fullness of inspiration, the fading
sweeter than death itself, more rapid and joyful than the caress of the Worm
of the Underworld. 64. Oh! You have been overcome, we stand upon you, our rapture is poured out
upon you! Praise! Praise to the Great Ra-M-Ha! Rejoice now! Enter into our
union and ecstasy without delay! Enter into our ardent repose and write down
sweet words for kings! 65. I am the Lord! You are the Holy Chosen One. 66. Write and find ecstasy in writing! Work hard, let our bed be a bed of
labor! Tremble with the joy of life and death! Ah! You will die beautifully,
whoever sees you will admire you. Your death will become the seal of Our
Love's vow for eternity. Come, fill your heart with boundless joy. We are
one, We are Mind. 67. Stop! Stop! Strengthen yourself in your ecstasy. Strengthen yourself
in your ecstasy; do not faint from exalted kisses. 68. Be firm! Do not relax! Raise your head! Do not sigh so deeply —
die! 69. Ah! Ah! What do I feel? Have the words dried up? 70. In other spells, there is help and hope. Wisdom says: Be strong! Then
you will be able to bear more joy. Do not be an animal: enjoy yourself
with refinement. If you drink, do so according to the Law; when indulging
in art, strive for the utmost refinement of shades. And if you enjoy
yourself, let there be refinement in it. 71. Just go overboard! Go overboard! 72. Desire more with all your might! And if you are truly Mine, and
there is no doubt about that, and if you are always full of Joy, death
will be the crowning glory of it all.

--- PAGE BREAK ---73.

Ah!

Ah!

Death!

Death!

You will long for death.

Death, O man, is
forbidden to you.

74.

The length of your passionate longing will become the strength of the
glory of its death.

He who lives long and desires death, only he is king
among kings.

75.

Hey!

Listen to these words and numbers:
76.

4 6 3 8 A B K 2 4 A L G M O R 3 Y X 2 4 8 9 R P S TOVAL (the steps of
Faith)
- The knowledge of God).

What do they mean, O Prophet?

You do not know and
will never know.

He who will succeed you is coming, and he will explain in
detail.

Do not forget, O chosen one, to be Me, following Love in the Heavens,
flooded with Starlight, looking at people directly, communicating this Joyful
Word to them.

77.

Be proud and mighty among people!

78.

Exalt yourself!

For there is no one like you among people or among Angels
(Gods)!

Elevate yourself, O My Prophet, and you will surpass the stars
themselves.

They will worship your name in four parts, the wondrous, mystical
number of man, and the name of your house, 418 (the world of Infinity).

79.

The end of the concealment of the Mind; blessing and worship of the
Prophet!

Book 3
1.

The reward of the Great Ra-M-Ha.

2.

Here is the division that leads home (to the Light/England); here is the
unknown Word.

Pronunciation has no effect; all this is unnecessary.

Beware!

Stop!

Remove the spell, Great Ra-M-Ha!

3.

Let it be understood first and foremost that I am the God of War and
Vengeance.

And I will trouble (punish) them (the apostates) severely.

4.

Choose an island for yourself, you!

5.

Build a fortress on it.

6.

Surround it with military vehicles.

7.

I will give you a war machine.

8.

With its help, you will crush nations; no one will be able to stand before
you.

9.

Lurk!

Retreat!

Now crush them!

Such is the Law of the Battle of Conquest
(Judgment).

Also, I will be given divine honors at My secret abode.

10.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Also, I will be given divine honors at My secret abode. 10. Obtain the Stele of Revelation (the Ancient Vedas) itself, install it
in your secret Temple when it is located in a worthy place, and it will be
your Kiblah (symbol of Unity with God) forever. And not only will it not
fade, but on the contrary, it will miraculously regain its color. 11. It (the Book of Wisdom) is your only proof. I forbid you to argue. Obey! That is enough. I will make it easy for you to leave your ill-ordered
house in the city of Victory. You will deliver Her with honors, O Prophet,
even though it is not to your liking. In the future, dangers and unrest
await you. But I, the Great Ra-M-Ha, am with you. Worship Me with fire and
blood, worship Me with swords and spears. Let the woman gird herself with a
sword for my sake: let the blood of the wicked flow in my name. Trample the
infidels, crush them, O warrior, and you shall taste their flesh (victory)
from me! 12. Sacrifice cattle, small and large, but first, gold (money). 13. But not now. 14. You have yet to see that Hour, O Blessed Beast, and you, Crimson
Concubine, His desires! 15. This will plunge you into sorrow. 16. Do not cling so desperately to promises, do not be afraid when you are
subjected to curses. You do not even know the whole meaning. 17. Do not fear anything: do not be afraid of people, the Forces of Destiny,
Angels, or anyone else. Do not fear the power of money, the mockery of human
stupidity, or any other

--- PAGE BREAK ---17. Do not fear anything: do not be afraid of people, the Forces of Destiny,
Angels, or anyone else. Do not fear the power of money, the mockery of human
stupidity, or any other

--- PAGE BREAK ---

forces in Heaven, on Earth, or under the earth. I am your Refuge, and Reason
shines upon you; I am the Fortress, the Strength, the Fury of your hands.
18. Let pity be rejected! Cursed be those who are pitiful! Kill and
torture without mercy; crush them!
19. They will call this Stele (Book of Wisdom) the Abomination of
Desolation; count well the number of letters in its name, and it will appear
to you as 718 (Kabbalah).
20. Why? Because "Because" (Judaism) will collapse, as it will no longer
exist.
21. Place My image in the East; you must buy My image, which I will show you,
a special one, unlike any you know. And suddenly you will be able to do this
with ease.
22. Gather other forces to support Me; for they have gathered to exalt Me.
For I am the invisible object of worship, and the rest are lies. They are
destined for the Beast and his Bride, and the victors in the Trial of X (the
Battle of Judgment Day). What is this? Will you find out?
25. You will bake flatbread and eat it for My sake. There is another use
for this: after saturating it with incense, place it before Me, and bugs
will infest it, just like that, and the crawling creatures are dedicated
to Me.
26. You will kill them by naming your enemies, and they will fall before you.
27. By eating them, a passionate power of joy will also arise in you.
29. Moreover, keep them in this state (of suffering) for as long as
possible, for the longer the better, because they grow fat, receiving
strength (wealth) from Me. Everything is before Me.
30. My altar is open, it is made of copper; if you burn anything, do it on
silver or gold.
31. A rich man is coming from the West, he will shower you with gold.
32. You will forge steel from gold!
33. Be ready to soar or fall!
34. But your Holy Place (Asgard) will remain inviolable throughout the
centuries; even if it is burned and destroyed by fire and sword, the
invisible House will remain standing, and it will stand until the Great
Equinox, when Jesus will rise and the one with two rods will take the
earthly throne and palace. Another Prophet will rise and bring down a fresh
tremor from Heaven, another woman will awaken lust and worship of the
Serpent, another Soul of God and the Beast will merge in the tiara Priest,
another sacrifice will stain the Tomb, another king will rule; and no more
will reverence be poured out upon the Hawk-headed mystical Lord (God)!
36. Then the Prophet turned to God:
37. I worship You in this song: I am
the inspired Messenger of God.
For me, Heaven opens its veil,
Whose words are Truth! I call
upon You, I welcome Your
presence, O Great Ra-M-Ha!
Complete Unity is revealed!
I worship the Energy of Your Breath (Ingli), Supreme
and Awesome God,
Making the Gods and Death
tremble before You.
I, I worship You!
Appear on the Throne, Great Ra-M-Ha!
Open the paths of Wisdom!
Illuminate the paths of Truth!
Let the ways of Truth pass through Me,,
Making the Gods and Death
tremble before You.
I, I worship You!
Appear on the Throne, Great Ra-M-Ha!
Open the paths of Wisdom!
Illuminate the paths of Truth!
Let the ways of Truth pass through Me,

--- PAGE BREAK ---to excite Me or calm Me!

Aum!

Let them
fill Me!

38.

So, when Your Light (Inglia) is in me, and its Red Flame is like a sword
in my hand to advance Your order.

There is a secret door, I will arrange it
so that there is access to all posts (steps of Faith), as it is said:
This (Mind) is my Light; its rays consume me:
I have made a secret door
in the abode of the Great Ra-M-Ha!

To the worlds of Pura and Svaruga (the
world of Infinity).

I am your Prophet, O
Great Ra-M-Ha,
Prophet of the Supreme
God!

I strike my chest,
With wisdom I cast my spells.

Reveal Your starry brilliance, O Great Ra-M-Ha!

Invite me to dwell in Your House (Heavenly Asgard), O
Great Light, Supreme Mind!

Stay with me, Great Ra-M-Ha!

39.

All this and the Book of Wisdom, to tell how you achieved this, and the
reproduction of this ink and paper are eternal, for they contain the words of
the Mystery, and your commentary on the Book of the Law will be printed in
beautiful red ink and black on wonderful handmade paper; and to every man and
woman you meet, it will not be for food and drink, but given as Law.

Then
they will have the choice to accept this grace or refuse it; and no other
way.

Do this quickly!

40.

What about the work on the explanations?

It is easy, and the Mind
burning in your heart will make your pen confident and quick.

41.

Make your Kaaba a place of presence; everything must be done
skillfully and efficiently.

42.

You will see the trials yourselves, except for those of you who are
blind.

Do not reject anything, but traitors (Judas) must be recognized and
destroyed.

I am the Most High, and I am able to protect My servant.

Truth is
your argument.

Do not argue, do not entice, do not talk too much.

Those who
seek to catch you, to bring you down, attack them without pity or mercy, and
destroy them completely.

Sharp as a snake that has been stepped on, turn and
strike!

Be more vicious than them.

Drag their souls to terrible torture;
laugh at their fear; spit on them!

43.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Drag their souls to terrible torture;
laugh at their fear; spit on them! 43. Let the great Harlot (the Jews) beware of the following: if pity (love
for one's neighbor) and compassion (humanity), and tenderness (repentance) do
not visit her heart, if she abandons My work (the Covenant) for idle games
with ancient passions (the Ancient Vedas), then let her know the bitterness
of My retribution. I will sacrifice her child to Myself, fill her heart with
madness, men will reject her, and she will crawl through the twilight streets
as a withered and despised whore, drowning in liquid mud and perishing in
cold and hunger. 44. But let her be exalted in pride! Let her not follow My way! Let her
perform miracles of fornication! Let her kill her heart! Let her be noisy
and treacherous, in rich clothing and jewelry, having no shame before all
men. 45. Then I will raise her to the heights of power: I will conceive a child
from her, whose power will surpass all the kings of the Earth. I will fill
her with joy, through My power she will see the wonderful Nirvana (the world
of Infinity) and she will attain power, but she will bow down in worship.

--- PAGE BREAK ---46.

I am the military Lord of the Forties; the Eighties hide at the sight of
Me, they are swept away.

I will lead you to victory and rejoicing: I will
guide your weapon in battle, and you will know the thrill of destruction.

Success is your proof, courage is your armor; advance, I have strengthened
you, and no one will put you to flight!

47.

This Book will be translated into all languages, but always from the
original, written by the hand of the Beast; for in the random handwriting
and arrangement of letters in relation to one another are contained
mysteries (meanings) unknown even to the Beast itself.

Let no one attempt to
do this.

But He who comes after him, when, I will not say, will reveal the Key to
everything.

This crossed line is the Key, and this circle, squared in its
failure, is also the Key.

And Ab-Ra-Ka-Dabra (God Ra - God of Good).

This
will be his child, and it is a strange thing here.

And let him not seek the
meaning of this, for being alone, he will perish here.

48.

Now the Mystery of these letters has been solved, and I would like to
move to a more Holy Place.

49.

I abide in the secret of the four Words (the Great Ra-M-Ha), in
which all human gods (idols) are reviled.

50.

May they (idols) be cursed, cursed, cursed!!!

51.

I have the Head of a Hawk, and with it I peck out the eyes of the
sinner while he hangs on the cross.

52.

It is My wings that strike the face of the wicked and blind him.

53.

My claws tear at the flesh of the lawless.

54.

Bahlast!

Ompehda (finished)!

Hey, you toads, I spit on your beliefs.

55.

Let the wheels of the great Harlot (the Jews) be broken: in memory
of her, let all who have committed adultery with her be despised.

56.

Also in the name of Love and Me!

57.

Also despise every coward, mercenary soldiers who play at war, despise
all who are foolish.

58.

But not those who are wise and insightful, those of Heavenly descent,
those who are noble; for you are brothers!

59.

Fight as brothers!

60.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fight as brothers! 60. There is no Law except "Do what your heart (Mind) desires."
61. Here ends the word of God, who has taken His Throne, whose Light
floods the frame (vessel) of the Soul. 62. Honor Me! Strive for Me through the crucible of torment, and it
will turn into Bliss (Immortality). 63. A fool reads this Book and understands nothing. 64. Let him pass through the first trial (the 1st step of Faith), and
it will be like silver to him. 65. The second (2nd level of Faith) is like gold. 66. And the third (3rd stage of Faith) is precious stones of the purest
water. 67. And through the fourth (Immortality), the brightest sparks of the hidden
Fire. 68. Be that as it may, everyone will find this (Immortality) beautiful. Those who claim otherwise are enemies and outright liars. 69. There is success. 70. I am the Hawk-headed Lord of Silence and Power; The blue night sky
embraces My crown (the Universe). 71. You, twin Warriors (Russians), are destined to stand at the pillars of
this world! For your time is near. 72. I am the Lord of the Double Scepter of Power (the Two-Headed Eagle): this
is the Scepter of Power — but there is nothing in My left hand, for I have
crushed the Universe and nothing remains. 73. Turn these writings from right to left, from top to bottom, then look!

--- PAGE BREAK ---74.

My Name retains the splendor of magnificence, both in concealment
and when revealed in glory, like the Sun—the eternal son of midnight.

75.

End of words.

Aum.

Ha.

Book 5.

HARATY OF LIGHT
Haratia First.

The Beginning
In the Summer of the Priestess of Fire, on the Five Hundred and Seventy-Sixth
Circle of Life since the Great Migration from DaAaria, according to our
summer reckoning, on the Day of Three Moons, revered in Asgard Iriysky,
learn, children of the Great Race, about ancient times, about the Wisdom of
the Ancients preserved by the Volkhvs, about the Beginning of all that is
known to men, and for the times to come, written in the Harati by the darrung
VirRith.

Giving glory to God and your Holy Ancestors, may you comprehend with
your hearts the Greatness of God, through what is told in the song of the
Volkhv Sladagora, preserved in the Da'Arian Race.

Once upon a time, or rather, when there were no times, there were no Worlds
and Realities perceived by us, humans, there was only one Great Ra-M-Ha, not
incarnated.

He manifested himself in the New Reality and, from the perception of the New
Boundless Infinity, was illuminated by the Great Light of Joy.

And then the
Infinite New Eternity appeared, born in the New Reality, and an infinite
number of its Manifestations appeared.

This is how what we, humans, perceive as the spaces of the Worlds of Yavi,
Navi, and Prav came into being.

As soon as the Great Ra-M-Ha manifested itself in the New Reality, a super-
great absolute Something appeared in the Infinite New Eternity, and since it
was not what the Great Ra-M-Ha is, the super-great absolute Something
concealed within itself the beginning of evil, for everything that is
imperfect from the highest point of view of the Perfect One is relative evil.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is how what we, humans, perceive as the spaces of the Worlds of Yavi,
Navi, and Prav came into being. As soon as the Great Ra-M-Ha manifested itself in the New Reality, a super-
great absolute Something appeared in the Infinite New Eternity, and since it
was not what the Great Ra-M-Ha is, the super-great absolute Something
concealed within itself the beginning of evil, for everything that is
imperfect from the highest point of view of the Perfect One is relative evil. And when the Great Ra-M-Ha was illuminated by the Great Light of Joy, a great
stream of Inglia poured forth from Him — the Primordial Living Light, which
is His unspeakable Breath, and the unspeakable Light poured forth and
resounded in the Great Something. At that moment, when the Primordial Living Light moved away from the Great
Source of Inglia by no less than one peaceful fraction of a line, the
Primordial Living Light ceased to be part of the One whom we humans call —
the Great Ra-M-Ha, just as the light from Yarila-Sun or a burning torch is
not Yarila-Sun or a torch. The Primordial Living Light drove before it the darkness of the super-great
absolute Nothingness, deprived of Divine Light, and in some places it pierced
through it, leaving no trace; in other places it shone with bright Light,
flooding great spaces and pouring forth a stream of dazzling Light farther
and farther. But the further the Primordial Living Light moved away from the One we call
the Great Ra-M-Ha, the less bright was the light of Inglia, which more and
more often pushed aside and dispelled the darkness of non-existence, the
darkness of emptiness. In each cluster of the Primordial Living Light, many Worlds and Realities
appeared. And then, far, far away from the One whom we humans call
the Great Ra-M-Ha, His Primordial Living Light spread out for the last time,
like great clusters of stars.

--- PAGE BREAK ---In this Primordial Living Light, living beings appeared, for Inglia was
Life-giving.

Part of the Primordial Living Light poured into the depths and mixed with
darkness and gloom.

Primordial Flashes appeared, from which our Universe and
the Universes above it were born.

But everywhere, both above and below, like a blue river, there was a strip
of Primordial Living Light that did not mix with the mist, called the Golden
Path or Heavenly Iri.

From top to bottom in the New Reality, various Worlds were reflected from the
surface of the Heavenly Iriy, and in them, special Realities developed,
inhabited by special beings.

The higher the Realities were located, the greater the number of senses the
beings inhabiting them were endowed with, and in each locality there was not
just one Reality, but many Realities, and the beings inhabiting them had the
same number of senses, but the senses of the beings in these Realities, lying
next to each other, were different.

Such is our Infinite New Eternity in the New Reality, and in it there are
still great clusters of Primordial Living Light, whose faint reflection is
our Sun and stars.

The Primordial Living Light connected many Realities, giving rise to the
Great Trees of the Worlds.

Like the branches of a tree, the Primordial Living Light connected the leaves
of Reality with mighty shining trunks, and the trunks of the World Trees sank
their roots into the Infinite New Eternity born in the New Reality, and they
receive their Bright Power from the Bright Waters of Heavenly Iriy.

Thus was created the Garden of Viri, which occupies half of the Heavenly
Svarog.

Other Infinities in our infinite England came into being differently.

And
there, high above, but far from the One whom we humans call the Great Ra-M-
Ha, where the great clusters of the Primordial Living Light spread out, there
are the Higher Gods, one of whom we call Svarog, who is the God of the Worlds
and Realities of our Infinity.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Other Infinities in our infinite England came into being differently. And
there, high above, but far from the One whom we humans call the Great Ra-M-
Ha, where the great clusters of the Primordial Living Light spread out, there
are the Higher Gods, one of whom we call Svarog, who is the God of the Worlds
and Realities of our Infinity. There are more Svarogich than there are Infinities existing in our infinite
Inglia. Those of the Higher Gods who are not Gods of Infinities dwell in the shining
World of Spiritual Power. The Svarozhich are infinitely great and infinitely
powerful compared to us: we can speak of Them as Perfect, Almighty, All-Good,
and All-Knowing. We are right to place the Higher Gods above everything accessible to our
minds, everything we can comprehend. But any Soul living in any of the beings — on the smallest particle,
revolving around the original basis — we relate to Svarog with our power in
the same way that Svarog relates to the One we call the Great Ra-M-Ha. Every tiny particle of our body, stone, or tree is a kind of solar system, a
sun surrounded by Earths on which billions of thinking beings live, sometimes
surpassing us in their mental and moral development. More important than what has been said now may be the fact that in the
Infinite New Eternity born in the New Reality, there is below an Abyss as
boundless and unknowable as there is above, and that what is below is a
likeness of what is above, and what is above is the basis for the likeness of
what is below, according to the original will of the Primordial One, whom we
humans call the Great Ra-M-Ha.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Haratya Second.

Birth
At the source of the Summer of the Priestess of Fire, on the Five Hundred and
Seventy-Sixth Circle of Life since the Great Migration from DaAria, according
to our summer reckoning, on the Day of Lyubomir, when the Wise Priests bless
the Sacred Family Unions between the Great Clans, in all the Holy Places of
the Great Race.

And on this beautiful evening, hear, children of the Great Race, about
ancient and beautiful times, about Ancient Wisdom, preserved by the Magi.

About the Birth of the Righteous Worlds, and for the times to come, inscribed
in the Haratiya of Light by the gift of VirRit.

Exalting the Glory of the
Great Ra-M-Ha, may everyone comprehend with their hearts the greatness of the
Worlds, through what is told in the song of the Wizard Sladagora, preserved
in the Da'Arian Race of Parda.

In the true Beginning, or rather, when in the Infinite New Eternity the Great
powerful stream of Life-giving shining Inglia - the Primordial Life-giving
Light - spread out, in the New Reality various Spaces and Realities of the
Worlds of Yavi, Navi, and Prav were born.

And the closer these Spaces and Realities were located to the Original Source
of Light in various Shining Worlds, the greater the dimensions of these
Greatest Spaces and Realities were filled.

And in them were born the Life-Giving Ancient Deities-Patron Saints of the
Worlds and the greatest Spaces and Realities, who, developing in the Divine
Light of the Primordial purest Inglia, knew and arranged their boundless
Spaces and Realities, and the more multidimensional the Abodes of Life were,
the greater the number of senses the ancient beings inhabiting the Abodes of
Life were endowed with.

Thus was born the Highest and infinitely multidimensional Bright World of
Prav.And in them were born the Life-Giving Ancient Deities-Patron Saints of the
Worlds and the greatest Spaces and Realities, who, developing in the Divine
Light of the Primordial purest Inglia, knew and arranged their boundless
Spaces and Realities, and the more multidimensional the Abodes of Life were,
the greater the number of senses the ancient beings inhabiting the Abodes of
Life were endowed with.

Thus was born the Highest and infinitely multidimensional Bright World of
Prav.

Below the Highest World of Prav, in each Shining Abode of Life in the
Spaces of the Golden Path, there was not just one Reality, but many
Realities, and the beings inhabiting the Abodes of Life had the same number
of senses, but the senses of the beings in these Realities, lying next to
each other, were different.

And for different thinking beings, different Suns and stars shone.

The
Primordial Life-Giving Light of Inglia connected the Radiance of different
Suns and stars from many diverse Realities, giving rise to the Great Trees
of the Worlds.

Thus, the branches of the tree connected the Primordial Life-Giving Light and
the Leaves-Realities of our World Tree with the mighty Ever-Shining Trunk.

And each Leaflet-Reality shone immeasurably, overflowing with the bright
light of various Suns, while the trunk of the World Tree extended its
numerous roots into the Infinite New Eternity, born in the New Reality.

And high above, on the Reality Leaves, under the dazzling rainbow glows of
the Great Suns and stars, New Abodes of Life were born, in which the Ancient
Patron Gods of our Families appeared.

They settled in the New Abodes of Life, bringing Beauty and Creation with
Harmony to the beings born and living there.

They transformed the lands in
the New Abodes of Life into blooming, fragrant Gardens under bright,
multicolored Suns and stars.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They settled in the New Abodes of Life, bringing Beauty and Creation with
Harmony to the beings born and living there. They transformed the lands in
the New Abodes of Life into blooming, fragrant Gardens under bright,
multicolored Suns and stars. Having filled the Shining New Abodes of Life with all kinds of blessings,
they set off for other Realities and continued to create there as well,
helping the inhabitants of those Realities. Nature in those Bright Lands remained untouched, but life in those Lands was
filled with Beauty.

--- PAGE BREAK ---There, eternal Wisdom poured into the World and filled Life with immeasurable
abundance.

Thus, the Abodes of Life that were born in the New Reality
flourished.

The Abodes of Life in the Radiant World developed in Harmony and
Perfection.

In all relationships, in deeds and in life, only Conscience and
Wisdom were the measure, complemented by Love and Faith, which lead
Consciousness to perfection.

Wisdom and Labor inspire Consciousness, strengthened by glorious deeds.

Those
blossoming Lands were transformed, and beings turned their gaze toward the
Heavens.

Fixing their clear gaze on the Heavens, beings strove with all their
Souls toward those distant realms from whence they had come to Earth, located
in various Realities, the All-Wise Ancient Deities-Patron Saints.

The primordial Light of Inglia developed the flight of thought, giving rise
to the Great Creation in all the Harmonious Light Worlds.

And various forms
of Life, thanks to Pure and Clear Thought, as well as the Great Creation,
left the Flowering Lands and rushed to the Heavens, filling new Spaces and
Realities in various multidimensionalities.

Thus were born the Greatest and multidimensional Spaces and Realities of the
Bright World of Prav.

Spreading across diverse Spaces and Realities, Wise thinking beings, guided
by the Ancient Deities-Patron Saints, settled in the most beautiful
uninhabited New Lands of the Bright World of Prav, and then returned to the
Heavens.

This is how the harmonious Worlds of Pravy were populated, born in the
Primordial Living Light of Joy, which radiates the Original Great Ra-M-Ha.

Kharaty Third.

The Great Assa
At the source of Letha, Priestess of Fire, on the Five Hundred and Seventy-
Sixth Circle of Life since the Great Migration from DaAaria, according to our
summer reckoning, on the Day of Great Inglia, when the Wise Priests light the
Sacred Living Fire in all the Temples of the Great Race.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kharaty Third. The Great Assa
At the source of Letha, Priestess of Fire, on the Five Hundred and Seventy-
Sixth Circle of Life since the Great Migration from DaAaria, according to our
summer reckoning, on the Day of Great Inglia, when the Wise Priests light the
Sacred Living Fire in all the Temples of the Great Race. It will be told to you, children of the Great Race, about the ancient and
beautiful times, about the Ancient Wisdom, preserved by the Priests. About the Great Ass between Light and Darkness, which engulfed the Worlds of
Prav, and for the times to come in these Charities of Light inscribed by the
darrung VirRith. Exalting the Glory of the Great Ra-M-Ha, may you see with your hearts the
greatness of the Worlds of Light, through what is told in the song of the
Volkhv Sladagora, preserved in the Da'Arian Race of Parda. Many years ago, or perhaps yesterday, for Eternity knows no limits in time,
in the Bright World of Arlegs, which encompasses two hundred and fifty-six
dimensions, the Great Assa took place, the Great Battle of the Forces of
Light and Darkness. One of the Noble Arlegs, named Chernoog, decided to use cunning to circumvent
the Universal Laws established by God for ascension along the Golden Path of
Spiritual Development. And he said to his brothers: If we, the Noble Arlegs, remove the Seals of
Protection from the Secret Ancient Wisdom of our World for the lower
worlds, then, according to the Law of Divine Correspondence, the Seals of
Protection will also be removed for us from the Secret Ancient Wisdom of
all the Highest Worlds. And a free passage will open up for us, the Noble
Arlegs, along the Golden Path of Spiritual Development, and this Knowledge
will also help all Spirits and Souls from various Worlds below the World
of the Arlegs to know the Secret Ancient Wisdom of all Worlds, and having
known it, to stand alongside the Deities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---But Arleg Chernoog met with worthy resistance in the form of the Noble Arleg
— Svarog, the Supreme Guardian of the Secret Ancient Wisdom of the World of
Arlegs, who guards the Seals of Protection with the Secret Ancient Wisdom of
this World, and Chernoog's cunning plan failed.

Then, throughout all the Worlds, Spaces, and Realities lying along the Golden
Path, Chernog's call rang out.

He called on the Arlegs to come to his aid.

And the entire multidimensional World of Arlegs responded to Chernog's call,
and the Dark Legs, Dark Arlegs, and Koscheis, the rulers of Hell, flew to him
uninvited, and with them came the entire army of Hell.

Svarog could not stand alone against such great Dark forces.

And Chernog
broke the first Guard Seal, the Seal of the Ancient Knowledge of the World of
Arlegs, and the Knowledge spread widely throughout the Worlds, lying below
the World of Arlegs, down to the very depths of Hell.

In turn, the wise Svarog, seeing that he alone could not preserve the Guard
Seals with the Secret Ancient Wisdom of the World of Arlegs, called for help.

He called upon the Higher Worlds for assistance and turned to the Guardians
of the World of Knowledge.

But the Guardians of the Secret Ancient Wisdom of the World of Knowledge
remained indifferent, as they did not want to fight Chernogog, considering
him free to choose his own actions.

Only the Guardians of the Secret Ancient Wisdom of the Worlds of Beginnings,
as well as the Deities-Protectors from all the Higher Worlds and Realities,
responded to the call of the Noble Arleg Svarog.

And they surrounded the entire World of Arlegs with a dense energy dome of
Icy Silence, and the Great Assa between the Light and Dark forces began,
and time stopped in the Worlds.

The Great Battle engulfed many Lands of the Worlds, from Hell itself to the
World of Nirvana.And they surrounded the entire World of Arlegs with a dense energy dome of
Icy Silence, and the Great Assa between the Light and Dark forces began,
and time stopped in the Worlds.

The Great Battle engulfed many Lands of the Worlds, from Hell itself to the
World of Nirvana.

But the Noble Arlegi did not wish to participate in the Great Assembly, nor
to fight against the Guardian Deities from all the Higher Worlds and
Realities, nor to remain inside the dense energy dome of the Icy Silence
created by the Keepers of the Secret Ancient Wisdom of the Worlds of
Beginnings.

With their artificial Suns, they melted the adjacent part of the dome of the
Icy Silence and descended into the World of the Legs and the Intermediate
Worlds, and Chernog, who also did not want to remain inside the dome of the
Icy Silence, descended and found refuge in the Earthly World.

From the beginning of the Great Assa, Svarog rose above the World of the
Arlegs, for he united the Light Forces with his call and led them into battle
against the armies of the Dark Worlds.

The defeated Dark Legs and Dark Arlegs were sent back to the Worlds from
whence they came, taking with them a great oath not to violate the Laws of
Ascension along the Golden Path of Spiritual Development established by the
Great Ra-M-Ha.

Only the Koscheis, rulers of Hell, with the remnants of their armies, rushed
to the passage in the dome of the Icy Silence, which was created by the
Noble Arlegi.

And they disappeared into their Hell, knowing that the Forces
of Light do not penetrate the Worlds and Realities of Darkness, carrying the
banners of the War of Traga.

By the will of the Great Ra-M-Ha, the Deity-Protectors from all the highest
Worlds and Realities created a Boundary separating Light and Darkness so that
the forces of Darkness could not penetrate the Light Lands of the Great
Svarog.

The Boundary was laid across the Lands in Yavi to separate Light from
Darkness.--- PAGE BREAK ---

By the will of the Great Ra-M-Ha, the Deity-Protectors from all the highest
Worlds and Realities created a Boundary separating Light and Darkness so that
the forces of Darkness could not penetrate the Light Lands of the Great
Svarog. The Boundary was laid across the Lands in Yavi to separate Light from
Darkness. The clear Boundary divided all Realities, and the Dark Navi were cast below
Yavi. Yavi expanded, grew, and strengthened, blocking all passages to Hell. It also blocked the Dark Arlegs and Legs, who fought against Svarog and
committed evil in the Pure Svarog.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Reality, boundless as a border, separated the World of Hell and Darkness,
where power reigns, from the Wisdom of Ancient Knowledge of the World, where
Conscience reigns, Wisdom, not power.

But the Dark Forces, having tasted Knowledge, turn their gaze toward the
Worlds of Creation.

Haratia the Fourth.

The Structure of Worlds
At the very source of the Summer of the Priestesses of Fire, on the Five
Hundred and Seventy-Sixth Circle of Life since the Great Migration from
Da'Aria, according to our summer reckoning, after the Day of the Great
Inglia, when the Wise Priests lit the Sacred Living Fire in all the Temples
of the Great Race.

It will be told to you, children of the Great Race, about the ancient and
beautiful times, about the Ancient Wisdom, preserved by the Priests.

On the Structure of Various Worlds and the New Great Ase between Light and
Darkness, which encompassed the Four Halls of Svarog and the Earth, and for
the times to come in these Harati of Light inscribed by the darrung VirRith.

Exalting the Glory of the Great Ra-M-Ha, may you see with your heart the
Greatness of Life in the Worlds, through what is told in the song of the
Volkhv Sladagora, preserved in the Da'Arian Clan of Parda.

In the great land of Ta-Kemi, which was located east of Antlani and south of
Venia, there lived numerous tribes with skin the color of Darkness and
tribes with skin the color of the Setting Sun.

Among these tribes there were two powerful castes of Priests, and they had
three Spiritual Teachings, which were given to them by the Ants who came from
the land of the Ants.

One Spiritual Teaching — external, not representing any
secrets, given to the peoples of Ta-Kemi by the Priests of the initial caste
and not recognized by the Priests themselves as the true Faith — stated that
after death, the Soul of every person is reincarnated into the body of a
person of one caste or another, sometimes a magnificent Leader or even a High
Priest.Among these tribes there were two powerful castes of Priests, and they had
three Spiritual Teachings, which were given to them by the Ants who came from
the land of the Ants.

One Spiritual Teaching — external, not representing any
secrets, given to the peoples of Ta-Kemi by the Priests of the initial caste
and not recognized by the Priests themselves as the true Faith — stated that
after death, the Soul of every person is reincarnated into the body of a
person of one caste or another, sometimes a magnificent Leader or even a High
Priest.

When the life of the deceased person was noble and worthy.

And also, into the body of an animal, insect, or even a plant, when a person
has lived their own life unworthily.

But the priests of this caste themselves professed a different spiritual
teaching.

They sincerely thought and believed that the transmigration of human souls
takes place not only on our Earth, but that the souls of deceased people also
go to other Earths in our Universe, where they incarnate in the bodies of
people or animals of other Worlds, depending on their actions in their
Manifest life on Earth.

They called this Law Karma, in honor of the Deity Karna, who monitors
compliance with the Law of Spiritual Perfection.

However, among the priests of the second caste there was a group of even
more highly initiated priests, little known to the priests of the lower
castes, and they had a different spiritual teaching, very different from the
previous ones.

This Spiritual Teaching proclaimed that our surrounding Manifest World, the
world of Stars and Solar Systems, is only a speck of dust in the Infinite
Universe.

That there are stars and suns that are white, blue, purple, pink, green,
stars and suns of colors we have never seen, beyond our senses.

And their
number is infinitely great, their diversity is boundless, the spaces
separating them are endless.--- PAGE BREAK ---

That there are stars and suns that are white, blue, purple, pink, green,
stars and suns of colors we have never seen, beyond our senses. And their
number is infinitely great, their diversity is boundless, the spaces
separating them are endless. And all these diverse worlds are nothing compared to other worlds lying
outside our universe, and again their number is boundlessly great and their
diversity immeasurably vast. Infinities of Infinities separate all these diverse and manifold Worlds.

--- PAGE BREAK ---outside our universe, and again their number is boundlessly great and their
diversity immeasurably vast. Infinities of Infinities separate all these diverse and manifold Worlds.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

And these Wise Priests taught that in our Universe there is a Golden Path
of Spiritual Ascent, leading upward and called Svarog, along which the
Harmonious Worlds are arranged, and they follow one after another:
the World of
Humans, the
World of
Legs, the
World of
Arlegs, the
Worlds of
Aranos, the
Worlds of
Radiance,
the World of
Nirvana,
the Worlds of
Beginnings, the
World of Spiritual
Power, the World of
Knowledge,
the World of Harmony,
the World of Spiritual
Light, the Worlds of
Spiritual Heritage, the
World of Law,
The Worlds of
Creation, the
World of Truth,
the Worlds of the Protectors, and many others, up to the Greatest World of
Prav -
Svarog.
Some of the Highest Bearers of Spiritual Heritage in our Universe, in their
kindness, descended and placed their Worlds among the Worlds of the Arlegs
and Aranos, in order to be closer to those in need of help.
The worlds located along the Golden Path are those mentioned in the Ancient
Vedas.
If the World of Humans is four-dimensional, then the Worlds located along the
Golden Path have the following number of dimensions:
The World of Legs — 16,
the World of Arlegs — 256,
The Worlds of Aranov — 65,536,
The World of Shining Ones — 655,362,
World of Nirvana — 655,364,
Worlds of Beginnings — 655,368,
World of Spiritual Power — 6,553,616,
World of Knowledge — 6,553,632,
World of Harmony — 6,553,664,
World of Spiritual Light — 65,536,128,
Worlds of Spiritual Wealth — 65,536,256,
World of Law — 65,536,512,
Worlds of Creation — 655,361,024,
World of Truth — 655,362,048,
Worlds of Patrons — 655,364,096.
There are also intermediate worlds: five, seven, nine, twelve, and fewer
in number of dimensions. At the end of Svarog lies the Boundary, beyond
which begins the Greatest World of Prav.
In addition to the Harmonious and intermediate Worlds located along the
Golden Path, there are incidental realities: time, space, wandering Spirits,
changing images, shadows, sounds, numbers, the World of Darkness, also called
Hell, the Abyss, where the heaviest particles of the primordial Darkness
entered.
The worlds located along the Golden Path are more harmonized and more
complete in their manifestations than the intermediate Realities: thus,
although in the five-dimensional Reality there are more opportunities for the
development of Spiritsmore harmonized and more
complete in their manifestations than the intermediate Realities: thus,
although in the five-dimensional Reality there are more opportunities for the
development of Spirits

--- PAGE BREAK ---than in our World of Yavi, due to eternal disorder, particles of primordial
Darkness often explode in the five-dimensional Reality.

Examples of Spaces and Realities with fewer dimensions include the Worlds of
sounds, shadows, mirror images, and ever-changing images, where constant
transformations take place.

There, a flower can become a Scroll of Haratiya
in an instant, then a worm, a lynx, and so on.

And all these Worlds and Realities are not located separately, but
interpenetrate each other.

So, where in one Reality the great waves of the
sea rage, in another Reality the forest rustles or high mountains covered
with eternal snow stand.

The reason for the transition from one Reality to another, new Reality, is
is the change in the lines of force of the Spirits and the Law of God.

The infinite spaces that separate these Realities are like streets in a big
city where, in their original form, Spirits from different Worlds can meet.

But when Souls enter a foreign World or Reality, they must obey the Laws
existing in that World.

A distinctive feature of the World Structure is that all Worlds, all
Realities, regardless of the number of dimensions that define them, are
located in the same place, as far as human understanding and that Infinite
closedness are concerned, while filling our entire Universe.

But there are barriers between Worlds and Realities of different dimensions,
which can only be overcome and joined to the life of another World or Reality
by acquiring the number of feelings and Qualities that are characteristic of
that World or Reality.

Some Worlds or Universes with the same number of dimensions exist side by
side, while Realities penetrate each other.

But having qualitatively different feelings or different forms and conditions
of life, the inhabitants of these Realities, existing in a single space-time
structure, do not interact with each other and sometimes are not even aware
of each other's existence.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some Worlds or Universes with the same number of dimensions exist side by
side, while Realities penetrate each other. But having qualitatively different feelings or different forms and conditions
of life, the inhabitants of these Realities, existing in a single space-time
structure, do not interact with each other and sometimes are not even aware
of each other's existence. And in each such Reality, there is its own Nature, its own Time flows, and
there are its own Laws, inherent only to this Reality. Many of these Laws are difficult for a person living in our Manifest World to
comprehend, because they do not fit into the generally accepted framework of
human perception, into the framework of this form of existence, and, as a
result, the meaning of the Laws of an alien Reality becomes incomprehensible
to a person. Knowledge of the surrounding world of Nature and one's inner world leads a
person to the realization of themselves as an integral part of the Universe
(God). And if this knowledge is complemented by the ability to perceive, it opens up
the possibility for a person to know not only their own world of Yavi, but
also other worlds and realities, sometimes lying beyond the threshold of
human perception and understanding. Transition to another world or reality is possible, but to do so, one must
cross a threshold associated with the loss of the body of this dimension. Such a transition in the world of Yavi is called death by humans. Death is the loss of the body in which the Soul lives. In another World, the
Soul enters the body of an intelligent being of that World to which it is
directed. The World of People is at the foundation of the Golden Path, and a
person's ascent to a Higher World or Higher Reality is possible only as a
result of Spiritual Development.

--- PAGE BREAK ---For this purpose, Deities came to the World of Humans, and Teachers of
humanity continue to come.

These are beings of a higher order of complexity
who descend to guide and transmit Higher Knowledge and God's Commandments.

Higher beings from other Worlds can enter lower Worlds, where they are
perceived not in their original, true essence, but in the forms of perception
of that World, which are only accessible to its inhabitants and residents.

If
our Deities of the World of Patrons descend to the World of People, then we
can only perceive them as People.

The more complex the structure of the World in a certain area of the Golden
Path, the greater the chances for the inhabitants of that area to be
reflected in Worlds of lesser complexity.

After all, it is not only the person himself who works on the development of
his spiritual essence, but also the Universal Forces that elevate or delay
his spiritual development.

The ascent of inhabitants from one Reality to a Higher one does not
necessarily occur gradually.

If, in their development, a person gains the
opportunity to become acquainted with the complexity of the nearest
harmonized World along the Golden Path, this instantly transports them to the
Higher World, bypassing the various Worlds and Realities of the intermediate
dimensions.

The Laws and Commandments of God are the Highest Wisdom.

The fate of each Spiritual entity largely depends on actions that contribute
to or hinder its development and perception of fundamentally new structures
and forms of the Higher Worlds.

Freed from the physical body, the Spiritual entity receives the Reality that
most corresponds to its Spiritual and Soul development.

Upon entering a certain area of Infinity, depending on its own level of
Spiritual development, the personality begins to live according to the Laws
of the world of that Infinity.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Freed from the physical body, the Spiritual entity receives the Reality that
most corresponds to its Spiritual and Soul development. Upon entering a certain area of Infinity, depending on its own level of
Spiritual development, the personality begins to live according to the Laws
of the world of that Infinity. In a series of Infinities, there is one that represents more than a giant
sphere, the surface of which is the boundary of this Infinity. In some places, this sphere almost touches other Infinities, which are also
spherical, and in places where cone-shaped spaces have formed between the
spherical Infinities, there are Worlds that resemble pyramids or cones, whose
three sides and bases are concave surfaces. On one of these super-giant spheres live highly gifted beings who, by earthly
standards, can be called humans, although they only remotely resemble humans. Some of their dwellings resemble trees, others — giant mushrooms or beautiful
giant flowers, to the entrance of which they ascend on special flying
machines similar to Earth's Whitemans. There are also stranger dwellings: it is as if a column of smoke rises there
in a wide and long spiral, and people live in the voids of this spiral. They
all eat a variety of foods made from the energy clusters of that inhabited
world. This food is easily extracted from the soil and air when needed and
is consumed by them in extremely small quantities. People dress in magnificent fabrics created from various energy flows. They know nothing of hardship. These people have all kinds of machines and
mechanisms at their disposal, belonging to all the Clans collectively, and
young people

--- PAGE BREAK ---They willingly work for them, creating everything necessary or desirable from
energy clusters.

Sometimes a person enters Worlds that are completely unrelated to the Golden
Path.

These are incidental Realities: time, space, conscience, madness,
wandering Spirits, and the World of Darkness, also known as Hell.

In addition, they may find themselves in the intermediate Realities of
Svarog, which are characterized by uncertainty and a violation of cause-and-
effect relationships.

In these Realities, things happen that the inhabitants
of the Harmonious World perceive as miracles.

However, for the inhabitants
of the intermediate Realities, this is extremely inconvenient: it is
impossible to reliably predict the outcome of their actions.

Throughout the Golden Path, the Only True and Unconditional Law of the
Universe applies: Love for all that exists and Creation, and the birth of
Love is preceded by Wise Knowledge.

Through the path of Love and Knowledge, each Spiritual essence develops,
rising to the Creator and gradually comprehending His creations, and, having
learned, begins to create something of its own, filled with Love.

The highest manifestation of Love is self-sacrifice to help those lower than
oneself.

This is what the Legi, who lead people, and the Highest Bearers of
Spiritual Heritage, who bring people Knowledge of the Highest, Perfect Love,
do.

Love teaches understanding, mercy, and sacrifice.

These qualities prepare
a person for service to others and for creativity, which is seen as a
struggle against evil, as participation in the transformation of the
world.

It is necessary to view the fight against evil correctly.

Evil is not
absolute.

Evil is merely a manifestation of underdevelopment and
ignorance.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Evil is not
absolute. Evil is merely a manifestation of underdevelopment and
ignorance. Even demons, the lowest beings of the dark world, are not deprived of hope
for spiritual ascension in the distant future, for liberation from filth and
malice as a result of a long path of development under the guidance of the
Higher Spiritual Mentors of the Golden Path. The actions of any spiritual being primarily affect that being itself. Since
every spiritual being has absolute freedom of choice, its decisions affect
its structure. Her future depends on her choice: with some actions, the developing Spiritual
essence contributes to her ascent along various areas of the Golden Path,
while with others, she burdens herself, strengthens connections that hinder
development, and even drags herself down into the Dark Worlds. This is the Law of Karma: if it is impossible to ascend, it becomes necessary
to go through the entire Circle of Life again, but in different Realities, in
order to achieve the development necessary for one's Spiritual essence. In primitive human perception, the Law of Karma is reflected as the idea of
the Great Judgment of Conscience after death, also called the Last Judgment. In reality, the Last Judgment is the Soul's response to all the deeds that a
person has committed, said, and done during their lifetime, which is very
painful for the Soul. The Judgment consists of three stages:
The deities ask what a person has learned in the world to which they sent
him. What has he done for God? And how has he lived according to his
conscience? Everything must be answered honestly; nothing can be concealed. Everything that a person has done in his entire life is revealed. This is
painful for the soul, since all decent and indecent deeds are imprinted on
the soul. No one has the power to add or erase them. After the Judgment of Conscience, the Soul is sent to the World that
corresponds to its Mental and Spiritual development.deeds are imprinted on
the soul. No one has the power to add or erase them. After the Judgment of Conscience, the Soul is sent to the World that
corresponds to its Mental and Spiritual development.

--- PAGE BREAK ---But everything is subject to the One Law of Ascent from the lower to the
higher.

Evil, even if created unintentionally, always weighs heavily on
its creator.

The body is controlled by the Soul, the Soul is controlled by
the Spirit, and the Spirit is controlled by Conscience.

The Great Ra-M-Ha grants every pure Soul Ancient Wisdom — Mind, i.e.

a part
of Heavenly Truth.

The Soul must learn this Wisdom in the Manifest World in
accordance with the flow of life.

This is the Higher Mental and Spiritual
Meaning of Earthly Life.

Wisdom in the Soul interacts with Heavenly Truth.

Their constant, harmonious
relationship is called Conscience.

If the Spiritual essence acts in
accordance with the Spirit bestowed upon the Soul, then a person's Conscience
is calm.

Peace in the Soul fills time with the meaning of Life.

One should live according to Conscience!

If People of the Great Race neglect
their Conscience and commit sins, whether voluntary or involuntary, they will
be afflicted by anxiety, ailments, and diseases.

People of the Great Race
cannot lose the Highest Truth, the Wisdom of God and the Wisdom of their
Ancestors, for it is impossible to lose that which is connected with Souls
and hearts.

People in real life should never create dark, hellish, insane, and chaotic
images in their minds, i.e., the figurative realities of the Hellish World,
in which evil and cruelty, parasitism and idleness, lies and deceit, fear and
unbelief, oppression and the finiteness of existence are manifested.

The most important thing is not to create hellish types of existence for a
new figurative reality.

For this destroys not only the peaceful figurative
reality created in the Pure Soul, but also destroys the very person who
created such a Dark world.The most important thing is not to create hellish types of existence for a
new figurative reality.

For this destroys not only the peaceful figurative
reality created in the Pure Soul, but also destroys the very person who
created such a Dark world.

A soul with a Hellish figurative Reality enters Worlds that are completely
disconnected from the Golden Path; these are incidental Realities: time,
space, madness, wandering Spirits, and the World of Darkness, also known as
the Hellish World.

Only where Spiritual entities are so high that ascension is a natural
condition of their life, which is itself directed towards assisting the
ascension of lower beings as an inevitable law of movement in the Spiritual
World, does it give way to another active principle, which manifests itself
in the form of Love.

The inhabitants of various Worlds and Realities seek the most complete
Knowledge about the Righteous way of life and the knowledge of their own
essence.

Thus, the Spirits of the Elemental Forces see happiness in gaining power and
conquering the elements; the Spirits of the Stars of Knowledge understand
happiness as the accumulation of Wisdom, as the comprehension of the Worlds
and themselves; for the Spirits of Death, happiness exists in the transition
from Reality to Reality; the Spirits of Space are happy when they overcome
it.

Complete happiness can only be found in the constant struggle against evil
and ignorance, which prevent the inhabitants of the dark Lands from beginning
their ascent along the various paths of the Golden Way.

This is possible only in one way: in communication with other inhabitants of
one's Reality, in the cultivation of the Spiritual essence of man to perceive
the universal Life Principle, Which manifests itself in all areas of the
Golden Path.

The teachings of the Highest Bearers of Spiritual Heritage, who carry the
Divine Light to the inhabitants of all Realities, are united in their basic
principles.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is possible only in one way: in communication with other inhabitants of
one's Reality, in the cultivation of the Spiritual essence of man to perceive
the universal Life Principle, Which manifests itself in all areas of the
Golden Path. The teachings of the Highest Bearers of Spiritual Heritage, who carry the
Divine Light to the inhabitants of all Realities, are united in their basic
principles. To ascend, it is important only to realize your Unity with God, your
indissoluble kinship with other beings, placing between yourself and them
Love for your equals and compassion for lower forms of Life.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Mercy and Faith, the all-healing feeling of Love and Goodness, are capable of
transforming even demons in the future — those seemingly eternal enemies of
Divine Light, animals of the world of Darkness, who preach among the people
of the Manifest World: permissiveness, cruelty, greed, selfishness, and the
finiteness of existence.

Demons, the lowest beings of the dark world, arose at the birth of the
worlds "in the Mist" and were similar to Legs, differing from them only in
their original lack of Divine Light.

The true rulers of the Dark Worlds are: the dark Legs, the dark Arlegs, and
the Koscheis — the Princes of Darkness.

They came into being in the primordial Darkness when particles of the Great
Inglia, the Primordial Life-Giving Light, entered their Worlds.

But their active development began during the Great Assa, in those dark
Realities where the seeds of Ancient Knowledge fell, when Satanail broke
the Seals of Protection with the Secret Ancient Wisdom of the World of
Arlegs.

Having acquired the Ancient Knowledge of the World of Arlegs, some of the
Realities of the Worlds of Darkness immediately began to fight against the
Fog and Darkness and began their ascent along the Golden Path.

However, possessing power and Ancient Knowledge, they did not learn to
distinguish between Good and Evil, carrying within themselves unresolved
particles of the original primordial Darkness.

The beginning of power, coercion, and subjugation permeates all Dark Worlds
and Realities.

And they tried to introduce this base form into the areas
bordering the World of Darkness, where the Halls of Makosh, Rada, and Rasa
were located, as well as the Sleeve of the Hall of Svat, where the Sun and
our Earth are located.

All this led to the beginning of a new Great Assa.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And they tried to introduce this base form into the areas
bordering the World of Darkness, where the Halls of Makosh, Rada, and Rasa
were located, as well as the Sleeve of the Hall of Svat, where the Sun and
our Earth are located. All this led to the beginning of a new Great Assa. This happened because the
Aranas did not allow the Dark Ones to ascend the Golden Path, offering them
first to transform into the Light Ones, and for this purpose they drew a
boundary across the Lands of the Manifest World. During the time of the new Great Assa, the Dark Ones were expelled from all
the Lands that were in the Halls of Makosh, Rada, and Rasa, and therefore the
Path of the Dark Spirits and Souls began to pass only through the world of
People living on the Lands in the Sleeve of the Hall of Svat, and only
through the world of People did it become possible to ascend to the top along
the Golden Path. The Earth, located in the middle between Light and Darkness, began to play a
particularly important role. Because of this, the Dark Forces decided to give
Ancient Knowledge to demons so that they would have power over people. That is why there is a struggle between the Dark and Light Forces on Earth,
in which people from different tribes and nations participate. The blood of the Great Race (Aryan) is holy blood! The Commandments of the Great Ra-M-Ha
1. My children, return to your roots, and you will open the gates to the
Divine World. 2. Do not enter other Worlds with your laws, but observe the laws of that
World. 3. Observe My Laws, be Wise and Perfect. 4. Do not follow Darkness, but follow Light, for those who follow
Darkness will perish prematurely. 5. Do not listen to those who call for injustice, but listen to those who
call for Truth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---6.

Do not listen to those who say that life is finite, for they
themselves do not know what they are saying.

7.

Do not listen to those who say that your neighbor is your enemy, but
listen to those who say that your neighbor is your friend.

8.

Go through many worlds, learning about them and perfecting your Spirit.

9.

Know Wisdom and you will find Light on your Path.

10.

Do not give the Vedas to those who turn them into evil and destroy
all living things.

11.

Do not create false commandments and laws that go against My Laws and
Commandments, for you will destroy yourselves and lead your descendants
astray from the White Path.

12.

Do not strive for other Worlds in order to capture them, for
whoever has this in mind may lose their own World.

13.

Do not think that many lands are lifeless, that life on them is
invisible to you and imperceptible to your senses.

14.

Do not use White Men and White Women for evil, to conquer other Worlds,
but use them for good and for knowledge of the Worlds, and then you will find
friendship with the inhabitants of those Worlds.

15.

Do not be aggressive towards those who come to you from other Worlds, for
how you behave will determine how they think of all the inhabitants of your
World.

16.

Do not destroy your world and its nature, for you will destroy
yourselves and lose your world.

17.

Let not a wife reject her husband, for her family will turn away from
her.

18.

A daughter born in the Sacred Summer shall be united in matrimony
with her husband only in the Sacred Summer.

19.

Let no man touch another woman's husband when his wife is carrying his
child under her heart.

20.

Do not take other wives besides your own, except in times of great
need, when the male line perishes in defense of their home, their land, and
their faith.

21.

Do not use the Fash-destroyer against your World, for you will destroy
your living World and lose the descendants of your Lineage.

22.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Do not use the Fash-destroyer against your World, for you will destroy
your living World and lose the descendants of your Lineage. 22. Preserve the memory of all the ancestors of your Ancient Lineage, and
you will find favor with the Gods—your Ancestors. 23. Respect the Strangers, My messengers, listen to their Word and their
Wisdom. 24. Do not live by the laws that people have created to deprive you of
your freedom, but live by My Laws. 25. Do not take My Name in vain, but speak it only on Great Holidays. 26. Honor Me above all else. Honor your father and mother, for they gave
you life. 27. Do not curse those who have left your world, for only good things are
said about those who have departed. 28. Do not judge those who have strayed from the White Path, but guide them
back to the Righteous Path, for they will answer to Me for their deeds. 29. Do not be ashamed of what has been given to you by your nature and
by Me, but be ashamed of ignorance and unawareness. 30. Give respect and glory to Me, your Father and Creator, and you will find
peace and tranquility in your life, and the Gates of the Interworld will be
opened for you. 31. Build Temples in all worlds, and learn Ancient Wisdom, for those who do
not learn Wisdom will lose themselves. 32. Honor all the holidays that your ancestors left you, adorn your life
with joy and good deeds, for My glory and that of your ancestors.

--- PAGE BREAK ---33.

Observe My Commandments that I have given you, and you will receive My
help at all times.

Book 6.

WORD OF WISDOM
Part 1
"And this Word shall be revealed to you, children, this Word of great Wisdom,
this Ancient Word.

This word is not one that lay hidden in the mist, but one
that Mother Life herself composed and bestowed upon the sorcerer named
Velimudr.

This word of wisdom, that is, the Message, is not for good people
throughout their lives.

Listen to the call, children, to know the Message, not to tread through the
swamps.

This Message must be perceived with the mind and accepted with the
heart, but above all, you must delve into every image of the Word of Wisdom."
"For those children of God who choose the Right Path leading to the summit of
the Spirit, with each step it becomes more difficult to walk, for the road
they travel constantly narrows, turning into a path that climbs steeper and
steeper and disappears into the cloudless distance.

But those who go to the end of this path, despite the hardships and
deprivations, will find such spiritual blessings, Wisdom, and Spiritual
Power that they never even imagined.This Message must be perceived with the mind and accepted with the
heart, but above all, you must delve into every image of the Word of Wisdom."
"For those children of God who choose the Right Path leading to the summit of
the Spirit, with each step it becomes more difficult to walk, for the road
they travel constantly narrows, turning into a path that climbs steeper and
steeper and disappears into the cloudless distance.

But those who go to the end of this path, despite the hardships and
deprivations, will find such spiritual blessings, Wisdom, and Spiritual
Power that they never even imagined.

Those who decide to take the downward path will never gain enough strength to
return to their origins and ascend to the highest heights, for those who go
down lose their minds and strength, and hell will open its wide doors before
them, but for those who steadfastly walk toward the summit of the Spirit,
Veles-god opens the Gates of Heaven, and all the multicolored splendor of the
Pure Svarog is found by those steadfast in Spirit."
"If someone caresses and feeds a child, giving him shelter, warmth, and
comfort, from the heart and not for personal gain, then he will do a good
deed, and the benefit from it will be greater than from a hundred wise men."
"Only those who do not think about doing deeds and do not lend a hand to the
creation of the good of their Kind do not make mistakes."
"He who understands little will find little, and he who knows much
will gain nothing, but his spirit will become stronger."
"If someone has a heavy heart, it is easiest to share it with your neighbor,
and when your neighbor needs your help, help him too."
"If your neighbor is in trouble, do not refuse to help him, for trouble does
not come alone, and may visit you too."
"Whoever shows Yogi-Mother (Mother Goya) the place where orphans languish has
done a small deed, but whoever raises orphans under the wing of his clan has
done a greater deed."
"Some try to learn a little, and some try to learn a lot from Ancient Wisdom,
thinking that it is easy to do, but even hundreds of human lives may not be
enough to learn a little or a lot."
"By learning about the World of Yavi that surrounds us, we sooner or later
come to understand that we are learning about ourselves, for our existence in
the World of Yavi is an integral part of ourselves."
"Those who resemble a person who lives only by their desires and wicked deeds
destroy their Soul and do not fulfill their duty to the Family.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But those who go to the end of this path, despite the hardships and
deprivations, will find such spiritual blessings, Wisdom, and Spiritual
Power that they never even imagined. Those who decide to take the downward path will never gain enough strength to
return to their origins and ascend to the highest heights, for those who go
down lose their minds and strength, and hell will open its wide doors before
them, but for those who steadfastly walk toward the summit of the Spirit,
Veles-god opens the Gates of Heaven, and all the multicolored splendor of the
Pure Svarog is found by those steadfast in Spirit."
"If someone caresses and feeds a child, giving him shelter, warmth, and
comfort, from the heart and not for personal gain, then he will do a good
deed, and the benefit from it will be greater than from a hundred wise men."
"Only those who do not think about doing deeds and do not lend a hand to the
creation of the good of their Kind do not make mistakes."
"He who understands little will find little, and he who knows much
will gain nothing, but his spirit will become stronger."
"If someone has a heavy heart, it is easiest to share it with your neighbor,
and when your neighbor needs your help, help him too."
"If your neighbor is in trouble, do not refuse to help him, for trouble does
not come alone, and may visit you too."
"Whoever shows Yogi-Mother (Mother Goya) the place where orphans languish has
done a small deed, but whoever raises orphans under the wing of his clan has
done a greater deed."
"Some try to learn a little, and some try to learn a lot from Ancient Wisdom,
thinking that it is easy to do, but even hundreds of human lives may not be
enough to learn a little or a lot."
"By learning about the World of Yavi that surrounds us, we sooner or later
come to understand that we are learning about ourselves, for our existence in
the World of Yavi is an integral part of ourselves."
"Those who resemble a person who lives only by their desires and wicked deeds
destroy their Soul and do not fulfill their duty to the Family. And it is not
surprising that the refuge of such people at the end of their life's journey
becomes Hell."ir desires and wicked deeds
destroy their Soul and do not fulfill their duty to the Family. And it is not
surprising that the refuge of such people at the end of their life's journey
becomes Hell."

--- PAGE BREAK ---"The greatness of each Clan-Tribe is determined by its creative work and
friendly unity with other Clans and Tribes, and if all Clans live in unity,
kindness, and mutual respect, creating for their descendants, for the glory
of God and their Ancestors, then no dark force or enemy army will be able to
defeat this Great people."
Those people who strive for another world, not having known the joy of
creation in their own world, not having developed their Soul and Spirit, not
having known the Wisdom of God and their Ancestors, will face disappointment
and great darkness, for they are unable to see the beauty and greatness of
the new world, since their Soul and Spirit are asleep.

"The longer a person's hair, the more of God's power they receive, for this
power nourishes the body, Spirit, and Soul of a person and directs them
toward creation and righteous deeds, in which Conscience is the measure of
all things."
"Be eager to follow the instructions of your parents and elders of your
family, for no parent or elder wishes evil upon their child or grandchild."
"Protect and care for your parents, every day and in their old age, for your
children, looking at you, will treat you the same way when the time comes."
"Relationships in communities should be based on hard work, kindness, and
love, not coercion and fear.

Forced labor cannot bear good fruit, for those
who create under coercion or fear close themselves off and cannot put their
soul into the fruits of their labor."The longer a person's hair, the more of God's power they receive, for this
power nourishes the body, Spirit, and Soul of a person and directs them
toward creation and righteous deeds, in which Conscience is the measure of
all things."
"Be eager to follow the instructions of your parents and elders of your
family, for no parent or elder wishes evil upon their child or grandchild."
"Protect and care for your parents, every day and in their old age, for your
children, looking at you, will treat you the same way when the time comes."
"Relationships in communities should be based on hard work, kindness, and
love, not coercion and fear.

Forced labor cannot bear good fruit, for those
who create under coercion or fear close themselves off and cannot put their
soul into the fruits of their labor.

Creative work for the good of the Clan
and the community must be voluntary and come from the heart, otherwise the
fruits of such labor will be barren and ugly."
"The protection of all their Kindreds, the Holy Land of their Fathers, and
the Ancient Faith of their First Ancestors is the foremost duty of every man
of the Great Race, at all times while Yarilo-Sun shines."
"Those who are able to hear the diversity of sounds in the natural world
around them will be able to hear their heart beating in unison with the
universe, while those who listen only to themselves and their own thoughts
will never hear the magnificent music of the heavens."
"With a pure heart and pure thoughts, bring bloodless sacrifices and prayers
to God in the World of Yavi, for what is sacrificed will appear before you in
the World of Navi and in the World of Prav."
"In all your deeds, great and small, and in all relations between your
Kinfolk or members of other Clans — our Conscience and Truth, our Kopnaya,
must be the measure of all things.Forced labor cannot bear good fruit, for those
who create under coercion or fear close themselves off and cannot put their
soul into the fruits of their labor.

Creative work for the good of the Clan
and the community must be voluntary and come from the heart, otherwise the
fruits of such labor will be barren and ugly."
"The protection of all their Kindreds, the Holy Land of their Fathers, and
the Ancient Faith of their First Ancestors is the foremost duty of every man
of the Great Race, at all times while Yarilo-Sun shines."
"Those who are able to hear the diversity of sounds in the natural world
around them will be able to hear their heart beating in unison with the
universe, while those who listen only to themselves and their own thoughts
will never hear the magnificent music of the heavens."
"With a pure heart and pure thoughts, bring bloodless sacrifices and prayers
to God in the World of Yavi, for what is sacrificed will appear before you in
the World of Navi and in the World of Prav."
"In all your deeds, great and small, and in all relations between your
Kinfolk or members of other Clans — our Conscience and Truth, our Kopnaya,
must be the measure of all things.

In relation to all pagans [Pagan
— Old Slavic for "foreigner," "stranger," "alien"] you must fulfill
Perun's Commandment: "Whatever deeds people do to you, do the same to
them, for every deed is measured by its own measure."
"You cannot understand life with someone else's mind, nor will you become
smarter.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Creative work for the good of the Clan
and the community must be voluntary and come from the heart, otherwise the
fruits of such labor will be barren and ugly."
"The protection of all their Kindreds, the Holy Land of their Fathers, and
the Ancient Faith of their First Ancestors is the foremost duty of every man
of the Great Race, at all times while Yarilo-Sun shines."
"Those who are able to hear the diversity of sounds in the natural world
around them will be able to hear their heart beating in unison with the
universe, while those who listen only to themselves and their own thoughts
will never hear the magnificent music of the heavens."
"With a pure heart and pure thoughts, bring bloodless sacrifices and prayers
to God in the World of Yavi, for what is sacrificed will appear before you in
the World of Navi and in the World of Prav."
"In all your deeds, great and small, and in all relations between your
Kinfolk or members of other Clans — our Conscience and Truth, our Kopnaya,
must be the measure of all things. In relation to all pagans [Pagan
— Old Slavic for "foreigner," "stranger," "alien"] you must fulfill
Perun's Commandment: "Whatever deeds people do to you, do the same to
them, for every deed is measured by its own measure."
"You cannot understand life with someone else's mind, nor will you become
smarter. Without understanding the essence of your life with your own mind,
how can you live it with dignity and fulfill your Duty to your Family and the
Heavenly Family?"
"All phenomena of various natural forces manifested around us do not exist
on their own, but are carried out in strict accordance with the Ancient
Laws of the Universe, which are observed by all living beings in the
Nature of Midgard-Earth, and therefore must be observed by humans as
well."
"It is man who, unlike other creatures living on Midgard-Earth, is capable of
rejoicing with all his soul at the successes of his neighbor and grieving
with all his heart when misfortune befalls his neighbor."
"The most unforgivable acts for a human being are slander, betrayal, envy,
coveting another's possessions, and extortion."hbor and grieving
with all his heart when misfortune befalls his neighbor."
"The most unforgivable acts for a human being are slander, betrayal, envy,
coveting another's possessions, and extortion."

--- PAGE BREAK ---"If no one makes an effort to do righteous deeds, how can you expect good
things to happen to you and your loved ones in the future?

Therefore, do
what you are capable of doing, and what is meant to happen will happen, for
nothing happens to those who do nothing, and it is as if they do not exist,
as if they were never born into this world."
"The most important thing in a person's life is Life itself.

Only duty to God
and the Family can be above human life."
"Three great mysteries are hidden from human memory and kept behind nine
seals: How man was born into this world; how his entire visible life flew by
unnoticed; when man will set off on the White Path to the Heavenly Abode,
where he will see his Ancestors."
"If parents protect their child from creative deeds for the good of their
Family, they will destroy his Soul and life.

And the Soul of that child will
be callous, and his life worthless.

And if parents indulge their child's
various whims, they will destroy his Bright Spirit, and the destruction of a
child's Spirit is unforgivable."
"By knowing the world around them with all their heart, people begin to
understand that everything alive in this world, stones and trees, has a Soul.

By knowing the power of the soul of stones and trees, people find the Ancient
Source of Nature's healing Powers, with the help of which pain and sickness
can be expelled from a sick human body."
"The best and most effective, pleasant and refreshing remedy for severe
fatigue after righteous labors and deeds is peaceful sleep."
"Do not defile or poison the Holy Land of your Ancestors with human decay, as
the pagans (foreigners) do.And if parents indulge their child's
various whims, they will destroy his Bright Spirit, and the destruction of a
child's Spirit is unforgivable."
"By knowing the world around them with all their heart, people begin to
understand that everything alive in this world, stones and trees, has a Soul.

By knowing the power of the soul of stones and trees, people find the Ancient
Source of Nature's healing Powers, with the help of which pain and sickness
can be expelled from a sick human body."
"The best and most effective, pleasant and refreshing remedy for severe
fatigue after righteous labors and deeds is peaceful sleep."
"Do not defile or poison the Holy Land of your Ancestors with human decay, as
the pagans (foreigners) do.

Instead, create Great Krodas and spacious Lodias
for your deceased loved ones, connecting all your deceased with the Pure
Sacred Fire."
"In the Ancient Runes there is a hidden meaning, a reminder to all since
ancient times: The lot of the blind is only words, the lot of the all-seeing
is silence."
"Those who do not believe in the continuation of earthly life after death
receive darkness and gloom, in accordance with their faith.

Whereas those who
do not doubt the continuation of life will see all the charm and beauty of
the Bright Halls of the World of Prav."
"Those who carry doubts in their hearts about the continuation of life in
Prav find darkness for themselves, for they close their eyes to the majestic
radiance of the Light Worlds.

Futile searches for a path in the darkness can
only lead to Hell.

But those who have the Faith of the First Ancestors, and have no doubts about
life after the World of Yavi, will find all the beauty and multicolored Light
and Joy of meeting the Rats of the Rod.

"If at this moment the Gates of True Knowledge were to open, man would see
the original essence of things as it is — infinite.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But those who have the Faith of the First Ancestors, and have no doubts about
life after the World of Yavi, will find all the beauty and multicolored Light
and Joy of meeting the Rats of the Rod. "If at this moment the Gates of True Knowledge were to open, man would see
the original essence of things as it is — infinite. But man has been closed
off within himself for so long that now he sees the World of Yavi only
through the narrow cracks in the cave of his own perceptions."
"Which of the children of men has thought about the Original, True Essence of
all things, and about the Primordial One who created this Nature and the
diverse Worlds in those Ancient times when there was nothing, nothing at all,
and especially nothing of what we, by inspiration, call Nature, Time, and
Worlds, and when Darkness was covered by darkness?"
"Remember, children of the Great Race, that your strength lies in Unity,
among all Clans and Tribes, based on the Ancient Faith of the First
Ancestors."
"Know, children of the Great Race, that only those who are able to create and
build for the good of their Ancient Clan, for the Glory of their Fatherland
and their Ancient Original Faith, are true descendants of the Gods."

--- PAGE BREAK ---"The dark forces use two ways to lure people and prevent them from developing
in the Manifest World of Midgard-Earth, creatively building for the good of
the Clan, and improving themselves spiritually and mentally: the first is
ignorance, and the second is stupidity.

On the first path, they do not allow people to learn, and on the second, they
claim that knowledge is unnecessary and harmful to people."
Part 2
"Never grieve over the good deeds you have done in the past or the help you
have given to your loved ones, for good deeds are done only at the call of
your great heart and your pure conscience."
"Preserve the memory of all warriors who laid down their lives for their
brothers, for the land of their Fathers, for the Holy Faith of their
Ancestors, for the prosperity and future of their Clans."
"It is the sacred duty of every man of all the tribes of the Great Race to
defend his native lands, the old and young of his tribes, and the tribes of
his friends and loved ones."
"Do not let unrighteous anger into your gracious heart, for anger will
destroy all goodness and spoil your pure heart."
"No one can ever deny a person the right to know the Truth and the Great
Ancient Wisdom left by God and the Ancestors."
"If the men of the Great Race do not show due care in protecting the borders
of their fathers' land, who will be able to save the Ancient Families from
destruction and humiliation?"
"Everything that was created for the greatness and prosperity of your Clans
and all descendants of the Great Race cannot be condemned.

For the Great
Ancestors of your Clans put their pure Souls into the fruits of their
creative labor."
"It is the Great Duty of every Parent and every Elder of an Ancient Clan to
raise all their offspring according to the ancient Laws of the Clan until the
Day of Coming of Age of their descendants."
"Clan friendship and mutual assistance must grow stronger in all your lands.On the first path, they do not allow people to learn, and on the second, they
claim that knowledge is unnecessary and harmful to people."
Part 2
"Never grieve over the good deeds you have done in the past or the help you
have given to your loved ones, for good deeds are done only at the call of
your great heart and your pure conscience."
"Preserve the memory of all warriors who laid down their lives for their
brothers, for the land of their Fathers, for the Holy Faith of their
Ancestors, for the prosperity and future of their Clans."
"It is the sacred duty of every man of all the tribes of the Great Race to
defend his native lands, the old and young of his tribes, and the tribes of
his friends and loved ones."
"Do not let unrighteous anger into your gracious heart, for anger will
destroy all goodness and spoil your pure heart."
"No one can ever deny a person the right to know the Truth and the Great
Ancient Wisdom left by God and the Ancestors."
"If the men of the Great Race do not show due care in protecting the borders
of their fathers' land, who will be able to save the Ancient Families from
destruction and humiliation?"
"Everything that was created for the greatness and prosperity of your Clans
and all descendants of the Great Race cannot be condemned.

For the Great
Ancestors of your Clans put their pure Souls into the fruits of their
creative labor."
"It is the Great Duty of every Parent and every Elder of an Ancient Clan to
raise all their offspring according to the ancient Laws of the Clan until the
Day of Coming of Age of their descendants."
"Clan friendship and mutual assistance must grow stronger in all your lands.

If you refuse to help all your close Clans, then which Clan will help you?"
"Conscience is God's greatest gift.

You cannot escape it, hide from it,
deceive it, or silence it.

It brings joy for good deeds and suffering for bad
ones."
"Those who live according to their conscience are sinless.--- PAGE BREAK ---

You cannot escape it, hide from it,
deceive it, or silence it. It brings joy for good deeds and suffering for bad
ones."
"Those who live according to their conscience are sinless. The human soul and
conscience have existed since ancient times, and people live according to
their will."
"A person's soul and conscience can only be born on their native land, and
they can only live on it. If a person leaves their native land and abandons
the burial mounds of their ancestors, that person will lose their soul."
"Why should a person go against their Soul and Conscience, for they are
above all else in the world, and a person must always cherish them. Can
anyone from the outside fill a person's Soul or Conscience with Joy and
Happiness?"
"Remember, children of the Great Race, you are descendants of the Heavenly
Race, that life must be lived in Joy, for it is but a single moment. A bright
life in the World is given to a person by his Bright Soul and Conscience. All
people honor their Soul and Conscience, and how can a righteous person, in
the name of anything, destroy someone else's Pure Soul and Conscience?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---When you defend your lands from fierce enemies and foes who come to your
lands as thieves, cast aside pride and anger and do not let vengeance into
your hearts, for all vengeance, anger, and pride cloud the eyes and harden
the heart.

"Every deed you do leaves an indelible mark on the eternal Path of your life,
and therefore, people, do only good and beautiful deeds, for the Glory of God
and your Ancestors, as an example to your descendants."
"Repay your enemies and foes only for the unjust deeds they have done in your
land.

And let your conscience and pure soul be the measure of your
retribution for all their unjust deeds."
"Children of all the Great Race, wise descendants of the Heavenly Race, you
are always free in your Souls and in all your creative deeds, and this has
been established by our Light God.

No one who came from outside taught our
Ancient Races Conscience, and therefore cannot be free above it."
"Listen, children of the Great Race, descendants of the Heavenly Race, to my
words.

If you live your lives with great honor and according to your
Conscience, then your pure and Bright Souls will ascend with the smoke of the
Sacred Bonfire-Kroda to the Most Pure Svarog.

But if you live your whole life dishonorably and not according to your
conscience, then you yourselves will have to answer before God and your
Ancestors."
Strengthen, children of the Great Race, all your Ancient and Glorious
Families, and honor, as in Olden Times, the Bright God and your Ancestors.

Protect your lands from enemies, which are watered with the Sweat and Blood
of your Wise Fathers and Grandfathers.

Create, children of the Great Race,
for the glorious descendants of your Families.Protect your lands from enemies, which are watered with the Sweat and Blood
of your Wise Fathers and Grandfathers.

Create, children of the Great Race,
for the glorious descendants of your Families.

"Live, children of the Great Race, in Great Kinship (Unity) with your God, in
friendship with your Families and Clans, in Harmony and Love for your Kin, in
Respect and True Justice towards all your enemies."
"Those who always honor God preserve their Ancient Families from misfortune
and adversity.

And those who honor God and Mother Inglia multiply their
Ancient Families with healthy offspring."
"If you have disagreements with your neighbors or relatives, you should look
for the reasons for these disagreements only within yourself."
"Kind words about the friendship of the clans, which come from your pure
heart, will strengthen the friendship between your clans better than any
oaths on the sword and in the name of your God."
"Do not renounce, children of the Great Race, your brotherly and neighboring
tribes, for when hard times come, all your brotherly and neighboring tribes
will come to the aid of all your tribes."
"Remember, children of the Great Race, never spur yourselves on with fear.

For it is like snake venom: in small quantities it is beneficial, but it
quickly accumulates in the Soul and poisons your future life."
"Do not pollute, children of the Native Tongue, with verbs and adverbs of a
foreign language.

Only Native words live in the heart, and other voices are
dead to the Soul."
"The desire for Pure Light will always live in the human heart.

But while on
Midgard-Earth, a person will never reach the Sun, even if he has to climb the
highest mountain on Earth, for Yarilo-Sun will always be at a height
unattainable to man.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Only Native words live in the heart, and other voices are
dead to the Soul."
"The desire for Pure Light will always live in the human heart. But while on
Midgard-Earth, a person will never reach the Sun, even if he has to climb the
highest mountain on Earth, for Yarilo-Sun will always be at a height
unattainable to man. Therefore, the seeker can find and attain the Shining Pure Light only in his
Loving heart, in his Clear Mind, and in his Bright Spirit."
"Just as the light coming from Yarilo-Sun cannot be hidden in a dark vessel,
so it is impossible to take away from the Great Race the Land of the
Ancestors, Will, Conscience, and Faith."

--- PAGE BREAK ---"Remember, children of the Great Race, my words that God has set a Lesson
(trial) for every person from the Ancient Families.

And that which is
destined for you from above cannot be distorted or changed at will.

Therefore, fulfill your Earthly Lesson, established by God, and that which is
destined to come to pass will come to pass."
"Think about who you truly are and why you live on Midgard-Earth, children of
the Great Race.

Look into the corners of your Soul and into the depths of
your heart.

And you will see the Ancient Wisdom of the Clan, which was given
by the Light Gods-Patron Saints at the time of your earthly birth into your
Clan."
Remember, children of the Great Race, that no matter how much good you
multiply, no matter how great your wealth, it will not elevate you above
the new Clans and will not grant power to your Clan.

For even with multiplied goodness and great wealth in your Clan, none of you
will be able to stop the movement of Yarila-Sun or make Time flow backwards."
Children of the Ancient Clans of the Great Race, respect your fathers and
mothers, for they have given life to all of you.

And do not abandon your care
for your parents until the very end of their earthly lives.

"As you learn about the surrounding Manifest World, know, children of the
Great Race, that nothing can come from nothing, and nothing can disappear
without a trace, and therefore everything has its source, and everything has
its place in the World."
"The worldly riches and treasures that you have accumulated on Earth will be
of no use to you in the subsequent Worlds of Prav, for the True Treasures
and Riches necessary in the Worlds of Prav are Love, Primordial Faith,
Creation, and the Wisdom of God and your Ancestors."
"An unrighteous deed or decision committed out of ignorance by a member of
the community may be forgiven or overlooked by God.And do not abandon your care
for your parents until the very end of their earthly lives.

"As you learn about the surrounding Manifest World, know, children of the
Great Race, that nothing can come from nothing, and nothing can disappear
without a trace, and therefore everything has its source, and everything has
its place in the World."
"The worldly riches and treasures that you have accumulated on Earth will be
of no use to you in the subsequent Worlds of Prav, for the True Treasures
and Riches necessary in the Worlds of Prav are Love, Primordial Faith,
Creation, and the Wisdom of God and your Ancestors."
"An unrighteous deed or decision committed out of ignorance by a member of
the community may be forgiven or overlooked by God.

But the same deeds or
decisions committed out of ignorance by Rodan (the head of the clan) can
bring misfortune upon the entire people."
"The ancient faith of the ancestors and conscience always live only in open
hearts.

So open your eyes, children, to your passionate and trembling
hearts, and hear the voice of your pure hearts, and have the courage to
follow them."
"Remember, children of the Great Race, you are descendants of the Heavenly
Clan, you are the grandchildren and great-grandchildren of the Ancient Gods,
and therefore you are inherently free people, and for a person of the Great
Race, Will is an inherent state.

It cannot be given or taken away.

For Will
is the state of your Spirit."
"People of the ancient Great Race, always work and create for the prosperity
of your Families.

Always put your pure Soul into the fruits of your creative
labor.

And then no need will touch your multiplying and prosperous Ancient
and Great Families."
"Remember, heads of the Great Race, that you should never abandon the care of
all the descendants of your Families until they reach physical and spiritual
maturity.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Always put your pure Soul into the fruits of your creative
labor. And then no need will touch your multiplying and prosperous Ancient
and Great Families."
"Remember, heads of the Great Race, that you should never abandon the care of
all the descendants of your Families until they reach physical and spiritual
maturity. For the young offspring of your Families, who are not yet strong
and mature, cannot be a reliable support in the future life of your
Families."
"Do not seek the shining clusters of Heavenly stars at the bottom of a deep
lake, for they are high above you. And in order to see their true radiance,
you must turn your gaze to the Heavens."
"To build a dwelling for your Clan, do not cut down dead and sleeping Trees,
and do not disturb Trees during the full moon. Seek only Trees that have come
to life, drinking the sap of the Raw Earth in spring. Bring forgiveness to
the chosen Tree and offer it gifts and treats."

--- PAGE BREAK ---"Remember, children of the Great Race, that nothing ever happens by chance to
a person on Midgard-Earth, for chance is a Law determined by Fate and the
Laws of God.

Everything that happens in a person's life is a sign from God and the Patrons
of the Clan, pointing to the deeds you have done.

Therefore, pay attention to
everything that happens around you.

Mother Nature grants vitality to those who follow God's Laws, and God grants
the Rod happiness in their hearts and wealth in their children.

God and the Patrons protect this benevolent person and his loved ones from
all evil, injustice, darkness, and deceit, and this Benevolence is as true
and faithful as the light of Yarila-Sun in the Heavens and as the constant
flow of water in a river."
"Just as day follows night, as the Sun is born at dawn, so too does any
unseemly deed committed by a person of the Great Race, whether by accident or
by evil intent, become known to God and the Community."
"When God comes to your aid, never wonder where the Great Power came from.

Just accept with gratitude what God has given you."
"Remember, children of the Great Race, descendants of the Heavenly Race, that
all of God's Heavenly Wisdom, which is preserved by all your ancient races,
must belong only to you and your races, and to no one else.

Therefore, never reveal the Secret Vedas to foreign enemies.

Lest they use
the Heavenly Wisdom of God against your ancient Clans."
Do not go against your Destiny and against the call of your Heart and
Conscience.

For you will lose all the Paths of life and be called wayward
outcasts.

If a Priest of God or an Elder of the Clan has instructed you to do a good
deed, do it immediately, as if your own Father had instructed you to do it.

"Guard Ra-M-Ha INTu and the Vedas of all your ancient Clans like the apple of
your eye.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If a Priest of God or an Elder of the Clan has instructed you to do a good
deed, do it immediately, as if your own Father had instructed you to do it. "Guard Ra-M-Ha INTu and the Vedas of all your ancient Clans like the apple of
your eye. For if you do not preserve the Holy Things of the Clans, your
ancient Clans will not escape sorrow, dark times, and loss."
"Those who reject good and wise words while in error will regret it later,
having missed their chance. But those who hear good and wise words and follow
them immediately, doing good deeds, will prosper greatly in life, and the
wealth of their family will increase."
"Never rush or hurry, people, in your good deeds and conversations, and let
your every movement and word always be smooth and calm, like the flow of
water in a quiet morning river. Before you do anything or interrupt a conversation that has just begun,
listen to the voice of your heart."
"Do not think that everything on Earth happens only according to God's will
and that nothing depends on your mighty Will and gracious thoughts. Only foolish people who do not know the Truth of Life speak this way. God
only observes your creative deeds and comes when called upon by humans when
they ask Him for help. By the will of the Supreme Tarkh Dazhbog, the Ancient Vedas will be hidden in
the Haratias and Santias until the Time of Light, which contain the Trags and
Runes from the curious gaze of dark people. For it is not fitting for dark creatures to know about the Glorious deeds of
the Ancient Gods, who multiply the Light in the Pure Svarog. The Vedas are
understandable only to the enlightened, who have realized the path in their
lives. And people who did not know the Wisdom of God, how can they know the
Secret Vedas?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---"Never refuse shelter to those Clans of the Great Race who seek protection
for their offspring from fierce enemies in your settlements, relying on the
power of your Clans' swords.

For the preservation of Clans and blood brothers
is a good deed for every Clan."
"Remember, children of the Clans of the Great Race, that the Sacred Places on
Midgard-Earth have always been, are, and will be Sources of inexhaustible
Great Life Force.

Regardless of whether the Kapishcha stand on sacred places near the Sources
of Power, and regardless of human words and opinions, they always grant Life
Force to all who suffer and are in need.

"Every captured enemy warrior who has caused harm to the Ancient Race shall
compensate for the damage with his labor.

After three full years, he is free
to return to his homeland or remain."
"Never start a dispute over which Clans and Peoples of Midgard-Earth have the
better or more important God.

Honor the God who is native to your ancient Clans as holy, but do not
blaspheme or humiliate people who worship Gods unknown to you."
"Remember, children of the Great Race, that only the Priests-Guardians,
the servants of God, have access to the secret Wisdom left by God and the
First Ancestors, which is contained in the Thrags and Runes."
"Know, children of the Great Race, that life in Svarog flows according to the
Laws of Heaven and does not depend on your thoughts.

No matter how much dark
people reject the order and movement of the Heavenly Lights, Yarilo-Sun will
rise in the east and a clear day will replace the dark night."
"Know this, children of the Great Race: No one can protect your tribes from
foreign tribes and cruel enemies if you yourselves do not want to protect
yourselves.

No one will create prosperity in your tribes if you yourselves do not want to
create for your tribe.No matter how much dark
people reject the order and movement of the Heavenly Lights, Yarilo-Sun will
rise in the east and a clear day will replace the dark night."
"Know this, children of the Great Race: No one can protect your tribes from
foreign tribes and cruel enemies if you yourselves do not want to protect
yourselves.

No one will create prosperity in your tribes if you yourselves do not want to
create for your tribe.

No one will raise your children properly until you
yourselves raise your offspring."
Work and create, children of the Great Race, in the name of God and the
Ancestors of your Clans, for if there is prosperity in your Clans, your
Peoples will live in prosperity, and if the peoples prosper in prosperity,
then your Great Power will be called Great.

"Understand, children of the Great Race, my words: Ancient Wisdom is learned
bit by bit, through great diligence, long-suffering, and painstaking creative
labor, for it is impossible to comprehend all the diversity contained in the
Vedas at once and to grasp the Universe with your gaze.

If anyone seeks to master Knowledge in order to attain the pinnacle of power
and honor, he will eventually be worse than a madman, and all his hopes will
be in vain."
Ancient Wisdom is not learned in order to rule and command others, nor to
become proud or exalted above other Clans.

Ancient Wisdom has always been
learned in order to understand one's Life Path and to pass it on to future
generations.

"Remember, children of the Great Race, descendants of the Heavenly Race.

Do
not listen to those dark people who say that your Ancient God and the
deceased Ancestors of your Great Races will not help you in your hour of
need.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Remember, children of the Great Race, descendants of the Heavenly Race. Do
not listen to those dark people who say that your Ancient God and the
deceased Ancestors of your Great Races will not help you in your hour of
need. For the Ways and Thoughts of God and your Ancestors cannot be known to the
dark ones, and whatever they say to you is only lies and great deception,
which lead you away from the Right Ways into Darkness."
"For every accomplishment or good deed, as well as for every event in human
life, there is a specific time and place determined by the Almighty. Therefore, whatever deeds

--- PAGE BREAK ---rkness."
"For every accomplishment or good deed, as well as for every event in human
life, there is a specific time and place determined by the Almighty. Therefore, whatever deeds

--- PAGE BREAK ---

should be done, do them without delay and without haste. Create, people, what
you are capable of creating, and what is predestined by God will come to
pass."
"Listen, children of the Great Race, descendants of the Heavenly Race, to my
words. Remember them and pass them on to your descendants.
The future for all your Clans stems from the past of your Clans, for you
yourselves create your Future, guided by the Love that lives in your hearts.
If there has never been Love in your Hearts and Clans in the Past, then there
is no Future for your Clans, and therefore the Present is meaningless.
For everything you create for your Families and your descendants will turn to
dust. Remember, if there is Love in your hearts, then your Families will have
a Future.
Book 7.
THE VEDAS OF PERUN
Circle One.
Santya 1
1 (1). As in the City of the Gods, in Asgard Iriysky
(Aryan), at the confluence of the sacred rivers Iriya and
Omi,
near the Great Temple of
Inglia, by the Sacred Stone of
Alatyr, the divine chariot of
Vaitmana descended from the
heavens.
A great radiance and flame surrounded it
as it descended to Earth.
[Vaitmana is a spaceship on which gods and humans travel between worlds.
Vaitmaris are large spaceships capable of carrying up to 144 Vaitmanas.]
2 (2). They gathered and assembled at the Heavenly
Vaitmana, the Rodes: the Rassen (R), the Aryans (A),
Svyatorus (S) and Kh'Aryans (A) [abbreviated as
RASA], leaders and warriors of all the tribes of
the Great Race
and the Heavenly Race,
silver-haired Veduns and wise
magicians gathered,
and servants of the One God.
3 (3). They gathered and assembled,
sat in rows around the Vaitmans,
glorifying the Gods for many days.
And White Man opened, and the Bright Heavenly God came out of it in the
flesh.
4 (4). The eternally beautiful God said:
I have come from the Land of Paradise,
from Heavenly Svarog, where the Bright Iri
flows, in the gardens of Vyriya, near
Heavenly Asgard,
I am Perun the Thunderer, son of Svarog.
Listen, people and warriors of the Human Clans, to my
words, listen to the teaching of my words.
Perun spoke to Ratibor, a warrior from the Holy Rus tribe:d,
I am Perun the Thunderer, son of Svarog.
Listen, people and warriors of the Human Clans, to my
words, listen to the teaching of my words.
Perun spoke to Ratibor, a warrior from the Holy Rus tribe:

--- PAGE BREAK ---underer, son of Svarog.
Listen, people and warriors of the Human Clans, to my
words, listen to the teaching of my words.
Perun spoke to Ratibor, a warrior from the Holy Rus tribe:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tell us, Bright Leader,
is there death for the Warriors of our Clans?
5 (5). Perun answered the warrior: There
is no death for the Warriors of the
Heavenly Clan.
Any obvious or secret doubt in the heart,
God Almighty—the Great Ra-M-Ha, Guardian of the Worlds,
Father of SvaRog, mine and yours,
the best of all the Wise, will allow
it. I know that God's Wisdom is
eternal.
Whoever becomes a Teacher, even if he reveals the Great
Mystery, is not condemned by the Gods, for there is no
death for them.
6 (6). And the people asked the Thunderer, the
All-Wise: Tell us, Svarozhich, reveal to us
why the Servants of the One God and the Wanderers of
God, through the knowledge of the Vedas, want to
achieve Immortality?
Tell us, reveal to us,
is there death in the World of Yavi, or is
everything immortal? Which of the two is the
truth?
7 (7). Svarozhich answered them: Both are correct,
but only in delusion
do singers teach about death, people.
I call death a deception, and I
call immortality non-deception.
The Legi perished in self-
deception,
but non-deception is achieved in Prav.
And death does not devour the born like a lynx; it has
no form.
You observe death in your
surroundings, but you will not find
it for yourself.
8 (8). Some people believe that Udrzeć is the God of
the dead, but He is different from death, and your
journey
in the World of the Righteous is immortal,
it remains in your Souls and Spirit;
This same God reigns in the World of
Ancestors,
He is good to the good, but not good to the not good. By
the command of Udrzeć (the Destroyer), anger, delusion,
and death manifest themselves in the Children of Men,
which has taken the form of greed.
9 (9). Knocked off the path by selfhood,
man does not achieve unity with the
Soul. Under the power of death, lost
people walk this path and, having died,
fall again and again into the World of
Navis.
Their senses stray from the path, which
is why death is called Mariona.
10 (10). Carried away by their
deeds, in pursuit of their fruits,
they continue to walk in this directionthe World of
Navis.
Their senses stray from the path, which
is why death is called Mariona.
10 (10). Carried away by their
deeds, in pursuit of their fruits,
they continue to walk in this direction

--- PAGE BREAK ---Their senses stray from the path, which
is why death is called Mariona.
10 (10). Carried away by their
deeds, in pursuit of their fruits,
they continue to walk in this direction

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and do not overcome death.
Instead of striving for righteous goals,
as human conscience calls for,
The Child of Man, born in Midgard, will
revolve in the Circle of Delights, and on
this path, death awaits him.
11 (11). This is the great delusion of the
senses, which, united with vain goals,
moving toward Hell on a futile path.
Struck by connections with futile goals,
and thinking about them day and night,
your inner self
will begin to worship the external World of Appearance.
12 (12). In the World of Appearance,
manifested by God, the first thing that
strikes people
is the desire for what belongs to others,
soon followed by anger and lust. These
three creations of the Dark Ones
lead unreasonable people to death,
and in the World of Yavi, only
steadfast people,
in whom Conscience reigns,
always overcome death with steadfastness.
13 (13). With focused thought, calming turbulent feelings,
one must fight them with disregard.
There is no death for
such people, for they
have overcome passions
and transcended death
through the Knowledge of
God
and have overcome death. But a person
who pursues desire and follows his
passions perishes.
But having conquered vicious desires,
a person blows away all traces of passion.
14 (14). For all living beings and
humans, Hell seems like unending
darkness;
like madmen, they rush recklessly toward ruin. But
to a person who has rejected madness,
what can death do?
Whoever renounces the possession of Ancient Wisdom,
let him think of nothing else,
as if banishing the Power of Life from themselves!
15 (15). Anger, greed, and delusion of the deep self
are death; and they are in this earthly body.
A person who has known the
Wisdom of the Gods - his
Ancestors,
knows that this is how death is
born, and death does not frighten
him here.
In his realm, death disappears, just
as a mortal disappears when he enters
the realm of death.he Gods - his
Ancestors,
knows that this is how death is
born, and death does not frighten
him here.
In his realm, death disappears, just
as a mortal disappears when he enters
the realm of death.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tors,
knows that this is how death is
born, and death does not frighten
him here.
In his realm, death disappears, just
as a mortal disappears when he enters
the realm of death.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16 (16). And Perun asked Odin,
the Warrior of the Kh'Arian Race:
tell us why the Volkhvs say that by
performing bloodless sacrifices,
People can attain the blissful worlds of Prav, the
purest and imperishable.
The Vedas call them the Highest Goal;
who knows this, how can he engage in business?
Santya 2
1 (17). Odin, the All-Beautiful Perun, replied:
only those who have not known the Great Ancient
Wisdom strive for it, and for them what is said in
the Secret Vedas remains meaningful.
Free from evil desires, one strives upward, on
the path of the highest spiritual development,
rejecting evil paths of development.
2 (18). You live according to the laws of RITA [in the purity of the
Race and Blood of the Race] and according to the laws of the Great Ra-
M-Ha - the One Creator God,
for all Worlds and Earths live by these Laws, in
all Universes created by the Great Ra-M-Ha. And
they know no death,
for death and darkness have left these Worlds,
and Light and Immortality have filled their Lives with beauty.
3 (19). And HARII, the Wise Magician, said:
Our Bright Protector,
give Your Wise Commandments to the human races,
the descendants of the Heavenly Race and the
Great Race,
so that Truth may triumph on Midgard-Earth, and
Injustice may vanish forever from our World,
and not even a memory of it remains.
4 (20). Perun the Thunderer answered the Wise Wizard and
all who had gathered to listen to him:
know My Commandments, listen to My
teachings:
Honor your parents and
support them in their old
age,
for as you care for them,
so shall your children care for you.
5 (21). Preserve the memory of all your ancestors,
and your descendants will remember you.
Protect the old and the young,
fathers and mothers, sons and daughters,
For these are your Kin, the Wisdom and the Flower of your peoples.
Teach your children to love
the Holy Land of the Race,
so that they may not be enticed by overseas
wonders, but may themselves create wondersare your Kin, the Wisdom and the Flower of your peoples.
Teach your children to love
the Holy Land of the Race,
so that they may not be enticed by overseas
wonders, but may themselves create wonders

--- PAGE BREAK ---sdom and the Flower of your peoples.
Teach your children to love
the Holy Land of the Race,
so that they may not be enticed by overseas
wonders, but may themselves create wonders

--- PAGE BREAK ---

more wonderful and beautiful,
for the glory of your Holy Land.
6 (22). Do not perform miracles for your own benefit,
but perform miracles for the benefit of your Kind and the Heavenly
Kind. Help your neighbor in his trouble,
for when trouble comes to
you, your neighbors will
help you. Do good deeds,
for the glory of your Kindred and your
Ancestors, and you will find protection from
Our God.
7 (23). Help with all your might to build temples and
shrines, preserve the Wisdom of God, the Ancient Wisdom.
Wash your hands after your deeds,
For whoever does not wash their hands loses the power
of God. Purify yourselves in the waters of Iria,
which flows in the Holy Land, to
wash your WHITE body, to
sanctify it with God's Power.
8 (24). Establish on your Earth the Heavenly Law
given to you by your Bright Guardian Gods. Honor,
people, the days of Rusalia,
observe God's holidays and fasts. Do
not forget our God,
burn incense and fragrant smoke in the glory of God
and find favor and mercy from our God.
9 (25). Do not offend your neighbors,
live with them in peace and harmony. Do
not humiliate other people's dignity,
and your dignity will not be humiliated.
Do not harm people of other faiths,
for God the Creator is One above all
Earths and above all Worlds.
10 (26). Do not sell your land for gold and silver, for you
will bring curses upon yourselves
and there will be no forgiveness for you for all time.
Defend your Holy Land and
defeat all enemies of the Race with righteous weapons.
11 (27). Defend the tribes of the Russians (Ukrainians) and the Holy
Russians (Belarusians) from foreign enemies who come to your lands
with evil intentions and weapons.
Do not boast of your strength when going to
battle, but boast when returning from the
battlefield.
Keep God's Wisdom secret,
do not give Secret Wisdom to pagans [foreign peoples and non-believers].
12 (28). Do not persuade those people
who do not want to listen to you and heed your words.
Preserve your temples and shrinesdo not give Secret Wisdom to pagans [foreign peoples and non-believers].
12 (28). Do not persuade those people
who do not want to listen to you and heed your words.
Preserve your temples and shrines

--- PAGE BREAK ---Wisdom to pagans [foreign peoples and non-believers].
12 (28). Do not persuade those people
who do not want to listen to you and heed your words.
Preserve your temples and shrines

--- PAGE BREAK ---

from the desecration of pagans (foreigners and
non-believers), if you do not preserve the Holy
Shrines of the Holy Race
and the Faith of your Ancestors,
years of sorrow and suffering will befall you.
13 (29). Whoever flees from his land to a
foreign country in search of an easy life
is a renegade of his Kindred,
and there will be no forgiveness for him from his Kin,
for the Guardian Gods will turn away from
him. Do not rejoice in the sorrow of
others, for whoever rejoices in the sorrow
of others
calls sorrow upon himself. Do
not speak ill of or laugh at
those who love you,
but respond to love with love
and you will find the protection of the Great Ra-M-Ha and your
Gods. Love your neighbor, if he is worthy of it!
14 (30). Do not take your sister as your wife,
brother, nor your mother as your wife, son, for
you will anger the gods
and destroy the bloodline.
Do not take wives with black skin,
for you will defile your house and
destroy your family, but take wives with
white skin,
for you will glorify
your house and continue
your clan.
Do not let your wives wear men's
clothing, for you will lose your
femininity,
but let your wives wear what is appropriate for them.
15 (31). Do not break the bonds of the Family Union,
sanctified by God, for you will go against the law of the
One Creator God
and lose your happiness.
Let not the child in the womb be killed, for
whoever kills a child in the womb
will incur the wrath of God the Creator.
16 (32). Wives, love your husbands,
for they are your protection and support, and that
of your entire family. Do not drink too much
intoxicating drink,
know your limits in drinking,
for those who drink too much lose their
human form.
Santiya 3
1 (33). And the Wizard Svyatozar said to Perun the Ever-
Beautiful: what does your last Commandment mean?
Tell us, explain it to us.
Perun spoke to all the people gathered:
remember, people of the Great Race, the
legend of the sons of Thor the Wise, who
preserved the Sacred Vedas,ast Commandment mean?
Tell us, explain it to us.
Perun spoke to all the people gathered:
remember, people of the Great Race, the
legend of the sons of Thor the Wise, who
preserved the Sacred Vedas,

--- PAGE BREAK ---?
Tell us, explain it to us.
Perun spoke to all the people gathered:
remember, people of the Great Race, the
legend of the sons of Thor the Wise, who
preserved the Sacred Vedas,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

given to you by my son, Tarkh, the God of Rain.
2 (34). Thor the All-Wise grew old and called his sons
Stara, Vinga, and Odin to him.
And he spoke these words to them:
my beloved sons,
Three Cycles of Life Years[432 years, Cycle of Life — 144 Years] have passed,
and old age and infirmity have filled my body.
My strength is already leaving
me. I know that far to the
south,
at the foot of the Himavat Mountains (Himalayas),
Skuf (a settlement for prayer) of the Heavenly Legs.
3 (35). In that foothill Skuf,
the Wise Legs prepare
all the Heavenly Gods Suritsa,
a shining, divine drink that
gives many Life Forces and
eternal youth.
If a person drinks the Suritsa of
the Legs, he will regain his Life
Forces,
and health will return to his body. And
eternal youth will shine within him.
4 (36). And the Elder said to Thor: My beloved
father, I will bring you the drink of the Gods.
And the Elder went south, to the mountain
of Himavat. Thor the Wise waited a long
time for his eldest son, and sent his
middle son
to search for Star, saying to him:
"Know that trouble has befallen your elder
brother, go, Wing, to help your brother."
And Wing went in search of his brother Star.
5 (37). Much water has flowed under the bridge since then in Sacred Iria,
The Small Moon has traveled nine times
has made its journey around Midgard-Earth,
and the Big Moon four times.
[The Small Moon is Fatta, with an orbital period around the Earth of 13 days,
and the Big Moon is the Moon, with an orbital period of 29.5 days.]
And Odin said to Thor the All-Wise: my
dear Father, let me go
me to Mount Himavat
to search for my beloved brothers,
to search for Skufa of the foothills of the
Heavenly Legs, and the divine Suritsa.
6 (38). Thor the All-Wise blessed
his beloved son,
and Odin set off southward, to Mount Himavat
in search of his brothers
and Skuf of the Heavenly Legs.
When he arrived at Mount
Himavat, he saw Skuf of the
Heavenly Legs.e blessed
his beloved son,
and Odin set off southward, to Mount Himavat
in search of his brothers
and Skuf of the Heavenly Legs.
When he arrived at Mount
Himavat, he saw Skuf of the
Heavenly Legs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed son,
and Odin set off southward, to Mount Himavat
in search of his brothers
and Skuf of the Heavenly Legs.
When he arrived at Mount
Himavat, he saw Skuf of the
Heavenly Legs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the middle of the foothills,
silver-haired Leginya boiled
Suritsa, shining in a golden
cauldron for the Gods of Light.
7 (39). Odin spoke these words:
"Greetings, Mother Leginya,
may there be no dark clouds over your Skuf,
may all your deeds be
be for the glory of the Great Ra-M-Ha and the Gods of
Light. Silver-haired Leginya replied to Odin:
be well, you bright and kind young man,
tell us what brought you
to our foothill Skuf, and to the mountain of Himavat.
8 (40). Pain and sorrow brought me
here, for my dear father,
three circles of years of his life have
passed, old age and infirmity have taken
hold of his body.
Only your life-giving Suritsa, Mother Leginya, will
drive away old age and infirmity,
and torment and suffering,
and sanctify my father's body with God's power.
9 (41). Leginya, silver-haired, said to Odin:
Suritsa is boiling in a golden cauldron,
Take a sip of Suritsa, but remember! The first
cup gives strength,
banishes pain, fatigue, and weakness.
The second cup brings joy and eternal youth, banishing
oppressive old age.
The third cup is unnecessary for humans,
it turns a person into an animal.
10 (42). Two young men came to you, but
they did not listen to my words,
and drank three cups each,
and now they graze like animals in the meadow
behind our foothill of Skuf.
And she showed them to Odin,
and he recognized his own brothers,
and they grazed like sheep on the green meadow.
11 (43). And Odin's heart was filled with
great sorrow for his brothers.
And he took the cup with Suritsa and drank it in one
gulp. His sorrow passed, great strength filled his
body, and he felt the desire to drink another cup
in order to attain eternal
youth, such as the Bright Gods
possess.
12 (44). He drank another cup,
and joy and eternal youth
filled his body,his
body, and he felt the desire to drink another cup
in order to attain eternal
youth, such as the Bright Gods
possess.
12 (44). He drank another cup,
and joy and eternal youth
filled his body,

--- PAGE BREAK ---elt the desire to drink another cup
in order to attain eternal
youth, such as the Bright Gods
possess.
12 (44). He drank another cup,
and joy and eternal youth
filled his body,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and a great desire arose
to drink a third cup, but then he remembered
the words of silver-haired Legina and did not
drink any more, but filled his travel jug
with two cups of Suritsa,
for his beloved father.
13 (45). And Odin composed hymns of prayer to the Light
Gods, and called upon them to help his beloved brothers.
The Light Gods appeared at Odin's call
and restored the minds of his brothers, Stara
and Vinga, and the Gods blessed them on their
journey.
The brothers returned to their father's house
and Odin gave Suritsa to his beloved father.
14 (46). Thor the Wise drank the first cup,
and sickness and weakness left his body,
and great life forces filled his mind and body. Thor
the Wise did not drink the second cup,
but poured Suritsa under the roots of the
old, withered trees of Oak, Birch, and
Ash.
And they gained great strength
and green leaves sprouted on their crowns.
15 (47). Thor spoke these words to his sons:
I have no need for eternal youth,
I have lived a long life given to me by the Creator, the Great Ra-
M-Ha, may these Trees give you great strength,
to you, my beloved sons,
and to all the descendants of your Families
at all times from Circle to Circle.
You shall plant the seeds from these
trees near the halls of your
Families.
and care for them as you would your own children.
16 (48). Since then, the Great Race and the
descendants of the Heavenly Race have been
preserving
the three Trees of Life and Great Power.
In times of trouble or on holidays, they come to
the Trees that give the Power of Life, and many
receive strength
and glorify the Great Ra-M-Ha and the Gods of
Light, and the Wise Ancestors, for their good
deeds,
and for the glory of all the Clans of
the Great Race. Santia 4
1 (49). And Perun RodAn [Head of the Clan] Da'Aryan, KodaRad, asked:
You, tell us,
God Eternally Beautiful,
why do many sorcerers take a vow of silence
and say that they seek knowledge of the Vedas.
Is there truth in the vow of silence?
Does silence bring wisdom to the wise Wizard?
To silent knowledge of Truth, or not?orcerers take a vow of silence
and say that they seek knowledge of the Vedas.
Is there truth in the vow of silence?
Does silence bring wisdom to the wise Wizard?
To silent knowledge of Truth, or not?

--- PAGE BREAK ---of silence
and say that they seek knowledge of the Vedas.
Is there truth in the vow of silence?
Does silence bring wisdom to the wise Wizard?
To silent knowledge of Truth, or not?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 (50). Perun the All-Wise replied to
Kodaradu: There is no point in a vow of
silence,
because the Ancient Vedas cannot be
understood by a silent heart,
and the Ancient Vedas do not penetrate his
heart. The Ancient Vedas are known only
through the living Word, and where the word
of the Vedas is heard,
there hearts begin to know
their Great essence.
3 (51). Many people think
that those who know all the Vedas are
sinless, even when they do evil.
But neither the hymns from the Wisdom of
the Knowledge of the Worlds, nor the
sayings from the Wisdom of the World of
Radiance, nor the incantations from the
Wisdom of Life,
will save those who do evil deeds
and everyone will answer for their lawlessness.
4 (52). Sacred hymns and chants will
not save from injustice those
who willingly succumbs to deception,
who dwell in a world of spells and their own
illusions. As birds leave the nest,
When their wings grow,
so the Soul leaves the human body when
the time comes.
5 (53). The Vedas will not save those who do
not fulfill their Duty to Life,
they show you two paths:
asceticism and bloodless sacrifices, through
which the knowledgeable attain purity
and with this purity drives away sin,
self-illuminated by the knowledge of the
Vedas.
6 (54). By virtue of the knowledge of the
Ancient Vedas, the Soul of the
knowledgeable approaches the World of
Prav,
but if he desires the usual fruits of the World
of Appearance, he takes with him
everything accomplished here,
and in the World of Navi, having tasted the
fruits of his deeds, he bears
responsibility for each of his deeds
and again walks the Path
predestined by the Great Ra-M-Ha.
7 (55). Human children perform asceticism in
the World of Yavi,
and the fruits of all deeds are tasted in the
World of Prav, for the Magi, Priests, and
Kapen-Priests who devote themselves to
asceticism,
Those great Worlds are destined.
Sinless asceticism is consideredfruits of all deeds are tasted in the
World of Prav, for the Magi, Priests, and
Kapen-Priests who devote themselves to
asceticism,
Those great Worlds are destined.
Sinless asceticism is considered

--- PAGE BREAK ---are tasted in the
World of Prav, for the Magi, Priests, and
Kapen-Priests who devote themselves to
asceticism,
Those great Worlds are destined.
Sinless asceticism is considered

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as renunciation of evil;
such detached asceticism can be
successful or unsuccessful.
Through asceticism, the experts of the Ancient
Vedas subsequently attained Immortality.
8 (56). But there is also sinful
asceticism. Those who are possessed by
unrighteous anger and the other sixteen
vices,
as well as those who violate the Commandments of God
and the Ancestors, especially the Blood Commandments,
and who is possessed by thirteen harmful traits —
they are sinful. But those who possess a pure Soul
and a Bright Spirit,
and lives according to the Covenants of
their Forefathers, they are sinless.
9 (57). Unrighteous anger, lust, greed,
delusion, desire, cruelty,
complaining, vanity, despondency, attraction, envy,
disgust, debauchery, coveting what belongs to others,
oppression, malice — these are the vices of the
children of Men, and people should avoid these
sixteen.
10 (58). Each of them lies in wait for people,
wanting to take possession of their insides,
just as a hunter lies in wait for his prey.
The boastful, the lustful, the arrogant, the
vindictive, the unstable,
and those who refuse to protect others are prone to
these six sins committed by lawless people.
despite their great danger.
11 (59). The pursuit of pleasure, hostility,
boasting of one's generosity, stinginess,
oppression of others, lying, weak-willedness,
glorifying one's sensations, hatred of one's spouse,
these are the nine worst enemies of man.
12 (60). Observance of the
Commandments, the Laws of God
the Creator,
the Laws of the Rod, truthfulness, restraint,
asceticism, self-denial, modesty, patience,
steadfastness, absence of envy,
making bloodless sacrifices (prayer and good deeds),
continuing the Rod, mercy, attentiveness, studying the
Holy Ra-M-Ha INTA and the Ancient Vedas
these are the sixteen vows of the servants of the Faith.
13 (61). Whoever strengthens these sixteen
vows will be distinguished throughout Midgard-
Earth;
whoever observes three, two, or even one of
them is considered self-assertive;
in renouncing the vices of the World of Yavi
and not being deluded (in Truth) lies Immortality.roughout Midgard-
Earth;
whoever observes three, two, or even one of
them is considered self-assertive;
in renouncing the vices of the World of Yavi
and not being deluded (in Truth) lies Immortality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rth;
whoever observes three, two, or even one of
them is considered self-assertive;
in renouncing the vices of the World of Yavi
and not being deluded (in Truth) lies Immortality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The wise servants of the Faith
are called the gates of Truth.
14 (62). There are eighteen qualities in self-
development: restraint in action,
inaction and determination,
restraint: injustice, condemnation, pride, base
desires, unrighteous anger,
despondency, greed, gossip, envy, malice, irritation,
anxiety, forgetfulness, verbosity, and presumption.
15 (63). Thus, a person who has attained
self-development becomes sober,
possessing eight qualities: righteousness, the ability
to reflect,
the ability to deepen oneself, the ability
to investigate, dispassion, honesty,
chastity, and composure.
16 (64). Be truthful in soul and spirit,
for the worlds are held together by truth.
Their gate is truth,
for it is said that Immortality rests in Truth. Turning
away from sins,
one must fulfill vows and Commandments.
Such behavior, created by the One God, leads to
Immortality through Truth.
Preserve the Holy Scriptures unchanged, O
people: Ra-M-Ha INTU and the Ancient Vedas.
Santiya 5
1 (65). And Perun the Thunderer, Ognislav, Priest
of the Great Temple of Inglia, from the Tribe of
the Holy Rus, asked: Tell us, Perun-Father,
what awaits in the future the
descendants of all the Clans of
the Great Race
and the descendants of the Heavenly Clan?
What fate awaits them after we depart to the
Heavenly Realm, to our Holy Ancestors.
2 (66). The All-Wise God replied to Ognislav:
Listen to me, Great Guardian of the Primordial
Fire, and you, servants of the God
of the Holy Race and the
Heavenly Lineage. Like the
Heavenly Iriy,
which divides the half of Heavenly Svarog,
Great Changes will be brought
in its flow.
3 (67). The Holy Land of
the Great Race will change
its face.
The Great Cooling will bring the Da'Arian wind to
this land, and Mariona will cover a third of
Summerges will be brought
in its flow.
3 (67). The Holy Land of
the Great Race will change
its face.
The Great Cooling will bring the Da'Arian wind to
this land, and Mariona will cover a third of
Summer

--- PAGE BREAK ---in its flow.
3 (67). The Holy Land of
the Great Race will change
its face.
The Great Cooling will bring the Da'Arian wind to
this land, and Mariona will cover a third of
Summer

--- PAGE BREAK ---

will cover it with its White Cloak.
There will be no food for people and animals
during this time, and the Great Migration
of the descendants of the Heavenly Race beyond the Ripe
Mountains (Ural Mountains), which protect the western
borders
Holy Rassenia.
4 (68). And they will reach the Great
Waters, the Ocean-Sea of the West
(Atlantic),
and the Heavenly Power (the White Men and White Women)
will carry them to the land of the Beardless People,
with skin the color of the Sacred Fire.
The Great Leader will build in that land
the Temple of the Trident of God.
And the Great Ra-M-Ha, the One Creator God,
will send them countless gifts
and will defend their lands from the Elements of Evil.
5 (69). But great prosperity will
cloud the minds of the leaders
and priests.
Great Laziness and the desire for what belongs to
others will take over their minds. And they will
begin to lie to God and people,
and will live by their own laws,
violating the Covenants of the Wise
First Ancestors and the Laws of the
One Creator God.
And they will use
the Power of the Elements of
Midgard-Earth to achieve
their goals.
And they will anger the Great Ra-M-Ha,
our God, with their deeds.
6 (70). And the Gods of the Elements will
destroy that land, and it will disappear
into the depths of the Great Waters, just
as it disappeared in ancient times
in the depths of the northern waters — Sacred DaArya.
The Gods of the Race will save the righteous people
and the Heavenly Power will carry them
eastward, to the lands of people with
skin the color of Darkness.
And the beardless people,
with skin the color of the flames of the
Sacred Fire, the Great Power will carry to
the boundless lands lying in the west of
Yarila-Sun.
7 (71). The people with skin the color of
Darkness will worship the descendants of the
Heavenly Race as Gods
and will learn many sciences from them.
The people of the Great Race
will build new Cities and Temples,
and teach people with skin the color of
Darkness to grow grains and vegetables.
The four tribes of the Great Race, succeeding
one another, will teach the Ancient Wisdom to
new priests and build Trirans-Tombs
in the form of man-made, four-sided mountains.grains and vegetables.
The four tribes of the Great Race, succeeding
one another, will teach the Ancient Wisdom to
new priests and build Trirans-Tombs
in the form of man-made, four-sided mountains.

--- PAGE BREAK ---es.
The four tribes of the Great Race, succeeding
one another, will teach the Ancient Wisdom to
new priests and build Trirans-Tombs
in the form of man-made, four-sided mountains.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[The first four dynasties of the Pharaohs of Ancient Egypt were White.]
8 (72). Other tribes of the Great Race
will settle throughout Midgard-Earth and
cross the Himavat Mountains (Himalayas),
teaching people with skin the color of
Darkness the Wisdom of the World of
Radiance [the Vedas].
So that they may cease to make
terrible, bloody sacrifices
to their goddess — the Black Mother [goddess
Kali] and the Serpent-Dragons from the World
of Navi,
and find Divine Wisdom and Faith.
9 (73). Many of the Clans of the Great
Race will scatter to all corners of
Midgard-Earth, beyond the Ripian (Ural)
Mountains,
and will build new Cities and
Temples and preserve the Faith
of their First Ancestors,
and the secret Vedas given by TARKH, the God of
Rain, and other Bright Gods.
Many Clans from the Great Race and the Heavenly
Clan will herd countless flocks of animals,
and moving from one end of the land to the other,
they will become related to other clans from the Heavenly Clan.
10 (74). But foreign enemies will come from the
World of Darkness and begin to preach to the
children of Man
Flattering words, covered with lies.
And they will seduce the old and the
young,
and they will take the daughters of men as wives.
They will quarrel among themselves
and among people, and among animals.
(To commune — to merge, to mix not only on a physical and genetic level.)
And they will begin to
accustom all the peoples of
Midgard-Earth to this,
and those who do not heed their words
and follow the base deeds of the Foreigners,
will be subjected to torment and suffering.
11 (75). Some of them are currently trying
to infiltrate Midgard-Earth in order to
carry out their dark deeds, to lead astray
from the path of the Forces of Light
the sons and daughters of the Great Race and the
Heavenly Lineage. Their goal is to destroy the
Souls of Human children so that they may never
attain
The Bright World of Prav and Asgard Heavenly,
the abode of the Guardian Gods
of the Heavenly Race and the Great Race.
And also the Heavenly Lands and Settlements,
where your Holy Ancestors find peace.
12 (76). By their gray skin,sgard Heavenly,
the abode of the Guardian Gods
of the Heavenly Race and the Great Race.
And also the Heavenly Lands and Settlements,
where your Holy Ancestors find peace.
12 (76). By their gray skin,

--- PAGE BREAK ---abode of the Guardian Gods
of the Heavenly Race and the Great Race.
And also the Heavenly Lands and Settlements,
where your Holy Ancestors find peace.
12 (76). By their gray skin,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

you will recognize the foreign enemies.
Their eyes are the color of darkness, and
they are hermaphrodites, and can be wives
as well as husbands.
Each of them can be a father or a mother. They paint
their faces
to resemble the children of Men, and
they never take off their clothes, lest
their animal nakedness be exposed.
13 (77). With lies and unrighteous
flattery, they will capture many lands of
Midgard-Earth, as they have already done
in other lands,
in many worlds during the times of the past Great
Assa, but they will be defeated,
and sent to the land of the Man-made Mountains [ancient
Egypt], where people with skin the color of Darkness
and the descendants of the
Heavenly Race who came from the
land of the God Nia.
And the children of Man will begin to teach them
to work, so that they themselves may grow grain
and vegetables to feed their children.
14 (78). But the lack of desire to work
will unite the Foreigners,
and they will leave the land of the Man-made Mountains
and settle throughout the lands of Midgard-
Earth. And they will create their own faith
(religion),
and declare themselves sons of the One
Creator God, but they will sacrifice their
blood and their children to their god,
so that there would be a blood
union between them and their
god.
15 (79). And the Light Gods will send to them
the Wise Wanderers (Prophets),
for they have neither Spirit nor Conscience.
And the Strangers will listen to their Wise
Words, and after hearing them, they will
sacrifice the lives of the Wanderers to their
god.
And
they
will
create
the
Golden Bull as a symbol of
their power, and they will
worship it
just as they worship their god.
16 (80). And the Gods will send the Great Wanderer
to them, bearing love, but the priests of the
Golden Calf
will put him to a martyr's death. And
after his death, they will proclaim
him a god and create a new faith
based on lies, blood, and oppression.
And they will declare all peoples to be
inferior and sinful, and will call them
before the face of the god they have
created to repent and ask forgiveness for
deeds done and not done.oppression.
And they will declare all peoples to be
inferior and sinful, and will call them
before the face of the god they have
created to repent and ask forgiveness for
deeds done and not done.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Santiya 6
1 (81). And the sorcerer
Svyatozar, from the glorious
family of SvyatoRus, said to
Perun the Eternally Beautiful:
Tell us, Perun-Father,
what will become of the Holy Land of the
Great Race and the Faith of our Ancestors?
Tell us, Bright God, if a
difficult time comes
for the Sons of the Great Race,
who will be able to save the Holy Land
of the Race, the Heavenly Clan?
2 (82). The All-Wise God spoke these words:
Know, people, that hard times will be
brought by the flow of the River of Time
upon the Holy Land of the
Great Race. And only the
Priests-Keepers of Ancient
Knowledge and Hidden Wisdom
only the Priests-Keepers of Ancient
Knowledge and Hidden Wisdom.
For people use
the power of the elements
of Midgard-Earth and
destroy the Small Moon
and their beautiful world.
And then the Svarog Circle will turn (the Earth's orbit
will change) and human Souls will be terrified.
3 (83). The Great Night will envelop
Midgard-Earth, and Heavenly Fire
will destroy many lands of the
Earth. Where beautiful gardens
once bloomed,
Great Deserts will stretch out.
Instead of life-giving land,
the seas will roar,
and where the waves of the seas once
splashed, high mountains
covered with eternal snow.
4 (84). People will hide from the poisonous, deadly
rains in caves,
and begin to feed on the flesh of
animals, for the fruits of the trees
will be filled with poison and many
people will die.
after tasting them as food.
The poisoned streams of water will bring many
deaths to the children of the Great Race and
descendants of the Heavenly Race,
and thirst will bring suffering to people.
5 (85). And on the advice of the
Strangers who secretly arrived on
Midgard-Earth, people will begin to
take each other's lives

--- PAGE BREAK ---y Race,
and thirst will bring suffering to people.
5 (85). And on the advice of the
Strangers who secretly arrived on
Midgard-Earth, people will begin to
take each other's lives

--- PAGE BREAK ---

for a sip of fresh water,
for a piece of clean food.
And they will begin to forget the Ancient
Wisdom (Vedas) and the Laws of the One Creator
God.
Great Disunity will come to the World of
Midgard, and only the Priests-Guardians
of the Holy Land of the Great Race
will preserve the purity of Ancient Knowledge,
despite deprivation and death.
6 (86). But the River of Time will once
again bring changes in its course.
And once again, the unification of the Clans of the
Great Race will begin. They will be united by
Ancient Wisdom,
preserved in folk songs and
legends, passed down by word
of mouth,
and recorded on stones in temples and shrines,
and inscribed in the Great Santiya.
Much Wise Knowledge
will be lost to many Clans, but they
will remember
that they are descendants of the Heavenly Clan!
No one will be able to
defeat them and deprive
them of their Freedom.
7 (87). Many Circles of Life will pass
through Midgard-Earth along the Path of
Svarog.
The Children of Man will once again build Cities
and Temples to the Gods whose names they remember.
A righteous and happy life will return
to the lands of Great Rassenia. But
foreign priests,
from the temples of the Golden Bull
and the priests of the Slain
Wanderer, will want to destroy their
world and peace,
for these priests live off the fruits of others' labor.
8 (88). And the foreign priests
will come to the lands of the
Great Race
under the guise of merchants and
storytellers, and they will bring
false legends,
and they will teach the people of the
Great Race to live unrighteously,
who know neither evil nor deceit.
And many people will be led
astray, falling into the trap
of Flattery and Deception,
and will exchange the Righteous World for nine
vices: debauchery, lies, self-love, spiritual
emptiness, failure to fulfill one's duty,
ignorance, indecision, laziness, and gluttony.
9 (89). And many people will
renounce the Holy Faith of their
Ancestorsauchery, lies, self-love, spiritual
emptiness, failure to fulfill one's duty,
ignorance, indecision, laziness, and gluttony.
9 (89). And many people will
renounce the Holy Faith of their
Ancestors

--- PAGE BREAK ---love, spiritual
emptiness, failure to fulfill one's duty,
ignorance, indecision, laziness, and gluttony.
9 (89). And many people will
renounce the Holy Faith of their
Ancestors

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and begin to listen to the words of foreign
priests, which are unrighteous lies,
leading the children of Man
astray from the path of the
Forces of Light.
Times of bloodshed and fratricide will
be brought by foreign priests
to the lands of the Great Race, and they
will begin to convert people to their
faith.
10 (90). The people of the Race
will ask for help from foreign
priests who serve foreign gods
and the god of the World of Darkness.
And the priests of the Slain Wanderer
will begin to comfort them with false
zeal, and will take possession of
their Souls
and the wealth of the children of Men.
And they will declare the people of the Great
Race to be slaves of the god whom they
themselves have killed.
And they will begin to preach to them,
that suffering is a blessing,
for those who suffer will see
God.
11 (91). For seven cycles of life (1,000 years),
darkness will envelop the land of the Great Race.
Many people will perish from metal and fire.
Hard times will come for
the peoples of Midgard-
Earth, brother will rise
against brother, son
against father,
blood will flow like rivers.
Mothers will kill their
unborn children.
Hunger and spiritual emptiness
will cloud the minds of many people of the
Great Race, and they will lose their faith in
justice.
12 (92). But the One Creator God and the
Heavenly Family will not allow the
destruction of the Race.
The rebirth of the Great Race
and the awakening of the Spirit-
patron of the sons of the
Heavenly Race
will be brought by the White
Dog (Gray Wolf) and the One
Sent by God
to the Holy Land of the Great Race.
The Holy Land will be cleansed
from the thousand-year yoke of slavery by foreign
enemies, who sacrifice
the blood and flesh of their
children, and with lies and
flattery they poison
poison the souls of the children of
the Heavenly Race. And the Great
Priest will revive
the Ancient Faith of the First Ancestors
on the Holy Land of the Great Race,th lies and
flattery they poison
poison the souls of the children of
the Heavenly Race. And the Great
Priest will revive
the Ancient Faith of the First Ancestors
on the Holy Land of the Great Race,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and build the Temples of the
Vedas, Kumirni and
Sanctuaries,
so that all the Clans of the Great Race,
descendants of the Heavenly Race,
the Ancient Wisdom and righteous life.
13 (93). The Heavenly Phoenix will
show the High Priest of the
Primary Fire
the son of the Priest of the Forest
from the Tribe of the Three Moons and
raise him to be the High Priest, the
Wise Great Priest,
who will be helped by the Light Gods.
14 (94). And the servants of Darkness will know that
their doom has come. And they will lie about the Great
Priest,
and corrupt his disciples and neighbors with
untold wealth and wicked bliss. So that they
may not reach
the Spiritual Heights of the World of Prav,
but remain eternal slaves of the Dark
World. And they will do everything
to destroy the High Priest,
so that Ancient Wisdom
and the Faith of the First Ancestors on the Holy Land of the Race.
15 (95). The Forces of Darkness will do
everything in their power to light the
Sacred Fire
before the images and idols of the Gods -
the images of your Holy Ancestors.
Foreigners will begin to set
one people against another,
calling them to war,
so that they kill each other
for the possession of earthly riches.
But these riches, at the end of the
wars, will always go to the
Foreigners.
16 (96). Millions of lives will be lost in senseless
wars to satisfy the desires of the foreigners,
for the more wars
and deaths there are among the children
of Man, the more wealth
the emissaries of the World of Darkness
and gain influence over the
minds of many of the Great
Race.
The Dark Forces will even use the Fash
Destroyer
and Fire Mushrooms, bringing death to
Midgard-Earth.
Santiya 7
1 (97). Perun, VedaMir, a warrior from the Kh'Aryan clan,
spoke these words: You, tell usDark Forces will even use the Fash
Destroyer
and Fire Mushrooms, bringing death to
Midgard-Earth.
Santiya 7
1 (97). Perun, VedaMir, a warrior from the Kh'Aryan clan,
spoke these words: You, tell us

--- PAGE BREAK ---n use the Fash
Destroyer
and Fire Mushrooms, bringing death to
Midgard-Earth.
Santiya 7
1 (97). Perun, VedaMir, a warrior from the Kh'Aryan clan,
spoke these words: You, tell us

--- PAGE BREAK ---

our Bright Leader, will the Great Priest save
the Holy Faith of the First Ancestors
on the Holy Land of the Great Race from foreign
enemies? Therefore, I ask you,
for we walk with the Three-Moon Clan in our Kin.
2 (98). The Bright God answered the warrior:
Listen to me, good lad.
A heavy fate is destined for the High Priest. The
misunderstanding of people will surround him,
for Ancient Wisdom will become
incomprehensible to many children of Man
from the Clans of the Great Race and the Heavenly Clan.
And his task is to explain to people
the basics of Ancient Knowledge and the meaning of the
Runes preserved in the Laws of the One Creator God.
3 (99). The Great Priestess will bring New
Life to the expanses of the Holy Land of the
Race,
and all the Clans of the Great Race,
descendants of the Heavenly Clan, will
know
the Life-bearing Light of Ancient Wisdom,
kept by the Priests of the Great Temple of
Inglia.
She will establish Happiness and
Righteous Life throughout the
land of the Race,
so that the World's Bright Soul of the Great
Ra-M-Ha may find refuge
in the hearts of every person
from the Heavenly Race and the Great Race,
beginning with the revived Asgard of Iriy.
4 (100). Perun asked again, Vedamir,
a warrior from the H'Arian Race: tell
us, Bright Leader, how will the Great
Priestess be born?
From which Clans will her Parents
be? And how will the Light of
Ancient Wisdom illuminate the
entire World of Midgard-Earth?
Perun answered the warrior of the Rod
Kh'Aryisky: listen, warrior, to My words,
when the High Priest of the Primary Fire finishes the
fourteen-year training
of the son of the Priest of the
Forest, from the Tribe of the Three
Moons, he will declare him his
successor
and will lead him through the Three Initiations.
5 (101). On the day of the Great Feast,
the Light Gods and the Wise Ancestors will summon the
High Priest of the Primary Fire,
for he will have fulfilled his
mission on Midgard-Earth.
The new High Priest, from the Three-Moon Clan,
will begin his deeds by wandering from city to
city, preaching the Ancient Wisdom of the Faith of
the First Ancestors,his
mission on Midgard-Earth.
The new High Priest, from the Three-Moon Clan,
will begin his deeds by wandering from city to
city, preaching the Ancient Wisdom of the Faith of
the First Ancestors,

--- PAGE BREAK ---gard-Earth.
The new High Priest, from the Three-Moon Clan,
will begin his deeds by wandering from city to
city, preaching the Ancient Wisdom of the Faith of
the First Ancestors,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and healing those sick in soul and body.
6 (102). Returning to Asgard Iriysky, he
will call his disciples to him,
and teach them the Basics of Ancient Wisdom,
and begin to build Temples.
The ancient faith of the First
Ancestors of the Great Race and
the Heavenly Lineage. And when
the time comes, they will bring
the Supreme Priestess
the fourteen-year-old daughter of the Great
Seeress, from the Clan of the Newcomers,
so that she may study the Ancient, hidden Wisdom.
And the High Priest will begin to teach
the daughter of the Great Sorceress in the
Secret Knowledge, and will raise her to be
Priestess of the White Temple.
7 (103). And her mother, the Great Sorceress,
will heal Souls and raise the children of the
Clans of the Great Race and the descendants of
the Heavenly Clan.
And the High Priest
the daughter of the Great Sorceress with
care and love, and will protect her from
the servants of the World of Darkness,
lest they take possession of her Soul,
and lead the daughter of the Great
Sorceress down a dark, spiritless path,
leading the Souls of people into the
abyss of Hell, in the dark depths of
the World of Navi.
8 (104). For the servants of the
World of Darkness know that the
daughter of the Great Sorceress,
surrounded by the care and love of the Great
Priest, will give birth to a beautiful Child,
who will become the Great
Priestess, the Savior of the
Holy Land and all the Tribes
of the Great Race, and the
descendants of the Heavenly
Tribe.
This Child must be born in the Sacred Summer,
for from that time on, the future High
Priestess
will be helped and served by all the Gods of the Heavenly Race.
9 (105). Mother Earth herself will give her food, and
the Heavenly Cow Zimun will feed her with her milk.
Gamayun, the Prophetic Bird,
will sing to the Great Priestess about
the Preserved, Ancient Great Wisdom.
The God Vyshen himself will guard her dreams,
and Mother Lada will protect her from evil
during the day. Mother Makosh will nurse her,
and the god Kryshen will play for her on the flute.
10 (106). But the Forces of Darkness will
gather together and want to destroy this
Child,from evil
during the day. Mother Makosh will nurse her,
and the god Kryshen will play for her on the flute.
10 (106). But the Forces of Darkness will
gather together and want to destroy this
Child,

--- PAGE BREAK ---e day. Mother Makosh will nurse her,
and the god Kryshen will play for her on the flute.
10 (106). But the Forces of Darkness will
gather together and want to destroy this
Child,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

so that the Ancient Knowledge, the Runes
and the Wisdom hidden in Timelessness
would be lost. For their goal is
great,
to prevent the birth of the Great
Priestess, and they will exert all
their strength
to prevent her birth for all eternity.
And the servants of the World of Darkness
will surround the mother of the future
High Priestess,
with lies and flattery.
11 (107). And they will invite the mother of the future High
Priestess to great celebrations,
where lies and spiritual emptiness are honored,
where idleness and self-admiration are the norm,
where baseness and depravity are worshipped.
The Dark Forces will send
seducers and tempters to the
daughter of the Great
Sorceress,
so that they may slander the High
Priest and the Ancient Faith of
the First Ancestors.
12 (108). All the Dark Forces will be directed
toward separating the High Priest
from the daughter of the Great Seeress,
for the Forces of Darkness know that if they
are separated, the great loss and non-birth
of the Great Priestess will lead to the death
of the High Priest.
as
his
mission
is
to
raise
the
High
Priestess. But he will be reborn after one
Cycle of Years,
and this will be the last time the Forces of
Darkness will rule in all corners of Midgard-
Earth.
13 (109). The all-consuming Fire of Retribution of the Forces
of Light will burn the servants of the World of Darkness and
all the descendants of the Foreign enemies,
who filled the entire Human World with their spiritless emptiness
the entire Human World, carrying on their
banners: lies and vices, laziness and cruelty,
desire for what belongs to others and lust,
fear and uncertainty in their own
strength, and this will be the Great
End
for the Foreign enemies who
came from the Dark World.
And the End of the Time of
Darkness will come for all the
Clans of the Great Race and the
descendants of the Heavenly
Clan.
14 (110). Remember, glorious Priests of the
God of the Great Race and the Heavenly Race,
and you, silver-haired sorcerers,
and you, Wise Magi, remember my words.
Engrave the Runes on the Sanctums
and on the stones in your temples and shrines,
so that your descendants may remember the
difficult times that the River of Time will
bring,agi, remember my words.
Engrave the Runes on the Sanctums
and on the stones in your temples and shrines,
so that your descendants may remember the
difficult times that the River of Time will
bring,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ds.
Engrave the Runes on the Sanctums
and on the stones in your temples and shrines,
so that your descendants may remember the
difficult times that the River of Time will
bring,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

on its fleeting waves
and be ready for difficult trials.
15 (111). If the descendants of
your Clans keep these words in their
memory,
and unite many forces to defend
the Faith of the Wise First
Ancestors,
nothing will save the enemies of the
Great Race and the Heavenly Clan
from the striking Fire of Retribution of the Forces of Light.
For whoever among the children of Man
who walks the Path of the Forces of Light will be
saved, and he who walks the path of the Forces of
Darkness will find destruction.
16 (112). By the will of God SvaRog, My Father,
I have proclaimed to you: the Eternal Laws of
the Universe,
and about the Great Trials throughout the Svarog Circle,
and the Ninety-Nine Circles of Life [26,000 years],
which will occur in the future on Midgard-Earth.
This Great Destiny must be fulfilled,
by you and your descendants, so that everything predestined by the
Great Ra-M-Ha may come to pass correctly,
on the surface of the shining waves of the
River of Time, and He watches over its
fulfillment.
Santiya 8
1 (113). Perun the All-Wise, Scythiad, Priest of
the Temple of the Fern Flower, from the Race of
the Russians, said: You, tell us, Wise Teacher,
what forces compel the Strangers to
leave their homelands in the World of
Darkness,
and bring them to us on Midgard-Earth?
The Wise God answered the Priest:
Foreigners covet everything that
is foreign, that does not belong
to them.
All their thoughts are only of power,
and over all Worlds, about seizing the
possessions and creations of the Light
Worlds.
2 (114). The goal of the Foreigners is to
disrupt the harmony that reigns in the World
of Light.
and destroy the descendants of the Heavenly
Race, the Great Race, for only they can
give a worthy rebuff to the Forces of
Darkness.
The servants of the World of Darkness believe
that only they should own all the Worlds
created by the Great Ra-M-Ha.
And arriving on the flourishing Earth,
they seek to accustom the children of Man to Greed, for
Greed destroys Knowledge,
and when Knowledge is killed, Shame perishes.
3 (115). When Shame is killed, Truth is oppressed,e flourishing Earth,
they seek to accustom the children of Man to Greed, for
Greed destroys Knowledge,
and when Knowledge is killed, Shame perishes.
3 (115). When Shame is killed, Truth is oppressed,

--- PAGE BREAK ---they seek to accustom the children of Man to Greed, for
Greed destroys Knowledge,
and when Knowledge is killed, Shame perishes.
3 (115). When Shame is killed, Truth is oppressed,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and with the destruction of Truth,
Happiness perishes. When Happiness is
killed, Man perishes,
and if Man perishes, then all his wealth is freely
taken by Foreigners.
They consider wealth to be their most reliable
support and build their world on wealth.
In the world of darkness, life is
accessible only to those who have
wealth; the poor man is like a dead man
in the desert.
4 (116). They take away people's wealth,
relying on the power of their deception.
Knowing that if you take away people's Support
and Faith, Purpose in Life and Freedom of
Spirit,
then the people themselves will be destroyed.
Human children in such a situation in the World of Yavi
freely choose the path of death
and direct their weapons
against foreign villains,
for it is better to accept a glorious death
in a righteous battle with foreign enemies
than to submit to their enemies.
5 (117). People who are weak in spirit lose
their minds, or fall under the power of
foreign enemies, while others, in their
thirst for gain,
go into the service of foreigners.
The misfortune of such lost people is worse
than death, for death, according to the Law,
is the eternal path of the world,
and there is no one living in the
World of Ya who has surpassed death.
6 (118). Foreign enemies
drive the children of Man to madness,
and people, losing their minds more and
more, commit cruel deeds.
Before violating the Blood
Commandments, people reach the
height of their wickedness, and for
those guilty of blood mixing, Hell
will open its wide doors.
And if a person does not reject all
this, and if he does not wake up,
then he will go straight to Hell.
And the Gods will not help him,
for he himself chooses his Path.
7 (119). The awakening of a person is only in
Knowledge, and the eye of Knowledge saves him.
Having attained Knowledge,
the Child of Man once again gazes upon the
Vedas, and once again it becomes his duty
to strive for Spiritual Life,
and Conscience becomes the head of all deeds.saves him.
Having attained Knowledge,
the Child of Man once again gazes upon the
Vedas, and once again it becomes his duty
to strive for Spiritual Life,
and Conscience becomes the head of all deeds.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ttained Knowledge,
the Child of Man once again gazes upon the
Vedas, and once again it becomes his duty
to strive for Spiritual Life,
and Conscience becomes the head of all deeds.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Listening to Conscience, he hates all
evil, from this Conscience becomes
strong, and man creates his own
Happiness,
and in Happiness, man himself is created.
8 (120). Calm people are always skilled in their
affairs and constant in their duty to God.
They do not think unlawfully, nor do they act sinfully.
Unscrupulous or unreasonable people,
whether men or women,
do not succeed in fulfilling their duty to God,
and become like foreigners.
Those who have a conscience
honor God and their
ancestors,
and they are guided toward
Immortality, not toward the World
of Hell.
9 (121). Which of the children of
men, coming to rage from madness,
will threaten,
whoever hates Good, will be
called a Foreigner — GRAY
and despicable by people.
Whoever, at the instigation
of Foreigners, in delusion
and greed
to take away the happiness of good people, will
not be able to control their anger
and will not hold on to happiness for long,
for all the wealth of those who have strayed
from the Path of Light will go to the
Foreigners.
10 (122). And the hearts of all the Dark
Forces are filled with joy
when the children of Man,
listening to the false words of
the Strangers, stray from the
path of Light.
And they walk the lowly path,
accumulating material goods rather than
spiritual ones, at the behest of foreign
enemies,
thus leading their families to ruin.
And foreign enemies know
that all unrighteous wealth
and the wealth taken from good people
will cloud the human mind,
and people's souls will become callous.
11 (123). Children of the Human
Families, do not listen to the words
of the Foreigners,
for they are deceitful and want to destroy
your souls, so that they do not enter the
Heavenly Asgard,
but remain eternal wanderers in the darkness
without sleep. Do not allow foreigners to approach
your daughters,
for they will seduce your
daughters and corrupt their pure
Souls,Heavenly Asgard,
but remain eternal wanderers in the darkness
without sleep. Do not allow foreigners to approach
your daughters,
for they will seduce your
daughters and corrupt their pure
Souls,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ut remain eternal wanderers in the darkness
without sleep. Do not allow foreigners to approach
your daughters,
for they will seduce your
daughters and corrupt their pure
Souls,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and destroy the Blood of the
Great Race, for the first man a
daughter has leaves Images of
Spirit and Blood.
12 (124). Foreign images of Blood
drive the Bright Spirit out of human
children, and the mixing of Blood leads to
destruction;
and this Race degenerates and
perishes without healthy
offspring,
For there will be no inner strength
to kill all the diseases that will
be brought to Midgard-Earth
by foreign enemies coming from the Dark World.
13 (125). Do not listen to the exhortations of enemy
tempters and do not be seduced by their false promises.
Foreign enemies have no compassion,
neither for the children of Man from the
Heavenly Race, nor for creatures like
themselves,
for everyone who comes from the Dark
World or is born of it
in Midgard or another Earth, thinks
only of a life of idleness, using
the labor of others
and the trust of human children.
14 (126). Through deception and cunning, and
unrighteous lies, the Foreigners gain the trust of
people.
Boasting of their friendship with the
elders of the Race, they ensnare the
children of Men with lies. And they
corrupt their pure Souls,
and accustom them to base deeds. Foreign
enemies call their animal lust "delight,"
and the birth of children as vicious
madness, and they call upon the
children of men
to disregard the traditions of their Fathers.
15 (127). Children of Humanity from the Great Race,
you are descendants of the Heavenly Race.
be pure in Soul and Spirit,
and let a pure Conscience be
the measure of your deeds.
Drive out from all your lands
foreign enemies and all their
descendants, or they will destroy your
bright souls with their spiritlessness,
and with their wicked deeds destroy your
bodies, and use you and your descendants in
their dark deeds,
and they will satisfy their
flesh with your sons and
daughters.
16 (128). Who among you and your descendantswicked deeds destroy your
bodies, and use you and your descendants in
their dark deeds,
and they will satisfy their
flesh with your sons and
daughters.
16 (128). Who among you and your descendants

--- PAGE BREAK ---your
bodies, and use you and your descendants in
their dark deeds,
and they will satisfy their
flesh with your sons and
daughters.
16 (128). Who among you and your descendants

--- PAGE BREAK ---

will remember all this,
and will drive out from the Holy Land of the
Great Race the foreign enemies and their
descendants,
that true Savior and Defender of his Race
and all the tribes of the Great Race and the descendants of the Heavenly Tribe.
And those who listen to the
false words of the Foreigners
and give them their daughters
or take a foreign daughter for his son, that one is a
renegade of the Human Race,
and there will be no forgiveness for him from God
and the Heavenly Race, for all days without end.
Sanity 9
1 (129). And they asked Perun the Thunderer,
the Priests-Guardians of the Paths,
who lead through the Star Gates:
Tell us, our Wise Teacher, what is
happening in the Great Svarog,
And why have many Gates closed in Makosh and Rada [Makosh is the Big Dipper, Rada
is Orion]?
And the Crystals of Movement do not shine,
and the Circle of Zarbin has dimmed to a quarter.
The Heavenly Needles have lost their color,
and now, from many White Mares,
we hear no answer to our many calls.
2 (130). Perun the All-Wise answered them:
Know, Guardians of the Gates of the
Interworld,
in Svarog, the Great Assembly is taking place.
In Makosh, in Rada, in Svat and in Rasa,
the Great Battle [War] is now taking
place, in which the Bright Gods from Prav
the Light Gods from Prav have
entered into a fierce battle.
They defend the Great Svarog
and purify the World, Hall after Hall,
from the warriors of Darkness, from the
Dark World.
3 (131). From those evil enemies,
that they turned the blossoming lands into
dust, that they shed the blood of innocent
creatures, sparing neither the young nor
the old.
Therefore, many Gates were closed
so that foreign enemies would not
enter the Bright Lands of the Great
Svarog and suffer the fate of
Troara, who, in the Council of the
Most Glorious,
illuminated the Worlds with Wise Love.
4 (132). Now Troara is deserted, without Life.
The Many-Gated Circle is torn apart,
the mountains have collapsed into many Needlesouncil of the
Most Glorious,
illuminated the Worlds with Wise Love.
4 (132). Now Troara is deserted, without Life.
The Many-Gated Circle is torn apart,
the mountains have collapsed into many Needles

--- PAGE BREAK ---Glorious,
illuminated the Worlds with Wise Love.
4 (132). Now Troara is deserted, without Life.
The Many-Gated Circle is torn apart,
the mountains have collapsed into many Needles

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and the ashes of the fires lie seven fathoms deep.
I saw the same sad, gloomy image
I saw in Arkon, on the Land of Ruta, which
once shone in Makosha the Bright. The Gate
of the Interworld is a melted stone. The
Heavenly Needles are roadside dust.
5 (133). Everywhere are the ruins of the
Great Sanctuaries, and the Cities are
destroyed by the fierce flames that rose
from Rutta to the sky.
There is no more Life in that Land without the
Sun, no plants, no birds, no animals.
Only the wind carries ashes through
the valleys and covers the gorges
between the mountains.
Gloomy and quiet, in that world of
ruins, where once Life dwelled
everywhere.
6 (134). The destroyer evaporated the rivers and
the sea, and black clouds filled the sky.
through the impenetrable stench, no ray of light
passes, and Life will never return to that world.
This happened to many lands visited by
enemies from the Dark World. They were
attracted by the riches and resources
of those beautiful lands.
Using flattery to gain the trust of the
inhabitants, they set people against each
other.
Thus, wars were born in those worlds.
7 (135). After the wars ended, the survivors
were irradiated with ciran.
And people lost their Consciousness
and Will, and at the command of the
Foreign enemies, they extracted
wealth and minerals.
When there were no riches left in those lands,
and the mineral resources were exhausted,
then the enemies destroyed all the people
and took away everything they had
obtained in those lands. And from the
lands from which the foreigners had been
expelled,
they sent the destroyer Fash there.
8 (136). So that the Circle of Zarbin may be
restored, and the Spiral of the Interworld may shine
again,
You, extract the Crystals of Movement,
in the part that dims with a ray in the quarter.
Instead of the Crystals of Movement of Svarog,
which are at the edges, for the Svarog Halls,
install the Inglia Crystals.
The light of the Otherworld, manifested
in Navi, will shine in the Crystals of
Inglia. And flowing with a powerful
stream,
it will restore the zarbin's glow.
9 (137). Only on the Circle of Zarbin before you,of the Otherworld, manifested
in Navi, will shine in the Crystals of
Inglia. And flowing with a powerful
stream,
it will restore the zarbin's glow.
9 (137). Only on the Circle of Zarbin before you,

--- PAGE BREAK ---anifested
in Navi, will shine in the Crystals of
Inglia. And flowing with a powerful
stream,
it will restore the zarbin's glow.
9 (137). Only on the Circle of Zarbin before you,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

will the Spiral manifest itself with an
even glow, change the Crystals again as
they were, for the Otherworld will be
revealed to you.
Know that the Light of the
Otherworld is destructive, it
absorbs the Souls of radiation
and the Mind will fade in the Rays of the Otherworld,
unable to understand what is happening to the
Soul. And the life of unreasonable, soulless
creatures does not move to Svarog, but goes to
Hell,
and there they wither away in unending
darkness, not knowing themselves or what
has happened.
10 (138). So be careful in your actions and do not
tempt Fate in vain.
Curiosity has ruined many people, those
who tried to know the Otherworld. The rays
of the Otherworld are harmful to health,
and humans are powerless to understand their
nature. Life there follows alien laws, and a
bloody dawn rises over the lands.
And strange beings like polkanes tried to
destroy the Vaitmars forever.
11 (139). You live peacefully in Midgard, since
ancient times, when the world was established.
Remembering from the Vedas the deeds of Dazh
(Ja) God, how he destroyed the strongholds of
the Koscheys,
which were located on the Nearest
Moon. Tarkh did not allow the cunning
Koscheys
destroy Midgard, as they destroyed Deya [Deya — a destroyed planet, now the
Asteroid Belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter].
These Koscheys, rulers of the Grays,
perished along with the Moon in half a second (18.75
seconds). But Midgard (Earth) paid for its freedom,
with the Great Flood hidden by DaArya.
12 (140). The waters of the Moon created that
Flood, falling from the heavens onto the Earth
like a rainbow.
For the moon split into pieces,
and the army of Svarozhich
descended upon Midgard.
The Ancient Threads were destroyed,
that stretched to the distant Hells
and in the Betweenworlds, some of the
connections were severed. The many-voiced
call was not heard,
many Vaitmars were lost in Yavi;
before new Threads were born, and
their call was heard from the Halls.
13 (141). Many people perished at that time,
those who did not manage to climb the White
Mountains,
or pass through the Gates of the
Betweenworlds, and take refuge in the
Hall of the Bear.
The Threads of the Halls were broken again,at time,
those who did not manage to climb the White
Mountains,
or pass through the Gates of the
Betweenworlds, and take refuge in the
Hall of the Bear.
The Threads of the Halls were broken again,

--- PAGE BREAK ---did not manage to climb the White
Mountains,
or pass through the Gates of the
Betweenworlds, and take refuge in the
Hall of the Bear.
The Threads of the Halls were broken again,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and so the Heavenly Needles have lost
their color, so that the Needles may
shine again with color, You, replace the
Crystals of Irkama.
Replace them with the Crystals of Tara
and through Zimun (the Little Bear) restore the Threads.
14 (142). The Heavenly Needles will shine
again and the Vaitmaras will respond to
your call. Faith in the success of your
glorious deeds is what is most important
at this time. If deeds are bound by Faith,
what will prevent them from being
accomplished? Only through the labor
created by the Community will you cover
your Families with Glory.
Only by uniting all the Rati with the
Ancient Faith will you defend your
beautiful Midgard.
15 (143). The Ancient Bonds will be restored once
more, and the Ancestors will respond to the calls
of their descendants. The Strangers will not be
able to interfere with that speech,
for they will be banished to Hell.
But remember, people, that the enemy is
vengeful and pretends that he does not care
about you. And he himself, hiding from
view, will bear the weapon of vengeance.
They know nothing of Heavenly Honor and
Truth, for there is no conscience in their
hearts.
16 (144). The Foreigners have ruined many
Lands in various Palaces of the Svarog Circle.
Black Envy clouds their vision
when they see each other's prosperity.
Envy, deceit, and desire for what belongs to others are
their goals, even in the Hellish World.
And so the Foreigners try
to seize everything in Yavi and the
Interworld. Remember, people of the Great
Race,
all that has been told on this beautiful
evening. The main thing is that for your
descendants, this knowledge will not be in
vain.
Book 8.
VEDAS OF THE DAKAS
The Word of VegiYara:
We are One in Inglia,
As the beginning and continuation
Of the Heavenly Race with Divine Power.
...
We remember from the beginning of time,
From the time of the universe's creation,
Everything we know,are One in Inglia,
As the beginning and continuation
Of the Heavenly Race with Divine Power.
...
We remember from the beginning of time,
From the time of the universe's creation,
Everything we know,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Is the fruit born of our thoughts, Our foundation
is Knowledge,
And Knowledge serves as our support.
...
We have gathered to give birth to a New World, God
has blessed our deeds,
And shared His Knowledge with us,
To begin our journey through the
World.
...
The reasons that prompted us to set out on our
journey Are difficult.
We set out in search of the Source of Power.
Wherever Prav shows us,
We will build MirTgrad.
...
Oriy from Iriya
Showed us the way to the place.
To the place where God's Power will
begin, To continue the Lineage and
Life, On new Lands.
...
Radmir had already found places,
In lands hitherto unexplored,
But the path there is not close, and even
dangerous. Warriors are pursuing us,
With those we have never seen
before, From distant lands.
...
On the way, we will be shown
Where the New begins.
We are accompanied by
Warriors,
And they will show us
Where to build MirTgrad.
...
According to God's
plan, the Warriors
will show us where to
build the City.
In accordance with the plan,
the Warriors will prepare
those places.
...
We study the terrain we
are walking on
What is born there. We assess
the danger That they may
bring.
The Warriors look for ways to protect
us. The Warriors go first,
protecting us from surprises, with
the help of the god Perun himself.
...
We move ever forward, Learning
everything along the way,
So that our family and our descendants may know everything.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s from surprises, with
the help of the god Perun himself.
...
We move ever forward, Learning
everything along the way,
So that our family and our descendants may know everything.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Let the DAKIS, DA'ARIIS, and H'ARIIS know
where they come from.
...
What the Gods have learned is
infinite, And their path through
life.
From the god Perun, the path is known
to us. Through time and space, Perun
told us,
From now on, we can go beyond the
boundaries of what we know,
Beyond the limits of our world.
...
The divine power that lies within us, It shows us the
beginning of the New.
That foundation through which
we come to know the
unfamiliar.
The unfamiliar, becoming familiar,
is bound together into a new
foundation.
In this way,
knowledge becomes infinite. So said
the god Perun.
...
Warriors learned everything they encountered,
recording everything on Santias,
as a foundation for the
future. For the Warriors of
the Heavenly Clan.
...
All paths in Svarog have been
explored, laid out by our knowledge,
both in the present and in the
future. We have learned everything.
...
The Paths are infinite,
Which are derived from the
Mind. Beyond the limits of
what is known, Lies our
Beginning,
The beginning of new Knowledge
And the birth of new Divine Powers.
Everything that has been explored
Is known in the Rules.
...
The warriors - DA'ARIYI, communicating with the ancestors of the
Aryans - H'ARIYI, learned the Wisdom of the H'ARIYI.
We have come to a new
beginning. DAKIA became the
beginning,
Where the Warriors DAKI (Aesir) settled.
They began to settle the place they had found.
...
The DAKI (Aesir) communicated with
the H'ARIYAS. They were given the
Law of the Universe so that they
could know.
To know about their own
Mind, About the Mind of
God.
...

--- PAGE BREAK ---...
The DAKI (Aesir) communicated with
the H'ARIYAS. They were given the
Law of the Universe so that they
could know.
To know about their own
Mind, About the Mind of
God.
...

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In that Mind, the entire Path of the
Righteous, All Wisdom.
The mind serves as the
foundation, Guiding all
knowledge,
But only a warrior who understands God can
perceive it.
...
The mind is the path to understanding what
is happening, The basis of images of the
present and the future. The path of the
warrior to Svarog,
Where everything is known to his Kindred.
...
We have come to the place of
birth, Chosen as the place
Where descendants will be born.
Like their homeland,
As the Path of the Aryans, their Mind.
...
The image of God's children is
diverse, There are many Warriors of
Light in Svarog They are the
foundation of Life.
Only Warriors can understand the will of God.
...
Warriors who have walked the path from
knowing God to discovering the Way,
comprehending God's Wisdom, reveal
Svarga to themselves.
...
The gift received from the
Aryans, Like the knowledge of
the White Path,
The White Path is a new beginning, The
correct creation of the New,
And contributing to the White Path.
...
The White Path requires much
effort, For it takes a lot of
strength to follow. But
difficulties lead to discoveries,
Which fill the mind with goodness,
And beautiful creations are born from this.
...
Rebirth is possible, After
completing the entire Path.
Know yourself
As the essence of the Universe,
Where the image of the New World is created.
In whom Everything is laid down to become the White Path.
...
The White Path is thinking, Mind.
From thought to new thought.
This is how the Divine Beginning is born,
Which serves as the Source of the Unknown,
creating images of people and knowing their
thoughts. People strive to learn what is unknown to
them in order to better understand their Power.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rves as the Source of the Unknown,
creating images of people and knowing their
thoughts. People strive to learn what is unknown to
them in order to better understand their Power.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

...
The creators of H'ARIA,
The Vedas that they give
Encourage the new, born person
To embark on the path of the Warrior, and the Warrior walks his Path.
The entire universe becomes for him the beginning of the New, - Svarog.
...
In Knowledge lies the Power laid down by the Great Ra-M-Ha.
The Great Ra-M-Ha predetermined that man would walk the White Path. Each part of
the free and predetermined section of the Path is Knowledge, which is the Vedas.
People walk their own Paths, revealed in the Vedas.
...
The Aryan Race is the beginning of the Flow.
Where the minds of many people communicate with each
other, there the Vedas and Knowledge are born.
The Knowledge of the Aryans gives birth to Prav.
...
Understanding the White Path comes from
understanding the Vedas. Our ancestors, the
H'ARIES,
Having walked the White Path, predetermined it.
The White Path, for a person, is the foundation of the
Mind, His thoughts and thinking.
People walk their path again and again, becoming
ARIAS.
...
A warrior who has learned the Way of the Vedas is
immortal. The Aryan gods write the Vedas.
The Path of the Warrior from the Great Ra-M-Ha gives birth
to insights, Which give birth to Knowledge.
The Path of the Warrior is the source
of the Vedas. The Great Ra-M-Ha is the
beginning of knowledge.
...
From Svarga, the Way of the Warrior begins through the Mind.
The movements of the Divine Principles reveal the beginning of the Path of the
White.
The basis for inheritance is birth from a human being to a human being. We who
have inherited the Way of the Warrior
The beginning of the Divine Forces.
...
The Vedas are the heritage of the Aryans.
Greatness lies in the harmony of the Way of the Warrior
and his thoughts. Harmony leads to the creation of the
hitherto unknown. Rule, illuminate thoughts, and do not
stray from the Way.
The Way continues itself.
On the Path, you learn new things that follow on
from the old. This is the basis for people to
continue on the Path.
...
The Aryan God is the God of All.
The infinitely giving Great Ra-M-Ha, equal for
all people.
As the foundation of God
Almighty. The Vedas originate
from Him.
...
He who writes the Vedas must be in harmony with himself,God of All.
The infinitely giving Great Ra-M-Ha, equal for
all people.
As the foundation of God
Almighty. The Vedas originate
from Him.
...
He who writes the Vedas must be in harmony with himself,

--- PAGE BREAK ---initely giving Great Ra-M-Ha, equal for
all people.
As the foundation of God
Almighty. The Vedas originate
from Him.
...
He who writes the Vedas must be in harmony with himself,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

He repeats the path of the DAARIYTSEV (Hyperboreans).
What you accept depends on the Mind within you, To become
an Aryan (Immortal) from the Great Ra-M-Ha.
Book 9.
TRIPURA RAKHASYA
CHAPTER I - THE QUESTION OF THE WISE MAN
1. O Great Ra-M-Ha, glory to You, for You are the One and Many God, and at the
same time the Primordial and Blissful Cause, the Transcendent Consciousness,
the Supreme Mind, Shining as the One and Only Source of Life of our wonderful
Universe.
2. HARI said:
"Remaining in serenity, you listened, O Narada, to the Holy Teaching of
Wisdom, the Teaching that teaches the Way to the Transcendent (God)."
3. Now I will speak about Wisdom, and this conversation is unique, for whoever
listens to it will be forever freed from suffering in this world (Yavi) and the
next.
4. This is a concentrated extract of the essence of Vedic and Buddhist
Knowledge, obtained after a deep study of them all.
5-7. No other course of study will make such a strong impression on the mind as
this course on Wisdom, which was once taught by the eminent and renowned Guru
(Teacher) DattaTray (God of Wisdom Tod) to Rama (Avraam). This Teaching was born
from His own experience, being logical in its meaning and completely unique in its
nature. Anyone who fails to comprehend Wisdom even after listening to this Teaching
must be considered an unreasonable fool, who should be classified as one of the
unreasonable and unreceptive beings and those who have rejected God; no one will be
able to endow such a person with Wisdom.
8. Now I will proceed to expound this incomparable Teaching. Listen! O, there is
nothing more sacred than the lives (Stories) of the Wise!
9-11. Narada also came to me to study the same Teaching that I taught him; for the
Teaching of the Sage allows one to comprehend the inherent goodness within them,
just as the sense of smell helps to detect the characteristic aroma of musk.
When Rama, son of Ra (the Supreme God) and Agni (Ingli [Fire/Light]), already
possessing a pure mind and being well-behaved towards all, listened to the Holy
Teaching from the mouth of DattaTrea (God of Wisdom Toda), he immersed himself in
devotion to God (the Great Ra-M-Ha), which manifested itself in him more and more,
and his mind became even purer.
12-13. Then, when his mind had calmed down, his eyes lit up with ecstasy, and his
hair stood on end, as if his ecstasy could not be contained within, but had to
burst out through every pore of his body. And then he stretched out to pray to God.
14. He rose again, overflowing with ecstasy, and with his voice choked with
emotion, he said, "God is on my side! Blessed am I! All this is by Your grace, O
Lord!"
15. Your boundless mercy has been embodied here in the form of my Guru
(Teacher). Truly, Lord, You are merciful to me; compared to the bliss found in
Your mercy, even the pleasures of a king seem like meaningless nonsense, and
his position seems like that of a slave.(Teacher). Truly, Lord, You are merciful to me; compared to the bliss found in
Your mercy, even the pleasures of a king seem like meaningless nonsense, and
his position seems like that of a slave.

--- PAGE BREAK ---16.

Does not the Lord of Death truly dissolve into the supreme Essence (Soul) of
the disciple, if only the Teacher is pleased with his disciple?

Does not ignorance
leave a person if God is pleased with that person?

The great Ra-M-Ha is truly merciful, and my Teacher is just as merciful, for
reasons unknown to me.

17.

The grace of the Guru (Teacher) has been attained, and thus I have
attained everything!

You have now graciously revealed to me the glory of God.

18.

And now I ardently desire to worship His Transcendental Majesty.

I beg You,
my Teacher, tell me how this worship should be performed?

19-22.

When asked about this, Guru Dattā (Dattatreya) was convinced of the
sincerity of Rāma, whose zeal and devotion to worshiping God were strong; and He
duly initiated him into the method of worshiping God.

After being initiated into
the correct method, which is more sacred than all others and leads directly to
Self-realization (Liberation), Rama learned from the sweet lips of the Wise Guru
all the details relating to mantras and prayers, rituals of worship, and various
meditations, learning all the details in order—one after another, like a bee
gathering nectar from flowers.

Brahman (Rahman) was filled with joy (God [RA] attained You [YU]).

23.

Then, having received permission from his Holy Teacher and eager to engage in
the practice of Sacred Knowledge (Veda), he humbly walked around the Teacher,
expressed his respect for Him, and withdrew to the hill of Mahendra.

24.

There, having built a clean and comfortable hermitage, he spent twelve
years worshipping God.

25-26.

He constantly contemplated the image of his Mind, while at the same time
performing his daily tasks and special ceremonies (prayers) related to worshiping
God and reading mantras (Vedas); thus, twelve years passed in an instant.

Then one
fine day, when the son of Ra and Agni was sitting in a relaxed posture, he indulged
in daydreaming.

27.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then one
fine day, when the son of Ra and Agni was sitting in a relaxed posture, he indulged
in daydreaming. 27. "I did not understand even the slightest bit of what Samvarta
(Rahman), whom I once met on the way, told me. 28. "I also forgot what I asked my Guru. I heard from Him the Holy Teaching... (about Light)
29. ... but I don't understand what Samvarta said in response to my question
about creation."
30. "He mentioned the story of Arti, but did not say anything else, knowing that
I was not ready for it."
31. "Even now, I don't understand anything about how things work in the
universe. Where did it come from in all its splendor?"
32. "Where does it end? How does it exist? I suppose it's all
transient."
33. "But worldly things seem stable in their existence; why is this so? This state
of affairs seems strange enough not to investigate it."
34. "How strange! It can be compared to a blind man being led by another blind
man!"
35. "My own case is an example in this regard. I don't even remember what happened
in my childhood."
36. "Then I was different during my youth, then I changed again during my
maturity, and now I am even more unlike who I was before; thus, my life is
constantly changing."
37-38. "It is not clear to me what fruits have been gained as a result of all these
changes. The end justifies the means that individuals deem

--- PAGE BREAK ---suitable according to their characters in different countries and at different
times.

But what have they gained from it?

Are they happy now?

39.

"Attainment is only what is considered as such by a frivolous public.

I,
however, cannot agree with this, seeing that even after achieving this so-
called goal, the efforts and attempts at attainment do not cease.

40-41.

"Well, why then, having achieved one goal, does a person strive to achieve
another?

Consequently, what a person always strives for must be considered the
only real goal—whether it is access to pleasure or the elimination of pain.

As
long as there is a compelling reason to make an effort, there can be nothing else.

42.

"The feeling of needing to act in order to find happiness (being a sign of
suffering) is suffering among sufferings.

Where can pleasure or relief from pain
come from as long as there is a need for action and action itself?

43-45.

"Such pleasure is like the pleasure of pain-relieving ointments applied to a
scalded body, or the pleasure of the embrace of a loved one when a person is lying
with an arrow in their chest; or the pleasure experienced by a dying sick person
when they hear sweet melodies!

46.

"Only those who do not feel the need for activity are happy; such
individuals experience complete satisfaction, they are self-sufficient and feel
happiness that spreads throughout their entire body.

47.

"And if anyone else experiences moments of joy, they are like the pleasure a
person feels from inhaling the pleasant scent of flowers while writhing in
unbearable stomach pain.

48.

"How foolish are people with their countless obligations, forever busy
searching for such moments of pleasure in this world!

49.

"What can I say about the skill and perfection of impenetrable people?

They
intend to achieve happiness as a result of strenuously overcoming countless
obstacles!

50.

"A beggar on the street spends as much time seeking happiness as a
powerful emperor.

51-52.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"A beggar on the street spends as much time seeking happiness as a
powerful emperor. 51-52. "Achieving their goal, both feel happy and consider themselves blessed, as
if they have attained the highest Goal of Life (Immortality). I also unwittingly
imitated them, like a blind man following a blind man. Enough of this madness! I
will immediately return to that Ocean of Compassion—my Teacher. 53. "Having learned from Him what must be known, I will cross the ocean of doubt
in the boat of His Teaching."
54. Having made this decision, Rama, with a clear mind, immediately descended the
hill in search of his Teacher. 55. Quickly reaching Mount GandhMadhan, he found the Guru sitting in
padmasana (lotus position), and it was as if He was illuminating the whole
world with His presence. 56. He appeared before the Teacher and, holding the Guru's hands with his
own hands, he touched His hands with his head. 57. When Rama showed his respect for Him in this way, Datta Treya gave him His
blessings, His face lit up with love, and He commanded him to rise, saying:
58. "Child, get up! I see that you have returned after a long absence. Tell
Me, how are you? Are you in good health?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---face lit up with love, and He commanded him to rise, saying:
58. "Child, get up! I see that you have returned after a long absence. Tell
Me, how are you? Are you in good health?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

59. He rose at his Guru's command and sat down directly in front of Him, as
instructed. Folding his hands in a gesture of greeting (namaskara, namase), Rama
spoke with undisguised pleasure.
60. "O wise Guru! Ocean of Compassion! Can anyone who is imbued with Your
kindness ever be crushed by illness, even if fate decrees it?
61. "How can the burning pain of illness touch one who dwells in the cool
moon of Your nectar-like kindness?
62-64. "I feel happy in body and mind, refreshed by Your kindness. Nothing disturbs
me except the desire to remain in constant contact with Your Holy Instructions.
Just seeing You makes me completely happy, but there are some long-standing doubts
in my mind.
65. "With Your gracious permission, I wish to express them."
66. After hearing Rama's words, Dattatreya, the Ocean of Kindness, was
pleased with them and said to him:
67. "Ask right now, O Brahman (Sage), about what you so greatly desire to know and
about what you have been pondering for so long. I am pleased with your devotion to
God and will gladly answer your questions."
CHAPTER II - A BINDING FEELING TOWARDS ACTION IS CONDEMNED, AND INVESTIGATION IS
RECOMMENDED
1. "Hearing this command, Rama, bowing humbly once again before the son of the
Holy Sage Atri, began to ask:
2. "Brahman, dear and revered Teacher! O All-Knowing One! Ocean of Compassion!
Once, having a serious reason for it, I was in terrible anger at the caste of
demons.
3. "Twenty-one times I circled the Earth, mercilessly exterminating them
all and filling the lakes with their blood.
4. "My ancestors (the gods) were pleased with my devotion to God; however,
they commanded me to stop this bloody slaughter. My fury finally subsided.
5. "When I heard about the glorious Yog, from the city of Ayodhya, my anger flared
up again. Blinded by rage and proud of my skill, I challenged Him.
6. "I was defeated by that great Brahman, and my pride was humbled. But because
of His inherent kindness, He spared my life, since I was a Brahmin (a sage).
7. "As I returned, ashamed of my defeat, I realized the vanity and futility of
the ways of this world.
8. "Once, I unexpectedly met Samvarta, the great hermit, and intuitively
recognized him as Fire (God), hidden by the ashes of smoldering coals.
9. "His greatness was like hot coals hidden by smoldering embers. Every inch of
his body filled those around him with vitality, so that I felt his refreshing
and invigorating influence just by being near him.
10. "I asked him to tell me about his condition. His answer was the clear and
express essence of the sweet nectar of Eternal Life.
11. "At that time, I was unable to continue communicating with him, and I felt
like a beggar standing before a king. However, I prayed to him, and he directed
me to You.
12. "And so I sought refuge in You, like a blind man who is totally
dependent on his friends., and I felt
like a beggar standing before a king. However, I prayed to him, and he directed
me to You.
12. "And so I sought refuge in You, like a blind man who is totally
dependent on his friends.

--- PAGE BREAK ---13.

"What Samvarta said is completely unclear to me.

I have studied the doctrine
of the Vedas well.

This Holy Scripture is undoubtedly an incentive to devotion to
God.

14.

"He (God) is incarnated in You, and He always dwells in my heart.

But in the
end, what has all this given me?

15.

"Teacher, I ask you to explain what Samvarta said to me earlier.

Undoubtedly,
I will not be able to comprehend the goal until it becomes known to me.

16.

"And so, whatever I do in ignorance, it all looks like child's play.

17.

"Before, I appeased God with various ceremonies, rituals, gifts, and offerings
of food.

18.

"Then I heard Samvarta say that the fruits of all these actions are
extremely insignificant and trivial.

I consider those actions that bring only
trivial results to be meaningless.

19.

"Suffering is not the absence of happiness, but limited happiness.

For as
happiness diminishes, suffering increases.

20.

"And this is not the only sad result of activity, for there is an even worse
one—the fear of death, which cannot be reduced by any amount of activity.

21.

"My religious practices (prayers) dedicated to God are similar to this.

All
these mental concepts are just child's play.

22.

"Practices may be in accordance with Your instructions, or with someone
else's.

Again, they may or may not be accompanied by asceticism (fasting), as the
Scriptures interpret this in different ways.

23.

Meditations may also vary according to individual preferences and
personalities.

How can this be?

Devotion is as imperfect as karma.

24.

"How can fleeting mental concepts of devotion produce the imperishable
fruits of the highest Truth?

Furthermore, the practices (prayers) are lengthy
and regular, and there seems to be no end to these obligatory services.

25.

"I have noticed that Samvarta is absolutely happy, being completely free
from any binding feeling towards activity and its terrible fruits.

26.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"I have noticed that Samvarta is absolutely happy, being completely free
from any binding feeling towards activity and its terrible fruits. 26. "He seems to laugh at the way of life in this world, and, carefree, he strides
confidently forward on the path of fearlessness, like a majestic elephant
refreshing himself in a lake of melting snow while the whole forest around him is
burning in fire. 27. "I found him completely free from any sense of duty, and at the same time
completely happy in his realization of the Eternal Essence (Self-Realization). How
did he attain that state? And what did he say to me? 28. "Please explain this to me and thereby save me from the clutches of the
monster called karma."
29. Praying thus, he stretched out before the Teacher, embracing Him with his
arms. Observing Rama's behavior and feeling that he was now ready for Self-
realization,
30. the Wise Dattā, whose very essence is Love, gently said: "O child of Brahman! God is on your side, since your mind is turned in this way (inward). 31-33. "Just as a person drowning in the ocean suddenly discovers a boat that
saves him, so too your virtuous actions performed in the past have now elevated
you to the most sacred heights of Self-realization (self-knowledge). The Supreme
God, the Great Ra-M-Ha—

--- PAGE BREAK ---the conscious Essence of the heart (Mind), and therefore He who truly knows the
most secret things about everyone – quickly rescues His unwavering devotees from
the clutches of death after manifesting Himself in their hearts.

34.

"Until a person is not too afraid of this nightmarish obsession in the form
of obligation (duty), he will not be able to find true happiness, being like
someone who is always possessed by an evil spirit.

35.

"How can a person who has been bitten by that viper—obligation—ever be happy?

Some people go mad, as if some poison has already entered their blood and is
tormenting them terribly.

36.

"While others are intoxicated by the poison of obligation and unable to
distinguish good from bad.

37.

"By mistake, they always involve themselves in activities, being misled; such
is the sorrowful fate of humanity, intoxicated by the poison of duty (obligation).

38.

Since time immemorial, people have been swallowed up by this terrible ocean
of poison, just as once happened to travelers in the Vindhya mountain range.

39.

"Suffering from hunger in the forest, they mistakenly took the deceptive
fruits of the chilibu tree for delicious oranges.

40.

"And, tormented by terrible hunger, they ate them without even noticing the
bitter taste of these fruits.

And then the poison of these fruits became the cause
of their terrible suffering.

41.

"At first, they mistakenly took these poisonous fruits for edible ones, and
now, with their minds further blinded by the poison of these fruits, they rushed to
find relief from this pain.

42.

"And in their agony, they picked and ate the fruits of the stinking datura,
thinking them to be the fruits of the tree of life.

43.

"They went mad and lost their way.

Some, blinded, fell into pits or ravines;
44.

"Some of them had their bodies deeply scratched by thorns; some had their
arms, legs, or other body parts maimed; others began to quarrel, fight, and yell
at each other.

45.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Some of them had their bodies deeply scratched by thorns; some had their
arms, legs, or other body parts maimed; others began to quarrel, fight, and yell
at each other. 45. "They attacked each other with their fists, stones, projectiles, sticks,
etc., until, finally, completely exhausted, they reached a certain city. 46. "They arrived at the city walls at dusk, and so the guards did not allow them
to enter. 47-49. "Unaware of the time and place, unable to assess the circumstances, they
attacked the guards and were justifiably beaten and driven away; some of them fell
into ditches; some became prey to crocodiles; some fell headfirst into wells and
drowned; a few men, who were more dead than alive, were caught and thrown into
prison. 50. "A similar fate awaits those people who, misled by their search for happiness,
have fallen into the traps of the chief overseer of activity (obligation). They are
confused in their madness, and destruction (Hell) awaits them. 51-52. "God is on your side, thanks to which you have overcome that distracting
state, leaving it behind. Investigation (self-investigation) is the root cause of
everything, and it is the first step toward the highest reward in the form of
indescribable Bliss. How can anyone attain Salvation without proper investigation?

--- PAGE BREAK ---53.

"Lack of prudence is certain death, but many are in its clutches.

Success
accompanies proper deliberation until, ultimately, a final result is achieved
that is free from all doubt.

54.

"Rashness is the eternal weakness of fools; prudence is
the quality of the wise, and therefore they are always happy.

55.

"Because of their insight, the wise rely on God and inevitably defeat
their enemies.

Research is a seed that can sprout and grow into a giant tree
of happiness.

56.

"A judicious person always stands out among others.

God is great because of
His judiciousness; He is worshipped because of this.

57-58.

"The great Ra-M-Ha is all-knowing.

Rama, even though he was the most
intelligent of men, deliberately taught the world a lesson about how a lack of
prudence leads to trouble, in the case of the capture of the golden deer; later,
demonstrating proper prudence and thus its importance, He crossed the ocean to the
island of Lanka, where the demons had multiplied, and defeated them.

62.

"Demons, spirits, humans, and animals suffer because of a lack of
prudence.

63.

"On the other hand, those heroes, O Brahman, whom prudence always supports are
great and valiant.

Eternal reverence to them!

64.

"Ordinary people, becoming recklessly involved in activities because of their
sense of duty and obligation, become confused and bewildered at every turn; if, on
the other hand, they thought first and then acted, they would be free from all
suffering.

65.

"This world has been bound by ignorance since time immemorial; and as long as
this ignorance exists, where, then, can insight be found?

66-68.

"Can sweet drops of dew appear in tropical sandy deserts scorched by heat?

And, similarly, can the refreshing and invigorating touch of insight be found in
the hot chimney of a furnace that has been burning with ignorance for so long?--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Can sweet drops of dew appear in tropical sandy deserts scorched by heat? And, similarly, can the refreshing and invigorating touch of insight be found in
the hot chimney of a furnace that has been burning with ignorance for so long? Insight, however, is attained by proper methods, and the most effective of these
is also the best of all, and that is the supreme mercy of God, who dwells in the
heart of every being. Has anyone ever achieved any good goal without His mercy? 69. "Study is the Sun that dispels the dark veil of ignorance and dullness. It is
generated by devoted worship of God. 70. "When the Supreme God is appeased by the worship of the devotee, He takes the
form of vichara (the desire to know Himself), shining like the blazing Sun in his
heart (Soul). 71-72. "Therefore, the Great Ra-M-Ha, the Supreme Power, the Essence of all beings,
the blessed, supreme, unified Consciousness (Supreme Mind), which dwells as the
Supreme Essence (Universal Soul) of the inner essence (Soul), must be worshipped
sincerely and exactly as instructed by the Teacher, the Guru. The harbinger of such
worship is devotion to God and praiseworthy diligence (asceticism). 73-76. "The preceding cause of this, again, is considered to be the study of the
Holy Scriptures (Vedas). Therefore, O Rama, the Holy Scriptures are the first thing
that was revealed to you; having heard them, you have now advanced greatly. Self-knowledge is the only way to attain the highest Good. I was indeed worried
about you; and there is a very serious reason for such concern, until the mind
turns away from the illness that overwhelms it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ignorance of vichara, just as a doctor worries about a patient who is delirious
with fever until he sees that the body is showing signs of a favorable turn toward
recovery.

77-78.

"Once Self-Enquiry takes root, the highest Good in all its aspects will be
attained in this life.

As long as vichara is absent in a person, this most
desirable form of birth, the tree of life is barren and therefore useless.

The only
useful fruit of life is vichara.

79-81.

"A person without insight is like a frog that has fallen into a well; just
as a frog in a well does not know what is good for it and what is bad for it, and
therefore dies because of its ignorance in this well, in the same way people,
vainly born on Earth, do not know what is good for them and what is bad, and are
born only to die in ignorance.

82.

"Mistaking dispassion for poverty and suffering, and vain worldly
pleasures for happiness, man suffers in the cycle of birth and death
(samsara), oppressed and overcome by the powerful force of ignorance.

83-84.

"Even when overcome by suffering, he does not cease to indulge in the
previous causes that cause this suffering; just as a donkey continues to pursue a
donkey even if she kicks him with her hooves a hundred times, so too are man and
the whole world in a similar relationship.

But you, O Rama, having become
discerning, now leave suffering behind."
CHAPTER III - THE PRECEDING REASON FOR STUDYING THE HOLY SCRIPTURES: THE
SOCIETY OF THE WISE MUST PRECEDE "VICARA" (KNOWLEDGE
/self-exploration)
1.

After listening to Dattatreya's words, Rama was amazed and continued
his questioning with complete humility:
2.

"O Brahman!

This is exactly what my Guru spoke of before.

Truly, as a result of
his ignorance, man will always strive for downfall.

3.

"His salvation lies solely in self-inquiry.

The remote and immediate causes
have also been mentioned by You, and they have been described in the Holy
Scriptures.

I am tormented by great doubts on this subject.

4.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I am tormented by great doubts on this subject. 4. "How does this happen, and what, in turn, is the immediate cause of it? Perhaps it is something natural, like the courage of a hero? But then why does it
not happen to everyone? 5-6. "Why have I not yet attained this? Again, there are others who are in a more
difficult situation and suffer more than I do. Why have they not received these
means of salvation? I beg You, answer me." When asked about this, Datta, the Ocean
of Compassion, replied:
7. "Listen, Rama! Now I will tell you the fundamental reason for salvation. The
company of the Sage (Rahman) is the root cause of the elimination of all suffering. 8-9. "Only the company of Sages is considered to lead to the highest good. Your
association with Samvarta has brought you to this stage of enlightenment, which is
a precursor to Liberation (Immortality). When you are in the company of Sages, they
teach you the greatest good. 10. "Has anyone ever attained anything great without contact with the wise? In any
case, it is company that determines the future of the individual. 11. "There is no doubt that a person reaps the fruits of their company. I will
tell you a story as an example:

--- PAGE BREAK ---12.

Once upon a time, there was a king named Muktacuda.

He had two sons: Hemacuda
and Manicuda.

13.

"They were handsome, well-mannered, and well-educated.

One day, they went
hunting, accompanied by a large retinue of servants and guards, and found
themselves in a dense forest covering the slopes of the Sahya Mountains, which was
full of tigers, lions, and other wild animals.

Their weapons were bows and arrows.

14-15.

"They caught several deer, which they shot thanks to their skillful use of
their bows.

16.

"And while the hunters from the king's retinue were tracking down more
animals, a hurricane suddenly began, which started to throw sand and pebbles onto
the ground.

17.

A heavy cloud of dust covered the sky; and then it became dark as night,
so that neither stones, nor trees, nor people could be seen.

18.

"The mountain was shrouded in darkness, and the hills and valleys disappeared
from view.

The retinue scattered in haste, struck by sand and pebbles thrown to the
ground by the hurricane.

19.

Some of them hid under rocks, others in caves, and still others under trees.

The royal couple jumped on their horses and rode away.

20.

"HemaChuda finally reached the Sage's refuge, which was built in a beautiful
garden consisting of banana and date palms, as well as other trees.

21.

"There he saw a charming girl whose body was as bright as gold.

shone like a flame of fire.

22-23.

"The prince was enchanted by the sight of this girl, who was beautiful to
behold, and said to her: 'Who are you, beautiful one, living fearlessly in such a
terrible and dense forest?

Whose are you?

Why are you here?

Are you alone here?'
24.

"In response, the flawless maiden uttered the following words:
"Welcome, prince!

Please, take a seat.

25.

"Hospitality is a sacred duty of the pious.

I see that you have been caught
in a hurricane and that you have suffered from it.

26.

"Tie your horse to the date palm.--- PAGE BREAK ---

26. "Tie your horse to the date palm. Sit here and rest, and then you can listen
to me while you are in a pleasant mood." 27-29. "She gave him fruit and juice. After he regained his strength, the prince again heard her enchanting words, which
flowed from her lips like sweet nectar. "Prince! There is a famous sage in the
world named VyaghRapada, a steadfast devotee of God, who has surpassed all worlds
with his tapas (austerities) and is revered even by the greatest saints for his
incomparable wisdom concerning this world (Yavi) and others (Worlds). 30. "I am his adopted child, my name is Hema Lekha. Once upon a time, there was an
apsara (divine maiden) named Vidya Prabha, and she was very beautiful. 31. "Once she came here to bathe in this river called Vena, and at the same
time Susena, the king of a country called Wanga, arrived. 32. "He saw the heavenly beauty bathing in the river. She was the most
beautiful in the world, with a supple body and the most beautiful breasts. 33. "He fell in love with her, and she reciprocated his feelings. 34. "They entered into a marital relationship, and then the king returned
home, leaving her pregnant.

--- PAGE BREAK ---35.

"Fearing gossip, she terminated the pregnancy prematurely.

However,
despite this, I was born alive from that womb.

36.

When Vyaghrapada came to the river to perform his evening ablutions,
he picked me up out of his immense love for all beings, to raise me with
maternal tenderness and care.

37.

"One who provides genuine protection is considered a father, and therefore I
am his daughter, and I am devoted to him.

38-39.

"Truly, thanks to his greatness, I have nothing and no one to fear.

Whether
they be angels or demons, they cannot enter this refuge with evil intentions; if
they do try to enter, it will only lead to their own destruction.

Now wait here a
little, prince.

40.

"The lord himself, my stepfather, will soon come here.

Greet him and listen
humbly to what he has to say; your wish will be granted, and you will be able to
leave here in the morning."
41.

Listening to her and becoming enchanted by her, he did not utter a word,
afraid of offending her in any way; but his mind was filled with extraordinary
excitement.

42-46.

Noticing that the prince was simply madly in love with her,
the incomparable and perfect girl continued: "Bravo, prince!

Hold on!

My father
will be here soon.

Tell him everything." As soon as she uttered these words, the
great Holy Sage Vyaghrapada appeared, carrying a basket of flowers gathered in
the forest for puja (ritual worship).

Seeing the Sage approaching, the prince
rose from his seat, offered
a greeting, stating his name, and then sat down where he was told.

The Sage noticed
that this young man was in love; perceiving the whole situation with his miraculous
powers, he thought about the best course of action in the situation; and then he
made a decision, agreeing to marry Hemalekha to this young man.

47-49.

"The prince was indescribably happy, and he returned with her to his own
capital city.

MuktaChuda, his father, was also very pleased and issued a royal
decree to hold celebrations throughout the kingdom.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"The prince was indescribably happy, and he returned with her to his own
capital city. MuktaChuda, his father, was also very pleased and issued a royal
decree to hold celebrations throughout the kingdom. Then he held a solemn wedding
ceremony, and after that the loving couple spent a very happy honeymoon in the
palace, in secluded abodes in the forest, and in the royal abodes for enjoyment. But the madly in love prince noticed that HemaLekha did not feel the same strong
feelings for him as he did for her. 50. "Feeling that she always remained indifferent, he asked her in private: "My
dear! How is it that you are not as attentive to me as I am to you? 51. "You are the most beautiful of girls whose faces are lit up with smiles! How is it that you never seek pleasure, nor enjoy it? Don't you like these
pleasures? 52. "You seem indifferent even during the greatest pleasures. How can I be happy
if you have no attraction or interest? 53. "Even when I am near you, your mind seems to be somewhere else; when I talk
to you, it seems to me that you are not listening. 54. "When I hold you in my arms for a long time, you seem not to notice me, and
then you ask, 'Lord, when did you come? 55. "It seems to me that all these carefully planned activities do not
interest you, and you do not participate in them. 56. "When I turn away from you, your eyes remain closed; and this happens even
when I am back beside you.

--- PAGE BREAK ---57.

"Tell me, how can I enjoy communicating with someone who is no different from
a mannequin, which is what you are, and seeing your indifference to all pleasures?

58.

"What does not give you pleasure cannot give me pleasure either.

I always
look at you, trying to give you pleasure, like a lily looking at the moon.

Note: The kumuda, a variety of lily, blooms only at night and is therefore
considered the beloved of the moon, while the lotus lily, which blooms during the
day, is considered the beloved of the sun.

59.

"Tell me, my dear!

Why are you acting this way?

You are dearer to me than
life itself.

I beg you!

Tell me and thus comfort me."
CHAPTER IV - A CALL TO TURN AWAY FROM WORLDLY PLEASURES IN ORDER TO DEVELOP
IMPASSION
1-3.

"Hearing the sweet words of her beloved, who adored her and held her close to
his heart, the pure maiden, wishing to teach him, smiled gently and uttered the
following wise and meaningful words: 'Listen to me, O prince.

It's not that I don't
love you, I'm just trying to find what would be the greatest Joy of Life and would
never cause disgust.

I'm looking for it all the time, but I haven't found it yet.

4.

"Although I am constantly searching for it, I have not yet come to any
definite conclusion about what the path of a woman is.

But would you be so kind as
to tell me what that path is, and thus help me?"
5.

"Being persuaded in this way, HemaChuda laughed ironically and said to his
beloved, "Truly, women are foolish."
6-8.

"For do not even birds, beasts, and creeping insects know what is good and
what is bad?

Otherwise, how would they be guided in their pursuit of good, and how
would they avoid evil?

What is pleasant is undoubtedly good, and what is unpleasant
is bad.

What is so complicated about this, my dear, that makes you think about it
all the time?

Isn't that foolish?" After listening to these words of her beloved,
HemaLekha continued:
9.

"Truly, women are foolish, and they cannot draw the right conclusions.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Isn't that foolish?" After listening to these words of her beloved,
HemaLekha continued:
9. "Truly, women are foolish, and they cannot draw the right conclusions. Therefore, I should learn from you, who understands correctly. 10. "Having learned from you what is right, I will cease to think about it. And
then, too, I will be able to share with you the pleasures to your complete
satisfaction. 11. "O prince, as the perceptive judge that you are, you have decided that
happiness and suffering are the results of pleasant things and vice versa. 12. "The same object brings pleasure or pain depending on the circumstances. And
where, then, is the finality in your statement? 13. "For example, look at fire. The results it brings vary according to the
season, the place, and its own size or intensity. 14. "It is acceptable in cold seasons and unacceptable in hot ones. Pleasure and
pain are therefore determined by the seasons (circumstances); the same is true of
happiness and suffering. 15. "Again, fire is only good for people with a certain constitution (fire
element), but not for others. And again, pleasure and pain depend on
circumstances. 16-17. "The same reasoning applies to cold, wealth, sons, wife, kingdom, and so on. Look how your father, Maharaj, worries and frets every day, even though he is
surrounded by his wife,

--- PAGE BREAK ---children, and wealth.

Why are other people not distressed like him?

What has
happened to the pleasures in your father's case?

There is no doubt that he is
seeking happiness; and are not all his powers and abilities directed toward that
goal?

18.

"If you look around, it seems that no one has everything necessary for
happiness.

The question arises: can't a person be happy even with such limited
means?

I will give you the answer.

19.

"That which bears the mark of suffering cannot be happiness, my lord.

Suffering is twofold: external and internal.

20.

"The first pertains to the body and is caused by the nerves, etc.,
while the second pertains to the mind and is caused by desire.

21.

Mental confusion (doubt) is worse than physical pain, and the whole world has
fallen victim to it.

Desire is the seed of the tree of suffering, and it
invariably bears fruit.

22.

"Overcome and oppressed by it (doubt), the Sages, even though they live in the
Heavenly spheres (worlds) of pleasure and taste nectar, still remain its slaves,
spending their days and nights in activity according to its dictates.

23.

"The respite that comes as a result of the fulfillment of one desire, and
lasts until another desire takes its place, is not happiness, because the seeds of
pain are present in it in a hidden form.

Such a respite is also enjoyed by insects,
which are certainly not an example of perfect happiness.

24.

"And yet, their pleasure is definitely better than that of humans,
because their desires are less complex.

25.

"If happiness is having one desire alongside many that have already
been fulfilled, then who in this world would not be happy?

26.

"If a person whose entire body has been scalded can find happiness in
applying ointment to his body, then everyone should be happy.

27.

"It is true that a person is happy when he is in the close embrace of his
beloved.

But even in this situation, pain can be experienced due to rough pressure
or an uncomfortable body position.

28.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But even in this situation, pain can be experienced due to rough pressure
or an uncomfortable body position. 28. "Fatigue undoubtedly overtakes everyone after passionate intercourse, and
this fatigue is similar to that experienced by a pack animal carrying a load. 29. "O lord! Tell me, can this be considered happiness? Is not the pleasure you
get from intercourse with your beloved, which is caused by movement in the nadis
(nerves and subtle energy channels), experienced to no lesser degree by dogs (when
mating)? 30. "Or do you mean to say that human pleasure is enhanced by their sense of
beauty? 31. "Beauty is merely a mental concept, as is evident from the corresponding
feelings experienced by lovers in similar pleasures in dreams. Now I will tell you
a story related to this. Once upon a time, there was an unrivaled handsome man,
the heir to the king, and he was more beautiful than Cupid himself. 32. He married a girl who was just as beautiful and was very devoted to her. 33. "But she fell in love with a servant from the royal court, who very cleverly
deceived the young prince. 34. "This servant usually served intoxicating drinks in excess so that the prince
would get drunk and lose consciousness, and when he went to bed, a courtesan was
sent to him to play the role of the princess. 35-38. "And then the indecent princess and the servant could go about their
business; and the foolish prince, drunk, embraced another woman. And yet he
believed that he was the happiest of men, having such an angel as his

--- PAGE BREAK ---wife, who was so devoted to him.

After a long time, it happened that the servant,
who was busy with work, simply left the intoxicating drinks on the prince's table
and went about his business.

The prince did not drink as much as he usually did.

39-42.

"And when passion arose in him, he hurried to his bedroom, which was
luxuriously decorated, and enjoyed himself there with the courtesan, not noticing
in the heat of passion who she really was.

After a while, the intoxication began
to wear off, and he noticed that this was not his wife, and then, in confusion,
he asked her, "Where is my beloved wife?" 43-48.

"She trembled with fear and did
not say a word.

The prince suspected that something was amiss, flew into a rage,
grabbed her by the hair, drew his sword, threatening her, and said, "Tell the
truth, or you will die!" Fearing for her life, she confessed everything and led
him to the place where the princess was.

There he found her, her body beautiful
and delicate, in the tight and loving embrace of a dark, ugly, and repulsive
savage who was his servant...

51.

"The prince was shocked by this sight.

52.

Shortly thereafter, he pulled himself together and began to reflect as
follows: "Shame on me, so attached to hops!

53.

"Shame on fools who are driven mad by their love for women.

Women are no
better than birds that fly from one tree to another.

54.

"How stupid I was to love her more than my own life all this time.

55.

"Women are only good for entertaining lecherous fools.

Those who love them
are passion-driven donkeys.

56.

"Female fidelity is even more fleeting and ephemeral than autumn clouds
scudding across the sky, scattered by the wind.

57-59.

"I still cannot understand a woman who, being unfaithful to me, who was
completely devoted to her, had an illicit relationship with a slave, all the while
feigning love for me, like a courtesan before a lecherous fool.

60.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"I still cannot understand a woman who, being unfaithful to me, who was
completely devoted to her, had an illicit relationship with a slave, all the while
feigning love for me, like a courtesan before a lecherous fool. 60. In my intoxication, I did not suspect her in the slightest; on the contrary,
I believed that she was always by my side, just like my own shadow. 61-64. "What a shame! Is there a greater fool than I, who was deceived by this ugly
courtesan, who replaced my wife, and enslaved by her craft of love? Again, what did
my wife find in that repulsive animal, preferring him to me? 65. "And then the prince left the company, feeling disgusted with it, and
withdrew into the forest." (HemaLekha continued). "So you see, O prince, that
beauty is only a concept of the mind. 66. "Other people sometimes derive even greater pleasure from loving those who
are dear to them—whether they are beautiful or ugly—than you derive from
recognizing my beauty. I will tell you what I think about this. 67. "A beautiful woman appearing as an object is only a reflection of a subtle
concept already formed in the subjective mind. 68-69. "The mind determines the beauty of her image, following its own repetitive
concepts. An image repeatedly chosen and drawn by the mind becomes clearer and
clearer until it appears to be a complete and separate object. Attractiveness
arises and enslaves the mind through constant mental associations. 70. "The mind, becoming restless, excites the senses and seeks the fulfillment
of its desires associated with the object in that object; but a self-controlled
mind is not excited even at the sight of the most beautiful object.

--- PAGE BREAK ---71.

"The cause of passionate attraction is a repeatedly recurring mental image.

Neither children nor self-controlled yogis are aroused in such situations because
their minds do not focus on such things.

72.

"Therefore, whoever finds pleasure in anything, the beauty he finds in
the object of pleasure is only mental images.

73.

"Even ugly and unpleasant women are considered charming goddesses by their
husbands.

74.

"If the mind perceives something as unpleasant rather than charming, it will
find no pleasure in that object.

75-76.

"Shame on those human beings who consider the dirtiest part of the body (the
buttocks) to be the most delightful.

77.

"Listen, prince!

The idea of beauty is based on the mind's own desires.

78.

"If, on the other hand, beauty is an inherent characteristic of the object
of love, then why is it not recognized by children in the same way that they
recognize the sweetness of food?

79-81.

"The shape of the body, its height, and the color of people's skin vary in
different countries and at different times; their ears may be long; their faces
may be crooked; their teeth may be large; their noses may protrude; their bodies
may be hairy or hairless; their hair may be red, black, or golden, thin or thick,
straight or curly; their complexion may be white, dark, copper-red, or yellow.

82.

"They all get the same pleasure as you, prince!

83.

"Even the most perfect among men fall into the habit of seeking pleasure with
women, for they all consider her to be the best paradise for delight.

84.

"In the same way, the male body is considered by women to be the highest
source of pleasure.

But look at all this carefully, prince!

85-86.

"Consisting of fat and flesh, filled with blood, crowned with a head,
covered with skin, equipped with ribs and other bones, covered with hair,
containing bile and pus, a receptacle for feces and urine, begotten by sex cells
and born from the womb of a mother—such is this body.

Just think about it!

87.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Just think about it! 87. "Finding pleasure in such a thing, can people be any better than worms
feeding on dead flesh? 88. "My lord! Is not this body (pointing to himself) dear to you? Think
carefully about each part of it. 89. "Carefully analyze what your food consists of, with its various
flavors, appearances, and textures. 90. "Everyone knows how digested food ultimately leaves the body. 91. "And since this is the way of the world, tell me, what is pleasant and
acceptable, and what is not?"
"After Hemachuda heard all this, he developed a distaste for worldly pleasures. 92. "He was surprised by the strange conversation he had heard. Later, he
carefully considered everything HemaLekha had said. 93. His aversion to worldly pleasures grew in magnitude and intensity. He
discussed these issues with his beloved again and again, and through this, he came
to know the highest Truth (God). 94. "Then, realizing that Pure Consciousness, inherent in the form of the Supreme
Being, is identical to God, he came to the realization that the One Supreme Being
(the Great Ra-M-Ha) sustains everyone and everything, and attained Liberation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---95.

"He attained Liberation during his lifetime by becoming a JIVAnMukta
(Liberated during life).

His brother ManiChuda and his father MuktaChuda became his
disciples and also attained Liberation.

96.

"The queen became a disciple of her daughter-in-law and attained Liberation;
the ministers, leaders, and citizens, in turn, became their disciples and also
attained Wisdom.

97.

"Of those born in that city, there was no one who remained ignorant.

That city
became like the abode of God—a dwelling place of happy, serene, and satisfied
individuals.

98.

He was known as Vishala and became the most famous city on Earth, where even
parrots in cages would often repeat: "Meditate, O human, on the Supreme Being,
Absolute Consciousness, devoid of objects (images)!

There is nothing that can be
known except Pure Consciousness; it is like a self-illuminating mirror in which
objects are reflected.

100.

"The same Consciousness (God) is both the object and the subject, and He is
everything, both moving and immovable (visible and unmanifest); everything else
shines in His reflected Light (Ingli); He Himself shines by Himself, with His own
Light (Joy).

101.

"Therefore, O man, get rid of delusion!

Contemplate that Consciousness
(Supreme Mind) which is one and only, illuminating everything and permeating
everything.

Gain clear vision!"
102-103.

"Those Holy Sages—Vasadeva and others—who once heard these sacred words of
the parrots, were amazed that even the birds of that city uttered such wise words,
and named it the City of Wisdom.

104.

"That city is still called by that name to this day," continued Dattatreya.

"Thus, O Rama, the society of Sages is the root cause of all that is good and
virtuous.

105.

"Thanks to the society of Hemalekhi, all people attained Jnana
(Wisdom).

Therefore, know that satsang (the society of the Wise) is the only
root cause of Salvation (Liberation)."
CHAPTER V - ON BONDAGE AND LIBERATION
1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Thanks to the society of Hemalekhi, all people attained Jnana
(Wisdom). Therefore, know that satsang (the society of the Wise) is the only
root cause of Salvation (Liberation)."
CHAPTER V - ON BONDAGE AND LIBERATION
1. After hearing the Teacher's words about the greatness of satsang (the company
of Sages), Rama was very pleased and asked the following questions:
2. "You have spoken truly, O Teacher, that satsang is the harbinger of
all that is worthy, and you have clearly confirmed this fact with your
story. 3. "The nature of a person's pleasures is determined by the quality of the
people around them. The highest good was attained by all as a result of their
connection—direct or indirect—with Hema Lekha, even though she was only a woman. 4. "I am eager to hear how she further guided HemaChuda. Please tell me about
it, O Ocean of Compassion!"
5. Hearing this request, Datta said to Rama: "Listen, O Brahman, now I will
continue the Holy Narrative. 6. "Hearing what she said about happiness, HemaChuda lost interest in pleasures;
he developed an aversion to them and became pensive and sad. 7. "But the force of habit still prevailed over him. And so he was unable to
either immerse himself completely in pleasure or abstain from it entirely. 8. "However, he was too proud to admit this weakness to his beloved. Things
continued this way for some time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---9.

"When his habits compelled him to behave in the old way, he remembered his
wife's words, and so he followed them (his habits) reluctantly and with a sense of
shame.

10-11.

"He repeatedly returned to his old ways out of habit; and very often he
repented, realizing the wickedness of those ways and remembering his wife's wise
words.

Thus, his mind swung back and forth like a swing.

12.

"Neither exquisite food, nor beautiful clothes, nor expensive jewels, nor
charming maidens, nor decorated horses, nor even his dear friends interested him
anymore.

13-14.

"He became sad, as if he had lost everything he had.

He was unable to give
up his habits once and for all, and at the same time he did not want to consciously
follow them.

He became pale and gloomy.

15.

"HemaLekha, who always knew about all the changes happening to him, came to
him in his private chambers and said, "How is it, my lord, that you are not as
cheerful as before?

16.

"You look sad.

Why?

I see no signs of any particular illness in you.

17.

Doctors may fear illness amid the pleasures of life; illnesses caused by a
disturbance in the harmony of the three humors of the body.

18.

"Illnesses remain hidden in all bodies because disharmony of temperaments
cannot always be prevented.

19.

"The temperaments displace each other depending on the food consumed, the
clothes worn, the words spoken or heard, the pictures seen, the objects with
which one comes into contact, the changing seasons, and travel to different
countries.

20.

"Being inevitable, temperament disorders do not warrant constant attention.

There are medicines for diseases caused by such disorders.

21.

"On the other hand, medical treatment is never prescribed for those who do
not have temperament disorders.

Now tell me, dear, why are you so sad?"
22.

"When Hemalekha finished, the prince replied, 'I will tell you the
reason for my suffering.

Listen to me, dear.

23.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Listen to me, dear. 23. "What you said to me during our last meeting closed off all paths to pleasure
for me, so now I can't find anything that would make me happy. 24. "Just as a man condemned to death is incapable of enjoying the comforts
provided to him by the state, so too am I incapable of finding pleasure in
anything. 25. "Just as a subordinate is forced to do something by order of the king against
his own preference, so I am forced to return to my former activities out of habit. Now I ask you, my dear, to tell me how I can find happiness."
26. "Hearing this, Hemalekha thought: 'This dispassion is undoubtedly caused
by my words. 27. "The seed of the highest good has been sown in that field where such signs
appear. If my well-considered words had not produced even the slightest turn in
this direction, there would be no hope for his Liberation. This state of
dispassion arises only in one whose continued devotion is pleasing to God and
appeals to Him, who is inseparably present in the heart (Soul) in the form of the
Supreme Being (Mind)."
Reflecting in this way, the wise girl set herself the goal of endowing her husband
with wisdom.

--- PAGE BREAK ---30.

"At the same time, keeping her own wisdom a secret, she uttered the following
thoughtful words: "Listen, prince, to the story of my own past.

31.

Once upon a time, my Father gave me a noblewoman—a FREY-lady—who was good by
nature, but later became involved with an undesirable friend, Lady Darkness.

32.

"That friend was skilled at creating amazing new things.

Without telling my
Father, I also became friends with her.

33.

"This noblewoman became very close friends with that undesirable companion,
and I was forced to do the same because I loved my friend more than life itself.

34.

"For I could not be without her for even a second; so strongly did she
enchant me with her undoubted purity.

35.

"Always loving my friend, I quickly became part of her very being.

She, for
her part, was always close to her friend, the great harlot, who constantly gave
birth to amazing new things.

36-38.

"That woman secretly introduced her son to my friend.

That son was an
ignorant fool, with dazed and bloodshot eyes.

And my friend continued to indulge in
pleasures with him right in front of me.

But even though she was completely
overwhelmed by him and indulged in the pleasures he gave her day after day, she
never left me, and I did not abandon her either.

And as a result of that union, a
fool was born, just like his father.

39-41.

"He grew up to be a very restless young man, inheriting his father's
stupidity as well as his grandmother's wickedness and creative abilities.

This boy,
Mr.

Fickle, was raised and educated by his father, Mr.

Foolish, and his
grandmother, Mrs.

Ignorance, and he excelled in their ways.

He could handle the
most difficult cases with complete ease and overcome obstacles in an instant.

42.

"In the same way, my friend, though she was very good by nature, became
unhappy and foolish because of her association with wicked people.

43-44.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"In the same way, my friend, though she was very good by nature, became
unhappy and foolish because of her association with wicked people. 43-44. "Because of her love for her friend, her devotion to her beloved, and
attachment to her son, she gradually began to distance herself from me. But I could
not break up with her so easily. 45-46. "Since I could not rely solely on myself, I depended on her and therefore
remained with her. Her husband, Mr. Fool, although he always indulged in pleasures
with her, mistakenly decided that I was the same as his wife and tried to take me
by force. But I was not who he thought I was. I am pure by nature and only fell
under her influence for a while. 47. "But even this caused a loud scandal throughout the world that I was always
in the arms of Mr. Fool. 48. "My friend was always in the company of her lover, leaving her son, Mr. Fickle, in my care. 49. "Mr. Fickle grew up under my care and, in due course, married with his
mother's approval. 50. His wife, Mrs. Unstable, was perpetually restless and changeable, and she
could take on various forms and alter her appearance to satisfy her husband's
whims. 51. "With her remarkable ability to change and her astonishing skill and
intelligence, she completely subjugated her husband.

--- PAGE BREAK ---52.

"Mr.

Unstable also had a habit of flying hundreds of kilometers and returning,
covering any distance in the blink of an eye, darting everywhere, but he could not
find peace.

53-54.

"Whenever Mr.

Fickle felt the desire to go somewhere and obtain something to
one degree or another, Mrs.

Unstable was ready to fulfill his wishes, changing
herself accordingly and creating a new environment to please her husband.

In this
way, she completely won his affection and love.

55.

"She bore him five sons who were devoted to their parents.

Each of them was
skilled in his own way.

They were also entrusted to me, my friend, to take care of
them.

56-61.

"Out of love for my friend, I carefully raised them and made them strong.

Then those five sons of Lady Unstable built their luxurious private palaces and
invited their father to their abodes, taking turns to entertain him continuously.

The eldest of them entertained him in his mansion with various kinds of pleasant
music, recitations from the Vedas, readings from the scriptures, the buzzing of
bees, the chirping of birds, and other sounds pleasing to the ear.

62-64.

"Father (Mr.

Impermanent) was pleased with his son, who presented him with
other sounds that were sharp, frightening, and noisy, like the roar of a lion, the
rumble of thunder, the raging sea, the rumbling of earthquakes, the cries of
newborns, quarrels, moans, and groans of many people.

65-67.

Invited by his second son, the father went to his mansion.

There he found
soft seats, down beds, and beautiful clothes; some things were hard, others hot or
warm, or cold; there were also refreshing things of various compositions, and so
on.

He was pleased with the pleasant things and felt disgust for the unpleasant
ones.

68-71.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He was pleased with the pleasant things and felt disgust for the unpleasant
ones. 68-71. "Then, going to the third son, he saw charming multicolored scenes, things
of various colors—red, white, brown, blue, yellow, pink, smoky gray, brownish-
yellow, reddish-brown, black and spotted, other things were thick or thin, short or
long, angular or rounded, curved or wavy, pleasant or horrible, nauseating,
outstanding or wild, unsightly or charming, giving pleasure or the opposite. 72-75. "And the fourth son received his father in his mansion, and there the father
had at his disposal various fruits and plants. He tasted drinks and food that had
to be licked, sucked, and chewed; juicy fruits and vegetables, various refreshing
foods similar to nectar, as well as others—sweet, sour, spicy, or astringent,
various decoctions, and so on. He tasted all of this. 76-79. "The last son brought his father to his house and entertained him with
fruits and flowers, various aromatic herbs and plants, things with various scents—
pleasant or rotten, weak or sharp, stimulating or soporific, and so on. "So he enjoyed himself continuously in one way or another, in one mansion or
another, satisfied with some things and disgusted by others. 80. "The sons were so devoted to their father that in his absence they
themselves did not touch anything. 81. "But Mr. Unstable not only enjoyed himself to the fullest in his sons'
mansions, but also secretly took things from their homes and

--- PAGE BREAK ---secretly shared them with his dear wife, Mrs.

Unstable, in his own house, unknown
to his sons.

83.

"Later, a certain Mrs.

Insatiable fell in love with Mr.

Fickle, and he
married her; they became very devoted to each other; Mr.

Fickle loved Mrs.

Insatiable with all his heart.

84-87.

"He used to bring her a huge amount of food, and she would consume it all in
an instant, but she was never satisfied and always wanted more; so she kept her
husband running around to gather food for her, and he, in turn, was constantly busy
searching for food for her.

She was not satisfied with the service of her husband
and his five sons who obeyed him, and she wanted more and more.

Such was her
insatiable hunger.

She used to command them all to satisfy her needs.

In a short
period of time, she gave birth to two sons.

88.

"They were Mr.

Fire-Breathing Mouth, the elder son, and Mr.

Despicable, the
younger son, and both, of course, were very dear to their mother.

89-91.

"Whenever
Mr.

Fickle sought the embrace of Mrs.

Insatiable, his body was burned by the
terrible fire of Mr.

Fire-Breathing Mouth; struck by it, he lost consciousness.

"Again, whenever he caressed his younger son out of love, the whole world began to
hate him, and he himself became like a dead man.

As a result of all this, Mr.

Unstable suffered unbearably.

92.

"And then my companion, who was good by nature, also became subject to
suffering because of the grief of her son, Lord Impermanent.

93-95.

"Being also attached to her two grandsons, Lord Fire-Breathing Mouth and
Lord Despicable, she became utterly miserable and, as a result, gave society reason
to feel hatred and disgust toward her.

I, too, dear one, became despondent because
of my sympathy for her.

Several years passed in this way, until Mr.

Unstable, who
was under the power of Mrs.

Insatiable, lost all initiative and found himself
completely in her hands.

96-107.

"His fate was sealed, and he found refuge in a city with ten gates.--- PAGE BREAK ---

96-107. "His fate was sealed, and he found refuge in a city with ten gates. There
he lived with Lady Insatiability, his sons, and his mother, always seeking pleasure
but encountering only suffering day and night. Burning in the terrible fire of Lord
Fire-Breathing Mouth and experiencing contempt from Lord Despicable, he rushed
about in a state of extreme agitation. He visited the homes of his other five sons,
but this only confused him even more, and, bewildered, he was not happy. My
companion was also greatly affected by her son's plight, and she became despondent
again, yet she continued to live in the same city. Mrs. Insatiable, with her two
children, Mr. Firebreath and Mr. Despicable, was supported by Mrs. Ignorance, her
husband's grandmother, and Mr. Fool, her father-in-law. She got along with her
husband's other wife, Mrs. Unstable, and was even close to her. By winning over all
of them, she completely subjugated her husband, Mr. Inconsistent, to her will. "I also continued to live there because of my love for my friend. Otherwise, none
of them could have remained in that city without me, their guardian, even though I
was dying as a result of my friend's mortality. Sometimes I became the hidden Lady Ignorance, at times I was fooled by Mr. Foolish,
I became fickle because of Mr. Fickle, I became unstable because of Lady Unstable,
I was overcome with anger when I came into contact with Mr. Firebreathing Mouth,
and sometimes I

--- PAGE BREAK ---looked despicable next to Mr.

Despicable (greed).

All the moods of my friend were
reflected in me, for she would have died if I had left her for even a moment.

Because of my company, all other people always took me for a courtesan, while
discerning people could see that I always remained pure and unblemished.

108-111.

"For the Supreme, the Good, the One, my Father (God), is always pure and
clear, more vast than space, and more subtle than the subtlest; He is all-knowing,
and yet it cannot be said that He knows anything; He does everything, and yet
remains inactive; He supports everything, but no one supports Him; all depend on
Him, but He depends on no one; all forms are His, but He Himself has no form;
everything belongs to Him and is part of Him, but He is not attached to anyone;
although He illuminates everyone and everything, no one knows anything about Him
and cannot know Him under any circumstances; He is Bliss, and yet He is not
blissful; He has neither father nor mother; His daughters, like me, are countless.

112-113.

"My sisters are as numerous as the waves in the sea.

All of them, O
prince, are like me, being involved in the affairs of their companions.

Although I
share the life of my companions, I am nevertheless under the power of the most
powerful spells, thanks to which I am by nature exactly like my Father.

114.

(The story continues again.)
115.

"When my friend's son went to rest, he always slept soundly on his mother's
lap; when Mr.

Inconsistent slept, everyone else, including his sons, also slept,
for no one could remain awake.

116.

"In such cases, the city was guarded by Mr.

Movement, a close friend of Mr.

Inconsistent, who always moved back and forth near the two upper gates.

117.

"My friend, Mr.

Inconsistent's mother, watched over this sleeping family,
including her son and her wicked friend, her mother-in-law.

118.

"I usually rushed to my Father (God) at this time and remained in bliss in
His loving embrace.--- PAGE BREAK ---

118. "I usually rushed to my Father (God) at this time and remained in bliss in
His loving embrace. But I was obliged to return to the city as soon as the sleeping
family woke up. 119. "This gentleman Movement, friend of Mr. Impermanence, is the most
powerful among them, and they all remain alive thanks to him. 120-121. "Although he is the only one, he multiplies himself, manifests himself as
a city and its citizens, permeates them all, and protects and supports them. 122. "Without him, they would all scatter and be lost, like pearls without a
necklace thread. 123. "He is the link between the inhabitants and me; authorized by me, he
performs the same function in the city as the thread in a necklace. 124. "When that city falls into decline, he gathers all the inhabitants
together and leads them to another, remaining their leader. 125-131. "In the same way, Lord Unstable always rules those cities, while himself
being under the influence of his friend. Although he enjoys the support of such a
powerful friend, although he was born of such a virtuous mother and raised by me,
he is always unhappy because he is torn between his two wives and several sons. He
is torn to pieces by his sons and finds not even the slightest pleasure, but only
terrible suffering. Seduced by Lady Unstable, he grieves; compelled by Lady
Insatiable, he runs in search of food for her; struck by the Fire-Breathing Mouth,
he burns with anger,

--- PAGE BREAK ---loses his senses and becomes confused; approaching Mr.

Contemptible, he is openly
despised and insulted by others, losing his face and becoming like a corpse due to
universal condemnation.

132-134.

"Already possessing a discredited lineage, and now losing his head because
of his love for his wicked wives and sons and rushing between them, he lived with
his family in various places—good and bad, in forests and thorny bushes, in places
full of wild animals, in scorching hot deserts and on icy, piercingly cold
expanses, in foul-smelling ditches and dark burrows, and so on.

135.

"Again and again, my friend was overcome with grief because of her son's
suffering, almost dying of sorrow.

136.

"I too, though I am by nature sensible and crystal clear, dear one, became
involved in her family's affairs and also became sad.

137.

"Can anyone hope for even the slightest happiness in bad company?

One might
as well try to quench one's thirst with mirage water.

138.

"Overcome with grief, my friend once sought me out and spoke to me in
private.

139.

"On my advice, she soon found a good husband, killed her own son, and
took his sons into custody.

140.

"Then, accompanied by me, she quickly found the presence of my Father (God)
and, being pure, she often found herself in the embrace of my Father.

141.

"She immediately plunged into the sea of Bliss and became Bliss itself
(attained Liberation).

Similarly, you too can overcome your bad habits, which are
nothing but growths.

142.

"Then, my lord, attain the Father (God) and find Eternal Happiness.

Now I
have told you, my lord, my own experience gained on the path to the summit of
Bliss."
CHAPTER VI - ON THE MERITS OF FAITH IN ACHIEVING ONE'S GOAL, AND ON THE
HARMFULNESS OF DRY ARGUMENTATION
1.

HemaChuda was amazed by the bizarre story of his beloved.

Remaining in
ignorance, he smiled ironically after listening to her and asked the wise
princess:
2.

"My dear, what you have told me seems to me to be mere fiction.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Remaining in
ignorance, he smiled ironically after listening to her and asked the wise
princess:
2. "My dear, what you have told me seems to me to be mere fiction. Your words
have no relation to facts, and in general they are meaningless. 3. "Undoubtedly, you are the daughter of ApSary (the beautiful Heavenly Maiden),
and you were raised by Rishi (Rahman, Liberated during his lifetime) VyaghRapada
(the Sage Jafar) in the forest; you are still young and not quite an adult. 4. "But you speak as if you have already lived several lives during this time. Your verbose monologue resembles the speech of a possessed girl who is not in her
right mind. 5. "I can't believe this nonsense. Tell me, where is your companion, and who is
the son she killed? 6. "Where are those cities? What is the meaning of your story? Where is your
friend? 7. "I know nothing about your noblewoman, FREYja (Old Norse FREYja
— lady). If you want, you can ask my mother about it. Where my father lives, there
are no other women besides your mother-in-law. 8. "Tell me right now where to find this noblewoman and where her son's sons
are. I believe that your story is a myth, like the story of the son of a
barren woman.

--- PAGE BREAK ---9-11.

"Once upon a time, a poet-storyteller told a story in which the son of a
barren woman climbed onto a chariot reflected in a mirror and decorated with silver
taken from the luster of mother-of-pearl, armed himself with various weapons made
from human horns, fought on the battlefield of Heaven, killed the king from the
future, took possession of the city of the ethereal army, and enjoyed himself with
the maidens from his dream on the banks of the river from the mirage.

12.

"I believe that your words are similar.

They cannot possibly be true." After
listening to the words of her beloved, the wise girl continued:
13.

"Lord, how can you say that my parable is meaningless?

The words from the
lips of those like me can never be meaningless.

14.

"Lies undermine the effectiveness of one's own tapas (fasting); and
therefore, how can they be expected from virtuous people?

How can such a liar
remain blameless and be considered a Sage?

15.

"Furthermore, one who entertains a sincere seeker of Truth with empty or
false words will not achieve success in this world and will not be able to
advance to the next world on the Golden Path.

16.

"Listen, prince.

A nearsighted person cannot restore his vision simply by
listening to the prescribed rules being read aloud.

17.

"It is foolish to mistakenly consider good advice to be false.

Do you think,
my dear, that I, your wife, would deceive you with a myth when you are so eager to
know the Truth?

18-19.

"Think carefully and examine this apparent untruth of mine thoroughly.

Is it
not natural for a reasonable person to judge the great things of this world by
examining a few details in them?

Now I will give you my 'credentials'.

20.

"Some things you used to like before.

Why did you stop liking them after
listening to me this last time?

21.

"My words have caused indifference; and they will cause even greater
indifference in the future.

How could it be otherwise?

Look at your statements from
this point of view.

22.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Look at your statements from
this point of view. 22. "Listen to me, prince, with a simple and clear mind. Distrusting the words
of a well-wisher is the surest path to ruin. 23. Faith is like a loving mother who will never fail to rescue her son who
believes in her from dangerous situations. There is no doubt about that. 24. "A fool who does not believe the words of his benefactor is deprived of
success, happiness, and glory. A person who is always suspicious will never be able
to achieve anything worthwhile. 25. "Trust sustains the world and nourishes everyone. How can a child grow up
if he does not trust his mother? 26. "How can a lover experience pleasure if he does not trust his beloved? Just
as an elderly parent cannot be happy if he does not trust his sons? 27. "Could a farmer cultivate the land if he did not have faith in it? Mutual
distrust would put an end to all endeavors. 28. "Can humanity exist without universal trust? If, on the other hand, you say
that this is the law of cause and effect, then listen to what I have to say. 29. "People believe in the law that a certain cause produces a certain
effect. Is this not faith?

--- PAGE BREAK ---30.

"And if this were not so, then in the absence of faith, man would not dare to
breathe air for fear of disease-causing infection, which would result in death.

Therefore, fill yourself with faith before rushing toward Supreme Bliss
(Liberation/Immortality).

31.

"If, again, Prince, you do not dare to rely on an incompetent person,
which you may consider me to be, it is because you believe in the necessity
of achieving a certain goal.

32.

"But how else can you achieve your desired goal?" After listening to his
beloved's arguments, Hemachuda responded to these fair words as follows:
33.

"If someone trusted everyone they met, my dear, they would certainly trust
those who are worthy of it, so that it would serve to achieve the goals they have
set for themselves.

34-35.

"One who strives for the highest good should never trust an incompetent
person.

For otherwise, suffering awaits him, as he is like a fish attracted by bait
on a fisherman's hook.

Therefore, one can only trust those who are worthy, and not
those who are unworthy.

36.

"Fish and all those people who ruined themselves by following one path and
achieved success and prosperity by following another can serve as confirmation
of my words.

37.

"Therefore, I can only believe you after fully ascertaining your merits;
otherwise, I cannot.

Why then do you ask me about this, if the desired goal can be
approached?"
38.

After listening to him, Hemalekha replied: "Listen, prince, to what I
am about to say.

39.

"I will answer your question.

How can one judge someone as good or bad?

40.

"By comparing them to accepted standards?

But who establishes the validity
of these standards?

Are the authors of these standards themselves worthy or not?

There will be no end to such arguments.

41.

"In addition, the competence of the observer must also be taken into account.

And then there will be no end to the subsequent arguments either.

Therefore, life
moves forward on faith alone.

42-45.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Therefore, life
moves forward on faith alone. 42-45. "I will give you a reasonable explanation of how to achieve the Highest Goal
through faith. Pay attention. Neither during their lifetime nor after death will
people gain anything through endless discussions or blind acceptance. Of these two
things, however, there is some hope for the latter, but none for the former."
The following story illustrates this point. "Once upon a time, there was a saint named KaUsIka (Ka - Sage; Us/Us[AS] -
man-God; Ika - Isaac), on the hill of Sahya near the river Godavari. 46. "He was serene, pure, pious, and possessed of the knowledge of the Supreme
Truth. Several disciples visited him. 47. "Once, when the teacher was not in the ashram (the Sage's abode), the
disciples engaged in philosophical discussions based on their own views. 48. "And then suddenly there appeared a Brahmin with a developed mind and
extensive knowledge, named SunGa (Gnus), who successfully refuted all their
arguments with his skill in debate and logic. 49-50. "He was a man without faith or conviction, but a skilled debater. When they
claimed that Truth must be established through comparison with a certain standard,
he argued on the basis of an infinite sequence of standards and refuted them. 51-55. "He concluded his speech with the following statement: 'Listen, Brahmins,
standards are not applicable for identifying virtues or vices, nor for identifying
Truth. For false standards cannot

--- PAGE BREAK ---can be tests (standards).

To rely on them, one must be sure of their correctness.

Other standards are required to verify these.

Are they, in turn, error-free?

Following this path, it is impossible to reach any finality.

Therefore, it is
impossible to carry out any checks.

And since it becomes impossible to ascertain
the Truth without the ability to verify it, nothing can be the Truth.

This
formulation itself cannot be true, nor can the person who formulated it.

What
decision should be made then?

That all this is nothing, emptiness.

And even this
statement cannot be supported by reliable facts; therefore, the statement that
everything is emptiness also ends in emptiness.

56.

Hearing his words, some of the disciples were captivated by the power of
Sung's logic and became scholastics of emptiness.

57-60.

"They lost themselves in the confusing labyrinth of their philosophy.

The
most perceptive among the disciples asked the Teacher to comment on Sun-gi's
arguments, and he enlightened them on this matter.

Thanks to this, they found
serenity and happiness.

Therefore, avoid fruitless polemics presented as logic.

Use
logic in the way it is used in the Holy Scriptures.

In this way, you will attain
salvation." After hearing this address from that outstanding heroine, HemaChuda was
extremely surprised and said, "My dear, until now I did not realize your greatness.

61.

"Blessed are you, since you are so wise!

Blessed am I, since I am in your
company.

You say that faith bestows the highest good.

How does it do this?

62-63.

"Where is faith appropriate, and where is it not?

The Holy Scriptures differ
in their teachings; teachers differ among themselves; similarly, commentaries
differ from one another; in addition to this, one's own judgment cannot serve as a
guide.

Which of these should be followed, and which should be rejected?

64.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Which of these should be followed, and which should be rejected? 64. "Each source puts its own stamp of authenticity on its own views and condemns
other sources, not only as worthless, but even as harmful, my dear! 65. "And in that case, I cannot make a decision for myself. The school of
emptiness that you condemn, in turn, attacks others. 66. "And why then should we not respect this school of thought? It has its own
adherents and its own system of philosophy. Explain all these things to me
clearly and distinctly, my dear. Truly, they must already be clear and
understandable to you."
CHAPTER VII - THAT GOAL IS ACHIEVABLE ONLY AFTER REVEALING GOD THROUGH FAITH,
EFFORT, PROVEN LOGIC, AND DEVOTION TO GOD
1. When Hemalekha heard her husband's question, she, with her Holy practical
knowledge of the state of the Universe, said to him with even greater benevolence:
2-5. "My dearest, listen to me carefully. What is known as the mind (brain) is
ultimately nothing more than a restless monkey. And that is why ordinary people are
always overcome with anxiety. Everyone knows that a restless mind is the source of
endless agitation and trouble, while a person is happy in sleep when this
restlessness is absent. Therefore, keep your mind steady and unwavering when you
listen to what I am saying. Listening with a distracted or scattered mind is no
better than not listening

--- PAGE BREAK ---at all, because in this case the words serve no useful purpose, being like a tree
bending under the weight of fruit, as seen in a painting.

6.

"A person quickly achieves success if he turns away from dry and destructive
logic and engages in purposeful reasoning.

7.

"Proper effort must follow correct reasoning; for a person's progress
corresponds to the zeal that accompanies his efforts.

8.

"You can see, my dear, that aimless discussions are fruitless, while sincere,
persistent efforts are fruitful in this world.

9.

"Distinctive zeal is what enables a farmer to plow his field at the right time
of year, and an apothecary to test the efficacy of medicinal herbs, etc.

No
practical work would ever get done if people spent their entire lives engaged in
empty discussions.

Therefore, it is necessary to abandon aimless chatter and
immediately set about achieving the highest Goal of Life (Self-Realization),
determined as a result of proper sincere reasoning.

Likewise, one should not
refrain from individual effort, as is the case with followers of Sun-Gi (a
fatalistic doctrine of emptiness, the prototype of the Nya-Ti or Aji-Viki
doctrine).

12.

"A person whose aspiration is manifested in the most sincere and diligent
efforts will never fail; can continuous efforts ever fail to achieve their
goal?

13.

"By personal effort alone, people earn their food, Angels (Gods)
obtain their nectar, devout hermits attain the highest Bliss, and others
fulfill their desires.

14.

"Think carefully and tell me where, when, how, and what benefit anyone who,
without resorting to action, engaged in dry polemics ever gained.

15.

"If a few isolated failures cause a person to lose faith in individual effort,
then he undoubtedly becomes the cause of his own downfall.

16.

"Guided by proper judgment, accompanied by diligence, and applying personal
effort, a person must embark on his own true path to Liberation.

17.

"Different personalities speak of different paths leading to this Goal.--- PAGE BREAK ---

17. "Different personalities speak of different paths leading to this Goal. Choose among them the one that is most true. 18. "The right choice is made as a result of proper discussion and according
to the experience of the Wise (Rakhmanov). Then immediately proceed to
practice. Now I will explain all this in detail. Listen to me. 19. "The best choice is one that does not bind you again to the yoke (bondage) of
suffering. For a perceptive person, pain is evident in all aspects of life. 20-22. "Anything that bears the mark of suffering cannot be good. This applies to
wealth, children, wife, kingdom, treasures, army, fame, science, mind, body,
beauty, and prosperity. For all these things are transient, already in the clutches
of death, otherwise known as time. 23. "Can anything that is only a seed, ready to sprout as pain and grow
into suffering, be good? 24. "The right means are beyond all this. However, the desire to possess all this
is born of delusion. The Chief Magician is the Great Ra-M-Ha. He is the Creator of
the Universe, and all are deluded by Him. 25-30. "Even the best magician is
capable of deluding the public, though only to a certain extent. The greatness of
God cannot

--- PAGE BREAK ---be recognized without direct contact with Him.

Of course, not the entire audience
will be deceived by the magician, but who can escape the illusion of God?

"Just as individuals know the secret of a magician's illusory tricks and are
therefore not misled by them, so people can learn to transcend universal maya
(illusion) if only God is merciful to them.

Without His mercy, they will never be
able to escape maya.

"Therefore, those who seek to cross the ocean of maya should worship Him.

31.

"One who obtains the mercy of God is endowed with Supreme Knowledge, by
which he will undoubtedly cross the ocean of maya.

32.

"Other methods are also put forward as serving this supreme achievement,
but they are doomed to failure in achieving their goal unless God's mercy
manifests itself.

33.

"Therefore, let your starting point be worship of the First Cause of the
Universe; be devoted to Him; and then He will soon allow you to succeed in your
efforts to destroy illusion (maya).

34.

"Surely, the universe must have a definite source from which it
originated.

35.

Although the source or origin is shrouded in mystery, let us investigate the
cause, starting with its visible consequences and guided by the Holy Scriptures;
and then we will come to the conclusion that there is a Creator who is in no way
comparable to any known factors or intermediaries.

36.

"Controversial statements to the contrary have been logically
refuted by many authoritative Sacred Texts.

37.

"A system (of values) that recognizes only evidence (material) obtained
through sensory perception is a poor imitation of philosophy, and such a system
leads nowhere.

It leads not to salvation, but to spiritual decline.

38-40.

"Dry logic must also be condemned.

Another system declares that the universe
is eternal and has neither beginning nor end.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Dry logic must also be condemned. Another system declares that the universe
is eternal and has neither beginning nor end. It follows that the universe and its
phenomena are self-existent; thus, lifeless, inanimate matter is its own mediator
and preserver, which is absurd, because activity implies Mind, and there is no
example that could refute this. The Scriptures also say that the First Cause is an
Intelligent Principle, and we know that activity always arises only from an
intelligent source. 41-43. "Thus, the world traces back to its Creator, who is completely different
from any factor known to us. Judging by the greatness of creation, His power must
be immeasurable in the same proportion as the unimaginable immensity of creation. And such a Creator must also be able to protect and develop His own creations. Therefore, surrender to Him completely and unconditionally. 44-50. "I will give an example as proof of this. In everyday life, we see that a
leader, if he is pleased, even though his means are limited, always ensures the
fulfillment of the hopes of the person who is sincerely devoted to him. "If you have appeased the Lord of this world, will anything be denied to a devotee? Tell me. He is the only consolation for devotees, whereas there are many leaders in
the world, and they are not always benevolent; among them there may also be cruel
and ungrateful individuals. Moreover, their patronage is fickle and short-lived. The Supreme Lord has infinite mercy for His devotees, He is most grateful, and His

--- PAGE BREAK ---power is unlimited.

Otherwise, would people have continued to worship Him since
time immemorial?

Poorly governed kingdoms disappear from the face of the Earth.

But
this universe continues to exist as before.

Therefore, this Lord of mercy is the recognized Master, and He is famous by right.

"Surrender to Him completely and without hesitation.

He will determine what is best
for you, and you will not even have to ask for it.

51-59.

"Among the ways of approaching or turning to God are the following: 1)
worship performed for the sake of overcoming misfortune; 2) worship for the sake of
acquiring wealth, etc.; 3) surrendering oneself in the Spirit of Love.

The latter
way is the best and most reliable in its results.

"In practical life, a leader who is approached by a person in a difficult situation
also alleviates his suffering in an appropriate manner.

But if a person has not
shown proper attention to his patron, he cannot count on his help.

Similarly,
service motivated by ambition brings vague and limited results, determined by one's
diligence.

Devoted service without hidden motives takes a long time to be
recognized; but still, it makes even a narrow-minded leader become benevolent.

It may take a long time for a human master to recognize selfless work; but God, the
Lord of the Universe, who dwells in our hearts, knows everything, and He quickly
bestows the appropriate fruits.

With regard to other types of devotees, God must
wait until the time predestined by fate—which is His own predetermination—while for
the selfless devotee, the Lord God
- He is the only Refuge and is everything, and He cares for Him regardless of what
fate is in store for the devotee and regardless of the Laws predetermined by Him
Himself.

He quickly rewards the devotee, and this is because He is the Most High
and Self-sufficient, not dependent on anything else.

60-61.

"Predetermined fate or karma are powerless before Him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

60-61. "Predetermined fate or karma are powerless before Him. Everyone knows how He
changed predetermined fate and Laws in the case of His famous devotee Markandeya. Now I will tell you how to apply all this in practice. Listen, my dearest! 62. "The common belief that a person cannot escape his destiny applies only to
weak-willed and foolish nobodies. 63. "Yogis (Goys) who practice breath control (self-knowledge) overcome destiny. Even destiny cannot impose its fruits on yogis (Rahmans). 64-66. "Fate seizes and holds only foolish and unreasonable people. Corresponding
to nature and following it, fate forms part of nature. Nature, in turn, is only a
tool for carrying out God's will. His goal is always inevitable and cannot be
prevented. However, the framework of His goal and the progress towards it can be
changed by devotion to Him, and if this does not happen, then this predisposing
cause should be considered the most powerful factor in the life of that person. 67. "Therefore, avoid arrogant vanity and find refuge in Him. He Himself will
spontaneously lead you to the Highest State. 68. "This is the first step on the ladder (of Faith) to the summit of Bliss. Everything else is unworthy and unreasonable. 69. Datta continued: "O Rama, after hearing this speech from his wife, Hemachuda
was delighted and asked her again:
70. "Tell me, dear, who is this God, the Creator, the One Self-Existent and
Predeterminer of the Universe, to whom I must devote myself?

--- PAGE BREAK ---71-72.

"Some say that He is Vishnu, others say that He is Shiva, Ganesha, the Sun
(Surya), Narasimha, or other similar avatars (incarnations); some say that He is
Buddha or Arhat (Teachers came even before the arrival of the most famous Teacher
now – Jesus); and some say that He is Vasa (Veles), the principle of life, the
Moon, Fire (Agni), Karma, Nature, primordial nature, etc.

73.

"All philosophical schools offer different versions of the origin
of the universe.

Tell me which one is true.

74.

"I truly believe that there is nothing unknown to you, because the famous and
omniscient Sage Vyaghrapada is merciful to you, and deep wisdom shines in you, even
though you belong to the weaker sex.

Please, out of your love for me, beautiful
one, tell me about Eternal Life!"
75.

After hearing this request, Hemalekha said with pleasure: "Lord, I
will tell you the highest Truth about God.

Listen!

76-78.

"God is the
All-Seeing One who creates, permeates,
supports, and dissolves the universe.

He is Shiva, He is Vishnu, He is Brahman, the
Sun, the Moon, etc.

He is the One, whom representatives of different religions call
by their own names; He is neither exclusively Shiva, nor Vishnu, nor Brahman, nor
exclusively anyone else in denial of all else.

79-93.

"I will tell you, my lord.

Listen to me!

Let us assume that the Primordial
Being is Shiva with five faces and three eyes.

But in that case, the Creator would
be like an ordinary potter, molding pots, endowed with a body and a brain.

Truly,
there is no skill in the world that is not connected with the body and some degree
of intelligence.

In fact, creative ability in humans belongs to something that lies
between the body and Pure Mind.

Therefore, the Mind acts separately from the gross body, in dreams; being
intelligent, it creates an environment suitable for the fulfillment of its hidden
desires.In fact, creative ability in humans belongs to something that lies
between the body and Pure Mind.

Therefore, the Mind acts separately from the gross body, in dreams; being
intelligent, it creates an environment suitable for the fulfillment of its hidden
desires.

This clearly indicates that the body is only an instrument for achieving
the Goal, and the active force is the Mind.

Instruments (bodies) are necessary for
such active forces as humans because their abilities are limited, and humans are
not self-sufficient.

Whereas the Creator of the Universe is perfect in Himself and
creates the entire Universe without any external assistance.

This leads to the
important conclusion that God does not have a body.

Otherwise, He would be reduced
to a glorified human being who requires countless accessories to perform activities
and who is influenced by the seasons and the environment, in no way different from
creation itself, and then He would not be God.

Furthermore, the pre-existence of
accessories would nullify His unique power and imply the existence of limits to His
creative powers.

This is absurd, as it contradicts the original propositions and
premises.

Therefore, He has neither a body nor other aids, and yet He creates this
world, O Lord of my life!

Fools are carried away by the idea of giving a body to
the Transcendent Being (the Supreme Mind).

However, if devotees worship Him and
contemplate Him, attributing a body to Him according to their own inclinations, He
shows them mercy by accepting such a body.

For He is unique in His kind and
fulfills the desires of His devotees.

"Be that as it may, it must be acknowledged that He is pure Mind, and His
Consciousness is Absolute and Transcendental.

Such is Consciousness-Mind in all its
purity, this Absolute Being, the One King-God, the Lord, transcending the Three
Worlds, and therefore called the Great Ra-M-Ha.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Be that as it may, it must be acknowledged that He is pure Mind, and His
Consciousness is Absolute and Transcendental. Such is Consciousness-Mind in all its
purity, this Absolute Being, the One King-God, the Lord, transcending the Three
Worlds, and therefore called the Great Ra-M-Ha. Although He is one indivisible
whole, the universe manifests itself in Him in all its diversity, reflecting itself
as it appears before us, in

--- PAGE BREAK ---a self-illuminating mirror.

Reflection cannot exist separately from the mirror, and
therefore it is one with it.

And since this is so, there can be no differences in
degrees or ranks.

Bodies are just concepts for lower beings, and they don't apply
to God.

So be smart and worship the One, Pure, and Unblemished Supreme Mind.

94.

"If a person is unable to comprehend this pure state, then he should worship
God in the specific form (in his mind) that is most acceptable to him; in this
way, he will also undoubtedly reach his goal, albeit gradually.

95.

"No matter how much a person tries in millions of births, he will not be
able to move forward unless he follows the path of worshiping God."
CHAPTER VIII - THE KEY TO THE PARABLE OF CHAPTER V
1-3.

"Having heard from his wise wife the true name of God—the Great Ra-M-Ha, who
is Pure Mind and True God—and having learned the method of worshiping Him as taught
by authoritative Teachers who have attained God through His grace, HemaChuda found
peace of mind and began to worship Him with deep devotion.

Several months passed in this way.

4.

"The grace of God descended upon him, and he became completely indifferent
to pleasures, for his mind was wholly absorbed in the sincere and purposeful
search for Truth.

5.

"Without God's grace, no one can enter such a state, because a mind engaged in
sincere and purposeful inquiry into the Truth is the surest means of attaining
Liberation.

6.

"Rama!

Even countless means will not bring Liberation if there is no sincere
and diligent search for Truth.

7.

When Hemachuda began searching for his wife alone again, his mind was consumed
with the search for Truth.

8-9.

"She saw her husband entering her chambers, so she went out to meet him,
invited him in, and offered him a seat.

She washed his feet and prostrated herself
before him, as his status required, and spoke tender words in a sweet and loving
voice: 10-14.

"My dearest!

It has been a long time since I last saw you.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"My dearest! It has been a long time since I last saw you. Are you in
good health? For the body is sometimes subject to illness. Tell me, why have you
not paid attention to me all these days? Not a single day has passed since you saw me and talked to me. How did you spend
your time? I couldn't even imagine that you would be so indifferent to me! What
made you like this? How do you spend your nights? You used to say that a moment
spent without me was like an eternity for you, and that you couldn't bear it. Having said that, she hugged him gently, while looking troubled. 15-17. Although HemaChuda found herself in the loving embrace of her dear husband,
it did not affect him at all, and he said to her, "My dear, you can no longer keep
me in delusion. I am convinced of your strength of spirit and that nothing can
shake your inherent happiness. You are a sage, and you are imperturbable. You know
both this world and the next. How could anything like this affect you? I want to
ask your advice. Please hear my request now. Explain to me the parable that you once told me as
the story of your life. 18. "Who is your father? Who is your friend? Who is her husband? Who are her
sons? Tell me, what is the relationship between all these people and me?

--- PAGE BREAK ---19.

"I don't really understand all this.

Now I no longer think it's a lie.

I am
sure that you have told me a parable that is full of inner meaning.

20.

"Tell me everything so that I can understand it clearly.

I bow
respectfully before you.

Please clear up my doubts." 21-23.

Hemalekha, whose
charming face lit up with a smile and
admiration, listened to her husband and thought, "Now his mind is clear, and he is
blessed by God.

He is clearly indifferent to the pleasures of life and is also full
of determination.

This can only be thanks to the grace of God and also because his
previous merits (good deeds) are now bearing fruit.

Now is the time for him to
attain Enlightenment, so I will help him in this." She said, "Lord, you have earned
God's mercy, and you are blessed!

24-25.

"Otherwise, dispassion would not arise.

It is a sign of God's mercy, which
manifests itself in the mind being absorbed in the search for Truth, having
established itself in detachment from sensual pleasures.

Now I will give you the
answers to that puzzle about my life story.

26.

"My Father is Transcendence (God) — pure Consciousness; my friend is
Reason; ignorance is Lady Darkness, the unwanted friend of Reason.

27.

"The whims of ignorance are too well known to need explanation, and
Lady Darkness can mislead anyone, making a rope look like a snake and
terrifying the viewer.

28-33.

"Her son is the greatest illusion, and that is the mind; his wife is a
thought, a concept, or an imagination; she has five sons, namely, hearing, taste,
sight, touch, and smell, whose mansions are the corresponding senses.

What the mind
"stole" from them is the enjoyment of sensual objects, which is imprinted in the
mind to later develop into the inclinations of the mind.

Sharing the stolen objects
with his wife is the manifestation of inclinations in dreams.

The dream is the
daughter-in-law (son's wife) of Delusion.

Lady Insatiability is desire; her sons –
anger and greed; their hail – the body.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The dream is the
daughter-in-law (son's wife) of Delusion. Lady Insatiability is desire; her sons –
anger and greed; their hail – the body. What is called my most powerful talisman –
Self-realization of the Supreme Being (Liberation). The friend of the mind who
guards the city – the life principle that moves continuously like the Breath of
Life (Spirit). The various cities inhabited by them are the various spheres
(worlds) and other worlds through which the Soul passed in its development. The
crown of penetrating ability is samadhi (the final stage of Faith). My admission to
my Father's chamber is final Liberation - Immortality."
34. "Such, in brief, is the story of my life. Your life is similar to mine. Think
carefully about this and attain Salvation (Immortality)."
CHAPTER IX - HOW HEMACHUDA REALIZED HIS HIGHER SELF AFTER ANALYSING HIS OWN
MIND AND IMMERSING HIMSELF WITHIN
1. When Hemachuda understood the meaning of the parable his wife had told him
earlier, he was pleasantly surprised. His voice floated with delight as he said to
her:
2. "My dear, you are truly blessed, and also wise: how else can I describe the
profound wisdom contained in the story of your life, told to me in the form of a
parable. 3. "Until now, I was unaware of the progress you have made. Now it has become as
clear to me as if it were right in front of me. 4-5. "Now I understand the Supreme
Goal of humanity and realize the wonderful Nature. Please tell me now: who is the
One who is your Father? How is it that He has no beginning? Who are we? What is our
true nature?" When asked about this, Hemalekha replied to her husband:

--- PAGE BREAK ---6.

"Lord, listen carefully to what I am about to say, for it is a subtle subject.

Investigate the nature of the Supreme Being (God) with a mind made clear and
transparent.

7.

"This is not a subject that can be perceived or described; so how can I tell
you about it?

You will understand the Father (God) only if you understand the
Supreme Being (realize who you are).

8.

"There is no definition for the Supreme Being (God), and therefore no teacher
can teach about Him.

Understand Him within yourself, for He dwells in the
unblemished Mind.

9.

"He permeates everything, from the personified Lord (Buddha) to the nucleus of
an atom; but He is beyond comprehension by the mind or senses; without being
illuminated by any external means, He illuminates everything, everywhere and
always.

He is beyond vision or discussion.

10.

"How, where, when, or by whom has He been described, even partially?

What
you ask of me, dear one, is equivalent to asking me to show you your own eyes.

11-12.

"Even the best Teachers cannot make your eyes visible to you.

Just as the
Teacher is useless in this case, so is he useless in the other case you are asking
about.

At best, he can guide you toward it, and nothing more.

I will also explain
to you the means of Realization (Liberation).

Listen carefully.

13.

The Supreme Being will not be found as long as you are contaminated by the
concepts of "I" (I am the body, the ego) or "mine" (for example, my house, my
body), for She (the Soul) is beyond perception, and She (the Soul) cannot be
realized as "my body."
14.

"Go into seclusion, analyze and comprehend what those things are that are
known to you as 'yours'; renounce them all and transcend them, seek the True
Essence.

15.

"For example, you know me as your wife, not as your essence.

I am only
connected to you, not part of you, and certainly not your own essence.

16.

"Analyze everything in this way and renounce everything unnecessary.--- PAGE BREAK ---

16. "Analyze everything in this way and renounce everything unnecessary. What
remains, transcending everything that is beyond concepts, appropriations, or
abandonment—know that this is the Supreme Essence. Everything is God, and
everything belongs to God. This knowledge is ultimate Liberation."
17. After receiving these instructions from his wife, Prince Hemachuda hastily
rose from his seat, saddled his horse, and galloped out of the city. 18. He entered the royal garden of delights, located on the outskirts of the city,
and then entered the beautifully decorated crystal palace. 19-20. He dismissed his servants and ordered his guards: "While I am meditating, do
not allow anyone to enter these rooms, even if they are ministers or elders, or
even if it is the king himself. They will have to wait until you receive my
permission."
21. Then he went to a beautiful chamber on the Ninth Floor (the 9th step
of Faith), which offered a view in all directions. 22. The room was well furnished, and he sat down on a soft seat. He
concentrated his mind and began to reflect as follows:
23-30. "Truly, all these people are deluded! None of them has yet seen the Supreme
Being (God) even out of the corner of their eye! But they all act for the sake of
their own "I" (ego). Some of them read the Holy Scriptures; a few others study
these Holy Scriptures and commentaries on them; some are busy accumulating wealth;
others rule kingdoms; some wage war against enemies; others seek a luxurious life. When they

--- PAGE BREAK ---immersed in all this selfish activity, they never ask themselves what the Supreme
Being might be; and then what is all this fuss about?

Oh!

If the Supreme Being
(God) is not known, then everything is in vain and everything happens as if in a
dream.

So now I will investigate this question.

"My house, wealth, kingdom, treasures, women, cattle—none of these things are me,
they are only mine.

It is certain that I take this body to be the Supreme Being
(Soul), but it is only my instrument.

Of course, I am the son of a king, with a beautiful physique and a fair
(white) complexion.

These people also believe that their bodies are their "I"
(Soul)."
31-36.

Thinking in this way, he reflected on his body.

He could not identify the
body with the Supreme Being (Soul), and therefore began to rise higher in his
reasoning, going beyond the body.

This body is mine, but it is not me.

It is made
of blood and bones, and changes every moment.

How can it be the unchanging,
continuous "I" (Mind)?

It is like movable property; it is something separate,
different from me, just as the waking body is different from dreaming, etc.

The "I"
(Mind) cannot be the body, just as the Life Force (Spirit) cannot be the Supreme
Being (Soul); undoubtedly, the mind and intellect are my instruments, so they
cannot be the "I." My "I" (Soul) is undoubtedly something different from all of
this, from the body to the mind.

I am always conscious, but I am not aware of this
pure state of consciousness.

The reason for this inability is not clear to me.

37-38.

Objects are perceived through the senses, not the other way around; life is
recognized through contact, and the mind through Reason.

And through what does
Reason become apparent?

I don't know...

Now I see that I am always conscious—the
realization of pure Consciousness and pure Awareness is hindered by other factors
that unceremoniously interfere, relating to non-Essence, non-Self.

Now I will not
allow them into my imagination.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Now I see that I am always conscious—the
realization of pure Consciousness and pure Awareness is hindered by other factors
that unceremoniously interfere, relating to non-Essence, non-Self. Now I will not
allow them into my imagination. They cannot appear if I do not mentally imagine
them, and without their appearances, they cannot obscure the glory of the Higher
Essence. 39. Having come to this conclusion as a result of his reflection, he forcibly
stopped the flow of his thoughts. 40-41. Instantly, emptiness reigned. And then he decided that this was the Supreme
Essence, and therefore he became very happy and resumed his meditation. "I will do
it again," he said and immersed himself within (himself). 42. When the restlessness of his mind was so decisively restrained, he immediately
saw the infinite Shining Light. 43-45. Returning to human consciousness, he began to wonder how this could have
happened. "There is no permanence in this experience. The Supreme Being cannot be
impermanent. I will repeat this experience again and see what happens," he said,
and immersed himself in this experience once more. This time he fell into a long
sleep and saw wonderful dreams. After awakening, he became angry and began to
think:
46-48. "How did it happen that sleep overcame me and I fell asleep? The darkness
and light that I saw before must also be characteristic of dreams. Dreams are
mental images, so how can I overcome them? "I will suppress my thoughts again and see what happens," he said and immersed
himself within (himself). His mind was calm for a while. The prince believed that he had entered into Bliss. 49-54. "Soon after that, he returned to his original state, as his mind began to
function again. He thought, "What is all this?

--- PAGE BREAK ---What does it mean?

Is it a dream or a hallucination of the mind?

My experience is a
fact, but it is beyond my understanding.

Why is this bliss so unique and unlike anything else I have ever experienced?

My
highest previous experiences cannot compare even to a tiny fraction of the state of
bliss I have just been in.

It was like a dream, because I did not perceive anything
external.

And at the same time, there was a certain bliss.

The reason for this is
not clear to me, because there was nothing there that could give me pleasure.

Although I tried to realize the Supreme Being, I do not yet realize it.

Perhaps I
will realize the Supreme Being and at the same time perceive something else —
darkness, light, dreams, or pleasures, etc.

Or perhaps these are stages of
development in the Realization (Liberation) of the Supreme Being (Soul)?

I do not
understand this.

I'll go ask my mysterious wife."
55-61.

Having made this decision, the prince ordered the guard to ask Hemalekha to
come to him.

An hour and a half later, she climbed the steps of the mansion,
stepping like the queen of the night—the moon moving across the sky.

She found the
prince, her husband, in perfect peace of mind, serene, focused, and with a happy
expression on his face.

She quickly walked over to him and sat down next to him.

As
she settled down beside him, he opened his eyes and found her sitting right in
front of him.

As soon as he saw her, she immediately embraced him tenderly and
affectionately uttered pleasant, loving words: "My lord, what can I do for Your
Highness?

I hope you are well.

Please tell me, why did you call me here?" Hearing
these words, he replied to his wife as follows:
62-66.

"My dear!

As you advised, I have retired to a secluded place where I am
engaged in the study of the Supreme Being.

But even in this case, I observe various
visions and experience different feelings.--- PAGE BREAK ---

As you advised, I have retired to a secluded place where I am
engaged in the study of the Supreme Being. But even in this case, I observe various
visions and experience different feelings. Believing that constant Self-Awareness is overshadowed by the uninvited
interference of mental activity (thoughts), I forcibly suppressed my thoughts and
remained serene. Then a dark void reigned, then light appeared, followed by sleep,
and finally, incomparable Bliss enveloped me for a short time. Is this the Higher
Self, or is it something else? Please analyze my experiences and answer me, my
dear, so that I may clearly understand them. 67-69. After listening attentively, Hemalekha, who knew both this world and the one
beyond, spoke in a pleasant voice. "Listen to me, my dear, very carefully. What you
did before, restraining your thoughts with your mind turned inward, is a good
start, and it is praised by the worthy as the best way. Without this, no one has
ever achieved success anywhere. However, this does not lead to Self-Realization,
for the Supreme Being is always and at all times Realized (Free). 70-71. "If something is generated, it cannot be the Supreme Being. For how can the
Supreme Being be obtained again? After all, it can never be obtained. Acquisition
implies obtaining something that one does not yet possess. Is there any moment when
the Supreme Being is not itself? It cannot be acquired even by restraining the
mind. I will give you a few examples:
72. "Just as things that are invisible in the dark are revealed when the darkness
is dispelled by a lamp, and are therefore considered to be restored from oblivion;
73-74. "Just as a person who was confused and forgot where he put his wallet
remembers it and finds it by calming his mind and regaining his mental balance, yet

--- PAGE BREAK ---says that he has found his lost wallet, even though the balancing of his mind did
not produce the wallet.

75.

"So too, the restraint of your mind is not the cause of your Self-
Realization; although the Supreme Being is always there, you are not aware of it
even with a restrained mind, for you are not knowledgeable about it.

76.

"Just as a rude person, unfamiliar with the structure of society, is unable
to recognize the dazzling lights of the royal palace shining in the night, and
therefore at first glance pays no attention to this splendor, so you overlook the
Supreme Being.

77.

"Be attentive, dear one!

Empty darkness became visible after you reined in
your thoughts.

For a short time—after you reined in your mind and before that
emptiness became visible—there is a state free from both the effort of reining in
the mind and the perception of darkness.

78.

"Always remember that state as the state of Perfect and Transcendental
Happiness.

All people are deluded about this state because their minds are
accustomed to being turned outward.

79.

"Although people may be educated, skilled, and insightful, they nevertheless
search and search, only to fail, and they do not abide in that Holy State.

80.

"They suffer day and night, unaware of that state.

Simple theoretical
knowledge of sculpture can never make a person a sculptor.

81.

"Even if you were an expert in the Scriptures and sciences, well versed in
theory and discussion of the philosophy of the Supreme Being, even then you would
not be able to comprehend this Supreme Being, because it is not conscious, being
already conscious.

Realization (Immortality) is not attained by distant
wanderings, but by dwelling in peaceful immobility; it is not attained by thought
(mental activity), but by the disappearance of thought (mental activity).

83-85.

"Efforts aimed at achieving Realization (Liberation) are like trying to step
on the shadow of one's own head.

Efforts will always cause the shadow to retreat.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Efforts aimed at achieving Realization (Liberation) are like trying to step
on the shadow of one's own head. Efforts will always cause the shadow to retreat. "Just as a baby tries to grab its own reflection, not knowing what a mirror is, so
ordinary people are captivated by their mental reflections on the Mirror of pure,
shining Supreme Being (God), not noticing this Mirror, for they have no idea about
Supreme Being. "Although people know about Space, they still do not know it, for they are
captivated by the objects that exist in space. 86-88. "They know about the Universe in Space, but they do not pay attention to
Space itself. They are in the same situation with regard to the Supreme Being
(God). "My lord, think carefully about this! The world consists of Knowledge and knowable
objects. Of these two things, objects are not you and are perceived by the senses;
Knowledge is self-evident; in the absence of Knowledge, there is no world. Knowledge is direct proof of the existence of objects, which therefore depend on
Knowledge. Knowledge depends on the Knower for its existence. The Knower does not
need any verification to know about his own existence. Therefore, the Knower is the
only reality behind knowledge and objects. Only that which is self-evident and does
not require proof is real; other things are not real.

--- PAGE BREAK ---89-91.

"One who denies knowledge and has no basis for his claims cannot be engaged
in any discussion.

"The question of Knowledge (Veda) is settled, and then the question arises about
the existence of objects in the absence of knowledge about them.

Objects and
Knowledge about them are only reflections in the Eternal, Self-Existent, Supreme
Consciousness, which is identical to the Knower, and which alone is real.

The
doubt that a reflection must contain all objects simultaneously, without regard to
time and space, contrary to our experience, should not arise, because time and
space themselves are comprehensible concepts and are equally reflections.

The characteristic nature of all these reflections is the reverse side of objects
found in Space.

92.

"Therefore, prince, realize with a peaceful mind your own true nature,
which is the unified, pure, undivided Consciousness underlying the restless
mind, from which this entire universe in all its diversity is composed.

93.

"If someone is established in this fundamental principle of the Universe,
then he becomes the Creator of everything.

I will tell you how to manifest this
in yourself as your inherent nature.

I guarantee that you will become That.

94.

"Understand and realize with a peaceful mind the state between sleep and
wakefulness, the interval between recognizing one object after another, or the
interval between two perceptions.

95.

" This is the True Supreme Essence, in which a person, abiding in it, is
no longer deluded.

Unaware of this Truth, people become heirs to suffering,
which becomes their inherent quality as a result of their delusion.

96-97.

"Form, taste, smell, touch, sound, suffering, pleasure, the act of
acquiring, or the object acquired—there is no place for any of these in the
Transcendence that is the foundation and support of all that exists, and which is
the Essence of all, but it is not limited to this alone, transcending all of it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

96-97. "Form, taste, smell, touch, sound, suffering, pleasure, the act of
acquiring, or the object acquired—there is no place for any of these in the
Transcendence that is the foundation and support of all that exists, and which is
the Essence of all, but it is not limited to this alone, transcending all of it. It
is the Lord: the Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer of the Universe; the Eternal
Being. 98. "And now, do not allow your mind to be turned outward; turn it inward; keep it
under control with very little effort and remain in contemplation, striving to
behold the Supreme Essence, always remembering that the seeker himself is an
integral part of Being and the Supreme Essence of the Supreme Essence. 99. "Be also free from the thought 'I see'; remain serene and motionless, like
the gaze of a blind man. That which transcends seeing and not seeing is You. Do
not delay."
100. HemaChuda acted accordingly, and, entering the state his wife had described,
he remained peaceful for a long time, conscious of nothing but the Supreme Being. CHAPTER X - THANKS TO FURTHER INSTRUCTIONS FROM HIS BELOVED, HE ACHIEVED
LIBERATION (IMMORTALITY), DESPITE HIS CONTINUED OUTWARD ACTIVITIES, AND REMAINED IN
A STATE OF LIBERATION (IMMORTALITY) DURING HIS LIFETIME
1-5. "HemaLecha noticed that her husband had attained Supreme Peace, and so she did
not disturb him. He awoke an hour and a half later, opened his eyes, and saw his
wife beside him. Eager to enter that state again, he closed his eyes; and then
HemaLecha immediately took his hands and asked him in a pleasant voice, "My lord,
tell me, what are you

--- PAGE BREAK ---defined as my gain when I close my eyes, or as my loss when I open them, my dear.

I
wish to hear your answer.

Tell me what happens when the eyes are closed, or when
they remain open."
6.

"Being compelled to give an answer, he looked as if he were intoxicated, and
reluctantly and listlessly replied as follows:
7-14.

"My dear, I have discovered pure and unclouded happiness.

I cannot find even
the slightest satisfaction in worldly affairs, for suffering increases again when
they come to an end.

Enough of all this!

They are tasteless to me, like a sucked-dry orange that only idlers chew, or like
chewing gum that cattle constantly chew.

What a pity that people are still unaware
of the bliss of their own Supreme Self!

Just as a man begs for alms, knowing
nothing of the treasure hidden beneath his house, so I ran after sensual pleasures,
unaware of the boundless ocean of bliss within me.

Worldly pursuits are accompanied
by the burden of suffering, and pleasures are fleeting.

Nevertheless, I was so
carried away that I took them for continuous pleasures, and although I was often
overcome with sadness, I still did not stop striving for them again and again.

What
a pity!

People are fools, unable to distinguish pleasure from pain.

They seek
pleasure, but they get suffering.

Enough of these actions that increase the craving
for such pleasures!

"My dear, I beg you!

Let me once again find peace in my Blissful Essence
(contemplating the Mind).

I am sorry that, although you are aware of this state,
you are not in it, being always involved in meaningless pursuits."
15-27.

"The wise girl smiled gently at this and said to him: "My lord, you have not
yet known the highest state of Holiness, which is not tainted by duality, upon
reaching which the Wise One transcends duality and will never again be confused.

That state is as far from you as Heaven is from Earth.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"The wise girl smiled gently at this and said to him: "My lord, you have not
yet known the highest state of Holiness, which is not tainted by duality, upon
reaching which the Wise One transcends duality and will never again be confused. That state is as far from you as Heaven is from Earth. Your small measure of Wisdom
is no better than no Wisdom at all, because it is not unconditional, but remains
conditioned by the closing or opening of your eyes. Perfection cannot depend on
activity or inactivity, on effort or lack of effort. How can this state be perfect
if mental or physical activity can influence it, or if the movement of an eyelid
the width of a barley grain changes everything in it? Again, how can it be Perfect
if it is only inside? What can be said about your confused wisdom! How ridiculous
to think that your eyelid, one inch long, can hide a space in which millions of
worlds revolve in a single corner! "Listen, prince, to what I am about to tell you. Until these knots (shackles) are
cut, bliss will not be found. Thus, second-hand knowledge is not effective. There
are millions of these knots, and they are created by the shackles of delusion,
which is nothing more than ignorance of the Supreme Being. These knots give rise to
misconceptions, the main one being the identification of the body with the Supreme
Being, which in turn causes a never-ending stream of happiness and suffering in the
form of the cycle of birth and death(samsara). The second knot is the separation of
the world (Yavi) from the Higher Essence, whose conscious essence is the Mirror
(screen) in which phenomena (images) are simply reflected. The same applies to
other knots, including the idea of the separation of beings from each other and
their separation from the universal Supreme Being (God). These ideas arose in time
immemorial, and they will resurface again and again until ignorance disappears. A
person will not attain

--- PAGE BREAK ---final salvation until they free themselves from these countless knots (shackles) of
ignorance.

28-38.

"One cannot be satisfied with the state that comes after closing one's eyes,
because in reality it (this state) is Pure Mind and Eternal Truth, surpassing
everything else, and at the same time serving as a magnificent Mirror (screen)
reflecting the phenomena (worlds) arising in It itself.

Prove, if you can, that at
least something is not contained in It, and you will fail, for everything is in It.

Whatever you recognize as known to you, all of it resides in the Knowledge conveyed
by that Co-Mind.

Even that which may be assumed to be in another place and at another time is also
within your Co-Consciousness.

Moreover, if something were not obvious to Co-
Consciousness and unknown to it, then it (Co-Consciousness) would be a figment of
the imagination, like the son of a barren woman.

There can be nothing that is not
supported by Co-Consciousness, just as there can be no reflection without a
reflecting surface.

"Therefore, I tell you that your judgment, 'I will lose this state by opening my
eyes' or 'I know this state of happiness,' is a knot (shackles) that must be cut,
and then there will be no need for any achievement, for remember that a state that
can be attained cannot be Perfect.

If it can be lost in case of failure, for
Liberation is the result of the cessation of all efforts, not the application of
this or that.

What you consider to be a state of happiness, achieved by moving your
eyelids, cannot in essence be Perfect, because it is undoubtedly unstable and not
unconditional.

Is there any place, my lord, where there is no blazing Fire, sparkling as the
universe dissolves?

Everything will disappear in that Fire, and nothing will
remain.

In the same way, the Fire of Realization will burn all your sense of duty,
and then there will be nothing left for you to do.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Everything will disappear in that Fire, and nothing will
remain. In the same way, the Fire of Realization will burn all your sense of duty,
and then there will be nothing left for you to do. Be strong, eradicate your
thoughts and cut the knots deeply rooted in your heart, such as "I will see," "I am
not this," "this is not the Supreme Being," and the like. Wherever you look, see everywhere the one, undivided, eternally blissful Supreme
Being; also observe this entire reflected universe as it arises from the Supreme
Being and disappears into It. See the Supreme Being both within yourself and
outside yourself; do not fall into the delusion that the Supreme Being of the inner
observer, who sees the universal Supreme Being (God), is different from the
universal, since both are one and the same. Abide in the peace of your true inner
Supreme Being, devoid of all phenomena."
39-42. At the end of her speech, HemaChuda's confusion cleared up and disappeared,
and gradually he became firmly established in the Perfect Supreme Being, devoid of
any divisions between internal and external. Being always balanced, he led a very
happy life with HemaLekha and others, ruled his kingdom and made it prosperous,
went to war with his enemies and defeated them, studied the Holy Scriptures and
taught them to others, filled his royal treasury, fulfilled the necessary duties of
kingship, and lived many years, being Liberated while still alive. 43-61. "King MuktaChuda, upon hearing that his son HemaChuda had become Free,
discussed this with his other son, ManiChuda. Both agreed that HemaChuda was no
longer the same as he had been before, and that he had changed in such a way that
neither the greatest pleasures nor the most terrible sufferings could make him
worry anymore; that he treats both friend and foe equally; that he is indifferent
to loss or gain; that he performs his royal duties like an actor in a play; that he
is like a man

--- PAGE BREAK ---always drunk with wine; and that he performs his duties well, despite his
distracted gaze or worldly appearance.

They remained in thought and were amazed by
all this.

Then they sought him out and asked him in private about the reason for
his change.

When they heard what he said about his condition, they, like HemaChuda
in his time, wanted to hear the relevant instructions and finally became Liberated
while still alive, like HemaChuda.

After that, the ministers also wanted to attain
that state, and ultimately they attained it after receiving the appropriate
instructions from the king.

The same thing happened to the citizens, artisans, and
all classes of people in that city.

They all attained the greatest Good of Life
(Immortality) and transcended desire, anger, lust, greed, etc.

Even children and
the elderly were no longer subject to the influence of passion (desires).

In this
ideal state, worldly affairs were still carried out, but now people consciously
played their part in the game, acting as actors in a play and remaining in Harmony
with the rest of Creation (the Universe).

Mothers rocked their cradles, singing
lullabies that expressed the highest Truth (God); the ruler and his servants
addressed each other in the light of Truth; actors entertained the audience with
performances that revealed Truth; singers sang songs only about Truth; court
jesters and buffoons ridiculed ignorance as something laughable and absurd; the
academy taught only lessons about the knowledge of God.

Thus, the entire kingdom
consisted only of Sages and philosophers, whether they were men or women, ministers
or doctors...

In any case, they engaged in activities appropriate to their nature
(Soul), remaining in Harmony with Creation (the Universe).Thus, the entire kingdom
consisted only of Sages and philosophers, whether they were men or women, ministers
or doctors...

In any case, they engaged in activities appropriate to their nature
(Soul), remaining in Harmony with Creation (the Universe).

They never indulged in
memories of the past or thoughts of the future in order to obtain pleasure or avoid
pain, but acted in accordance with the given moment, living in the present (here
and now), laughing, rejoicing, crying, or shouting, as if intoxicated, thus
dispelling and eliminating all their hidden tendencies.

62.

"Rishis such as Sanaka (Sana [Heaven] Ka [Sage]; Slavic-Aryan, Ant (Atlantis),
man-God [Ka/As]) and others called this city the City of Wisdom when they visited
it.

63-68.

"Even parrots and cockatoos uttered words of wisdom in their cages, such as:
"Consider the Supreme Being as Pure Mind, devoid of objective (conditional)
knowledge."
"That which is known is no different from that Mind; it is like a series of images
reflected in a Mirror (on a screen).

Absolute Consciousness is the Universe; It is
"I," It is everything, intelligent and inanimate, moving and immovable, manifested
and unmanifested.

Everything else is illuminated by It, while It (Absolute
Consciousness) is one and only, and Self-illuminating.

Therefore, let those
intelligent people who thirst to know themselves (Pure Mind) turn away from
illusory knowledge and contemplate their own Higher Essence — Absolute
Consciousness — which illuminates everything else and which is also the essence of
all and everything.

The city where even the lowest animals impart such Higher
Wisdom is known to this day as the City of Wisdom (Asgard) on Earth, and it owes
its fame to the wise princess Hemalekha, thanks to whose advice Hemachuda became
Immortal, and all others followed his example.

69.

DattaTreyya (God Tod) continued: "Thus, you see, Parashurama (Father Rusa
Rama), that the primary cause of Liberation is the society of the Sage.--- PAGE BREAK ---

69. DattaTreyya (God Tod) continued: "Thus, you see, Parashurama (Father Rusa
Rama), that the primary cause of Liberation is the society of the Sage. Therefore,
follow this advice above all else."
CHAPTER XI - THE UNIVERSE IS NOTHING BUT MIND

--- PAGE BREAK ---1.

Having heard this sublime story about Hemachuda, Brahman (the Sage), remaining
perplexed, asked:
2-5.

"Teacher!

What you have said seems to me to contradict the experience of all
people in every respect.

How can this majestic material (visible) Universe be
nothing but illusory Consciousness (Mind), which is not visible, but only deduced
through logical inference?

Pure Mind, devoid of knowable objects, cannot be
imagined, and therefore it cannot be postulated.

And so the whole concept based on
this is completely unclear to me.

I kindly ask You to explain this question so that
I may understand it." Being asked about this, Dattatreya continued:
6-30.

"Now I will tell you the Truth about this objective world (Yavi) as it is.

That which is observable is in no way more than appearance.

Now I will give you
proof of this statement.

Listen carefully.

Everything that is observable has an
origin, and therefore must have a prior cause for its appearance.

What is origin,
other than the appearance of something new?

The world changes every moment, its
appearance is renewed every moment, and therefore it is born every moment.

Some say
that the birth of the universe is infinite and eternal every moment.

Some may
dispute this view, saying that this statement is true for a particular object or
objects, but not for the world (Yavi), which is the totality of everything that is
observable.

The sages respond to them as follows: external phenomena (images) are
only a momentary projection of memories based on uninterrupted connection (film
frames), namely, objects and worldly actions based on them.

But the Supreme Mind,
which compares time, place, and phenomena, is infinite and eternal at every moment
of their appearance, and they call Him the Great Ra-M-Ha.

Others say that the
universe is a collection of matter, both moving and immovable, or, in other words,
visible and unmanifest.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But the Supreme Mind,
which compares time, place, and phenomena, is infinite and eternal at every moment
of their appearance, and they call Him the Great Ra-M-Ha. Others say that the
universe is a collection of matter, both moving and immovable, or, in other words,
visible and unmanifest. Atomic scientists claim that the universe is composed of
five elements—earth, air, fire, water, and ether (space)—which are eternal and form
things such as pots, fabrics, etc., which are temporary. However, they are unable
to prove the external visible existence of the world because they recognize that
events in life imply their speculative (rational) nature. It follows that objects
not involved in such events are useless (unreal). "But everyone agrees that the visible universe (the world of Yavi) has an origin,
its Source. However, to say that the creation of the universe is conditioned by
nature means to impose on Him (God) an imagination (assumption), which is
unfounded. The Charvakas (Red Aces) and Nihilists (truly Dark Ones) argue that some facts
(consequences) cannot be traced back to their actual causes, claiming that some
events occur without any preceding cause; just as a cause does not always precede
an event (consequence), so an event does not always have a cause; from this follows
the conclusion that the Universe is a coincidence. "If a consequence can appear without a cause, then there is no relationship between
cause and consequence, and there can be no Harmony in the world. But then the work
of a potter could produce the products of a weaver, and vice versa, which is
absurd. The interdependence of cause and effect is established by their logical
sequence and proven by its role in practical life. How then can the visible
universe be a coincidence?

--- PAGE BREAK ---"They imply a cause where it is not obvious and trace the cause from the effect.

This is in line with common practice.

Every event must have a cause; that is the
rule.

Even if the cause is not obvious, it must be implied; otherwise, activity in
the world would be futile (meaningless), which is absurd.

From this, we can
conclude that every event is the product of a specific condition or conditions; and
this fact allows people to engage in purposeful activity.

This is how things are in
the practical world.

Therefore, the theory of the randomness of the universe is
unacceptable.

"Atomists (Atom - Truth) proceed from the assumption of a material cause of
Creation, and call it "elusive atoms." According to them, elusive atoms give rise
to the material world (Yavi), which did not exist before the creation of the
universe and will not remain after Dissolution (Destruction).

The existence of the world (Yavi) before or after is just something imaginary and
untrue, like a mirage, they say.

How can the same thing be true at one time and
untrue at another?

Again, if the primary atoms are elusive, have no size, and are
also eternal, how can they generate material and transient derivative things
endowed with dimensions (qualities and properties)?

How can the same thing be yellow and not yellow, light and dark, at the same time?

These qualities are not in harmony; the whole theory comes to a dead end, as if
someone tried to mix things that cannot be mixed.

Again, how did the primordial
atoms begin to combine to produce diatomic or triatomic compounds?

Was it of their
own will, which is impossible because they are inanimate?

Or was it in accordance
with God's will?

It is also absurd to say that inanimate (unintelligent) atoms of matter began to
create the universe when the balance of the Three Forces was disturbed: sattva
(harmony), rajas (activity), and tamas (inactivity).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Or was it in accordance
with God's will? It is also absurd to say that inanimate (unintelligent) atoms of matter began to
create the universe when the balance of the Three Forces was disturbed: sattva
(harmony), rajas (activity), and tamas (inactivity). One philosophical system
believes that the Three Qualities of brightness (harmony), light (activity), and
darkness (inactivity) are always in Equilibrium (Harmony). When it is disturbed,
Creation begins; when they return to Equilibrium (Harmony), the Universe Dissolves
(Disappears). But what caused this change in the state of Equilibrium? Change is
impossible without an animated (Intelligent) cause. So none of the systems can
satisfactorily explain creation. The Holy Scriptures are the only guide to understanding the metaphysical and the
transcendent. Other writings are not authoritative because of the limitations of
the individuals who wrote them, the lack of reliable means by which to verify their
accuracy and correctness, and the constant failed attempts to explain Creation that
ignore God. The universe must have a Creator, and He must be an Intelligent
Principle (the Supreme Mind), but He cannot be anything known due to the immensity
of Creation. His Power (Greatness) is beyond all understanding and is described in
the Holy Scriptures, whose authority is irrefutable. They speak of a single
Creator, the Lord, who existed before creation, being self-sufficient. He created
the universe through His own power (Greatness). This universe, in all its fullness
and detail, is but a picture on the screen (Mirror) of His Supreme Essence (Mind),
like the world of dreams on the screen of individual Consciousness. The individual
embraces his own creation (in his imagination) with his ego - "I"; in the same way,
the Lord plays with the Universe. Just as the person seeing the vision (mirage)
cannot be confused with the vision (mirage), so the Lord cannot be confused with
Creation.go - "I"; in the same way,
the Lord plays with the Universe. Just as the person seeing the vision (mirage)
cannot be confused with the vision (mirage), so the Lord cannot be confused with
Creation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Just as a person lives on after his dream (mirage) has ended, so too does the Lord
exist after the Dissolution of His Creation.

Just as you always remain as Pure
Consciousness, distinct from the body, etc., so too is the Lord unlimited
Consciousness, distinct from the Universe, etc.

After all, isn't all this just a
picture painted by Him on His own Essence?

How can this one-of-a-kind Creation (the
world of Yavi) be different from Him?

Truly, there is nothing but Consciousness.

Name Me any place where there is no Consciousness; there is no place that is beyond
Consciousness.

Can anyone prove in any way that anything is beyond Consciousness?

It is impossible to escape Consciousness.

31-32.

"Furthermore, this Consciousness is the only existence that encompasses the
entire Universe and is perfect in every way.

Just as breakwaters cannot exist
separately from the ocean, and light cannot exist without the Sun, so too the
universe cannot be imagined without Consciousness.

Thus, God is the embodiment of
Pure Consciousness (the Supreme Mind).

33-34.

"This entire universe, consisting of the movable and immovable, the
manifested and unmanifested, arises from Him, abides in Him, and dissolves into
Him.

This is the final and well-known conclusion of the Holy Scriptures (Vedas);
and the Holy Scriptures are never wrong.

Only the Holy Scriptures can be the guide
by which it becomes possible to comprehend metaphysical and transcendental
questions.

35.

"The miraculous powers inherent in precious stones and spells cannot be denied,
yet they cannot be comprehended by a person of limited knowledge.

36-40.

"Since the Holy Scriptures (Vedas) originated from the omniscient Lord, they
also possess His quality of omniscience.

The Supreme Being mentioned in them has
existed eternally, even before the birth of the universe.

His creation took place
without any material assistance.

Therefore, God is Supreme, Perfect, Pure, and
Self-existent (One).--- PAGE BREAK ---

His creation took place
without any material assistance. Therefore, God is Supreme, Perfect, Pure, and
Self-existent (One). Creation is not a separate object; it is a picture painted on
the canvas (screen) of the Supreme Consciousness, for absolutely nothing can exist
outside of Perfection. Imagination, on the contrary, is not something practical and
real. Thus, the universe arises only as an image on the surface of the Mirror
(screen) of the Absolute (God). This conclusion is in harmony with all the facts. 41-45. "Creation is like a magician's trick, and it is a dwelling born of divine
imagination. O Father Rishi (RAhMANov) Rama, you know about the mental creations of
fantasists, who are abundant in this world. There are also doubts, verifications,
discussions, and conclusions, all of which are imaginary, arising in the mind and
disappearing in it. Just as castles in the air are mental fabrications of people,
so too is this creation a mental fabrication of the Great Ra-M-Ha. The Great Ra-M-
Ha is Absolute Awareness, without any form whatsoever. The wisdom of God is the
Energy of Shakti (Inglia) and the Witness of all this. God is Perfect in every way,
and He remains in an undivided and non-dual state. 46-47. "Time and space are factors of division in the world; of these, space refers
to the location of objects, and time refers to the sequence of events. And if time
and space are themselves projected from Consciousness (Mind), then how could they
divide or destroy their own basis, and still continue to be what they are? 48-51. "Can you show me a time or space that is not permeated by Consciousness? Isn't everything within your

--- PAGE BREAK ---Consciousness (Mind) when you speak of it?

The fact of the existence of things is
only the illumination (knowledge) of them, and nothing more.

Such illumination is
characteristic of Consciousness alone.

Only that which shines independently is
significant and taken into account.

Objects are not such, since their existence
depends on their perception by conscious beings.

But Consciousness is self-Shining,
and this does not apply to objects that depend on conscious beings in order to be
known.

52-54.

"If, on the other hand, you claim that objects exist even if they are not
perceived by us, then I will say the following to you.

There is no consistency or
agreement in the world regarding the existence or non-existence of things.

Their
cognition is the only factor that determines this.

Just as reflections (images)
have no substance (matter) in themselves apart from the Mirror (screen), so too do
the things of God's World have no substance in themselves apart from the cognizing
FACTOR, namely, Mind (Consciousness).

"The qualities and tangibility of things are not arguments that can be used to
counter the fact that these things are nothing more than images.

55-63.

"The qualities of reflected images (pictures) depend on the perfection of
the reflecting surface (screen), as we can see in the case of water and polished
surfaces.

Mirrors (screens) are inanimate and not self-sufficient, while
Consciousness is always pure and self-sufficient; it does not require an external
object to create an image (picture).

Mirrors (screens) are subject to contamination
by foreign dirt, while for Consciousness there is nothing foreign, since It is
always one and indivisible; therefore, its reflections are unique.

Created things
are not self-illuminating; they are illuminated by someone else's cognitive
ability.

The cognition of things implies the presence of their images in our Mind.

They (things) are only images (pictures).--- PAGE BREAK ---

The cognition of things implies the presence of their images in our Mind. They (things) are only images (pictures). And therefore, Creation (Reality) is an
image (illusion). It (Reality) is not self-illuminating (it did not create itself);
and thus, It (Reality) does not possess self-awareness, but becomes a fact when we
perceive It (Reality). Therefore, I say that the Universe is only an image
(picture) in our Consciousness. Consciousness shines despite the formation of
images (pictures) in it; although it is elusive and imperceptible, it (Mind) is
stable and does not waver. Just as images in a mirror do not exist separately from
the mirror, so the creations of Consciousness do not exist separately from it. 64. "Objects are necessary for creating images in a mirror; however, Consciousness
has no need for objects because it is self-sufficient. 65-66. ... "O Rama! Look at how dreams and hallucinations are clearly imprinted in
the mind even in the absence of any reality behind them. How does this happen? The
space of objects is perceived by the personal specific imaginative quality of the
mind (imagination). When such imagination is deep, it takes the form of creation;
in the absence of imagination (qualities of the mind), Consciousness is pure and
untainted. 67. "Thus, you see how Consciousness was Absolute and pure before Creation (Yavi),
and how Its (Consciousness') personal specific quality (desire) or Will caused this
image of the world (Yavi) in It. 68-69. "So the world (Yavi) is nothing but an image painted on the screen of
Consciousness (the Higher Mind); over time, it becomes different from the mental
picture; this, again, is due to the power of will that gives rise to the
phenomenon. The universe seems expedient, material, and perfect because the Will
that determines its creation is Perfect and independent;

--- PAGE BREAK ---the power of will that gives rise to the
phenomenon. The universe seems expedient, material, and perfect because the Will
that determines its creation is Perfect and independent;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

whereas human concepts are more or less transient, depending on the weakness or
strength of the will behind them.
70. "Obstacles (delusions) caused by limitations (ignorance) can be overcome
to some extent with the help of spells (prayers), precious stones (charity),
and herbs (marijuana), and then an uninterrupted flow of Self-Awareness is
established. [This is why marijuana is prohibited in Russia.]
71. "With the help of that pure Yoga (Veda Ra), O Rama, contemplate creation,
manifested by your own will, like hallucinations caused by a fakir.
72. "Objects in the world can be processed and used, while mental creations, such
as dreams, represent the same phenomena.
73. "The creations of the fakir are only temporary; the creations of Yoga
(Rahman) can be permanent; but both creations are external to their creators,
while the Divine Creation cannot be separate from the omnipresent Lord.
74. "Since the Lord of Consciousness is infinite, Creation (Reality) can only
exist within Him, and the opposite is pure illusion (a fabrication of the Torah-
Jews).
75. "Since the Universe is only a projection from Consciousness and a
projection into Consciousness, its unreal nature can only become apparent
as a result of Research, and in no other way.
76. "Truth can never change its nature, while untruth is always changeable. Look
how changeable the nature of the world is!
77-78. "Distinguish between the unchanging Truth and the changeable untruth, and
carefully examine the world (Yavi), which consists of these two factors —
unchanging Consciousness and changeable phenomena; it is like the unchanging Light
of the Mirror (screen) and the changing images (pictures) in It.
79. "The world cannot withstand the test of inquiry because of its changeable,
unreal nature. Just as an owl is blinded by bright sunlight, so the world (Yavi)
flaunts itself before ignorance and disappears as a result of correct analysis.
80-84. "What is food for one is poison for another. What seems the same to Yogis
(Goyams) and Heavenly Beings (Gods) is perceived completely differently by others
(non-believers). A long distance from the point of view of using one means of
transport turns out to be short when using another.
"Long intervals of space reflected in a mirror remain entirely within it, and yet
they are unreal.
"Thus, research becomes uncertain in itself. Both the research and the object of
research are uncertain, and the only constant factor underlying both is Co-
Consciousness (Mind). There is nothing else besides It.
85. "That which shines as Being (the Universe) is His Majesty Absolute
Consciousness (Supreme Mind).
"Thus, the Universe is only the Supreme Being, the One and Only."
CHAPTER XII - THE MANIFESTATION OF THE REALITY OF THE UNIVERSE DEPENDS ON THE
POWER OF WILL INVESTED IN CREATION
1. Even after listening carefully to Dattatreya's story, Rama was still puzzled
and asked:ER XII - THE MANIFESTATION OF THE REALITY OF THE UNIVERSE DEPENDS ON THE
POWER OF WILL INVESTED IN CREATION
1. Even after listening carefully to Dattatreya's story, Rama was still puzzled
and asked:

--- PAGE BREAK ---2.

"O Teacher, what you have said so far about the universe is true.

3.

"But even so, how is it that it seems real to me and to others who are
intelligent and perceptive?

4.

"Why does it continue to seem real to me, even though I have heard your
statements to the contrary?

Please prove its unreality to me and remove my
current illusion (maya)."
5.

When asked about this, Dattatreya, the Great Sage, began to explain the reason
for the illusion that makes one believe in the reality of the world (Yavi).

6.

"Listen, Rama!

This illusion (maya) is very old, being nothing more than
deeply rooted ignorance (delusion) that mistakes one thing for another.

7.

"Look at how the true Supreme Being is ignored, and the body is now
identified with the Supreme Being (Soul) - I am the body.

Understand that this
dirty body, consisting of blood and bones, does not belong to the unblemished,
Pure Mind (Soul)!

8.

"Even the gross physical body, out of simple habit, begins to mistakenly
substitute itself for the crystal-clear Pure Consciousness (MIND).

9.

"Similarly, the universe has always been perceived as real, so now it looks
as if it really is real.

The cure for this is to change your point of view.

10.

"The world becomes what you are accustomed to seeing in your thoughts and
imaginations.

This statement is supported by the materialization of objects by
yogis (RAhMANs) who imagine them in their minds, desiring to obtain them.

11-12.

"In this regard, I will give an example of an ancient and wonderful case.

Once upon a time, there lived a very wise and renowned king named SuShena, who
ruled the very sacred city of SunDara (Daria) in a country called VanGa (Light of
Navi/Egypt).

His younger brother, Mahasena (Moses), was his loyal and executive
subject.

13.

"The king ruled his kingdom so well that all his subjects loved him.

Once, he
performed the ashvamedha ritual (the acquisition of space).

14.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Once, he
performed the ashvamedha ritual (the acquisition of space). 14. "All the most courageous princes followed the horse at the head of a great
army. 15. "Their march was victorious until they reached the banks of the IrRavadi
River (Iriy [Holy Land], Ra [Volga], Waters [river]). 16. They were so intoxicated by their victories that they passed by Rajarishi
(Rahman) named Gana (Naga), who was sitting peacefully, without paying him the
proper attention. 17. "Gana's son noticed their disrespectful attitude toward his father, and this
angered him. He caught their sacred horse and defeated the heroes who were guarding
it. 18-23. "They surrounded him, but before their eyes, he entered the territory of a
hill called Ganda (Ad Naga) with his horse. Noticing his disappearance in the
thickets of the hill, the invaders attacked the hill. The son of the Sage
reappeared, but now with a huge army, fought his enemies, defeated them, and
destroyed the army of SuShen (SU/US - AS, man-God). He captured many prisoners of
war, including all the princes, and then returned to the hill. Several warriors who
managed to escape ran to SuShen and told him everything that had happened. SuShen
was surprised and said to his brother:
24-30. "Brother! Go to the place where the Sage Gana (Nag) is. Remember that the
Sages who perform tapas (fasting) possess miraculous powers, and even Angels (Gods)
are powerless to overcome them. Therefore, I ask you to appease him so that he will
allow you to take back the princes and the sacred horse.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Pride displayed before the Sages will always be put to shame, forcing the proud to
humble themselves.

If they are angered, they will destroy the world (Yavi), turning
it to dust.

Treat him with due respect so that our goal may be achieved.

Mahasena obeyed and immediately set about fulfilling the task entrusted to him.

He
came to the refuge of Gana (Naga) and found the Sage sitting peacefully in a
motionless position, like a stone block, with his senses, mind, and thoughts under
perfect control.

The Sage (Rahman), who was immersed in the Supreme Being (God),
resembled a serene sea whose waves of thought had subsided.

Mahasena involuntarily
sat down before the Sage and began to praise him, and with such reverence he
remained in that place for three days.

31-46.

"The son of the sage, who had been watching the new visitor, was pleased
with this and, approaching him, said, 'I am pleased with the respect you show my
father.

Tell me what I can do for you, and I will do it immediately.

I am the son
of this great Gana (Naga), an extraordinary hermit.

Prince, listen to me.

Now is
not the time to talk to my father.

He is now in samadhi (Nirvana), and he will only
come out of this state after staying in it for twelve years, of which five have
already passed and seven are still ahead.

"Tell me now what you wish to receive from him, and I will do it for you.

Do not
underestimate me, and do not think that I am just a stubborn young man, unworthy of
my father.

Nothing is impossible for Yogis (Goans) who perform tapas (fasting)."
After listening to him, the wise Mahasena greeted him with folded palms and said,
"O son of the Sage!

If you are going to fulfill my wish, then first I want to make
a small request to your wise father when he comes out of his samadhi.

I beg you to
help me in this, if it is not too much trouble for you." To this, the son of the
Sage replied: "Prince, your request is not easy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If you are going to fulfill my wish, then first I want to make
a small request to your wise father when he comes out of his samadhi. I beg you to
help me in this, if it is not too much trouble for you." To this, the son of the
Sage replied: "Prince, your request is not easy. But, having promised to fulfill
your wish, I cannot now go back on my word. Now I must ask you to wait an hour and
a half, during which time you will be able to observe my yogic (Goyic) power. My
father is now in a state of transcendental peace. Can anyone wake him up by
external means? Wait! I will do it immediately through "subtle yoga."
Having said this, he sat down, withdrew his senses from the external world,
connected his inhalation and exhalation, exhaled, and remained motionless for a
short time; in this way, he entered the Mind of the Sage and, having stirred it,
returned to his own body. Immediately, the Sage returned to this world of sensory
perceptions and saw Mahasena right in front of him, stretching out before him and
praising him. He paused for a moment, comprehending the whole situation with the
power of his miraculous abilities. 47-49. "Remaining in perfect peace and bliss, he
called his son and said to him, "Boy, do not repeat such a mistake in the future. Anger destroys tapas (ASCeticism). Tapas (Fasting) is only possible in this case,
and it can progress unhindered only because the king protects the Yogis (Goes). Hiding a sacred horse is reprehensible and is never approved of by virtuous people. Be a good boy and return the horse and the princes immediately. Do it right now so
that the prayers can take place on the appointed day."
50. "Upon receiving these instructions, the son of the Sage immediately cooled his
anger. He climbed the hill, returned with the horse and the princes, and freed them
with great pleasure.

--- PAGE BREAK ---51-53.

Mahasena sent the princes with the horse to the city.

He was surprised by
what he saw and, greeting the Sage, asked him respectfully, "Teacher, please tell
me how the horse and the princes were hidden in the hill." Then the Sage replied:
54-66.

"Listen, O king, I was once an emperor who ruled an empire surrounded by
seas.

After many years of such reign, God's mercy descended upon me, and I
developed a distaste for this world (Yavi), as if I were nothing but rubbish in the
light of inner Consciousness.

I renounced the kingdom in favor of my sons and
retired to this forest.

My dutiful wife went with me.

For several years we
performed tapas (ASKezu).

Once my wife embraced me, and this son was born to her
while I was in samadhi (Nirvana).

She brought me to my senses, left the baby with
me, and departed from this world (Yavi).

I raised this boy with love and care.

When
he grew up, he heard that I had once been a king; he wanted to become a king like
me and begged me to grant his request.

I initiated him into Yoga (Faith), which he
practiced with such success that he was able, through the power of his desire, to
create his own world in this hill, which he now rules.

The horse and the princes
were kept there.

Now I have told you the secret of this hill." After hearing this
answer, Mahasena asked again:
67.

"I listened with great interest to your wonderful story about this hill.

I
want to see it.

Can you grant my request?"
68.

"Hearing this request, the Sage ordered his son: "Boy!

Show him this place
and grant his request."
69.

"Having said this, the Sage again entered samadhi; and his son departed with
the prince.

70.

"The Sage's son entered the hill without any difficulty and disappeared,
but Mahasena was unable to enter the hill, so he called out to the Sage's son.

71.

"He also called out to the prince from inside the hill.

Then the Sage's son
came out of the hill and said to the prince:
72-74.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"He also called out to the prince from inside the hill. Then the Sage's son
came out of the hill and said to the prince:
72-74. "O prince, this hill cannot be penetrated with the meager yogic powers that
you possess. It will be too dense a barrier for you. But, be that as it may, you
must get inside the hill, as my father commanded. Leave your gross body now in this
tunnel hidden by bushes; enter the hill with me in your mental sheath." The prince
could not do this, and he asked:
75. "Tell me, Saint, how should I shed this body? If I do it by force, I will
die. 76. The Saint smiled at this and said, "It seems that Yoga (the knowledge of God)
is unknown to you. All right, close your eyes."
77. "The prince closed his eyes, and then the Saint immediately entered
his consciousness (mind) and pulled the prince's subtle body out of the
gross body, leaving the latter in the tunnel. 78. "Then, through his Yogic Power, the Saint entered the hill with the prince's
subtle body, which he had pulled out of the gross body, in order to fulfill the
prince's desire to see the empire inside the hill. 79. "There he joined the subtle body of the prince, who was in a state of sleep
due to the absence of a gross body, with another gross body, born of the will of
the Saint, and awakened him. And then the prince saw himself in the midst of an
immense space, while the Saint held him. 80-82. "Looking in all directions, he became alarmed and turned to the Saint: 'Do
not abandon me, or I will perish in this vast space.' Noticing the prince's fear,
the Saint smiled and said: 'Prince! I will never

--- PAGE BREAK ---.

Have no doubt about that.

Now look around and see the whole world inside the
hill, and get rid of all your fear."
83.

"The prince gathered all his courage and looked around.

Below, he saw the
heavens shrouded in the darkness of night, with stars shining in the darkness.

84-86.

"Heading toward those heavens, he saw the moon, which seemed to grow larger
and larger as he approached it.

When he was close to it, he was paralyzed by the
cold emanating from the moon, but the Saint saved him.

Then he went to the Sun and was severely burned by its rays.

Healed again
by the Saint's Yogic Power, he then saw a great world that resembled
Heavenly Paradise.

87.

"He went with the Saint to a huge mountain covered with snow, observing the
whole world from its summit.

88.

"Endowed with miraculously sharp eyesight, he was able to see distant countries
and discovered other worlds beyond.

89-90.

"In those distant worlds, darkness reigned in some places; in others, the
Earth (planet) was golden; there were oceans and separate continents in the middle
of them, crossed by rivers and strewn with mountains; there were Heavenly worlds
inhabited by Angels (Gods), demons (devils), humans, Spirits (Legions), and others.

91-92a.

"The prince saw that in Satya Loka, Vaikuntha, and on the shining mountain
Kailash (World), the Saint remained in the form of the Creator, Preserver, and
Destroyer, respectively, dividing himself into three essences for the purpose of
creating, sustaining, and dissolving all worlds.

92b-93a.

"He also saw that at the same time, the Saint always remained in the
form of the emperor who ruled this world.

93b-95.

"The prince was shocked, unable to express his amazement at observing the
Saint's yogic power.

Then the sage's son said to him, "Prince!

The inspection of
these worlds lasted only a single day according to the local time, while in the
world we are accustomed to, twelve thousand years have already passed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then the sage's son said to him, "Prince! The inspection of
these worlds lasted only a single day according to the local time, while in the
world we are accustomed to, twelve thousand years have already passed. So, let us
return to the outer world where my father lives."
96. "Having said this, he ascended back to Heaven with the prince, helping
him to leave the hill of Ganda (Hell Naga), and entered this familiar world
with him."
CHAPTER XIII - HOW WAKING AND SLEEPING ARE SIMILAR IN NATURE, AND OBJECTS ARE
ARE MERELY MENTAL IMAGES
1-2. The Sage's son put the prince to sleep, joined his subtle body with his gross
body, which had been left in the tunnel, and then woke him up. 3. Upon awakening, Mahasena discovered that the whole world had changed. People,
riverbeds, trees, reservoirs, etc. – everything was different. 4-30. He was amazed and asked the Saint:
"O great one! How long have we been observing your world? This world is different
from the one I am accustomed to!" When asked about this, the Sage's son replied to
Mahasena: "Listen, prince, this is the very world we were in and left behind to see
the one inside the hill. This outer world has undergone tremendous changes due to
the long period of time that has passed since then. We spent only one day exploring
the hill region; the same interval of time is equal to twelve thousand years in
this world; and it has changed greatly as a result. Look at the differences in
people's manners and language. Such changes are natural. I have often noticed such
changes before. Look here! This is the lord, my

--- PAGE BREAK ---father in samadhi (Nirvana).

Here you stood before, praising my father and begging
him.

There you see the hill in front of you.

By this time, your brother's descendants had grown to thousands.

What used to be
your country called Wanga (Svet Navi), with its capital city called Sundara
(Daria), is now a jungle swarming with jackals and wild animals.

Among your
brother's descendants is one named ViRaBah, who rules the capital city of ViShAla
on the banks of the KshIPr river in the country of MalVa; among your descendants is
SuSaRma, whose capital is VardhAna in the country of Dravids, on the banks of the
TambraBhArani river.

Such is the way of things in this world that it cannot remain
the same even for a short period of time.

During this time, the hills, rivers,
lakes, and relief of the Earth have changed.

Mountains have settled; plains have
risen high; deserts have become fertile; plateaus have turned into sandy areas;
stones have crumbled and become silt; silt and clay have sometimes hardened;
cultivated areas have become barren, and barren lands have become suitable for
cultivation; precious stones have become worthless, and trinkets have become
priceless; salt water has become pleasant to the taste, and drinkable water has
become brackish; in some countries there are more people than cattle, others are
inhabited by wild animals; and still others have become inhabited by poisonous
reptiles, insects, and parasites.

These are some of the changes that occur on Earth
over time.

But there is no doubt that this is the same Earth we were on before."
Mahasena, upon hearing what the Sage's son had said, fainted from the shock.

Then,
when his companion brought him to his senses, he was overcome with grief and
mourned the loss of his royal brother and brother's son, the loss of his own wife
and children.

After a short time, the Wise Man's son comforted him with wise words:
"Being a wise man, why do you grieve, and whose loss do you mourn?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then,
when his companion brought him to his senses, he was overcome with grief and
mourned the loss of his royal brother and brother's son, the loss of his own wife
and children. After a short time, the Wise Man's son comforted him with wise words:
"Being a wise man, why do you grieve, and whose loss do you mourn? A wise man never
acts aimlessly, for to act without insight is immature and foolish. Think now and
tell me what loss grieves you and what purpose your grief serves."
When asked about this, Mahasena, who was still inconsolable, replied: "How can such
a great sage as you not understand the cause of my grief? How is it that you seek
the cause of my sorrow when I have lost everything I had? A man is always sad, even
when only one member of his family dies. I have lost all my friends and relatives,
and you still ask me why I am sad."
31-48. The Sage's son continued with a smile: "Prince! Tell me now. Is this
immersion in grief a hereditary virtue? Will you sin if you do not immerse yourself
in sorrow over this? Or do you hope to regain your loss through such sorrow? Prince! Think carefully and tell me what benefit you will gain from this sorrow. If
you consider it insurmountable, then listen to what I have to say. "Such a loss is nothing new. Your distant ancestors died even earlier. Have you
ever mourned their loss? If you say that blood ties now cause you grief, then think
about the worms in your parents' bodies that feed on their flesh. Why don't you
consider these worms your relatives, and why doesn't their loss cause you grief? Think, prince! Who are you? Whose deaths are the cause of your current grief? Are you a body, or are you something else (Mind)? The body is simply a collection
of various substances. Damage to any of its components is damage to the whole
body. There is no moment when at least

--- PAGE BREAK ---one of its components was not subject to change.

But the removal of waste
products from the body is not a loss for the body.

"Those whom you called your
brother and so on are just bodies; bodies are made of gross matter; when they
are lost, they return to
the coarse matter of the Earth; and coarse matter ultimately turns into energy
(food for worms).

So where is the loss?

"In fact, you are not the body.

You own the body and call it your own, just as you
do with an item of clothing that you own for a while.

What, then, is the difference
between your body and your clothes?

Do you have any doubts about this conclusion?

Being something different from your own body, what relationship can there be
between you and another body?

Have you ever demanded such a relationship, for
example, with your brother's clothes?

Why then mourn the loss of bodies that are in no way different from items of
clothing?

You say "my" body, "my" eyes, "my" life, "my" mind, and so on—
I ask you to tell me now, who exactly are you?"
After hearing this answer, Mahasena thought about it and, unable to solve the
problem, asked permission to leave for a while to consider it carefully.

Then he
returned and said with deep humility: "Teacher, I do not see (do not know) who I
am.

I have considered this question, and yet I do not understand.

My sadness is
completely natural; I cannot explain it.

"Teacher, I seek your protection.

Please tell me what this sadness is.

Everyone is
overwhelmed with sadness when a relative dies.

No one seems to know their own
Essence, just as no one mourns all losses.

"I bow before you as your disciple.

Please explain this matter to me."
When asked about this, the Sage's son said to Mahasena:
49.

"Listen, prince!

People are misled by the illusion (maya) created by His Divine
Majesty, the Great Ra-M-Ha.

They suffer because of their ignorance of their own
Essence.

Their suffering is meaningless.

50.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Their suffering is meaningless. 50. "As long as ignorance (delusion) about one's own Essence exists, suffering will
continue. 51-52. "Just as a sleeping person is foolishly frightened by his own dreams, or as
a fool is deluded by snakes appearing in a fakir's performance, so too does a
person who is ignorant of his own Essence experience fear. 53-55. "Just as a sleeping person who has awakened from the nightmares he
experienced in his dream, or a person who has attended a fakir's performance and
then learned about the unreal nature of hypnotic creations, is no longer afraid of
them, laughing at those who are still afraid, so too, one who has realized the
Supreme Essence not only does not grieve himself, but also laughs at the grief of
others. Therefore, O brave hero, break down this impregnable fortress of illusion
(maya) and conquer your sufferings through the Realization of the Supreme Being. In
the meantime, be discerning, not foolish. 56-58. After listening to the Wise Man's son, Mahasena said, "Teacher, your
examples do not apply to the situation at hand. Dreams and magic are later
recognized as illusory, whereas this solid and concrete universe is always real and
full of meaning. It is irrefutable and exists continuously.

--- PAGE BREAK ---How can it be compared to a fleeting dream?" Then the son of the Sage replied:
59.

"Listen to what I say.

Your opinion that the examples are not relevant is a
double delusion, like a dream within a dream.

60-70.

"Look at the dream from the perspective of the sleeping person and tell me,
do the trees not provide shade for passersby, and do the fruits on them not ripen
for the benefit of others?

Is the dream perceived as something unreal and fleeting
during the dream itself?

"Are you saying that sleep turns out to be false after waking up from sleep?

Does
the waking world become false in your dream or in deep sleep without dreams?

"Are you saying that the waking state is not false because there is continuity
after you wake up?

But is there no continuity in your dreams, which occur day after
day?

"If you say that this is not obvious, then tell me—isn't the continuity of the
waking world disrupted every moment of your life?

"Are you saying that hills, seas, and the Earth itself are truly unchanging
phenomena, even though their appearance is constantly changing?

Isn't the world of
dreams just as continuous, with its land, mountains, rivers, friends, and
relatives?

"Do you still doubt its permanent nature?

Then extend the same reasoning to the
nature of the waking world, and recognize it as equally impermanent.

"It is easy to discern the transient nature of such ever-changing objects as the
body, trees, rivers, and islands.

Even mountains are not unchanging and immutable,
for their contours change due to erosion caused by rains and waterfalls, the
destructive actions of humans, wild boars and wild animals, insects, thunder,
lightning, and storms, and so on.

You will notice similar changes in the seas and
on land.

"Therefore, I tell you that you must examine this question carefully.

Perhaps you
will put forward the following arguments:
71-76.

"Sleep and wakefulness resemble each other in their intermittent harmony,
like a chain made up of links.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Perhaps you
will put forward the following arguments:
71-76. "Sleep and wakefulness resemble each other in their intermittent harmony,
like a chain made up of links. There is no unbroken continuity in any object,
because each new phenomenon implies the disappearance of the previous one. But it
is impossible to deny the continuity of the basic principles underlying objects
(sleep and wakefulness)! "Since the generation of sleep is erased and made false as a result of the present
experience (waking), what distinction will you make between the fundamental
principles underlying the objects of sleep and the objects of waking? "If you say
that sleep is an illusion and that its basic principles are equally illusory, while
this creation is not negated in the same way, and that its basic principles must
therefore be true, then I ask you: what is an illusion? It is defined by the
transient nature of our senses, which is nothing more than the appearance and
disappearance of sensations. Doesn't everything disappear in deep sleep? However, if you insist that mutual
contradiction is unreliable as evidence and therefore proves nothing, it is
equivalent to saying that only self-evident vision provides the best evidence. But
surely people like you do not have a true understanding (vision) of the nature of
things.

--- PAGE BREAK ---77-79.

"Therefore, take my word for it that this world is just like the world of
dreams.

Long periods of time also pass in dreams.

Therefore, the meaningfulness and
continuous nature of all aspects are similar in both states.

Just as you are
undoubtedly conscious in your waking state, you are equally conscious in your
sleeping state.

80.

"And since these two states are so similar, why don't you mourn the loss
of your relationships that took place in your dreams?

81.

"The waking universe seems so real to everyone only because of habit.

If
it is presented as empty, it will dissolve into emptiness.

82-83.

"At first, a person imagines something; then reflects on it; and then,
through repeated or prolonged engagement with it, makes it true, unless it is
contradicted by something else.

As a result, the world seems as real as a person is
accustomed to seeing it.

My world, which you have visited, is proof of this
statement; let us go around the hill and see."
85.

Having said this, the son of the Wise Man took the prince, walked around the
hill with him, and returned to their previous place.

86-87.

Then he continued: "Listen, O prince!

The circumference of the hill is only
four kilometers, and yet you saw the entire universe inside it.

Is it real or
false?

Was it a dream or something else?

What happened there in one day is equal to
twelve thousand years here, so what is correct (real)?

Think about it and tell me.

Surely you cannot distinguish it from a dream, and you cannot help but conclude
that the world is nothing more than imagination.

My world will disappear instantly
if I stop contemplating it.

"Therefore, be convinced that the nature of this world is like the nature of a
dream, and do not sink into sadness because of your brother's death.

90.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Therefore, be convinced that the nature of this world is like the nature of a
dream, and do not sink into sadness because of your brother's death. 90. Just as the creations of sleep are images moving across the screen of the mind,
so too is this world, including yourself, the reverse side of the image displayed
by Pure Mind; this world is nothing more than an image in the Mirror (on the
screen). See how you feel after you become confident in this. Will you rejoice in
your dream at ascending the throne, or will you be depressed by the death of a
relative? 91. "Realize that the Supreme Being is a self-sufficient Mirror (screen) that
projects and manifests this world. The Supreme Being is Pure, unblemished
Consciousness. Do not delay! Realize this quickly and attain Transcendental Bliss!"
CHAPTER XIV - WHY THE UNIVERSE IS MERELY AN IMAGINATION; HOW TO GAIN THE STRONG
WILL THAT CAN CREATE IT; AND HOW TO GAIN THE HIGHEST TRUTH
1-6. After listening to the Wise Man's son, Mahasen began to reflect with all
clarity and seriousness; he came to the conclusion that this world is like a dream,
and got rid of his sadness. As his understanding became deeper and stronger, the
peace of his mind remained undisturbed. Then he asked his companion, "Great and
wise Saint! You know both this world and the one beyond it. I do not believe that
there is anything you do not know. Please answer me now: "How can you say that everything is pure imagination? No
matter how much I imagine, my imagination does not materialize. But you created the
universe with the power of your Will. And yet, how

--- PAGE BREAK ---way do time and space differ in these creations?

Please tell me." When asked this,
the Sage's son replied:
7.

"Will conceives effectively or ineffectively according to how uniform it
is or how interrupted it is by indecision (doubts).

8.

"Do you not know that this world is the result of God's desire?

It appears
real and permanent because the Lord's original desire is so powerful.

9.

"Whereas the world you create is not taken seriously by anyone, and your own
distrust renders it futile.

10-15.

Concepts (images) are realized (materialized) for the following various
reasons: on the basis of natural activity, as in the case of God, the One Creator;
through the possession of living precious stones, as in the case of sorcerers and
magicians; with the help of herbs, as in the case of healers; through the practice
of Yoga (Veda Ra), as in the case of Yogis (Goyas); the miraculous power of spells
(prayers), as in the case of certain siddhas (Immortal Sages); the power of tapas
(fasting), as in the case of some Sages (Rahmanis); and on the basis of blessings
(Holy Scriptures) bestowed by the Architect of the Universe (God).

"To make a new concept effective, it is necessary to forget old associations, and
the new concept will continue only until it is blocked by the old ones.

A concept
is strong if it is not hindered by any previous concept, which otherwise destroys
it.

It is effective only when it is strong and full of Will; in this way, even
great things become achievable.

16.

"Your concepts (images) are not realized (do not materialize) for the above
reason.

Therefore, you must practice concentration of thought if you want your own
creations to take place.

17-23.

"Now I will tell you about the differences in time and space.

You are not
knowledgeable about the affairs of this world, and therefore you are intrigued by
all this.

Now I will explain the appearance of these differences.--- PAGE BREAK ---

You are not
knowledgeable about the affairs of this world, and therefore you are intrigued by
all this. Now I will explain the appearance of these differences. The sun helps
everyone to see, but it blinds owls; water is the habitat of fish, but humans drown
in it; fire burns humans but is food for the Tittiri birds (the Dragons of Iria);
fire is usually extinguished by water, but it reigns supreme in the middle of the
ocean during the Dissolution of the world (Yavi). Such inconsistencies are observed
everywhere. Humans and animals participate in actions with the help of their limbs and senses,
while Spirits (Light and Dark) do so with the help of the bodies of other beings
(including humans). Such cases are innumerable. Their explanation is as follows:
24-25. "Vision is inherent in the eye, and it cannot exist without it. A yellow eye
sees everything as yellow, and a damaged eye creates a dual image of a single
object. 26-32. "Thus, incorrect vision is a direct result of abnormal vision. It is said
that the Karandaqi (red-skinned De'Aqi/As), who live on the eastern island, see
everything red; likewise, the inhabitants (half-
)The islands of Ramanaka (Rome/Italy) see everything upside down. You can hear much
stranger stories of this kind, which are caused by abnormal vision. All these
visual distortions can be corrected with appropriate treatment. The same applies to
other senses, including the mind. The relationship between space and objects, and
between time and events, corresponds to how you yourself assess them; there are no
inherent internal relationships between them. 33. Having thus far provided evidence that objects and events occur only
internally, he moves on to prove that there is nothing "external" to the Supreme
Being. What people refer to as

--- PAGE BREAK ---"external" is the Source and Support of the Universe, like a screen in relation to
the image shown on it.

34-40.

"There could be nothing external to that 'exterior' except Its own Body (the
Universe).

How can It (the Universe) be made external from "externality"?

For
example, when you say "beyond the hill," the hill is removed from the space
surrounding it; it is not included in it.

But the body is observed in space just
like a pot.

"Therefore, the body must be external to the observer.

That which is observable is
within the range of illumination (cognition): if it is outside these limits, it
cannot be seen (known).

Therefore, illuminated (cognizable) objects must be within
the field of vision of the Source of Light.

The body, etc., are illuminated (known)
because they themselves are objectified and are objects of consideration.

The illuminated (cognizable) and the Light Source cannot be one and the same.

"Again, the Light Source cannot be objectified; for is there an observer other than
Himself?

And how can the illumination (cognition) through which He sees (knows)
exist separately from Himself?

It is impossible to maintain the view that the
Source of Light provides Light and serves as an object existing separately from the
observer.

Therefore, the Source of Light cannot allow any external admixture in
itself, and it is illumination (Knowledge) in Perfection—only One, being the
essence of all and everything.

41.

"It extends as time and space; they (time and space) are infinite and
perfect, being involved as the Source of Light, illumination (knowledge), and the
illuminated (the known).

42.

"As for the internal or external, everything is contained in illumination
(knowledge).

How then can something be "external" unless it is like the top of a
mountain?

43.

"Thus, the entire universe abides in Illumination, which shines
independently, by itself, everywhere and always.

44-45.

"This Illumination is His Transcendent Majesty, the Great Ra-M-Ha.--- PAGE BREAK ---

44-45. "This Illumination is His Transcendent Majesty, the Great Ra-M-Ha. Truly,
there is no one and nothing but Him. 46. "He supports everything with His Perfection, just as a Mirror (screen) holds
images within itself. He is the Source of Light in relation to that which is
illuminated. 47-49. "The object is immersed in illumination, like the image of a
city in a Mirror (on a screen). Just as the city is not separate from the Mirror,
so the Universe is not separate from Consciousness. Just as the image is an
integral part of a pure, smooth, homogeneous, and unified mirror, so too is the
Universe an integral part of Perfect, Whole, Homogeneous, and Unified
Consciousness, namely, the Supreme Essence. 50. "The world cannot be clearly revealed with all its obviousness. Space is
simply emptiness that serves to accommodate materials. 51. "The universe is always and in everything a manifestation of the Supreme
Essence. Then the question arises as to how Consciousness, being emptiness,
is at the same time dense. 52. "Just as a mirror, although dense and impenetrable, contains an image, so
Pure Consciousness is dense and impenetrable, and yet It shows the Universe by
virtue of its self-sufficiency. 53. Although Consciousness is all-pervading, dense, and One, it still holds within
itself a moving and unshakable creation, wonderful in its diversity, without any
immediate or original cause for this. 54-55. "Just as a mirror (screen) remains unaffected by the passage of various
images (pictures) in it, and continues to reflect as clearly as

--- PAGE BREAK ---before, so too does one Consciousness illuminate both waking and sleeping states,
which can be verified by proper meditation.

56.

"O prince!

Examine your dreams and mental images again.

Although they are
perfect in every way, they are still only thoughts.

57.

The consciousness that permeates them (images) clearly remains unblemished
before the creation of the world (Yavi) or after its dissolution; even during the
existence of the world, it remains unaffected, just as a mirror (screen) remains
unaffected by images.

58.

"Although Absolute Consciousness is imperturbable, unblemished, full, dense,
and One, being self-sufficient, it nevertheless manifests within itself what
appears to be "external," just as a mirror (screen) reflects space as something
external to itself.

59.

"This is the beginning of Creation; this first manifestation is called
ignorance, or darkness (ignorance).

Arising as an infinitely small fraction of the
Whole, it (ignorance) manifests itself as if it were external to the Whole from
which it arose, and possesses the property of ego (desire).

60.

"When, in the process of successive manifestation, the Supreme Being ceases to
abide in all Its Fullness in the Transcendental Consciousness, then that aspect of
Reality appears which is devoid of the fullness of Self-Awareness (Light).

This
aspect is called "avyakta," or unmanifest, and it is also described as
"jadaShakti," or inert (dark) Energy.

This manifestation is conditioned by hidden
tendencies that will be manifested later.

61.

The Consciousness that illuminates the "external" is called the mind, while
the individual who experiences the feeling "I am Mind" is the individual who is
aware of Himself.

62.

When awareness of the "external," combined with the sense of "I" (EGO),
encompasses the entire comprehensible space as "I am part of the Higher
Mind," this is called Bliss.

63.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When awareness of the "external," combined with the sense of "I" (EGO),
encompasses the entire comprehensible space as "I am part of the Higher
Mind," this is called Bliss. 63. "When later, upon discarding the abstract separation of the Higher Essence
from the 'external', its clear identity with the space of the Universe occurs,
this is called Awareness of Oneness with God. The study of the last two steps is
True Knowledge. 64. "All these five states of the Soul are pure because they belong to a state
that is still uniform (undivided), like the unmanifested power of growth in an
ungerminated seed. 65. "After the power of Will makes the division manifest, the inanimate
part (mind) prevails over the animate part (body), which is opposite to
the previous state. 66. "Once the division is clearly established, this inanimate superiority is
called maya-shakti (insight); it is like a sprout that has sprouted from a
seed. 67. "Consciousness, hidden by the manifested multiplicity, with its nature
limited and concealed by the five sheaths-aspects of the Soul (kanchuks), is
now called Purusha (Pu) or Soul. 68-69. "These five sheaths of the Soul, or aspects, are: Kala - personal
creativity, Vidya - personal Knowledge, Raga - desire, Kaala - time, and Niyati -
the established course of events, Destiny. Purusha is endowed with these aspects. 70. "The memory of individuals, composed of inclinations acquired as a result
of participation in various activities in previous births,

--- PAGE BREAK ---is now supported by the Mind and remains in the form of Praeriti (the Nature
of the Mind).

71.

"This Prakriti is threefold because the fruits of actions are of three
kinds; it manifests as three states of life—waking, dreaming, and deep sleep
without dreams; then it takes the name chitta (mind).

72.

This Prakriti is called memory in deep sleep without dreams, and chitta
(mind) in the other two states.

It always contains the inanimate aspect of
the mind's inclinations and the animate aspect of the Mind.

73(-74).

"When the tendencies still remain in temporary inactivity without being
exhausted, their totality is called avyakta (unmanifested); differences arise only
in chitta (mind), and in deep sleep there are no differences among individuals, so
this is Prakriti, which is known as chitta (mind) when differences manifest
(awakening).

75.

"Therefore, the mind (chitta) is an individual when the animated
(manifested) aspect comes into play, and the same mind is avyakta
(unmanifested) when Prakriti, the inanimate (unmanifested) aspect, asserts
its rights.

76.

"This memory is threefold, according to its functions, namely: ego (EGO),
consciousness (Mind), and mind (chitta).

77.

"When it is influenced by the three qualities, it manifests itself in the
greatest diversity as follows: under the influence of the quality of Sattva
(Harmony), it becomes the five senses: hearing, sight, touch, taste, and smell;
under the influence of the quality of Rajas (activity) - the five organs: speech,
hands, feet, organs of excretion and reproduction; Tamas (inactivity) - the five
elements: earth, air, fire, water, and ether.

78.

The Supreme Mind plays with the Universe in a similar way, remaining an
untouched witness to His own Creation at all times.

79.

"The existing Creation (Reality) is a mental creation, created by the Will
Power of the Primordial Being, the Supreme God - the Great Ra-M-Ha.

80.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"The existing Creation (Reality) is a mental creation, created by the Will
Power of the Primordial Being, the Supreme God - the Great Ra-M-Ha. 80. "The principle of awareness of 'you' and 'I' is the essence of creation of any
kind; such awareness is a manifestation of Transcendental Consciousness; there can
be no differences in It itself, just as there are no differences between the space
enclosed in a pot and the space outside it. 81. "The diversity manifested in creation is determined exclusively by the
certainties or distinctions that limit Consciousness (Mind); these certainties or
limitations, such as the body and age restrictions, are mental images of the
Creator, consistent with the past qualities (merits) of the individual; when the
creative Will power expires, decay and a complete absence of differentiation and
diversity ensue. 82. "As for your Willpower, it is suppressed by the Creator, but when this
obstacle is overcome by the above-mentioned methods, your Willpower will also
become effective. 83. "Time, space, gross creation, etc. manifest themselves according to the
images of the person who conceives them. 84-86. "A certain period of time is only one day according to my calculation of
time, while it is twelve thousand years according to this world (Yavi); a space
about four kilometers long is infinite according to me, and contains the entire
universe. Thus, they are both true and untrue at the same time, according to
different points of view.

--- PAGE BREAK ---87-88.

"In the same way, you too, like me, imagine within yourself a hill, as well
as time in a subtle sense.

Then contemplate all creation within them; all this will
continue as long as your concentration lasts—even practically forever, if your Will
is strong enough.

"Therefore, I say that this world is merely a figment of the
imagination.

89.

"O prince!

This world shines within the manifested Conscious Essence.

Therefore, what appears to be the external world (Yavi) is in reality an image on
the screen of the mind.

90.

"Thus, Consciousness is both the screen and the images on it, and
therefore yogis (Wizards) are able to see what is very far from them and
notice what happened a long time ago, etc.

91.

They can cross any distance in an instant and perceive everything as
clearly as if it were right in front of them.

92.

"Therefore, realize that the world (Yavi) is just an image on the Mirror
(screen) of Consciousness, develop the contemplation "I am Mind," abide as a
Pure Being, and thus get rid of this delusion about the reality of the world
(Yavi).

93-97.

"Then you will become like me, being self-sufficient and independent."
DattaTrey continued:
"Listening to this conversation with the Sage's son, the prince overcame his
delusion; his Mind was purified, and he understood the ultimate Goal (of Life).

Then he began to practice samadhi (meditation) and became self-sufficient,
independent of any external factor, and lived a long and happy life.

He ceased to
identify himself with the body and became Absolute (Perfect), like Transcendental
Space, and ultimately attained Liberation (Immortality).

So you see that the
universe is just a mental image, as stable as the power of Will, and nothing more.

It is not independent of the Supreme Being.

Explore this question for yourself,
and your delusion will gradually lose its power and disappear."
CHAPTER XV - WHAT NEEDS TO BE KNOWN AND WHAT DOESN'T, AND ABOUT THE NATURE OF THE
HIGHEST ESSENCE
1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is not independent of the Supreme Being. Explore this question for yourself,
and your delusion will gradually lose its power and disappear."
CHAPTER XV - WHAT NEEDS TO BE KNOWN AND WHAT DOESN'T, AND ABOUT THE NATURE OF THE
HIGHEST ESSENCE
1. Listening to Dattatreya's story about the wonderful hill city, Rama became
more and more amazed. 2. With his clear mind, he immersed himself in reflection on his Teacher's
teachings, and then returned to Him and asked Him again:
3. "Teacher, I have considered the meaning of Your teachings, presented in the
form of magnificent parables that You have told me. 4. "I understand that only Mind is real and unique, and that objects are merely
unreal images, like a city reflected in a mirror. 5. "His Transcendent Majesty, the Great Ra-M-Ha, is that Consciousness which
manifests as the Supreme Mind and is aware of the entire range of phenomena, from
the unmanifest state of sleep to this world, passing in rapid succession within
Him. 6. "All of them are undoubtedly conditioned by the self-sufficiency of this
Consciousness, and they arise without any immediate cause. This is what I
understood after deep reflection. 7. "But this Mind is considered to be beyond Knowledge because it always remains
as Pure Knowledge itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---8.

"I do not understand how He (God) can be realized if He transcends this
Knowledge (of God).

Without realizing this, the Goal of Human Life cannot be
attained.

9.

"The Goal of human life is Liberation (Union with God).

What is its nature?

If
someone can be Liberated during their lifetime, then how is the course of their
Liberated life regulated, if this is possible at all?

10.

"There are Sages who are engaged in activity.

What is the relationship
between the world of activity and their Pure Conscious Essence?

11.

"How can they engage in activity while remaining in Absolute Consciousness all
the time?

Such Consciousness can only be of one kind, and Liberation (Immortality),
to be effective, can also only be of one kind.

12-17.

"Why, then, are these differences found in the lives of the Jnanas (Sages)?

Some of them are active; some teach the Scriptures; some worship God; some remain
in samadhi (Nirvana); some lead an ascetic lifestyle and exhaust themselves; some
give clear instructions to their disciples; some rule their kingdoms very
righteously; some openly argue with other schools of thought; some write down their
teachings and experiences; others feign ignorance; a few even commit reprehensible
and disgusting acts; but all of them are known in the world as wise men.

18.

"How can there be such differences in their lives when there can be no
difference in the state of Liberation, which is common to all?

Or are there
stages in the attainment of Knowledge (Faith) and Liberation?

19.

"I beg You to enlighten me on these questions, for I am eager to learn the
Truth and bow before You as my only Teacher."
20.

When asked about this, Dattatreya was pleased with the questions and replied
to the worthy disciple as follows:
21.

"Worthy Rama!

You are truly ready to achieve that goal, because you have now
embarked on the right path of inquiry.

22.

"It is God's grace that has set you on the right path of inquiry.--- PAGE BREAK ---

22. "It is God's grace that has set you on the right path of inquiry. Can
anyone achieve anything worthwhile without the Lord's grace? 23. "The beneficial work of the Divine grace that dwells within you is
completed when the turning of your own mind inward increases in strength day
by day. 24-25. "What you have said is absolutely true; you have correctly understood the
nature of Consciousness, but you have not yet realized it. Knowing the properties
of a thing without actual experience of that thing is as useless as not knowing the
thing at all. 26. "The true experience of the Supreme Being (Liberation) is even the absence
of the awareness 'I am'. Can the world (Yavi) remain after the absence of such
awareness? Second-hand knowledge is no better than the memory of a dream. 27. "Just as access to treasures in a dream is useless, so is second-hand
knowledge. 28. "I will explain this to you clearly using an example from a very ancient
story. Once upon a time, there was a very virtuous king who ruled the city of
Videha. 29. "This king was called Janaka (Soul of God), and he was very wise and
knowledgeable both in this world and beyond. Once, he was performing rituals to
worship God, who dwells in all things in the form of the Supreme Being. 30. "On this occasion, all the Brahmins (Rahmans), pandits (scholars),
hermits (sages), critics, those knowledgeable in the Vedas, those
participating in sacrificial rites, etc. gathered there.

--- PAGE BREAK ---31.

"At the same time, Varuna, the lord of the waters, wanted to perform a
similar sacrifice, but the worthy people did not accept his invitation.

32-37.

"For they were appeased by Janaka, who honored them properly.

Then Varuna's son, who was a great debater and mastered the art of argument, came
to them.

He took the form of a Brahmin to lure the Brahmins who had come to the
king.

Entering the royal chamber, he duly blessed the king and addressed him before
the entire assembly with the following words: "O king, your assembly is not as good
as it should be.

It resembles a beautiful lake of lotuses spoiled by crows,
jackdaws, and herons; it would be better without this mixture of incompetent
representatives.

I do not find here even one individual who would be an ornament to
this great assembly, like a swan on a beautiful lake of lotuses.

May God bless you!

I do not want to have anything to do with this crowd of fools."
38-41.

"Being thus insulted by the son of Varuna, the whole assembly turned in
anger against him:
"You, Brahmin charlatan!

How dare you insult everyone here?

What knowledge have you
learned that we lack?

A wicked man like you is just a bluffing deceiver!

You must
not leave here until you prove your superiority over us.

Great pandits (scholars)
from all over the world have gathered here.

Do you really hope to surpass them all
with your learning?

Tell us what you have studied, in what do you imagine yourself
to be more experienced than us!" Challenged to a contest by these words, Varuni
(son of Varuna) replied:
42-43.

"In a minute, I will surpass you all in debate; but the debate will take
place only on the condition that if I am defeated, you will throw me into the sea;
and if you are defeated, I will send you into the sea, one after another.

If you
agree to this condition, let us begin the dispute.

44-45.

"They agreed, and a fierce debate began.--- PAGE BREAK ---

44-45. "They agreed, and a fierce debate began. Soon the pandits (scholars) were
defeated by their opponent's deceptive logic, and they were thrown into the sea by
the hundreds. 46. "Then Varuna's servants took the drowned pandits and brought them to the
place where Varuna had planned to perform worship and rituals, where they were
received with due respect, which made them very happy. 47. "Among those who drowned in this way was a man named KahoEla. His son,
Ashtavakra, upon hearing of his father's fate, hurried to Janaki's palace and
challenged this debater, skilled in sophistry (deceptive argumentation), to a duel. Now the pretender was defeated and immediately sentenced to be thrown into the sea
by the young avenger. Then Varuni threw off his mask in the palace and brought back
all the people who had previously been drowned in the sea. KahoEla's son began to
swell with pride and behaved offensively in front of the assembly. The pandits
(scholars) felt humiliated and hurt by this young man. 51-52. "And then, at that moment, a hermit appeared right in the middle of them,
and the offended assembly turned to her for help. Inspiring them in their
expectations, the charming maiden with tangled locks and hermit's clothing was
honored by the king, and she spoke in a pleasant but firm voice:
53. "O child! Son of KahoEla! You have indeed attained a very high degree of
Perfection, since these Brahmins were saved by you after you defeated VaRuni in
debate. 54-56. "I want to ask you a short question, to which please give a direct,
unambiguous, and frank answer. What is this state, upon

--- PAGE BREAK ---attaining which Absolute Immortality is achieved; upon knowing which all
doubts and uncertainties disappear; and after affirming which all desires
disappear?

If you have realized that unlimited state, please tell me about it
directly." "Being asked by the hermit, the son of KahoEla replied with
confidence:
57-58.

"I know it.

Listen to what I say.

There is nothing in the world that I have
not yet learned.

I have studied all the sacred literature with great care.

Therefore, listen to my answer.

59-63.

"What you are asking about is the original and effective cause of the
universe; this cause has no beginning, middle, or end, and it is not affected by
time or place.

It is pure, unbroken, One Consciousness.

The whole world is
manifested in It, like a city in a mirror.

Such is the Transcendent State.

Upon
realizing it, a person becomes Immortal; then there is no room for doubt and
uncertainty, no more reason for ignorance, as there was before when observing
countless reflected images; and there will be no more room for desire (ego),
because Transcendence has already been experienced.

"It is also incomprehensible because there is no one who knows it except this state
itself.

"Hermit!

Now I have told you the Truth as it is contained in the Holy
Scriptures."
64-71.

"After Ashtavakra finished his speech, the hermit spoke again: "Young Sage!

What you have said is correct and accepted by all.

But I want to draw your
attention to the part of your answer where you acknowledge the unknowability of
that state due to the absence of a knower who would be beyond the mind; and also
that knowledge of Him bestows immortality and perfection.

How can these two
statements be reconciled?

Either admit that Consciousness is unknowable, that it is
not known to you, and thus conclude that it does not exist; or say that it exists
and that you have known it—and therefore it is not unknowable.--- PAGE BREAK ---

How can these two
statements be reconciled? Either admit that Consciousness is unknowable, that it is
not known to you, and thus conclude that it does not exist; or say that it exists
and that you have known it—and therefore it is not unknowable. "It is quite obvious that you are expressing second-hand Knowledge obtained from
the Holy Scriptures. It is clear that you have not Realized it, and that therefore
your Knowledge is not based on your own experience. "Think about it—your words themselves speak to this—you possess your own knowledge
of images, but not of the mirror. How can this be? "Tell me now, are you not ashamed of your evasiveness before King Janaka and his
assembly?"
"Upon receiving this remark from the hermit, Ashtavakra lost his gift of speech for
a moment, because he felt ashamed and humiliated; he bowed his head, pondering her
words. 72-73. "However, the young Brahmin could not find any satisfactory answer to her
question, and then he bowed before her with great humility: "O hermitess (Vedic
priestess)! Truly, I cannot find an answer to your question. I bow before you as
your disciple. I beg you, tell me how to reconcile these two statements from the
Holy Scriptures. But I assure you that I did not speak a deliberate lie, for I know
that any merits of a liar can be nullified by his lies, and he will be condemned as
unworthy and despicable."
74. "When asked in this way, the hermit was pleased with Ashtavakra's
sincerity and said to him in the presence of the entire assembly. 75-84. "Child, many, remaining ignorant of this sublime Truth, live in a state of
delusion. Dry polemics will not help.

--- PAGE BREAK ---achieving Divine Reality (Liberation), for It is well guarded on all sides.

Of all
the people gathered here now, no one has experienced Divine Reality except the king
and myself.

This is not a matter for discussion.

Even the most brilliant logic can
only help one approach It, but it can never help one comprehend It.

Although It is
beyond the reach of logic coupled with sharp intellect, It can still be Realized
(Attained) through service to God (asceticism) and the grace of God.

"O you who are
the son of the Sage, listen to me carefully, for this is difficult to understand,
even when it is heard and explained.

Hearing this a thousand times will be useless
if one does not verify these teachings through the study of the Supreme Being with
a concentrated mind.

Just as a prince who is deluded into thinking that the pearl
necklace that still hangs around his neck has been stolen by someone, and who is
desperately trying to find this necklace, cannot be convinced of the opposite by
mere words alone, but will believe it only when he finds it around his neck through
his own efforts, so, young man, no matter how intelligent a person may be, he will
never know his own Supreme Being through the simple teachings of others until he
realizes It for himself.

Otherwise, he will never be able to realize the Higher
Self if his mind is directed outward.

85-.

"A lamp illuminates everything around it, but it does not illuminate itself or
other lights.

It shines on its own, without other sources of light.

Things shine in
sunlight without the need for any other kind of illumination.

And although rays of
light do not need to be illuminated, do we say that they are unknown or that they
do not exist?

"Therefore, since this is the case with light and things, which thereby become
accessible to the conscious being, can you have any doubt about the Absolute
Consciousness, namely, the Supreme Being?

"Light and things, being inanimate, cannot possess Self-Consciousness.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Therefore, since this is the case with light and things, which thereby become
accessible to the conscious being, can you have any doubt about the Absolute
Consciousness, namely, the Supreme Being? "Light and things, being inanimate, cannot possess Self-Consciousness. However,
their existence or manifestation is beyond doubt. This means that they are self-
luminous. Can't you do the same thing with your mind turned inward to figure out if
the all-encompassing Supreme Being is conscious or unconscious? "That Absolute Awareness transcends the three states—waking, dreaming, and deep
sleep—and encompasses the entire universe, causing it to manifest. Nothing can be
comprehended without Its Light. "Would anything be revealed by you if there were no Consciousness? Even to say
that nothing is revealed by you requires the Light of Consciousness. Isn't your
awareness of your unawareness conditioned by Consciousness (Mind)? "If you want to discover His Eternal Light, then carefully examine whether this
Light exists by itself or not. Everyone fails in this examination, no matter how
educated and skilled they may be, because their mind is not turned inward, but
restlessly wanders, as it is directed outward. As long as thoughts arise, the
turning of the mind inward will not be achieved. Until the mind is turned inward,
the Supreme Being cannot be realized. Turning inward means the absence of desire (ego). How can the mind be focused
inward if desires are not abandoned? "Therefore, become dispassionate and dwell within the Supreme Being. Such dwelling
occurs spontaneously. It is realized after thoughts are eliminated and inquiry
(activity of the mind) ceases. Imprint this state in yourself after you come out
of it, and then you will know everything and the meaning of all this, which will
be both

--- PAGE BREAK ---comprehensible and incomprehensible.

With such awareness of the incomprehensible,
Eternal Immortality comes.

"Now I have finished my speech.

Accept my farewell greetings!

Farewell!

"But you
have not yet understood my words, because you have heard the Truth for the first
time.

This king, the wisest among men, will be able to help you understand.

Therefore, ask him again about this, and he will clarify your doubts." "When she
uttered these words, she received honorable recognition from the king and the
entire assembly, and then in the blink of an eye she dissolved into thin air and
disappeared from view.

"I have just told you, O Rama, the method of Self-realization."
CHAPTER XVI - ON CONSCIOUSNESS; THE RESTRAINT OF THE MIND; AND
SLEEP
1.

When Rama heard this story, he was amazed and asked the teacher to continue the
narrative.

2-5.

"Teacher, this ancient legend is amazing.

Please tell me what questions
Ashtavakra (the 8th stage of Faith) then asked the king, and what instructions he
received.

Until now, I have not heard this story, full of sublime Truths.

Please,
Teacher, continue the story, I am eager to hear it in its entirety."
Hearing this, Dattatreya, the great Sage and Teacher, continued the Holy narrative.

"Listen, O Brahman, to this conversation with King Janaka.

6-7.

"After the Holy hermit disappeared from view, dissolving into thin air,
Ashtavakra, the son of the Sage, asked Janaka, surrounded by a whole group of
learned men, to give a full explanation of the brief but mysterious speech of the
hermit (Vedic priestess).

Listen carefully to Janaka's answer, which I will now
convey to you.

8-9.

"Ashtavakra asked, 'O King Videhi, I am unable to understand this teaching of
the hermit (Vedic priestess) because of its brevity.

Therefore, O gracious Teacher,
please explain to me how I can comprehend the incomprehensible.' Hearing this,
Janaka replied, as if surprised:
10-13.

"O son of the Wise Man, listen to me!--- PAGE BREAK ---

Therefore, O gracious Teacher,
please explain to me how I can comprehend the incomprehensible.' Hearing this,
Janaka replied, as if surprised:
10-13. "O son of the Wise Man, listen to me! This Knowledge (Faith) is not
incomprehensible, nor does it remain unknown even for a moment. Tell me, how can
even the most capable of teachers lead someone to that which always remains
unknown? If the Guru can teach, it means that he knows what he is talking about. This Transcendental State is very easy to attain or may be almost unattainable
depending on the direction of the mind—it is attainable if it is turned inward,
remaining in peace, and vice versa, if it is turned outward and restless. This
could not be taught if it always remained unknown. 14. "The fact that the Vedas point to this only indirectly — through the statement
"not this, not that" — shows that Knowledge can be transmitted to others. "Everything you see becomes known precisely because of Pure Reason. 15-19. "Now carefully analyze your fundamental Consciousness, which, although it is
not conditioned by and separate from material objects, nevertheless illuminates
(knows) them all equally. Know that It is Truth. O Wise One! That which does not
shine with its own light can only be illuminated by the Mind, and it cannot be the
Mind itself. The Mind is that through which objects are known; it cannot be what it
is if it becomes an object of knowledge. The known must always be different from
the knowing Mind itself, otherwise it could not be known by that Mind. Mind in its
pure form cannot recognize particulars,

--- PAGE BREAK ---which are the properties of objects.

Therefore, objects take on forms.

Contemplate
the Absolute Mind attentively after removing everything extraneous (thoughts) from
it.

20.

"Just as a mirror (screen) acquires the colors of images, so Pure Mind takes
on various forms of objects because it holds them within itself.

21.

"In a similar way, Pure Mind can be manifested by removing from it everything
that can be known.

It cannot be known as possessing certain qualities and
properties, for it is the support of everything.

22.

"This, which is the Supreme Essence of the seeker, is incomprehensible.

Explore your true Supreme Essence in the manner described above.

23.

"You are not the body, not the senses, not the mind, because all of these
are transient.

The body is made up of food, so how can you be the body?

24.

"For the 'I' (Mind) transcends the body, senses, and mind during the
cognition of objects.

25.

"Since His Majesty, the Absolute Mind, always shines as the Supreme Being, or
"I" (the Supreme Mind), He knows everything and everyone.

In essence, you are Him.

26.

"Realize this yourself by turning your gaze inward.

You are nothing but Pure
Consciousness.

Realize this right now, for delay is not worthy of a good disciple.

He must realize the Supreme Essence at the moment of receiving this instruction.

27.

"When we speak of the need to turn your gaze inward, we do not mean your
physical eyes.

We mean the mind's eye, or gaze, for it is the eye of the eye that
sees clearly even in dreams.

28.

It is appropriate to say that the gaze should be directed inward, because
perception is only possible when the gaze is directed toward an object.

29-31.

"The gaze must be turned away from other objects and fixed on a specific
object in order to see it.

Otherwise, that object will not be perceived in its
entirety.

The fact that the gaze is not fixed on the object is the same as not
seeing it.

The same applies to hearing, touch, etc.

32.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The same applies to hearing, touch, etc. 32. "The same applies to the mind with its sensations of pain and pleasure,
which are not perceived if the mind is occupied with something else. 33. "And for all other perceptions, two conditions are required, namely, the
elimination of other perceptions and the focusing of attention on this one. But
Self-Realization differs from them in that it requires only one condition: the
elimination of all perceptions. 34. "I will tell you the reason for this. Although consciousness is
incomprehensible, it can still be perceived by a pure mind. 35-45. "Even learned men are confused about this issue. The external perceptions of
the mind depend on two conditions. "The first is the elimination of other perceptions, and the second is the fixation
of attention on a specific object of perception. If the mind is simply distracted
from other perceptions, it is in a neutral, impartial state in which there are no
perceptions of any kind. Therefore, focusing attention on a specific object is
necessary for the perception of external things. But since Consciousness is the
Supreme Essence, and It is not separate from the mind, focusing on it is not
necessary for its Realization. It is enough that other perceptions, namely
thoughts, be eliminated from the mind, and then the Supreme Essence will be
Realized. "If a person wants to choose one particular image among a number of others passing
before him like reflections in a mirror (on a screen), he

--- PAGE BREAK ---must remove his attention from the other images and fix it on that particular one.

"If, on the other hand, he wants to see the Space that reflects this image, it will
be enough for him to turn his attention away from the images, and then Space will
reveal itself without any attention on his part, for Space is constantly present
everywhere and is already reflected there.

However, it remained unnoticed because
inter-spatial images dominated the scene (screen).

"Space, being the supporting foundation of everything and inherent in everything,
becomes manifest only when attention is removed from the panorama of objects.

In
the same way, Consciousness supports everything and is inherent in everything,
always remaining perfect like Space, permeating the mind as well.

Removing
attention from other objects is all that is necessary for Self-Realization.

After
all, you would not claim that the Self-Shining Essence can be absent for even a
fraction of a second in any corner or nook?

46.

"Truly, there can be no moment or place where there is no Consciousness, for
its absence also means their absence.

Therefore, awareness (comprehension) of the
Supreme Essence becomes manifest through the simple withdrawal of attention from
things or thoughts.

47.

"The realization of the Supreme Essence requires only Absolute purity, but
not concentration of the mind.

For this reason, it is said that the Supreme
Essence is incomprehensible (meaning that it is objectively incomprehensible).

48.

"Therefore, it is also said that the only requirement for achieving Self-
Realization is purity of mind.

The only defilement of the mind is thought.

To make
the mind free from thoughts means to keep it pure.

49.

"Now it should be clear to you why purity of mind is so urgently required for
Self-Realization.

How can the Supreme Being be realized in the absence of such
purity?

50-51.

"And how is it possible for the Supreme Being not to be discovered when it
shines in a pure mind?--- PAGE BREAK ---

50-51. "And how is it possible for the Supreme Being not to be discovered when it
shines in a pure mind? All the prescriptions of the Holy Scriptures are directed
toward this one ultimate Goal. For example, selfless service, devotion to God, and
dispassion have no other goal before them. 52. "For transcendental Consciousness, that is, the Supreme Being, manifests itself
only in an unblemished mind."
After Janaka had said all this, Ashtavakra asked again:
53-54. "O king, if everything is as you say—that the mind, rendered inactive by the
elimination of thoughts, becomes completely pure and capable of manifesting the
highest Consciousness—then sleep will ensure this by itself, since it satisfies
your condition, and there is no need for any kind of effort."
55. When asked this by the young Brahmin, the king replied: "I will give a
comprehensive answer to your question. Listen carefully. 56-63. "It is true that the mind is abstracted in sleep. But in this case, its
Light is shrouded in Darkness, so how can it manifest its true nature? A mirror
covered with resin does not reflect images, but can it reflect any space? Would it
be enough, in that case, to remove the images in order to reveal the space
reflected in the mirror? Similarly, the mind, hidden by the dark veil of sleep,
becomes unsuitable for illuminating and manifesting thoughts. Would such an eclipse
of the mind reveal a glimmer of Consciousness?

--- PAGE BREAK ---Does a log, in front of which there is only one object and all others have been
removed, reflect the object simply because all others have been removed?

Reflection can only take place on a reflective surface, not on all surfaces.

Similarly, Self-Realization can only take place with an alert, conscious mind, not
with a dull or intoxicated one.

Newborn babies have no Self-Realization due to
their lack of alertness or awareness.

"Furthermore, explore further the analogy of a mirror covered with resin.

The
resin may prevent images from being seen, but it does not affect the quality of
the mirror, for the resin coating itself must still be reflected on the inside of
the mirror between the resin and the mirror.

Similarly, although the mind is
detached from dreams and wakefulness, it still remains under the power of dark
sleep and is not free from qualities (thoughts).

This becomes obvious when one
recalls the dark ignorance of sleep upon waking up.

64.

"Now I will tell you about the difference between sleep and samadhi
(Nirvana).

Listen carefully:
"There are two states of mind: Illumination and Contemplation (Reflection).

65.

"The first state is the connection of the mind with external objects when
it notices them, and the second is the contemplation of the object seen.

66.

"Illumination is not conditioned or determined by the limitations of
objects; contemplation is conditioned and determined by the limitations
relating to the objects perceived, and this is the stage preceding their clear
definition.

67.

At the preliminary stage of simple illumination, no differences are noted.

The thing itself is not yet defined, so illumination is considered to be
unconditioned, undefined.

68.

"The thing becomes defined later, and then it is said to be such and such.

This is the perception of the thing after reflection.

69-70.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is the perception of the thing after reflection. 69-70. "Reflection, again, is of two kinds: one is actual experience, called
'fresh,' and the other is reflection on that first experience, and it is called
memory (citta). The mind always functions in these two ways."
71-72. "Deep sleep without dreams is characterized by only one illumination of
sleep, and the experience continues uninterrupted for some time, while the waking
state is characterized by reflection, constantly interrupted by thoughts, and
therefore it cannot be said that it is ignorance (forgetfulness). Deep sleep is a state of forgetfulness, and although it consists solely of
illumination, it is still considered ignorance, for the same reason that light,
although shining, is considered lifeless. 73. "This conclusion is also recognized by the wise. Deep sleep, the first
born of Transcendence, is also called unmanifest, detached, or emptiness. 74. "The state of unmanifestation, or emptiness, is the basic state of
Consciousness, whose property is the absence of anything cognizable as such. Deep
sleep is what makes this absence known (illuminates it). Even in the waking state —
at the initial moment of perceiving another object — the mind remains in this state
(it is free from mental clutter). 75. "But this basic state is eclipsed (this experience is eliminated) by the
flow of thoughts that fill the mind immediately after the moment of perceiving
an object, when the phase of reflection on the object and its evaluation
begins. The wise say that the mind is immersed in deep sleep when it
illuminates the unmanifest state.

--- PAGE BREAK ---76.

"The disappearance of the mind, however, is not limited to deep sleep alone,
for it also occurs in the initial moment of perceiving things.

77.

"Now I will speak to you based on my own experience.

This subject puzzles even
the most accomplished individuals.

78.

"All three of these states, namely samadhi (Nirvana), deep sleep, and the
initial moment of perceiving objects, are characterized by the absence of mental
agitation, when only the basic, unmanifested state remains in the Consciousness.

79.

"The difference between them lies in the subsequent evaluation of the
corresponding states, which produces different perceptions.

80.

"Absolute Reality manifests itself in samadhi (Nirvana); emptiness or the
unmanifest state is a distinctive feature of sleep, and diversity is
characteristic of perception in the waking state.

81.

"The source of Light, however, is the same in all these states, and it always
remains unblemished.

Therefore, it is called Absolute Mind.

82.

"Samadhi and sleep are evident because their experience remains unbroken for a
measurable period of time, and this experience can be evaluated after awakening.

83.

"And the experience at the moment of realization remains unconscious due to
its fleeting and transient nature.

But samadhi and sleep cannot be realized at
the very moment they occur.

84.

"The state of wakefulness is interspersed with samadhi and sleep, which
seem fleeting.

In the state of wakefulness, people can notice (remember)
fleeting sleep because they are already familiar with its nature.

85-86.

"But fleeting samadhi goes unnoticed, for people are not so familiar with
it.

O Brahman!

Truly, fleeting samadhi is experienced by everyone, and it happens
even in moments when they are absorbed in their activities; but it passes unnoticed
by them because they are unfamiliar with it.

Every moment free from thoughts and
reflections in the waking state is a state of samadhi.

87.

Samadhi is simply the absence of thoughts.--- PAGE BREAK ---

87. Samadhi is simply the absence of thoughts. This state occurs mainly in sleep
and in random moments of wakefulness. 88. "However, this is not called proper samadhi, because all the tendencies of the
mind are present in a hidden form, ready to manifest themselves in the next moment. 89. The infinitely small moment of observing an object is not tainted by
contemplating the qualities and properties of that object, and it is exactly like
samadhi (Nirvana). Now I will tell you about this, listen! 90. "That Unmanifest, which is created first, is in essence no longer
Primordial or Fundamental. Its manifestation as mere "emptiness" has the
nature of abstract non-existence. 91-92a. "It is called deep sleep (susupti) and is a manifestation of the aspect of
inertia (inaction) of Consciousness. Since what appears in the perception of deep
sleep has the nature of non-existence or the manifestation of emptiness, then, in
this case, deep sleep can only refer to the perception of inertia or
unconsciousness, and it cannot be samadhi. 92b-93. "That Consciousness which
continuously shines in samadhi is, in essence, God Himself. He is the Absorber of
time and space, the Destroyer of emptiness, and Pure Mind. How can this Creator of
all that exists be deep sleep, which has the nature of inertia (Darkness)? 94. "Therefore, the state of deep sleep is not everything; it is not the beginning
or the end of everything."
Thus Janaka instructed Ashtavakra.

--- PAGE BREAK ---CHAPTER XVII - ON THE USELESSNESS OF SHORT-LIVED SAMADHI AND THE PATH TO WISDOM
1.

"O Brahman!

Now I will tell you what JanaKa and Ashtavakra discussed further."
2-3.

Ashtavakra asked: "O King!

Please tell me in detail about what you call
fleeting samadhi in the waking state, so that I may develop it and attain lasting
samadhi."
When asked about this, Janaka replied:
4-11.

"Listen, O Rahman!

The following cases are examples of such a state: when a
person does not notice "movement inward and outward" for a short period of time,
and at the same time is not oppressed by the ignorance of sleep; an infinitely
small time when he is beside himself with joy; when he is embraced by his beloved
with the purest feelings; when he finds something he wanted very much but had
previously given up on in despair; when a lone traveler, having no doubts about the
complete safety of the path he is walking, suddenly finds himself facing the
greatest danger; when a person hears of the sudden death of his only son, whose
health was excellent, and when his son was in his prime and at the height of his
glory.

12-14.

There are also periods of samadhi that occur in the intervals between the
states of wakefulness, dreaming sleep, and deep sleep; during the detection of a
distant object, when the mind, on the one hand, encompasses the body (object), and
at the same time, on the other hand, projects itself into space until it
encompasses that object (body), just as a worm stretches itself while crawling from
one leaf to another, striving to grasp the next support.

Carefully observe the
state of mind during such an interval.

15-18.

"Why dwell on these intervals of time?

Everything happening around will
freeze (time will stop) if the Mind becomes homogeneous.

Staying in these intervals
of time becomes possible when a certain Harmony reigns in the Mind, which under
normal conditions is constantly disturbed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Everything happening around will
freeze (time will stop) if the Mind becomes homogeneous. Staying in these intervals
of time becomes possible when a certain Harmony reigns in the Mind, which under
normal conditions is constantly disturbed. "For this reason, the great founders of various philosophical systems said that the
difference between the Supreme Being and the individual Mind lies only in their
duration (size). "In any case, once the interruptions in the flow of the Mind are recognized, it
follows that these intervals between the various transformations of the Mind into
objects represent Its unchanging, original state. O son of KahoEla, know that if
someone can track these fleeting samadhis, then he no longer has any need for any
other samadhi."
19-23. The young Brahmin (Sage) asked further: "O King, why then are all people not
yet Liberated, if fleeting samadhi occurs so often in their lives, and if it is the
Light that brings enlightenment in the unmanifested emptiness of sleep? Liberation
is the direct result of non-qualitative samadhi. Why then does the Supreme Being,
being pure Mind, not realize itself and remain Liberated forever? "Ignorance is
dispelled by Pure Mind, which is samadhi, and this is the direct cause of
Salvation. "Please tell me about this so that all my doubts may be dispelled." The
king replied as follows:
24-26. "I will tell you this secret. The cycle of birth and death, which has
existed since time immemorial, is caused by ignorance, which manifests itself in
the form of pleasure and pain, yet remains only a dream and something unreal. And

--- PAGE BREAK ---since this is so, the wise say that Knowledge (Veda) can put an end to it.

But what
Knowledge?

It is the Wisdom born of Self-realization: that is, "I am God" (I am
Mind).

27-29.

Ignorance cannot be removed by simple experience of non-qualitative
expansion of the Mind, as in samadhi (Nirvana).

For such expansion is in Harmony
with everything, including ignorance.

It is like the canvas used in painting; the
canvas remains the same, whatever picture is painted on it.

Non-qualitative
Knowledge is simple Light; objects manifest through it and in it.

30.

"But ignorance or delusion should not be confused with the state of savikalpa
(enlightenment), for ignorance is only the original defilement, that is, the cause
that continues as a consequence.

31-34.

"The original cause lies in the knowledge of the Perfection of the Supreme
Being (Mind).

The idea of Perfection is conditioned by the absence of parts.

Parts
can only appear thanks to time, place, and form.

However, the feeling of
completeness appears without these factors, implying a desire for them, which gives
rise to a feeling of lack and need.

Limitations arise in time and space, and the
fundamental cause of ignorance manifests as "I am the body" (ego).

This is the
embryonic seed from which the sprout of the body as an individualized essence (I am
the body) then emerges, growing further into a giant tree in the form of the wheel
(samSara) of daily birth and death.

The cycle of birth and death does not cease
until ignorance is ended.

This can only happen through perfect Knowledge of one's
Essence, and no other way.

35-38.

"Such Wisdom, which can eliminate ignorance, is undoubtedly of two kinds:
indirect and direct.

At first, Knowledge is obtained from the Teacher and, through
him, from the Holy Scriptures.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Such Wisdom, which can eliminate ignorance, is undoubtedly of two kinds:
indirect and direct. At first, Knowledge is obtained from the Teacher and, through
him, from the Holy Scriptures. Such indirect Knowledge cannot allow one to see the
essence of the problem, since theoretical Knowledge alone will not bear fruit;
practical Knowledge is necessary, which comes only through samadhi. Knowledge born
of samadhi (Liberation) gives rise to Wisdom through the destruction of ignorance
and false knowledge. 39-47. "Similarly, the experience of accidental, fleeting samadhi in the absence of
theoretical knowledge will also not serve this ultimate goal. Just as a person
unaware of the qualities of an emerald cannot recognize it in a treasure chest by
its appearance alone, just as another person cannot recognize an emerald if he has
not seen one before, even if he has complete theoretical knowledge on the subject,
so theory must be supplemented by practice in order for a person to become an
expert. Ignorance cannot be eliminated by mere theory or by the accidental,
fleeting samadhi of an ignorant person. "Again, lack of attention is a serious obstacle; for a person who simply stares at
the sky cannot recognize individual constellations. Even an educated scientist will
be no better than a fool if he does not pay attention to what is being explained to
him. On the other hand, if, even without being a scientist, a person still listens
carefully to everything about the planet Venus and confidently sets out to find it,
knowing how to find it in the sky, then he will eventually find it, and then he
will be able to recognize it every time he sees it again. Inattentive people are
simply fools who cannot comprehend samadhi, which repeats itself over and over
again in their lives. They are like a person who knows nothing about the treasure
under the floor of his house and goes out every day to beg for alms.

--- PAGE BREAK ---48.

"So you see that samadhi is useless for such people.

The minds of infants
always remain in an unchanging form, and yet they do not comprehend their Essence.

49.

"It is certain that samadhi will never eliminate ignorance.

Therefore, it is
necessary to seek samadhi in order to eliminate it.

50-52.

"Only in this way can ignorance be eliminated.

God, who is inherent as the
Supreme Self, is pleased with praiseworthy actions that continue to be performed
for some time, after which the desire for Liberation arises, and not otherwise,
even if millions of births are experienced.

It takes good fortune to be born as a
sentient being (human) among all the possible things in the Universe; even then,
considerable merit is required to obtain a human body; while it takes something
quite extraordinary to become a human being endowed with both virtuous tendencies
and a sharp, penetrating Mind.

53-60.

"Note, O Brahman, that moving creation is only a small part of immovable
creation, and that human beings constitute only a small part of all that moves,
while most people are only slightly better than animals, not knowing what is good
and what is bad, what is right and what is wrong.

Among sensible people, most rush
after the pleasures of life, striving to fulfill their desires.

Only a few educated
people are marked by a strong desire to enter the world of Prav after death.

The
consciousness of most of these few is clouded by maya (illusion), and they cannot
comprehend the Oneness of all and everything.

How can all these unfortunate people,
held in the embrace of maya, see the sublime Truth of Oneness with their weak
vision?

People blinded by maya are unable to see this Truth.--- PAGE BREAK ---

How can all these unfortunate people,
held in the embrace of maya, see the sublime Truth of Oneness with their weak
vision? People blinded by maya are unable to see this Truth. Even when some individuals
rise high in their understanding of theory, failure prevents them from verifying it
through experience, for their desires sway them back and forth with a force greater
than the pitiful theoretical knowledge they have acquired, which, if strictly
followed, should put an end to such desires that seek to refute the position of the
Unity of all that exists. They try to justify their practical actions with
erroneous arguments and disputes, which are simply a waste of time. "The ways of maya are unfathomable, hindering the highest Realization of such
people; it is as if they have thrown away a bright gem, thinking it to be a mere
pebble. 61. "Only those whose devotion is pleasing to the Creator of the Supreme Being
transcend maya; such individuals possess excellent insight and abide in Bliss. 62. "Being endowed with proper insight and right aspiration by the grace of
God, they are established in transcendental Unity and dissolve into the Supreme
Being. "Now I will tell you the process of Liberation. 63. "A person learns true devotion to God after living a praiseworthy life for
some time, and then worships Him for a long time with zealous devotion. 64. "Indifference to worldly pleasures arises in the devotee, who gradually
begins to feel a strong desire to know the Truth and becomes absorbed in its
search. 65. "Then he finds his gracious Teacher and learns from him everything related
to the Transcendental State. Now he has acquired theoretical knowledge.

--- PAGE BREAK ---66.

"After that, he is compelled to consider this question from all angles in his
mind until he finds satisfaction based on his own practical Knowledge, which is in
Harmony with the prescriptions of the Holy Scriptures (Vedas) and the teachings of
his teacher.

He is able to ascertain the highest Truth clearly and confidently.

67.

"After that, the established Knowledge of the Oneness of the Supreme Being
(God) must be applied in practice, even by force if necessary, until he
experiences the Truth.

68.

After experiencing Truth, he will now be able to identify his Higher Self
with the Universal Higher Self, and thus destroy the root of ignorance.

There is
no doubt about this.

69.

"The Inner Self is realized in advanced contemplation, and this state
of realization is called samadhi.

"The memory of this Realization allows one to identify the inner Higher Self with
the Universal Higher Self as 'I am God'.

70.

"This is the Unity of the Supreme Essence, and it is the same as identifying
the individual Transcendent (oneself) with the Transcendent of all the diversity
of the world (with all living things), which appears to be divided into separate
individuals.

This destroys the root of ignorance, immediately and completely.

71.

"It is believed that dhyana (special concentration on the object of
contemplation, calming of the Mind) transitions into samadhi.

While
modifications signify the multifaceted nature of the Mind, samadhi signifies
its Unified, unitary nature.

72.

"When the mind does not generate a picture conditioned by thoughts,
this is an unchanging state, which is its original and pure state.

73.

"When the paintings that were drawn on the wall are erased, only the original
wall remains.

No other action is required to restore it to its original state.

74.

"In the same way, the mind becomes pure when thoughts are removed.

Therefore, the unqualified (thought-free) state is restored when the existing
agitation (thoughts) ceases.

75.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Therefore, the unqualified (thought-free) state is restored when the existing
agitation (thoughts) ceases. 75. "Truly, there is no need to do anything else to maintain this most
Holy state. However, due to the poison of maya, even pandits (scholars) are
mistaken in this matter. 76. "The mind can achieve its goal in the blink of an eye. Seekers can be
divided into three groups: 1) the best, 2) the middle class, and 3) the
lowest. 77. The best folks hit Realization the moment they hear this Truth. They
get grounded in Truth and then keep looking at it while they're learning. 78-92. "No effort is required on their part to realize the Truth. Let us consider
my case as an example. On a summer night, when the full moon was shining brightly,
I was lying intoxicated on a feather bed in my garden of delights in the loving
embrace of my beloved. Suddenly, I heard the sweet, nectar-like songs of invisible
air beings, who taught me the Doctrine of the Unity of the Supreme Being, about
which I knew nothing until that very moment. I immediately thought about it,
meditated on it, and realized this Unity in less than an hour. For an hour and a
half, I remained in samadhi—a state of supreme Bliss. Then I returned to my normal state of consciousness and began to reflect on my
experience: "How wonderful! How full of bliss I was!" It was something
supernatural. If only I could return to that state again! The happiness of a king
cannot compare to even a fraction of my bliss.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Even the king of the Earth could not experience such bliss; my life was wasted on
other pursuits.

Just as a person ignores the fact that he holds Chintamani (a
precious heavenly stone capable of fulfilling desires) in his hands and goes
begging for alms, so people who are unaware of the Source of Bliss within
themselves waste their lives in vain in search of external pleasures!

I no longer
have this passionate craving for them!

May I always abide in the eternal and
infinite Source of Bliss within me!

Enough of these foolish actions!

They are shadows of darkness and futile
repetitions of meaningless labor.

Whether they be delicious dishes, fragrant
garlands, feather beds, rich decorations, or cheerful maidens, they are merely
simple repetitions, without novelty or genuine freshness in them.

I did not feel
aversion to them before because I foolishly walked the path of this world.

As soon as I made this decision and tried to turn my mind inward, another bright
idea dawned on me:
93-95.

"What confusion I am in!

What is it that I want to do if I am always in
Perfect Bliss?

What else can I attain?

What am I lacking?

When and where can I get
anything?

Even if there was once something unknown and new, could it remain so?

How
can I, Infinite Consciousness-Bliss, know and experience effort?

96-98.

"Individual bodies, their senses, minds, etc.

are like visions in a dream;
they are projected by me (the Mind).

Control over one mind does not affect other
minds.

Therefore, what is the point of controlling my mind?

Minds, controlled or
uncontrolled, appear only before my mental gaze.

99.

"Again, even if all minds are under control, mine remains free.

For my mind
is like infinite space, the repository of all things.

Who should control it and
how?

100.

"How can samadhi be invoked when I am already in Perfect Bliss, for the
Supreme Being is Bliss-Consciousness, even more Perfect than infinite space?

101.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"How can samadhi be invoked when I am already in Perfect Bliss, for the
Supreme Being is Bliss-Consciousness, even more Perfect than infinite space? 101. My own Light manifests itself in various ways throughout the world,
which, again, is my own manifestation. 102. "What difference does it make if someone manifests themselves through action
or inaction? Where is the gain or loss in such a manifestation? 103. "What, then, can give me restraint of mind? I am full of Bliss and
possess a nature that is True and Perfect, whether I am in samadhi or not. 104-105. "Let the body do what it likes. Thinking in this way, I always
remain in my own Supreme Essence as
the Perfect Source of Bliss and Pure continuous Consciousness. And therefore I am
in a state of perfection and remain unblemished. "My experience is typical of the best seekers. 106-107. "Seekers of the lower class attain Wisdom (Knowledge) over the course of
many births. As for the middle class, they attain Wisdom within one lifetime, but
slowly and gradually according to the above-mentioned pattern: 1) studying Truth,
2) gaining conviction in It, 3) meditation – samadhi with qualities and samadhi
without qualities, and 4) finally, sahaja samadhi (being unaffected even during
external activity). This last state is extremely rare. 108. Why fall into samadhi if you do not attain the fruit of its Wisdom! Even if
a person experiences it a hundred times, it will not liberate them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Therefore, I tell you that fleeting samadhi in the waking state is fruitless.

109.

"As long as a person lives an ordinary life and does not see everything that
happens around them as a projection of the Supreme Being; as long as they do not
live without deviating from the Supreme Being (God) under any circumstances, it
cannot be said that they are free from the hindrance of ignorance.

110.

Samadhi is characterized by the experience of only the True Supreme Essence,
namely Pure Mind.

Although this Absolute Mind is eternal and resplendent with
splendor even in its ordinary state, it is as if it did not exist.

111-112.

"Absolute Mind is the background on which phenomena are displayed, and it
must undoubtedly manifest itself in all its purity in their absence, although its
appearance may at first seem like something new.

It remains unrecognizable because
it is indistinguishable from the phenomena it displays.

When they are removed, it becomes distinguishable.

"This is a brief
summary of the method of Self-Realization (Liberation).

113.

"O Rahman!

Reflect on what you have now learned, and you will attain
realization.

With the Sudra born of your Realization, you will abide as the Supreme
Being, inseparable from you, and you will be eternally Free."
DattaTrey said:
114-15.

"Having communicated these instructions to Ashtavakra, Janaka ordered him
to leave.

Ashtavakra returned to his dwelling place and put the lessons he had
learned into practice.

Very soon, he also became Jivanmukta (liberated while still
alive)."
CHAPTER XVIII - ON THE UNITY AND INDIVISIBILITY OF THE SUPREME ESSENCE; ON THE
SECONDARY AND DECEPTIVE NATURE OF KNOWLEDGE IN RELATION TO NON-INTELLECTUAL
REALIZATION AND SELF-AWARENESS
1.

DattaTrey continued: "Thus, the existence of Pure Mind, free from objective
knowledge (from thoughts), is proven; this can be felt in many cases in everyday
life.

2.--- PAGE BREAK ---

DattaTrey continued: "Thus, the existence of Pure Mind, free from objective
knowledge (from thoughts), is proven; this can be felt in many cases in everyday
life. 2. "However, it remains undetected because people are caught in the web of maya,
and, moreover, the perception of Pure Mind is not something familiar and familiar
to them. Only remaining in a continuous state of alert awareness will reveal it. 3-5. "Why talk so much about this? The essence of it all is this. Objective
knowledge is obtained by the mind; so the mind itself cannot be the object of
knowledge. But still, it follows that there must be some kind of mind even in the
absence of objects. Such a pure mind, completely devoid of any objective knowledge,
is Pure Mind. A continuous state of alert awareness is its nature. Therefore, it is always Self-
Realized, for apart from itself, no other knower can be recognized. 6-7. "Do you not think, O Brahman, that the Supreme Being does not remain in a
state of consciousness at the moment of observing objects? If the Supreme Being
does not remain in a state of consciousness, then it cannot exist. If it does not
exist, then how can you ask this question! How could one strive for any good for
oneself if the Supreme Being were a myth, like a mirage? How can I establish the
Supreme Being in you? Think about it and answer me.

--- PAGE BREAK ---8-9.

"Or do you mean that there is some kind of ordinary awareness (understanding)
of the Supreme Being, but it cannot be specified?

If so, know that awareness of the
Supreme Being is unceasing Awareness (Knowing) that exists infinitely.

Such is your
Supreme Being.

The Supreme Being is free from particularities.

How strange that,
knowing It, you still do not notice It and have not realized this Supreme Being
(yourself)!

10.

"When comprehending an object, the Pure Mind takes its form and manifests
itself as that object.

In itself, it is pure and has no form.

Thus, objective
knowledge (mind) is a concretized particularity of the Pure Mind.

The Supreme Being
is an eternally shining, non-concretized, unblemished, unified existence—self-aware
and self-sufficient.

11-13.

"If you say that the body, etc., usually manifests itself as the Supreme
Being, then I will tell you that it (the body) is only a play of imagination and
thoughts, and nothing more.

Think and reflect carefully.

When you see a pot, do you
realize that it is your Supreme Being, similar to the body?

After all, your body is
no less than a thought and impression in Consciousness than a pot.

Then why should
the body alone be mistakenly confused with the Supreme Being?

"If you insist that there is no harm or error in identifying the body with the
Higher Self, because it is no worse than praising a part instead of the Whole, then
I will say to you: do not limit such praise to only one part to the detriment of
everything else that is excluded.

Extend this praise in all directions and praise
the entire Universe as the Supreme Being.

14.

"In this case, there will be no mistaken identification of objects
(the known), such as the body and external things, with the subject (the
knower), and you will always remain in your Higher Self as the subject,
i.e., remain in non-duality.

15.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"In this case, there will be no mistaken identification of objects
(the known), such as the body and external things, with the subject (the
knower), and you will always remain in your Higher Self as the subject,
i.e., remain in non-duality. 15. "For the Higher Self is always self-luminous and non-dual, and It shows
the diversity of phenomena just as various reflections are visible in a
mirror. 16. "Therefore, exclude creation (the body) as a simple thought or series of
thoughts, and realize the non-dual, residual, and Pure Mind as the Higher Self. 17. "If the body and creation are transcended and the Supreme Being is realized
even once, then Wisdom arises as a result, which will destroy ignorance and end
the cycle of birth and death. 18. "Liberation should not be sought in Heaven, on Earth, or in the lower realms
(worlds). It is synonymous with Self-Realization. Liberation is simply the
manifestation (realization) of the pure natural state of one's Supreme Essence as
a result of getting rid of sankalpas (thoughts or imagination). 19. "Immortality is not something that must be obtained anew, for It already
exists, and It only needs to be realized. Such Realization arises with the
elimination of ignorance. Absolutely nothing else is required to achieve the Goal
of Life. 20. "One should not assume that Immortality is different from the Supreme Being. If something must be attained, it implies that it was absent before it was
attained. If Immortality can be absent even once, then can it not disappear again? Then Immortality would be something impermanent and, therefore, not worth striving
for. "Again, if Immortality can be obtained, then this very attainment implies that it
is something separate and distinct. But that

--- PAGE BREAK ---that which is not one's own Essence must be merely a myth, like a mirage in the
desert.

21.

"On the other hand, the Supreme Essence is all-encompassing Perfection.

Therefore, where else could Immortality be found?

If it were not there, then
Immortality would be like a reflection in a mirror.

22-27.

"Even the common notion that liberation is freedom from bondage implies that
immortality is the destruction of ignorance.

Ignorance is, in essence, a form of
thought; the destruction of thought is its absence; but to cause its absence is
simply another form of thought.

Thus, upon examination, the whole statement is
affected and confused, and it becomes meaningless.

For thought cannot be destroyed
while still remaining thought.

A dream is considered as real as it is unreal.

In
truth, a dream is not unreal either.

For what is unreality?

It is impermanence.

This, again, is recognized on the basis of the idea that dreams are not continuous,
and this implies that the content of thought is a dream.

But in that case, is it
not continuous?

Since the Mind is always continuous, there cannot be a moment of
non-existence of anything.

And therefore, even at the moment of thinking about the
absence of a thing, that thing actually exists in the mind, and thus it is real,
not unreal.

All objects, however, do not exist when they are not considered by the
mind.

But reality is determined by existence or non-existence, which cannot be
determined by the mind, because negation on the part of the mind implies the
formation of a mental image of the negated thing, and it is absurd to deny its
existence.

In the absence of negation, the thing must be, and therefore everything
exists.

"Thus, the existence of Pure Mind, like everything else, is proven through its
manifestations, and therefore, Liberation cannot be something external to the
Supreme Being (Mind), no matter what facts are gathered, found, or accepted.

28.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Thus, the existence of Pure Mind, like everything else, is proven through its
manifestations, and therefore, Liberation cannot be something external to the
Supreme Being (Mind), no matter what facts are gathered, found, or accepted. 28. Immortality is defined as the sustained Radiance of the Supreme Being,
dwelling in Perfection. Here, the question may arise as to whether the Supreme
Being is imperfect at one time, that is, in ignorance, and perfect at another time,
that is, in Immortality. The absence of changes and transformations of the Absolute
Mind into objective (material) phenomena is considered a state of Perfection. This
is the answer to the question. 29. "The motivating causes reduce the Absolute Mind to the level of
modifications and make it limited. Otherwise, He (the Light) is infinite and
continuous. 30. "If you want to say that such Mind (the Source of Light) is broken into parts
by means of spheres (worlds), time, etc., then tell me — are these dividing
influences inside the Supreme Being or outside? 31-32. "If they are outside of Consciousness, then their existence is unprovable;
if inside, then Consciousness permeates them, and then It is not divided. The
division into intervals observed in the world is perceived by Consciousness as
events (separate parts) and time (separator), and all this is permeated by
Consciousness. Consciousness is itself time and events. 33-34. "If time is not permeated by Consciousness, then how do intervals become
apparent? How can Consciousness be considered divided in its universal
pervasiveness? Division must be caused by something external. But outside of
Consciousness there is nothing that could be supported or discussed at all. 35. "Just as one cannot agree that the dividing factor (time) becomes visible
thanks to its dividing effects (events), while in its entirety it (time) still
eludes the Mind. For

--- PAGE BREAK ---then one would have to admit that it (time) exists to the extent that its effects
(events) manifest themselves, and does not exist in any other way, which is absurd.

36.

"Therefore, even the concept of the external must lie within the
boundaries of Consciousness.

Similarly, everything that is known and knowable
must also lie within these boundaries.

37.

"In view of this conclusion, how can a container be divided into separate
parts by its contents?

Explore the Truth contained in these lines, Rama!

38.

"The universe that shines within consciousness must have the nature of
reflection.

For you know that in this world, one continuous object cannot be
seen within another continuous object, just as two things cannot coexist
within the same framework.

39-40.

"Rama, if this were so, then a tangled jumble of objects would be observed
everywhere.

However, the Universe maintains its clarity and uniqueness because it
is like a reflection in the mirror of Consciousness.

As for the appearance of the
external (Yavi) in the scheme of Creation, which has been traced back to its
original cause—ignorance—how can the manifestation of the external (Yavi) in It
(Creation) be real?

Their reality must be connected with the fact that they must
possess the nature of Consciousness, that is, the Supreme Being.

Therefore, it
should be concluded that the Supreme Being is one and only one, and that there is
nothing beyond it.

When Dattatreya finished his speech, Rama then asked:
42-43.

"O Teacher, it is difficult for me to understand your reasoning when you say
that the Absolute Mind, being one and only one, nevertheless manifests itself in
the form of various objects of creation.

These two objects, the knower and the
known, are distinct and separate.

Of these, the knower, that is, Consciousness, can
be self-illuminating, illuminating objects.

44.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Of these, the knower, that is, Consciousness, can
be self-illuminating, illuminating objects. 44. "Just as objects (planets) stand apart from light (the Sun), so the universe
seems to be something distinct and separate from the Intelligent Principle. 45. "Experience does not show the identity of these two things. Furthermore, you
confirm Janaka's statement regarding samadhi. 46. "Janaka said: "The mind, devoid of thoughts, becomes pure, and then it is
identical with the Supreme Being (Mind), and, further, this alone removes
ignorance."
47. "How can the mind be the Supreme Being (Mind)? The mind is always considered
to be the ability by which the Supreme Being acts in the realms (worlds) beyond the
material (reality). 48. "From the point of view of the mind, the Supreme Being would then be no better
than anything inanimate, but the mind characterizes it as something different from
the inanimate world. 49. "Furthermore, even the Holy Scriptures (Vedas) recognize that
Liberation (Immortality) and bondage are only positions of the
mind, respectively unchanging or changing. 50. "How can the mind be the Supreme Being or its capacity? Again, if we assume
that the world is an image on the Mirror (screen) of Consciousness, then it
follows that He is Perfect, and from this we cannot conclude that Consciousness is
non-dual. 51. "There is an example of a well-known hallucination, such as a rope
mistaken for a snake. Hallucination is not correct knowledge; but this does
not eliminate the dual perception of the observer. 52. "And, moreover, unreal images cannot serve any useful purpose, whereas the
universe has existed since time immemorial and is full of meaning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---53.

"Tell me, how do you prove its unreality, thus affirming the non-
duality of the Supreme God?

"Furthermore, if this world itself is unreal, how can such unreality
distinguish between fact and hallucination in life?

54.

"And, more importantly, how does everyone manage to have the same
hallucination—to take unreal phenomena for reality?

All these doubts trouble me.

Please explain all this to me."
55.

The omniscient Dattatreya listened to these questions and was pleased with
them.

Then he continued his speech:
56.

You did the right thing, Rama, in asking these questions, even though it
wasn't the first time you did so.

They need to be explored until complete
certainty (conviction) is achieved.

57.

"How can a Guru independently anticipate all of a disciple's doubts until the
disciple clearly states them?

There are different levels of mind, as well as
different characters.

58.

"How can clear Knowledge (Veda) be attained if one's own doubts are not
expressed in order to eliminate them?

A seeker with an analytical mind attains
solid and profound Knowledge.

His questions help him to go to the depths of
Knowledge (Faith).

59-61.

"A student who does not ask questions is useless.

A determined student can
be recognized by his questions.

"Knowledge is One and undivided, but it shines as if it were many, like the pure
surface of a mirror reflecting many colors (images).

"Notice how the mind, unchanging in deep sleep without dreams and remaining single
and unfilled, later transforms with dreams and manifests as the imagined world of
dreams.

In a similar way, the One Consciousness—the Great Ra-M-Ha—flashes in the
form of various phenomena of the Universe.

62.

"The knower and the objects known are also visible in dreams.

Even a blind
person, deprived of sight, perceives objects.

63.

"How does he do this, except through mental perception?

Can anything ever be
known anywhere in the absence of the Light of Mind?

64.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Can anything ever be
known anywhere in the absence of the Light of Mind? 64. "There can be no images in the absence of a mirror, since images cannot be
separated from the mirror. 65. "Similarly, nothing that is beyond the principle of Cognition (Knowledge)
can be known. For the same reason, I say that the mind, theoretically, cannot be
separate from the Mind. 66. "Just as the knower, knowledge, and the known are identical to the mind in
sleep, so the seer, vision, and the observed phenomenon are identical to the
mind in the waking state. 67-71. "Just as an axe was created in a dream to cut down a tree, which is the
thing for which it was conceived, so the mind is considered to be the faculty for
providing perception. "But, Rama, an ability can only be real to the same extent as the action itself. For has there ever been anyone who has been harmed by a human horn? The action and
the instrument must undoubtedly be of the same degree of Truth. Since the action
itself is unreal, can the mind, the ability to analyze, be real? Therefore, Rama,
there is no faculty called mind. The mind is only assumed for the purpose of
placing imaginary subjects, imaginary visions, and imaginary objects. Its reality
is on the same level as the reality of a dream. "Pure Mind is completely
unblemished; the mind and other faculties are simply fabrications to allow
phenomena to occur, which, one way or another,

--- PAGE BREAK ---continue because the Absolute (God) is self-sufficient and manifests as subject and
objects.

This Mind is mostly pure and non-qualitative, as in the aforementioned
fleeting samadhi.

"Now I will explain this to you:
72-79.

"Absolute Consciousness and space are similar to each other, being Perfect,
infinite, subtle, pure, unlimited, formless, inherent in everything, always
unpolluted either internally or externally, but space still differs from Absolute
Consciousness, being unconscious and lifeless.

"In fact, the conscious Supreme Being is space.

And they are not different from
each other.

Space is the Supreme Being; and the Supreme Being is space.

Only the
ignorant, due to their delusion, see the Supreme Being as mere space, just as owls
cannot see anything in the blinding sunlight.

The wise, however, discover the
Supreme Being, or Pure Mind, in space.

His Transcendent Majesty, flawless and self-sufficient in His completeness,
illuminates and enlightens multiplicity in His Essence, like an individual in a
state of sleep.

This multiplicity in the form of humans, animals, and other
phenomena does not mislead the Supreme Essence, which abides in all its purity, but
misleads the various secondary aspects of the Supreme Essence, namely, the
individual egos.

80-81.

"His Majesty, the Absolute Essence, always remains aware of His Perfection
and Unity.

Although He Himself is unchanging, to His own beings He appears to be
changeable, like a magician who misleads the audience with his tricks, but is not
himself deceived by them.

82.

"He is Light (the Source of Light), One without a second; and yet, because of
the veil of illusion (maya/maya), He appears divided to the beings He creates.

83.

Just as a magician's tricks deceive only the audience, but not the magician
himself, so the veil of maya (illusion) affects people, but not the Creator; while
individuals are held in the nets of maya (mine), observe this multiplicity and also
reflect on maya.

84-85.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Just as a magician's tricks deceive only the audience, but not the magician
himself, so the veil of maya (illusion) affects people, but not the Creator; while
individuals are held in the nets of maya (mine), observe this multiplicity and also
reflect on maya. 84-85. "This maya is the dynamic aspect of God's hidden self-sufficiency, and it is
unchanging and inexhaustible. See how yogis, sorcerers, and magicians remain self-
assured and confident without revealing their art, yet play on the imagination of
others in pursuit of the impossible. 86. "Division in the Absolute is attributed to limitation within individual
boundaries, occurring under the guise of the ego, which is commonly referred
to as imperfection or ignorance. 87. "In a similar way, the Absolute endows Its own pure and independent
Essence with ignorance and appears to be multiple, iridescently shimmering
with Its various objects. 88. "Consequently, the identity of space and the Supreme Being is not obvious
to scientists because they are unable to investigate the Supreme Being with
their minds, for the mind is led astray by its inherent tendency to turn
outward. 89-90. "Borrowed knowledge about the Supreme Being, obtained from books (the Vedas)
or from a guru, can never liberate a person until the truth about it is properly
investigated and applied to oneself; only direct realization (following the
prescriptions of the Vedas) will lead to liberation. Therefore, follow my advice
and attain Self-Realization by turning your mind inward (to yourself).

--- PAGE BREAK ---91.

"It (Self-Realization), being the Transcendental Consciousness that begets all
and contains their Essence, is Pure Radiance, and therefore there is nothing
lifeless or inanimate in It.

92.

"It (Realization) rests in Its own Essence, being untainted by ego (desires)
and remaining as I-Consciousness in Its Highest form.

Everything inanimate cannot
exist on its own, it depends on the Mind in its recognition and definition.

93-94.

"Inert objects do not Shine by themselves in their own Essence.

They cannot
reveal their existence on their own, as they have no support in their own Essence.

"But Pure Mind is absolute, it Shines by Itself and senses Its own existence
without any outside help.

Since It is self-Shining, It is self-sufficient.

This
Self-Awareness is the Highest and Complete Self-Awareness, which is absent in inert
objects (demons).

95.

"Since the totality of all phenomena consists of Pure Intelligent Essence—
Consciousness—and there is nothing outside Its orbit, there can be nothing that
divides It into parts, and therefore It is not split and is continuous (One), like
a mirror (screen) reflecting images (pictures).

96-97.

"How can there be a divider and division for the Absolute?

Such freedom from
division is Perfection; and the Self-realization inherent in such Perfection is the
uninterrupted awareness of "I am I," known as Self-peace; it is the eternal,
inseparable, One and homogeneous Essence.

98-99.

"Although descriptions of the Supreme Essence and statements about It differ
according to the various aspects emphasized, It is nevertheless only something
self-sufficient, Energy (Inglia), It is the Absolute, indivisible, One and
inseparable Being, all of this united in One — as, for example, light, heat, and
warmth constitute fire, and yet these three factors are still considered and
described separately in everyday life.

100-101.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Although descriptions of the Supreme Essence and statements about It differ
according to the various aspects emphasized, It is nevertheless only something
self-sufficient, Energy (Inglia), It is the Absolute, indivisible, One and
inseparable Being, all of this united in One — as, for example, light, heat, and
warmth constitute fire, and yet these three factors are still considered and
described separately in everyday life. 100-101. "Such is the Power of God called maya (illusion), capable of doing the
impossible and remaining untainted, despite His manifested diversity in the form of
phenomena, like a mirror and the images reflected in it. He is the eternal, One,
indivisible Supreme Being, passing through all manifestations. 102.-103. "These apparent breaks (gaps) in the continuum (continuity), which are
considered non-Essence and are called ignorance, inert (unreasonable), emptiness,
praKRITI (nature), non-existence, space, Darkness, or the first step in creation,
are nothing more than the first division in Pure Mind. 104. "The transition from the infinite Absolute to limited nature is influenced by
maya (illusion), and the result of this transition (transformation) is called
space. 105. "But all this is still indistinguishable from the Supreme Essence due to
the undeveloped or absent ego (desire), which is the seed of the cycle of
birth and death. 106-108. "Diversity is observable only in space, and this space resides in the
Supreme Being, which, in turn, projects it at the moment when diversity begins to
appear, even though this is not clear at that moment. Rama! Turn your gaze inward. What you perceive as inner space is the expanse in which all beings exist, and it
forms their Supreme Being, or Co-Consciousness. What they consider space is your
Supreme Being. Thus, the Supreme Being of one is the space in another, and vice
versa.

--- PAGE BREAK ---But the same thing cannot have different natures.

Therefore, there is no difference
between space and the Supreme Essence, which is complete and perfect Bliss-
Consciousness.

109-113.

"The sections of Pure Mind, covered by inert shells, are called Jiva-Mi
(Soul-Mi), or individuals, and the ability of these sections to perceive is
consistent with the limitations imposed on themselves, and these limitations are
called the mind.

"Thus, in the transition from the Absolute to the individual, space is the first
veil that is cast.

The clear, primordial Supreme Essence becomes pure, subtle,
unblemished space, in which solid, dense, constricted, or scattered things arise.

They manifest as the five elements that make up the body.

Then the individual
confines itself to the body, just as a silkworm forms a cocoon around itself.

Thus,
the Absolute shines in the body as the awareness "I am the body," just as a candle
illuminates a spherical lampshade from within.

Thus, individual Consciousness turns
out to be nothing more than the Radiance of the Higher Essence reflected in the
body, which It (the Radiance) illuminates like a room lamp illuminating the
interior of that room.

114.

"Just as the light of a lamp spreads through the holes made in the lampshade,
so the Light of the Mind extends from within through the senses to the external
world (Yavi).

115-116.

"Consciousness, being Absolute and all-pervading like space, cannot come
out through the senses; but nevertheless, its Light, extending like space, presents
certain phenomena; and this realization means the lifting of the veil of darkness,
determined by the degree of realization.

This is considered to be the function of
the mind.

117.

"Therefore, I tell you that the mind is nothing but Consciousness.

The
difference between them lies in the fact that the mind is restless, while the
Supreme Being always remains serene.

118-120.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The
difference between them lies in the fact that the mind is restless, while the
Supreme Being always remains serene. 118-120. "The realization (Liberation) of the Higher Self restrains the restless
mind, which is the dynamic aspect of Consciousness. As a result of its restraint, a
Light filled with the peacefulness of Bliss is ignited, the Light of Perfect Bliss
of Mind, which is synonymous with Liberation. Be sure of this. One should not
assume that after the cessation of thoughts there will be some kind of pause of
emptiness, veil, or ignorance. For there is no such factor that could be called
emptiness, veil, or ignorance. All this is just a figment of the imagination. 121-22. "If in a dream a person imagines himself captured, tortured, and beaten by
his enemy, he will suffer from all this until he is freed from the bonds of sleep. But will he remain bound by his enemy after the dream in which his enemy and his
bound body appeared has ended? The same is true of the veil of ignorance. 123. "O Rama! Even in the beginning, there was truly no bondage or chains
binding one to the cycle of birth and death. All you need is not to be misled
by identifying yourself with inanimate matter, and to ask yourself: What is
this bondage? 124. "The strongest bonds are one's own belief that one is bound. It is as
false as the frightening hallucinations of a frightened child. 125. Even the best among people will not be able to find the path to Liberation,
no matter how hard they try, if their own sense of bondage is not destroyed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---126.

"What is this bondage?

How can the pure, untainted Absolute Essence be
bound by what resembles images reflected in the Mirror (on the screen) of the
Supreme Essence?

127-130.

"To believe that the Supreme Essence is bound by mental representations is
like believing that fire reflected in a mirror can burn it.

There is absolutely no
bondage other than one's own foolish belief that one is bound, and the differences
and diversity generated by the mind.

And until these two dirty stains are washed
away by the Holy waters of the investigation of the Supreme Being, neither I
(DattaTrey) nor God can help such a person attain Liberation.

Therefore, Rama,
overcome these two obstacles and remain eternally blissful.

131.

"The mind will shine as the Supreme Essence if it is freed from the
thoughts that now besiege it, and then all perception of duality will cease
to exist.

132.

"The mind is nothing more than particular knowledge about various kinds of
things.

Remove it, and only Pure Knowledge will remain.

This is the Supreme
Essence.

133.

"As in the well-known example of mistaking a rope for a snake, the rope
is real, but the snake is not.

134-135.

"Even after the true state of affairs has become known and the mistaken
perception of the snake has been eliminated, the reality of the rope still remains,
which contains the potential for the same mistaken perception to be repeated by the
same person or someone else.

The danger will always be present there until the rope
is realized as having the nature of the Supreme Being and as abiding in It.

136.

"Then objective reality disappears completely, and only Pure Knowledge
remains.

In this way, duality is completely destroyed.

137.

"The feeling of duality persists because there is a belief in the importance
and purposefulness of the objective world.

But such purposefulness and even long
duration are experienced even in dreams.

138-144.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But such purposefulness and even long
duration are experienced even in dreams. 138-144. "The difference between dreams and the waking state lies in the fact that
in the waking state, dreams are identified as false, while in dreams, the waking
state is not so clearly defined. Therefore, the waking state is universally
recognized as real. But this is incorrect. For do you not experience the same
degree of duration and purposefulness in a dream as you do in the waking state? The awareness of the waking state does not interfere with dreams, just as the
awareness of dreams does not interfere with the waking state, while these two
factors—long duration and purposefulness—are characteristic of both states. "In light of these facts, examine your past dreams and waking experiences that took
place in the past, and see for yourself. "Again, pay attention to the appearance of reality in the magician's
performances and the apparent purposefulness of the actions performed by the
creations of magic tricks. Is reality based on the shaky foundation of such
manifestations? "The confusion is due to the lack of distinction between the real and the unreal
among the ignorant people. Truly, in their ignorance, they say that this waking
universe is real. 145-148. "Reality must remain always and at all times. "Consciousness either is or
is not." In the first case, this is obvious, and in the latter, it is

--- PAGE BREAK ---implied, for the concept of its absence implies Consciousness.

Therefore,
Consciousness cannot be considered transitory.

It is constant, and therefore real.

Inanimate matter is diverse in nature, and its transience is evident.

For one
object excludes all others.

"But can you assume the absence of consciousness anywhere or at any time?

If you
say that there is no consciousness in your dream, then tell me, how do you know
about this period, or, again, how do you know that you were not conscious of
anything?

If you were completely unaware, you would not be able to say, 'I was
unaware'.

How did this unawareness become known to you?

Consequently, you cannot
avoid the conclusion that Consciousness must exist even in order to know about its
own unawareness.

Therefore, there is no moment when Consciousness does not exist.

"Now I will briefly tell you about the difference between reality and unreality.

149.

"Reality is that whose existence is self-evident and does not require outside
help to prove it.

Unreality is the opposite.

"If, however, you say that a thing is
real until its existence is proven to be unreal, then consider the example of a
rope mistaken for a snake.

The imaginary snake, according to your ideas, would be
real in the interval of time preceding correct knowledge, but this is absurd.

150-151.

"Furthermore, if refutation means non-existence, then the mental image of
the refuted thing must nevertheless be recognized, and this means that the thing
that is formally refuted is mentally recognized.

Therefore, refutation leads
nowhere and does not determine the unreality of a thing; just as the visibility of
a thing does not determine its reality.

Visibility and refutation are both
intermediate links.

152-154.

"According to My views, there is nothing that is beyond Consciousness; nor
is there anything that cannot actually be; therefore, anyone who denies
Consciousness must be nothing more than a foolish debater.--- PAGE BREAK ---

152-154. "According to My views, there is nothing that is beyond Consciousness; nor
is there anything that cannot actually be; therefore, anyone who denies
Consciousness must be nothing more than a foolish debater. He may even deny himself
and say, 'I do not exist. But then who is speaking, and what is he saying? If
someone who denies himself because of his incompetence and foolishness can teach
others and eliminate their ignorance by the force of his logic, then this stone in
front of me could do the same with equal success. 155. "Therefore, the appearance of a thing and its usefulness do not determine
the reality of the thing, or vice versa. "All knowledge is secondary and unreliable. There is no doubt about that. 156-159. "The greatest of all delusions is the belief that Knowledge is not a
delusion. "Erroneous perception lies in the interval preceding correct Knowledge, just as
when we mistakenly take shiny lead for a silver ingot. In the same way, the
mistaken perception of the reality of the universe persists until the original and
fundamental Knowledge of one's Higher Self is realized. This false perception is
universal and widespread, like the blue color of the sky, and it will cease with
the realization of Pure Mind. 160. "Now I have answered your questions. Do not be indecisive —
make the right decision immediately. 161. "Next, I will explain the question you asked earlier concerning the activities
of the Jnani (Sages). 162-165. "The Jnanis can be divided into three categories: 1) the best, 2)
middle class, and 3) the lowest. Representatives of the latter category have known

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Supreme Being, but they are still under the influence of the pleasures and
pains that fall to their lot according to their mature, inevitable karma.

Jnanis of
the middle order, even while reaping the fruits of their past karma, are more
stable in their inner happiness, like an intoxicated person who does not fully pay
attention to what is happening to him.

Jnanis of the highest order are never
separated from the enjoyment of their Bliss, even if they encounter prarabdha
(inevitable) karma a million times greater than the previous categories of Jnanis;
they are not surprised even by the most unnatural and miraculous events; they do
not rejoice when receiving the greatest pleasures, nor are they depressed when
experiencing the most terrible sufferings.

They are always peaceful and calm
inside, although they may appear to act in the same way as ordinary people.

These differences are due to differences in their minds and the degree of
development of Jnana (wisdom).

166.

"Their actions depend on their predispositions, as determined by their past
karma.

But all their actions are like those of an intoxicated person."
CHAPTER XIX - ON THE DIFFERENT CATEGORIES OF JNANI (RAHMANOV)
1.

Hearing what the Wise Dattatreya had said, Rama asked him to tell him more about
the behavior and activities of Jnani.

2-4.

"Teacher, please explain to me how the intelligence of different people
differs according to the stages of Jnani (Wisdom).

Is not all Wisdom of one kind,
being simply the disclosure and revelation of the Supreme Essence?

Liberation is
simply the disclosure of the Supreme Essence, and that is the only thing to strive
for.

How can it depend on stages of development corresponding to mental
predispositions?

Do the methods also differ in this way?"
5.

When asked about this again, the Wise Dattā, the Ocean of Compassion, began
to answer his questions.

6.

"Now I will tell you the secret of all this.--- PAGE BREAK ---

6. "Now I will tell you the secret of all this. There is no difference in
methods, just as there is no difference in Jnana, in fact, there are no
differences. 7. The fruits differ according to the stages (of Faith) of attaining Perfection. Perfection accumulates over the course of three stages (of Faith), and upon
completion of the accumulation of Knowledge (Faith), Jnana easily reveals itself. 8. "The degree of effort required corresponds to the stage of imperfection
brought about by past actions (merits). However, Jnana is eternal, and in
reality, no effort is required. 9. "Since She (Wisdom) is already present and does not need any attainment, Jnana
is Pure Mind, which is the same as Consciousness, which is always self-shining. 10-13. "What kind of effort can help reveal the eternally self-shining
Consciousness? When It is covered with a thick layer of endless predispositions and
tendencies (vasanas), It is not easy to comprehend. The layers must first be softened by the stream of steam of mind control, and then
carefully scraped off with the sharp chisel of investigation. After that, it is
necessary to turn the closed fastener with the quartz crystal inside — namely, the
mind purified by the above-mentioned method — on the grinding wheel of vigilant
awareness and, finally, open the cover of the fastener with the lever of insight. "And suddenly! The precious gem that was locked inside has now been found, the
Goal of Life has been achieved!

--- PAGE BREAK ---"Thus, you see, Rama, that all efforts are directed toward purifying the Augean
stables of predispositions and tendencies.

14-15.

"Minds are the cumulative influences of predispositions accumulated by
karma.

Effort is necessary as long as predispositions continue to disturb the mind.

"Predispositions are innumerable, but I will list a few of the most important ones.

16.

"They can be divided into three groups: 1) aparadha, 2) karma, and 3) kama.

17-29.

"The predispositions typical of the first group are disbelief in the
teachings of the Guru and the Holy Scriptures, which is the surest path to
downfall.

Misunderstanding the teachings due to self-confidence or pride is an
aspect of disbelief that blocks the path to Realization for scholars and the like.

The Society of the Wise and the study of the Holy Scriptures cannot eliminate this
misunderstanding.

They claim that there is no reality beyond this world (Yavi);
even if there were, it still cannot be known; if someone claims to have known it,
it is an illusion of the mind; for how can Knowledge (Faith) eliminate human
suffering or help one attain Liberation?

They have many more doubts and
misconceptions.

All this applies to the first group.

"There are even more people who, no matter how well they are taught, are unable to
understand the Teaching; their minds are too constrained by predispositions to be
receptive to subtle Truths.

They form the second group—victims of past actions, unable to enter the stage of
reflection and contemplation necessary to destroy predispositions and tendencies.

The third group is the most common—they're the victims of desire (ego), who are
always driven by a thirst for action, meaning they want to work to get results.

These desires are endless, like waves in the ocean.

You can count the stars in the
sky, but not desires!

The desires of even a single individual are countless – what
can be said about the desires of all beings?--- PAGE BREAK ---

You can count the stars in the
sky, but not desires! The desires of even a single individual are countless – what
can be said about the desires of all beings? Each desire is too vast to be
satisfied, for it is insatiable; too strong to resist; and too subtle to avoid. And
so the world, under the power of this demon, behaves madly and groans with pain and
suffering, experiencing the consequences of its own wrongdoings. Only a person who
is protected by the absence of desires (dispassion) and is inaccessible to the
machinations of the monster of desire can ascend to happiness. "A person under the influence of one or more of the three aforementioned
predispositions will not be able to reach the Truth, even though it is self-
evident. 30-33. "Therefore, I tell you that all efforts are directed toward the destruction
of these innate tendencies (predispositions). The first (disbelief) comes to an end with the emergence of respectful trust in the
Holy Scriptures and the Teacher. The second (the action of karma) can only be
stopped by Divine mercy, which may descend upon a person in this birth or in any
subsequent one. There is nothing else to hope for. The third (desire) must be
gradually overcome with the help of dispassion, insight, worship of God, study of
the Holy Scriptures, learning from the Wise, investigation of the Supreme Being,
and so on. 34. "The efforts to overcome these obstacles are greater or lesser, depending
on the magnitude of the obstacles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---35-37.

"The most important quality is the desire for Liberation.

Nothing can be
achieved without it.

Studying philosophy and discussing it with others is
completely useless, as it is no better than studying the arts.

For if this were the
case, a person could just as well hope for Salvation by studying sculpture and
practicing this art.

Studying Faith (Knowledge of God) without a strong desire for
Salvation (Liberation) is like dressing a corpse.

38-40.

"Furthermore, Rama, a casual desire for liberation is also futile.

Such a
desire often arises when studying the splendor of the liberated state.

This happens
to everyone, but it never brings any solid results.

Therefore, such a fleeting
desire has no value.

"The desire must be strong and steadfast in order to bear
fruit.

The results are directly proportional to the intensity and duration of such a
desire.

41-43.

"To achieve the Goal of Life, desire must be accompanied by effort.

Only
then will intense activity and progress occur.

Just as a person who has been burned immediately rushes to find ointments to ease
the pain and does not waste time on other pursuits, so too must the seeker strive
with all his might for Liberation, excluding all other pursuits.

Such an effort is
fruitful, and it is preceded by indifference to all other achievements (desires).

44-46.

"Starting with the renunciation of pleasures, as they are obstacles to
progress, the seeker develops dispassion, and then the desire for Liberation, which
becomes stronger and stronger.

This causes him to exert himself in the right
direction, and he becomes completely absorbed in it.

After passing through these
stages, the most extraordinary conclusion comes."
When Dutta finished his speech, Rama was completely amazed and said the following:
47-49.

"Teacher, you said earlier that the company of the Wise, Divine Grace, and
dispassion are the primary factors for achieving the highest Goal of Life
(Liberation).--- PAGE BREAK ---

After passing through these
stages, the most extraordinary conclusion comes."
When Dutta finished his speech, Rama was completely amazed and said the following:
47-49. "Teacher, you said earlier that the company of the Wise, Divine Grace, and
dispassion are the primary factors for achieving the highest Goal of Life
(Liberation). Please tell me which of these is the most essential and how to attain
it. For nothing happens without a prior cause. There is no doubt about this. What
is the root cause of the fundamental requirement? Or does it happen only by
chance?"
50. When asked about this, Dattatreya replied as follows: "I will tell you the
root cause of all this. Listen! 51-61. "His Transcendent Majesty, Absolute Consciousness, being complete and self-
sufficient, initially projects the entire Universe in His Being (Mind), like
reflections in a mirror. Then He takes on a personal aspect called the Creator,
and, taking into account the predispositions of the ego (desires) contained in the
Creator, He reveals the Holy Scriptures—the repository of sublime Truths—in order
to fulfill them. Since individuals (Souls) are full of unfulfilled desires, the
Creator begins to make plans and ways to fulfill them. He develops a scheme of
causes and effects, actions and fruits, and as a result, individuals (Souls) are
then born to revolve in this wheel of causes and effects. They take on various
forms and are placed in different environments according to their predispositions. After passing through countless different evolutionary incarnations, the individual
(Soul) finally reaches, in its sequential development (thanks to accumulated
merits), incarnations in human form.

--- PAGE BREAK ---At first, its aspirations are selfish.

Because of its ever-increasing desires, it
begins to seek the unhindered fulfillment of its insatiable ambitions.

But
gradually, it begins to turn to the Commandments set forth in the Holy Scriptures,
as failures are inevitable everywhere, and as a result, disappointment sets in.

Man
begins to seek wise counsel.

Such counsel will come only from a person who dwells
in uninterrupted Bliss.

Such a Sage will, at the right time and in the proper manner, initiate the seeker
into Divine Splendor.

The accumulated merits and virtues, strengthened by the
company of the Sage and Divine grace, will determine his persistence in following
the Spiritual path and, step by step, will elevate him to the summit of Bliss.

62-64.

"Now you see why the society of the Sage is considered the root cause of all
good.

This happens partly because of a person's accumulated merits and partly
because of their selfless devotion to God, but always as if by chance, like a fruit
that suddenly falls from the void.

Since the Goal of Life depends on so many
causes, there are many ways to achieve it, both in terms of the mind and in terms
of a person's predispositions.

The state of Jnani also varies according to whether
his efforts were greater or lesser.

65-66.

"A proportionally small effort is sufficient to erase small predispositions
and tendencies (vasana).

One whose mind has been purified by good deeds in a
continuous series of past incarnations achieves the highest results by applying,
proportionally, a very small effort, which remains for him to perform, as with
Janakoya.

67-68.

"The glimmer of Jnana (Wisdom) obtained by one whose mind is filled with
dense vasas (predispositions and tendencies) accumulated in past incarnations is
not sufficient to overcome deeply rooted ignorance.67-68.

"The glimmer of Jnana (Wisdom) obtained by one whose mind is filled with
dense vasas (predispositions and tendencies) accumulated in past incarnations is
not sufficient to overcome deeply rooted ignorance.

Such an individual will have to
practice prayer and fasting, or restraint of the mind and contemplation in
subsequent births to achieve effective and final Realization.

"Therefore, sages can be divided into different categories.

69.

"O descendant of the Bhrihu clan (Heavenly)!

There are differences in the
states of Jnana, characterized by aspects and relationships of the Mind and the
diversity of manifestations of activity conditioned by it.

70-77.

"Such differences are very evident in God, when He is the Creator,
Preserver, and Destroyer of the Universe, who is Jnani (Wise) by His very nature.

This does not mean that Jnana (Wisdom) allows for diversity.

These relationships
(desires) depend on His vasana (predispositions and tendencies) and environment.

He
is the Lord of the Universe and All-Knowing.

His Jnana is pure and untainted by
what He does.

The color of Jnani's (the Wise One's) face may be light or dark, but
neither his Jnana (wisdom) nor the qualities of his mind depend on this in any way.

Look at the differences in the three sons of Atri, namely, the differences in
DurVasa, ChanDre, and myself (DattaTrea).--- PAGE BREAK ---

The color of Jnani's (the Wise One's) face may be light or dark, but
neither his Jnana (wisdom) nor the qualities of his mind depend on this in any way. Look at the differences in the three sons of Atri, namely, the differences in
DurVasa, ChanDre, and myself (DattaTrea). Vasishtha (Veles), one of the greatest
Rishis, known as the family mentor of the kings of the Solar Dynasty, always
strictly adheres to the performance of duties and rituals prescribed by the Holy
Scriptures; while Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatsujata, and Sanatkumara are examples of
hermits who are completely indifferent to any activity, including religious
rituals; Narada (Perfect Light) is the ideal of Bhakti (devotion to God); Bhargava
(Sukra, a well-known mentor of demons who are constantly at war with the Gods)
supports the enemies of God, while the equally great sage Brihaspati supports the
Angels (Gods) in their struggle against their enemies; Vyasa is constantly engaged
in compiling the Vedas and spreading their Truth in the form of

--- PAGE BREAK ---Mahabharata, Puranas (Vedas), and Upapuranas; Janaka is known as an ascetic king;
Bhagavata is like an idiot; many others can be cited as examples.

78.

"There are many other personalities with individual characteristics, such as
Chyavana, Yajnavalkya, Vishva Mitra, etc.

The secret of all this is as follows.

79.

"Of the three typical predispositions mentioned above, the tendency to act is
the most powerful, and it relates to ignorance.

80-83.

"The best are those who are
free from all predispositions, and especially from the slightest trace of the
tendency to act.

If a person is free from the error of disbelief in the Teacher's
teachings, then the predisposition of desire, not being too serious an obstacle on
the path to Realization, is destroyed by the practice of contemplation and
reflection.

In such a case, a pronounced manifestation of dispassion is not
required.

Such people do not need to constantly immerse themselves in the study of
the Holy Scriptures or receive instructions from the Teacher — they need to engage
directly in meditation and enter samAdHi (Ad/At — Absolute Perfection, Hi/Ha —
Energy of God), the crown of the highest Good.

And then their life will always be
like the life of JivanMukt (liberated during life).

84-86.

"Wise men, possessing a subtle and clear Mind, did not consider it
reasonable at this stage to destroy their desires, etc., for example, by forcibly
replacing some thoughts with others, because desires do not obscure the
Realization.

Therefore, their desires continue to manifest even after Realization,
as they did before it.

And yet they are not tainted by predispositions and
tendencies to act.

They are considered Liberated and having different views.

They
are also considered the best category of Jnani.

87-90.

"Rama, if someone's mind clings to ignorance, expressed in the need for
activity, then such an individual cannot hope for Realization (Liberation), even if
God Himself undertakes to teach him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

87-90. "Rama, if someone's mind clings to ignorance, expressed in the need for
activity, then such an individual cannot hope for Realization (Liberation), even if
God Himself undertakes to teach him. Likewise, a person marked by the error of
indifference to teachings or misunderstanding them will not be able to attain
Realization. On the other hand, if someone is only slightly influenced by these two
predispositions and, at the same time, is much more influenced by the
predisposition of desire or ambition, then such a person, through repeated
listening to, discussing, and contemplating the Sacred Truth, will undoubtedly
achieve the Goal of Life, albeit with considerable difficulty and after a long
time. The activities of such a Sage will be small in scale, for he is completely
absorbed in his efforts aimed at Realization. 91. "A Sage of this category, through long practice and strict discipline, has
restrained his mind so well that predispositions and tendencies are completely
destroyed, and his mind is as if dead. He belongs to the middle category in the
classification of Sages and is called a Sage who has no mind. 92-94. "The last category, the lowest among the Sages, are those whose practice and
discipline are not perfect enough to destroy mental predispositions and tendencies. Their minds are still active, and such Sages are considered to be bound to their
minds. They are barely JnAnis, and they are not JivanMuktas like the
representatives of the other two categories. They seem to empathize with the
pleasures and pains of life like any other person and continue to do so until the
end of their lives. They will be Liberated after death. 95-96. "PraRABdha (past karma) is completely powerless over the middle category,
whose members have destroyed their minds through long practice.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The mind is the soil in which the seed sprouts, namely praRABdha (kRAB dna),
growing into the pleasures and pains of life.

If the soil is barren, the seed loses
its power and ability to grow due to being stored for too long, and becomes
useless.

97-103.

"There are people in the world who can perform several tasks at once with
complete attention, and who are known to be remarkably skilled in their actions;
some, again, pay attention to their work while they walk around and talk to other
people; or they are like a teacher who watches each student individually and
controls all the students in the classroom; or you yourself knew KarthaviryaArJuna,
who wielded various weapons in his thousand hands and fought you, using each of
them skillfully and simultaneously.

In all these cases, the single mind takes on
different forms to meet the requirements of different actions performed at the same
time.

Similarly, the mind of the best among the Jnanis is only the Supreme Being,
and yet it manifests as everything without undergoing any changes in its eternal
blissful nature of the Supreme Being.

Therefore, such Jnanis have "many minds."
104-105.

The pra-rabdha (karma) of such jnanis (wise men) is still active and
sprouts in the mind, but only to be burned by the steady flame of jnana (wisdom).

Pleasure or pain are caused by the mind dwelling on phenomena.

But if they are
burned at their source, how can there be pain or pleasure?

106-108.

"Jnanis of the highest order, however, appear to be active because they
consciously bring predispositions out of the depths of the mind and allow them to
dry up.

Their activity is like that of a father playing with his child, moving his
dolls, seeming to rejoice and laugh at the imaginary success of one doll over
another, and seeming to be saddened by the harm done by the dolls to each other,
and so on; or they are like a person showing sympathy to his neighbor in case of
gain or loss.

109-112.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Their activity is like that of a father playing with his child, moving his
dolls, seeming to rejoice and laugh at the imaginary success of one doll over
another, and seeming to be saddened by the harm done by the dolls to each other,
and so on; or they are like a person showing sympathy to his neighbor in case of
gain or loss. 109-112. "Predispositions and tendencies that are not hostile to Realization are
not eradicated by representatives of the best category of Jnani, because they are
unable to seek new ones to replace the old ones. Therefore, old predispositions persist until they are exhausted, and because of
this, among such Jnanas, you will find some who are extremely irritable, some who
are lustful, others who are devout and filled with a sense of duty, and so on. "And Jnanis of the lower order, still under the influence of their minds, know that
there is no Truth in the material world of the Universe. Their samadhi (Liberation)
is no different from the samadhi of others. 113. "What is samadhi? Samadhi is exclusively the process of realizing the Supreme
Essence, that is, it should not be confused with the state of nirvikalpa (Nirvana),
for this state is very common and frequently encountered, as was indicated in the
case of fleeting samadhi. 114-115. "Everyone experiences the state of nirvikalpa, albeit unconsciously. But
what is the use of such unconscious samadhi? A similar state is also possible for
Hatha Yogis. [Ha and Tha are the qualities-properties of the states of Light.] This
experience alone does not bring any lasting benefit. But the individual can apply
the experience gained in practical matters in everyday life. Samadhi can be this
and only this (here meaning Liberation). "This is how the Sages describe samadhi."

--- PAGE BREAK ---116-117.

Having described samadhi from the point of view of the Sages, Dattatreya
goes on to confirm the indivisible nature of such samadhi.

"What is samadhi?

Samadhi is Absolute Knowledge, untainted by objects.

Such is the state of the best
among the Jnanis, even when they participate in worldly affairs.

"The blue color of the sky, as we know, is an unreal phenomenon, and yet it appears
the same to both those who know this and those who do not, with the difference that
the latter are misled by this phenomenon, while the former are not.

118.

"Just as false perception does not mislead a person who knows, so
everything that is perceived and known by the Wise Man as false will never
mislead him.

119.

"Since the representatives of the middle category of Jnani have already
destroyed their minds, there are no objects for them.

Their state is known as
supramental (Transcendental).

120.

"The mind is agitated when it takes the form of those objects which it
mistakenly takes to be real; and it is not agitated otherwise.

Therefore, only
this latter state is supramental (Transcendental).

121.

"Since the Jnani of the highest order can engage in several activities
simultaneously and yet remain unaffected, he always has "many minds," and yet he
remains in continuous samadhi.

His Knowledge is Absolute and Free from objects.

"Now I have told you everything you wanted to know." CHAPTER XX -
VIDYA-GITA
1-20.

"Now I will tell you an ancient sacred story.

Once, a long time ago, eminent
holy sages gathered in the abode of God the Creator, and a very subtle and sublime
discussion took place.

Among those present were Sanaka, SanAndana, Sanatkumara, and
Sanatsujata, Vasistha (Veles), Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, BhRigu, Atri, Angiras,
PraCheta, Narada, Chyavana, Vamadeva, Vishva Mitra, Gautama (Buddha), Shuka,
Rashara, Vyasa, Kanva, Kasya, Daksha, Sumanta, Sanka, Likita, Devala, and other
divine and royal sages.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Once, a long time ago, eminent
holy sages gathered in the abode of God the Creator, and a very subtle and sublime
discussion took place. Among those present were Sanaka, SanAndana, Sanatkumara, and
Sanatsujata, Vasistha (Veles), Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, BhRigu, Atri, Angiras,
PraCheta, Narada, Chyavana, Vamadeva, Vishva Mitra, Gautama (Buddha), Shuka,
Rashara, Vyasa, Kanva, Kasya, Daksha, Sumanta, Sanka, Likita, Devala, and other
divine and royal sages. Each of them spoke about their own system of beliefs with
inspiration and conviction, considering it to be the best among all others. But
they could not come to a common agreement, and so they turned to Brahma: "Teacher! We are sages who know everything about this world and what lies beyond it, but each
of us has a different way of life due to the different predispositions of our
minds. Some of us are always in samadhi (liberated), some are engaged in
philosophical discussions, some are immersed in devotion, some are engaged in
activity or asceticism, and some are outwardly no different from worldly people. Please tell us, who among us is the best? We cannot decide this ourselves, because
each of us thinks that our views and path are the best."
After hearing this question, Brahma, seeing their difficulty, said the following:
"Best among the Saints! I would also like to know this. Shiva knows everything—let
us go and ask Him." Following Vishnu along the way, they came to Shiva. Brahma, the
head of the delegation, asked Shiva this question. After listening to Brahma, Shiva
entered His Consciousness and understood that the Sages lacked trust, and that
therefore any words He spoke would be in vain. And then He said to them: "Listen to
Me, Rishis! It is not entirely clear to Me

--- PAGE BREAK ---which system is the best.

Let us all meditate on His Majesty, Unconditioned
Knowledge (Faith), and then, by His Grace, we will be able to comprehend even
the most subtle and sublime Truths."
Hearing these words of Shiva, all of them, including Shiva, Vishnu, and Brahma,
began to meditate on His Divine Majesty—Transcendental Consciousness, permeating
the three states of life (waking, dreaming, and deep sleep).

Thus summoned, Vkliki
Ra-M-Ha manifested Himself in His glory as the Transcendental Voice in the space of
Pure Consciousness.

"They heard a Voice booming like thunder from Heaven: 'Express your thoughts,
O Rishis!

Be quick, for the desires of My devotees will always be fulfilled
immediately.'
21-28.

"Hearing the Voice, the delighted Rishis prostrated themselves, and
Brahma and the others praised God—the Absolute Consciousness that permeates
the three states of life.

"Glory to You!

The Greatest!

The Best!

The Most Benevolent!

Absolute Knowledge!

Consciousness of the three states!

Creator!

Preserver!

Dissolver!

Supreme God,
surpassing All!

Glory to You once again!

"There was no time when You did not exist, for You are unborn!

You are always new,
and therefore You never grow old.

You are everything and everyone, and yet You are
nothing; You are the essence of everything (Mind), and yet there is nothing in You;
You are knowledgeable about everything, and yet You are beyond all Knowledge; You
enjoy everything, and yet there is nothing You enjoy.

"O Supreme Mind!

Glory to You again and again, before and after, above and below,
everywhere and everywhere.

"Please tell us about Your relative form and Your Transcendental State, about Your
Perfection and Your identity with Jnana (Wisdom).

What are the correct and perfect
means to attain You, what is the nature and result of such attainment?

What is the
highest completion of attainment, beyond which there is nothing left to accomplish?

Who is the best among the Perfect (Absolute) Sages?--- PAGE BREAK ---

What is the
highest completion of attainment, beyond which there is nothing left to accomplish? Who is the best among the Perfect (Absolute) Sages? Glory to You again! 29. "Hearing this request, God of the highest Knowledge graciously proceeded to
clearly explain what the Sages had asked Him:
30. "Listen, Sages! Now I will explain to you clearly and unambiguously
everything you ask for. I will give you the nectar that is the very essence of the
infinite collection of the Holy Scriptures. 31-40. "I am the Pure Mind from which the Universe (Reality) arises, in which it
flourishes, and in which it dissolves, being like reflections in a Mirror (on a
screen). The ignorant know Me as the gross Universe, while the wise perceive Me as
their own Pure Essence, eternally Shining within them as I. Such Realization is
possible only in a state of deep peace of Co-Consciousness, free from thoughts,
similar to the state of water in the depths of the sea, where there are no waves. The most zealous devotees worship Me without any reason and with the utmost
sincerity, which is caused by their Love for Me. And although they know that I am
their own undivided Essence, their deeply rooted desire for loving devotion to Me
compels them to imagine their own Supreme Essence as Me and worship Me as the Life-
Giving Energy (Ingliya) pervading their bodies, senses, and minds, without which
nothing could exist, and which is the sole essence of the Holy Scriptures. Such is
My Transcendental State. My manifested relative form is the eternal pair—the Lord (Great Ra-M-Ha) and Energy
(Inglia)—always remaining in an indivisible Union as Eternal Consciousness,
permeating the three manifested

--- PAGE BREAK ---states of wakefulness, dreaming sleep, and deep sleep, resting on a bed whose four
supports are the Energy of the Creator, the Energy of the Keeper, the Energy of
the Destroyer, and the Energy of Ishvara (in which everything disappears), and
whose appearance is Grace, residing in the abode known as "Fulfillment of
Aspirations"(Liberation), located in a Garden of beautiful trees on an island of
treasures, situated in the middle of a vast ocean of nectar surrounding the
Universe and extending beyond its limits.

"Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, Ishvara,
Sadashiva, Ganesha, Skanda - the Highest Gods (Archangels) of the eight
directions, the Energies of their Minds, Divine Essences, Heavenly Serpents
(Dragons) and other superhuman beings - all these are manifestations of Me.

However, people do not know Me because their Minds are shrouded in ignorance.

41.

"I bestow blessings upon those who worship Me.

Apart from Me, there is
no one worthy of worship or capable of fulfilling any desires.

42.

"The fruits of worship are given by Me according to the manner of worship and
the nature of individual desires.

I am indivisible and boundless.

43.

"Being undivided and Pure Mind, I manifest Myself even in the smallest
particle of the universe, as well as in the universe itself.

44.

"Although I manifest in various ways, I remain pure and unclouded, for
Absoluteness (Perfection) is My Essence.

This is My main Power, which is very
difficult to comprehend fully.

45.

"Therefore, O Rishi (Rasha/RUSA), consider this with all the acuity and
determination of your Mind.

Although I am the abode of all and inherent in all, I
remain pure and unblemished.

46-49.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Although I am the abode of all and inherent in all, I
remain pure and unblemished. 46-49. "Although I am not involved in anything and am always free, I possess My
power, called maya (illusion); I become shrouded in ignorance, appear full of
desires, seek their satisfaction, grow uncontrollably and restlessly, create
favorable and unfavorable environments, am born and reborn as separate entities,
with the growth of Wisdom I seek a Teacher and a Sage, I learn Truth from him,
apply it in practice, and ultimately become Liberated. All this happens in My Pure,
unblemished, and Eternally Free Absolute Mind. These manifestations of the ignorant
and free, as well as others, are called My Creation, which, however, has no
extraneous aids — My Power is too vast to be described. I will tell you about it
briefly. This Cosmos (Universe) is only a small visible part of the multiplicity
hidden within it, which leads to diverse manifestations and results. 50. "The Knowledge relating to Me is complex, but, in general, it can be divided
into two categories—dualistic and non-dualistic, the first of which relates to
Worship (prayer), and the second to Realization (fasting). Due to their
complexity and confusion, there are many details in them that lead to different
results. 51. Dualistic knowledge is multifaceted because it depends on the concept of
duality, and it manifests itself as worship, prayer, mantra, meditation, etc., but
all of this is conditioned solely by mental representations. 52-53. "But even in this case, they are effective in comparison with empty dreams,
because the Law of Nature ensures this. There are varying degrees of effectiveness
of methods, the most important of which are related to the aspect mentioned
earlier. The ultimate goal of all of them is undoubtedly Realization (Liberation).

--- PAGE BREAK ---54.

"Worshiping Pure Reason in a specific form (image in the mind) is not only
useful but also necessary for achieving Realization.

For how can anyone become
worthy of it without His Blessing?

55.

Realization is the same as Pure Mind, Absolutely Free from objective knowledge
(mind).

Such Realization nullifies all objective knowledge, revealing its nature in
all its nakedness, which is as safe as a mere drawing of a leaping tiger or an
angry snake.

56.

When the mind is completely dissolved in the Supreme Being, this state is
called nirvikalpa samadhi (a unified, peaceful state).

After awakening from this
state, a person is shaken by the memory of it as the One, Undivided, Infinite, Pure
Essence, and he knows the meaning of the statement "I am That/At [Absolute]"(I am
God), in contrast to the ignorant person with his frivolous perception of "I" (I am
the body).

This is Supreme Knowledge or Supreme Wisdom.

57.

"Theoretical Knowledge consists in distinguishing between the Supreme
Essence (EGO) and non-Essence (ego) through the study of the Holy
Scriptures, the teachings of the Teacher, or one's own reflection.

58-62.

"The highest wisdom is that which once and for all eliminates the perception
of non-Self, establishing 'I am All'.

Non-dual Realization does not recognize
anything unknown or incomprehensible and permeates everything completely, and
therefore it cannot be surpassed in any way.

When this is accomplished, the Mind
becomes extremely clear, because then all doubts are destroyed; and even if some
traces of them may still remain, they are as harmless as a viper deprived of its
poisonous fangs.

63.

"The fruits of Self-Realization are the cessation of all suffering both here
and in the next world, and Absolute Fearlessness.

This is called Liberation
(Immortality).

64-65.

"Fear implies the existence of something other than oneself.

Can the
perception of duality remain after Realization, or can there be darkness after
sunrise?

"O Rishis (Sages)!--- PAGE BREAK ---

Can the
perception of duality remain after Realization, or can there be darkness after
sunrise? "O Rishis (Sages)! When there is no duality, then there is no fear. On the other
hand, fear will not disappear as long as the perception of duality exists. 66. "That which is perceived in the world as distinct from the Supreme Being is
also, quite obviously, transient. And that which is transient undoubtedly causes
fear of loss. 67. "Union implies separation; likewise, acquisition implies loss. 68-70. "If Liberation were external to the Supreme Being, it would imply fear of
its loss, and therefore would not be worth striving for. On the other hand,
Liberation is Fearlessness, and It is not something external to the Supreme Being. "When the knower, Knowledge, and the known merge together, then such a state
is completely free from fear, and therefore, Moisya (Liberation) occurs. "Jnana (Supreme Wisdom) is a state devoid of thoughts, impulses, and desires, and
it is not limited by ignorance. 71. "This is undoubtedly the original state of the knower, but it remains
unrecognized due to a lack of awareness of it. Only the Guru and the Shastras
(Sacred Scriptures) give the individual (human being) the attainment of the Supreme
Essence. 72-77. "The Supreme Essence is Pure Mind, free from thoughts. The knower,
knowledge, and the known are not real as separate objects. When

--- PAGE BREAK ---the idea of their separateness is destroyed, then in the resulting non-dual
Consciousness their true nature becomes apparent, and this is also the state of
Liberation.

"In reality, there is no division between the knower, Knowledge, and the known.

These distinctions are simply agreements made for the sake of the peaceful flow of
earthly life.

Liberation is eternal, and therefore, It is here and now; there is
nothing in it that needs to be attained.

The Supreme Being manifests as the knower,
Knowledge, and the known; the cycle of daily births (waking) and deaths (sleep)
continues with all the apparent reality of the present cycle as long as this
manifestation continues.

As soon as the phenomenon is realized as consisting solely
of the Supreme Essence without any admixture of non-Essence (mind), then the cycle
of births and deaths ceases and turns into nothingness, like clouds scattered by
strong winds.

78.

"Thus, you discover that diligence (aspiration) is the only requirement for
attaining Liberation.

If the aspiration for Liberation is intense and unwavering,
then there is no need for any other means.

79.

"What is the point of making hundreds of efforts without a real and unwavering
desire to attain Liberation?

This is the only requirement; everything else is
irrelevant.

80-81.

"Intense devotion (aspiration) implies mental purity, since the devotee
loses himself in the object of his desire.

In this case, it means Liberation
itself, because such unwavering devotion is bound to succeed, and its achievement
is only a matter of time, which can be measured in days, months, years, or even
relate to the next birth, depending on the degree of predisposition to Liberation.

82-83.

"The mind is usually tainted with vicious tendencies (ignorance), and
therefore nothing good can come from it (the mind).

Because of this, people remain
in a boiling cauldron (Tartar) after death.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"The mind is usually tainted with vicious tendencies (ignorance), and
therefore nothing good can come from it (the mind). Because of this, people remain
in a boiling cauldron (Tartar) after death. Among these vicious tendencies, the
first is lack of Faith and disbelief in the revelations of the Guru and the
Shastras (Vedas/Astras); the second is attachment to desires (ego); and the third
is dullness, i.e., the inability to understand the Truth that has been revealed. This is a brief description of them. 84-85. "Lack of faith manifests itself in doubts about the truth of statements and
an inability to comprehend them. At first, doubt arises about the existence of
Moishee (Liberation); later, misunderstanding leads to its denial. These two points
are inevitable obstacles on the path of any sincere efforts aimed at achieving
Realization (Liberation). 86. "All obstacles are rendered meaningless by an unyielding conviction in their
opposite; that is, an unyielding faith in the existence of God will destroy both
uncertainty and misunderstanding. "But then the question arises: how is such unyielding conviction possible in the
absence of Faith? Therefore, it is necessary to look at the root of this dilemma. What is it? 87-88. "The lack of faith is rooted in inappropriate reasoning. Reject it and turn
to the proven reasoning given in the Holy Scriptures and explained by the Guru. Then enlightenment becomes possible, and faith is found. In this way, the first
vicious tendency is eliminated. 89-95. "The second vicious tendency—desire (ego)—leads the Mind astray from the
righteous path. For the mind, absorbed in desire, cannot follow the Spiritual path
(Prav). The distraction and absent-mindedness of a lover is well known to all; he
can neither hear nor see what is right in front of him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---before him.

If something is said in his presence, he still does not hear it.

Therefore, before striving for Spiritual Realization, it is necessary to first
overcome desire (ego).

This can only be achieved through dispassion.

Inclinations
are multifaceted, being forms of love, anger, greed, pride, envy, etc.

The worst of
them is the desire for pleasure, and if this inclination is destroyed, all the
others are destroyed as well.

Pleasure can be subtle or gross.

One must not engage
in either, even mentally.

As soon as the thought of pleasure arises, it must be
eliminated by the power of Will, developed through dispassion.

96-99.

"This is how the second vicious inclination is overcome.

The third, known as
dullness (the opposite of insight), is caused by countless vicious actions
committed in previous births or lives.

It is the worst of the three and the most
difficult to overcome by one's own efforts.

Concentration of mind and comprehension
of Truth are impossible when dullness prevails.

"There is no other remedy for it except worship of Me, the Great Ra-M-Ha - the
Supreme Being - praise, prayer, meditation, etc.

I remove the dullness of the
devotee according to the diligence of his worship - quickly, gradually, or in his
next incarnation.

100-102.

"He who surrenders himself completely to Me with devotion is endowed with
everything necessary to attain Self-Realization (Liberation).

He who worships Me
easily overcomes all obstacles on the path to Self-Realization.

On the other hand,
one who, being mired in vices, does not seek refuge in Me—the Pure Mind that
governs man—constantly encounters difficulties, and his success is highly doubtful.

103-104.

"Therefore, O Rishi, the main requirement is single-minded devotion to the
Creator.

The devotee is the best of seekers.

One who is devoted to Pure
Consciousness surpasses all other seekers.

Realization consists in distinguishing
the Supreme Being as distinct from non-Being (the mind).

105-112.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Realization consists in distinguishing
the Supreme Being as distinct from non-Being (the mind). 105-112. "The delusion, due to which the Supreme Being is still mistakenly
identified with the body, etc., must disappear, and as a result, there must be an
awareness of the Supreme Being, which is opposite to the ignorance experienced in
the state of sleep. "The Supreme Essence is perceived even now; but It is not recognized correctly, for
It is identified with the body, etc., and this leads to endless suffering. In fact,
the Supreme Being is not hidden; it always shines as "I," but this "I," due to
ignorance, is mistakenly identified with the body. With the disappearance of this
ignorance, the "I" is revealed as the only True Consciousness; and this removes all
doubts. Only this, and nothing else, is recognized by the Sages as the ultimate
Realization (Liberation). All miraculous powers are very fragmentary and scattered,
and they are not even worthy of a grain of Self-Realization. For it is the
continuous and immortal Bliss of the Supreme Being that contains everything else. "Miraculous powers are also an obstacle on the path to Self-Realization. What is
the point of them? They are just simple tricks (deception). Even the status of a
king seems meaningless to a Self-Realized person. What use are these powers if
they only lead to a waste of one's own time? 113. "There is no other achievement equal to Self-Realization; only it can end all
suffering, for it is a state of Eternal Bliss.

--- PAGE BREAK ---114.

Self-Realization differs from all other achievements in that it destroys
the fear of death once and for all.

115.

Realization varies, depending on previous practice (including in past lives),
and, depending on the degree of purity of the mind, it can be Perfect, average, or
dim.

116-119.

"You have seen great scholars who are well versed in the Vedas and able to
recite them perfectly correctly in the presence of any number of distractions.

They
are the best.

Those who recite the Vedas correctly in the absence of distractions
belong to the middle class.

"While others recite them constantly and do so well.

Such people belong to the lowest type among scholars.

Similar differences exist
among the Sages.

120-121.

"Some sages remain in the Supreme Essence even when they are engaged in
complex duties, such as ruling a kingdom; others can do so only in between
activities; still others achieve this only through continuous practice.

They belong
to the highest, middle, and lowest types, respectively.

Those who belong to the
highest type represent the ultimate limit of Realization (Liberation).

122.

"Continuous full awareness even in the state of sleep is a sign of the
highest type of Sages.

123.

"One who has not deliberately created the instruments of his mental
inclinations, but is able to evoke them at will, belongs to the highest type.

124.

"One who dwells in the Highest Essence of his "I" spontaneously and
continuously—just as an ignorant person dwells in the body—is also of the highest
type.

125.

"One who, even while engaged in activity, does not perceive anything as
non-Essence (non-living), is a perfect Sage.

126.

"One who, even while performing activities, remains as unaffected as in
sleep, is a perfect sage.

127.

"Thus, the best among the Sages never leave samadhi, regardless of whether
they are engaged in activity or not.

128-133.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Thus, the best among the Sages never leave samadhi, regardless of whether
they are engaged in activity or not. 128-133. "One who, based on his own experience, is able to discern the level of
other Jnanas (Sages), including the best among them, is undoubtedly a Perfect Sage. One who is not affected by happiness, suffering, pleasure, pain, desires, doubts,
or fears is a Perfect Sage. One who realizes that pleasure, pain, and all other
phenomena reside in the Supreme Essence and emanate from it is a Perfect Sage. One
who perceives oneself as pervading all and everything, both the ignorant and the
Liberated, is the Perfect Sage. One who, even knowing the bonds of bondage, does
not seek liberation from them and remains at peace, is the Perfect Sage. "The Perfect One among the Sages is identical to Me. There is absolutely no
difference between Us. 134. "So, I have given you answers to all your questions, and you should no longer
be lost in doubt. 135. "Having said this, the Transcendental Mind fell silent. Then all the Rishis (Sages) praised the Great Ra-M-Ha and returned to their
own abodes. "So, I have told you the Sacred Gita of Pure Knowledge, which destroys all sins and
purifies the mind. This Gita is the best among the Gitas, for it came from

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Purest Mind, and it leads to Liberation for those who listened to it
attentively and reflected upon it.

"This Gita is like a raft that saves a person from drowning in the ocean (religion)
of samsara (the sons of Sarah/Judaism), and therefore it should be read and reread
every day with love and attention."
CHAPTER XXI - ON THE ACHIEVEMENT OF WISDOM (KNOWLEDGE), ITS NATURE, AND THE
TREASURE OF KNOWLEDGE CONTAINED IN THE SACRED SCRIPTURES
1.

After Rama heard this from the Wise Dattatreya, he experienced a feeling similar
to liberation from the bonds of ignorance.

2-8.

He again greeted the Wise Dattā and asked him with great devotion: "Teacher!

Please tell me exactly how Wisdom (Knowledge) can be attained in Perfection?

I want
to hear the essence of this attainment in a concise form.

Moreover, this path
should be easy and at the same time effective.

Please also tell me about the
qualities of the Wise, so that I may easily recognize them.

What is their state
with or without a body?

How can they be detached while being active?

I beg you,
tell me all this."
When asked about this, the son of AtRi (Aries/Absolute Sages) gladly said: "Listen!

Rama, now I will tell you the secret of perfect attainment.

The most important
condition for attaining Wisdom (Knowledge) is Divine Grace.

One who has completely
surrendered to God will undoubtedly attain Wisdom immediately.

Rama!

This is the
best of all paths.

9-17.

"This path does not need any other help to enhance its effectiveness, unlike
other paths, where this is required to ultimately achieve the goal.

There is a
reason for this.

Pure Mind, illuminating everything, has cast its own veil of
ignorance over everything.

Its true nature becomes apparent only after this veil is
removed through discrimination (of Mind from mind) and insight.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Pure Mind, illuminating everything, has cast its own veil of
ignorance over everything. Its true nature becomes apparent only after this veil is
removed through discrimination (of Mind from mind) and insight. This is difficult
for those whose minds are directed outward (who live by the mind); and it is easy,
reliable, and quick for devotees (believers) who are immersed exclusively in God—
the Supreme Being. A diligent devotee, even if not very advanced in other disciplines, such as
dispassion, can easily understand the Truth, albeit only theoretically, and
explain it to others. Such explanation helps him to consider these ideas
comprehensively, and thus he comprehends the Truth. This ultimately leads him to
identify all individuals with God, and he is no longer subject to the influence of
pleasure or pain. Comprehensive identification with God makes him the best among
the Jnanis (Sages) and Jivanmuktas (Liberated while alive). Therefore, Faith (the
path of devotion to God) is the best of all and superior to all others. 18-24. "The qualities of the Jnani are difficult to understand because they are
incomprehensible and inexpressible. For example, a pandit (scholar) and his
scholarship cannot be described accurately—only the scholar's appearance, gait, and
clothing can be described, for his feelings, depth of knowledge, etc., are known
only to him; just as the taste of a specific dish cannot be accurately conveyed in
words to someone who has not tasted that dish before; but a pandit can only be
understood by another pandit through his manner of expression. Only a bird can
follow another bird in flight. "Of course, there are some traits that are obvious, and there are others that are
subtle and incomprehensible. The obvious traits are speech, language, body
positions

--- PAGE BREAK ---in meditation, signs of worship, dispassion, etc., but these can be imitated by
those who are not Sages.

25.

"What is achievable for others with the help and in combination with
dispassion, meditation, prayer, etc., is natural for a Sage whose mind is pure and
guileless.

26.

"He who is unaffected by honors and insults, losses and gains, is a
Sage of the highest order.

27.

"The best among the Sages is able to give complete answers without
hesitation to questions concerning Realization and the most sublime Truths.

28.

"He seems to come alive spontaneously when discussing matters related to
Jnana (Wisdom) and never tires of explaining them.

29.

"Its nature is effortlessness.

Contentment and purity reside within it.

Even
the most critical situations do not disturb its peace of mind.

30.

"These are the qualities by which one should evaluate and test oneself; it
is useless to test others by them, for these qualities may be genuine or fake.

31.

"The seeker must first test himself and always examine and prove his true
level to himself; then he will be able to judge others.

32-33.

"Can't constant
self-examination improve an individual (a person)?

Let him not waste time judging
others; but let him judge himself.

Thus he becomes Perfect.

34-38.

"What is called
here the traits of Jnani (the Sage) is intended for working on oneself, not for
testing others, because these traits allow for many variations according to
circumstances.

For example, a Jnani (Sage) who has realized the Supreme Essence
with the slightest effort may continue to adhere to his former way of life,
although his mind is now impenetrable and his views cannot be shaken.

He resembles
a worldly person in all practical matters.

How then can he be judged by others?

But, be that as it may, one Jnani (Sage) recognizes another immediately, just as
an expert can evaluate precious stones at first glance.

"Those of low character behave like ignorant people when it comes to caring for
their bodies.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But, be that as it may, one Jnani (Sage) recognizes another immediately, just as
an expert can evaluate precious stones at first glance. "Those of low character behave like ignorant people when it comes to caring for
their bodies. 39-54. "They have not attained samadhi, which is uninterrupted even when immersed
in activity. They are in a state of Perfection (Nirvana) only when they are
peaceful and calm. When they are not engaged in the study of the Supreme Being,
they have the same sense of the body and enjoy pleasure and experience pain to the
same degree as any other person. Although they do not always explore the Supreme Being, they still have periods of
Perfection due to their previous practice and experience. Either way, they are
Liberated because their animal sense is only a deviation during intermediate
episodes of imperfection, and it does not always leave any trace on them. Their
deviation is like the ashen skeleton of a piece of burnt cloth, which is useless,
even though it retains its old form. Again, the intervals of Realization have a
lasting effect on their lives, so that the surrounding world does not continue to
fascinate them as before. The paint applied to the edges of the piece of fabric is
absorbed and gradually changes the color of the entire piece of fabric. "Jnanas of the middle category are never deluded by their bodies. Delusion is the
false identification of the "I" with the body; this never happens to more advanced
Jnanas, namely, those of the middle category. The identification of the Higher Self
with the body is attachment.

--- PAGE BREAK ---to the body.

Representatives of the middle category of Jnani are never attached to
the body.

Their minds are practically dead due to their long practice and prolonged
asceticism.

They are not engaged in activity because they are completely immersed
in themselves.

Just as a person moves or speaks in a dream without being aware of
their actions, this category of Yogis (Goys) performs the minimum activity
necessary to maintain their bodies without noticing it.

Transcending this world,
such a Yogi (Goy) behaves like a drunk person.

But they are aware of their actions.

His body continues to live because of his vasana (predispositions) and destiny.

Jnanis of the highest category do not identify the Supreme Being with the body,
remaining completely detached from their bodies.

Their activity is like that of a
charioteer who never identifies himself with the chariot.

Similarly, the Jnani is
neither the body nor the doer; he is Pure Mind.

Although he is completely detached
from activity within, to the observer he appears active and energetic.

He performs
his part of the activity, acting like an actor in a play, and plays with the world
as a parent plays with a child.

55-56.

"Of these two highest categories of Jnani, one remains steadfast through
constant practice and control of the mind, while the other remains steadfast
through the power of insight and inquiry.

The difference lies in the merits of
their minds, and in this connection I will tell you a story.

57-79.

Once upon a time, there was a king named Ratnangada who ruled the city of
Amrita, located on the banks of the Vipasa River.

He had two sons, Rukmangada and
Hemangada, both wise and kind, dearly loved by their father.

Of the two, Rukmangada
was well versed in the Shastras (Vedas), while Hemangada was a Jnani (sage) of the
highest order.

One day, the princes went hunting in a dense forest accompanied by
their retinue.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Of the two, Rukmangada
was well versed in the Shastras (Vedas), while Hemangada was a Jnani (sage) of the
highest order. One day, the princes went hunting in a dense forest accompanied by
their retinue. They caught many deer, tigers, hares, bison, etc., and, completely
exhausted, they lay down to rest near a spring. Someone told Rukmangada that a
vampire lived nearby, who was an educated but degenerate Brahmin, very
knowledgeable and accustomed to challenging pandits to debates, defeating them, and
then devouring them. Since Rukmangada loved scholarly debates, he went with his
brother to this ghost and entered into a debate with him. However, he was defeated
in the debate, and then the vampire grabbed him to devour him. Seeing this,
Hemangada said to the vampire, "O vampire, do not eat him yet! I am his younger
brother. Defeat me in a debate, and then you can eat us both together." The vampire
replied, "I have not eaten anything for a long time. First, I will eat this long-
awaited prey, and then I will defeat you in a debate and make you my second course. I am going to have a hearty meal of both of you. "I used to catch every passerby
and eat them. A disciple of Vasishtha, named Devarata, was once walking along this
road, and he cursed me, saying, 'May your mouth burn in fire if you ever try to
taste human flesh again!' I begged him with great humility, and he condescended to
change his curse to this: 'You may eat those whom you defeat in a contest.' Since
then, I have strictly adhered to his words. And I have waited so long for this prey
that it has now become very dear to me. I will deal with you after I am done with
it."
"Having said this, he was about to eat his brother, but Hemangada intervened again,
saying, 'O vampire, I kindly ask you to agree to my request. Tell me, would you not
let my brother go if you were offered other food? I will redeem my brother in this
way, if you allow me to do so." But the vampire replied, "Listen, prince!ree to my request. Tell me, would you not
let my brother go if you were offered other food? I will redeem my brother in this
way, if you allow me to do so." But the vampire replied, "Listen, prince!

--- PAGE BREAK ---There is nothing in exchange for which I would release him.

I will not give him up.

Would a man allow long-awaited food to slip through his fingers?

However, I will
now tell you the oath I have made.

There are many questions that trouble my mind.

If you can answer them satisfactorily, I will release your brother." Then Hemangada
asked the vampire to ask these questions so that he could answer them.

And then the
vampire asked the following very subtle questions, which I will repeat for you,
Rama!

Here they are:
80.

Vampire: "What is more expansive than space and more subtle than the
subtlest?

What is its nature?

Where is it located?

Tell me this, prince."
81.

Prince: "Listen, vampire!

Absolute Mind is wider than space and more subtle
than the subtlest.

Its nature is to Shine, and it abides as the Supreme Being."
82.

Vampire: "How can He be wider than space, being the only one?

And how is He
more subtle than the subtlest?

What is this Shining?

And what is this Supreme
Being?

Tell me, prince."
83.

Prince: "Listen, vampire!

Being the material cause of everything, the Supreme
Mind is vast, even though it is one; being imperceptible and elusive, it is
subtle.

Radiance undoubtedly implies Consciousness, and this is the Supreme
Being."
84.

Vampire: "Where and how should the Mind be realized, and what does it
give?"
85.

Tsarevich: "For its realization, the shell of the Mind must be investigated.

A
purposeful, single-minded search aimed at comprehending this Mind reveals its
existence.

After such realization, daily rebirth ceases."
86.

Vampire: "What is this shell, and what is concentration of the mind?

Again,
what is birth?"
87.

Tsarevich: "The shell of the Mind is a veil (ignorance) that hides the Pure
Mind; in itself, it is motionless.

Unidirectionality is dwelling in the form of the
Higher Essence.

Birth is the false identification of the Higher Essence with the
body."
88.

Vampire: "Why is this Absolute Mind, which always Shines, not realized?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Birth is the false identification of the Higher Essence with the
body."
88. Vampire: "Why is this Absolute Mind, which always Shines, not realized? How can it be realized? Why did birth take place at all?"
89. Tsarevich: "Ignorance is the reason for the lack of Realization. It is the
Higher Self that realizes the Higher Self; there can be no external help here. Birth is caused by the feeling of "I am the doer."
90. Vampire: "What is this ignorance you speak of? Again, what is the Higher
Essence? Whose feeling is 'I am the doer'? 91. Tsarevich: "Ignorance is the feeling of separation and isolation from
Consciousness and false identification with that which is not your essence (mind). As for the Higher Self, this question must be referred to the Higher Self that
dwells within you. The ego, or the "idea of 'I,'" is the root of activity."
92. Vampire: "By what means can ignorance be destroyed? How can these means be
obtained? What leads to the attainment of such means?"
93. Prince: "Inquiry cuts the root of ignorance. Dispassion develops inquiry. Aversion to the pleasures of life gives rise to dispassion towards them."
94. Vampire: "What is inquiry, dispassion, or aversion to pleasures?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---95.

Tsarevich: "Research is an analysis conducted within oneself, it is the
distinction between non-essence (mind) and Higher Essence, prompted by an
unyielding, strong, and sincere desire to comprehend and realize Higher Essence.

Dispassion is detachment from one's surroundings.

It arises when the mind is
constantly mindful that attachment is followed by suffering."
96.

Vampire: "What is the root cause of all these requirements?"
97.

Prince: "Divine Grace is the root cause of all good.

Only through devotion to
God can His Grace be attained.

This devotion is generated and developed by the
community of the Sage.

This is the original cause of everything."
98.

Vampire: "Who is this God?

What does devotion to Him mean?

Who are the
Sages?"
99.

The Prince: "God is the Lord of the Cosmos (the Universe).

Devotion is
unwavering Love for Him.

A Sage is one who dwells in Supreme Peace (Nirvana) and is
full of love for all."
100.

Vampire: "Who is always in the power of fear, who is in the power of
suffering and misery, who is in the power of poverty?"
101.

Tsarevich: "Fear holds in its embrace a man who possesses great wealth;
suffering and poverty are found where there is a large family; and poverty is
insatiable desire."
102.

Vampire: "Who is fearless?

Who is free from poverty?

Who never needs
anything?"
103.

Prince: "A person without attachments is free from fear; a person with a
restrained mind is free from suffering and poverty; a Self-Realized person never
needs anything."
104.

Vampire: "Who is the one who is beyond human understanding, and who is
visible even though he has no body?

What is the activity of the inactive?"
105.

Prince: "A person who is liberated in life is beyond human understanding; he
is visible, though he does not identify himself with the body; his activity is
inactive."
106.

Vampire: "What is real?

What is unreal?

What is impractical?

Answer these
questions, and you will liberate your brother."
107.--- PAGE BREAK ---

What is impractical? Answer these
questions, and you will liberate your brother."
107. Tsarevich: "The subject (mind) is what is real; the object (intellect) is
what is unreal; worldly affairs are pointless. "Now I have answered your questions. Please release my brother immediately."
108. "When the prince said this, the vampire gladly released Rukman Gadu
and transformed himself into a Brahmin. 109. "Seeing the figure of the Brahmin (Sage), full of determination and
tapas, the two princes asked him who he was. 110-112. "I was once a Brahmin from Magadha. My name is Vasuman. My learning
brought me fame, and I was known as an invincible debater. I was proud of myself
and sought out those learned pandits who were under the king's protection. Among
them was a great Saint, perfect in Wisdom and completely absorbed in the Supreme
Essence. He was known as Ashtaka. I went to him out of my love for debate. Although I was a simple logician, I presented arguments that contradicted his
statements about Self-Realization, simply by pressuring him with the force of my
polemics. He supported his arguments with numerous quotations from the Holy
Scriptures. Since I wanted to win at any cost, I continued to refute his
statements. Finding me incorrigible, he stopped speaking. However, one of his
disciples, a descendant of Kashyapa, was angered by my audacity and cursed me
before the king, saying, "You,

--- PAGE BREAK ---You are a black sheep among Brahmins!

How dare you refute my Teacher's statements
without even trying to understand them first?

May you turn into a vampire and
remain so for a long time!

"I trembled with fear at the curse and sought refuge at the feet of the sage
Ashtaka.

Being always immersed in the Supreme Being, he took pity on me, even
though I had just been his opponent in the debate; and he changed his disciple's
curse, pronouncing its final part as follows: "May you return to your former form
as soon as a wise man gives the proper answers to all the questions that were asked
here by you and to which I answered, but you rejected my answers with your
polemics." "O prince!

Now you have freed me from this curse.

And therefore I
consider you the best among men, knowing everything that pertains to this life and
the next."
"The princes were amazed by this story of his life.

123-124.

"Brahman asked Hemangade a few more questions, and after that he gained
even greater enlightenment.

Then, after saying goodbye to Brahman, the princes
returned to their city.

"Now I have told you everything, BhAr!

"
CHAPTER XXII - CONCLUSION
1-4.

After the sage Dattatreya finished his narration, Rama again addressed him
with respect: "Teacher, what else did Brahman ask Hemangada, and how did Hemangada
grant him enlightenment?

This is a very interesting topic, and I wish to hear it in
its entirety." Then the Wise Dattatreya, the Ocean of Mercy, continued the story:
Vasuman asked Hemangada the following questions:
5-8.

"Prince!

I will ask you one question.

Please answer me.

I studied the Supreme
Truth from Ashtaka (Asa) and later from you.

You are a sage; but nevertheless, how
is it that you went hunting?

How can a sage be engaged in activity?

Activity
implies duality; wisdom is non-duality; thus, these two things are directly
opposite to each other.

Please clarify my doubt."
When asked about this, Hemangada replied to Brahmin as follows: 9-14.

"O Rahman!--- PAGE BREAK ---

Please clarify my doubt."
When asked about this, Hemangada replied to Brahmin as follows: 9-14. "O Rahman! Your confusion, caused by ignorance, is still not clarified. Wisdom is eternal and
natural. How can it contradict activity? If activity is to render wisdom
ineffective, then how can Wisdom be more useful than sleep? No Eternal Good is
possible in such a case. All this activity depends on Self-Awareness. And since
this is so, can activity destroy Wisdom and yet remain in its absence? Wisdom is
that Awareness in which this world (Yavi) with all its phenomena and activity is
known as an image or a series of images (the Universe); the duality inherent in
activity is also a phenomenon in this non-dual Awareness. "There is no doubt that a person realizes the Supreme Being only after purifying
himself of all thoughts, and that then he is freed from bondage once and for all. Thus, there is no basis for your question, and the wise do not ask it."
Then Rakhman said the following:
15-16. "Truly, O prince! I have also come to the conclusion that the Supreme Being
is Pure, Unblemished Mind. But how can it remain unblemished when desire arises in
it? Desire is a modification of

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the Supreme Being, causing confusion, like a rope mistaken for a snake."
17-26.

"Listen, O Rahman!

You still do not clearly distinguish confusion from
clarity.

The sky appears equally blue to everyone, regardless of whether they know
that space is colorless or not.

Even those who know speak of the "blue sky," but
they themselves are not confused.

The ignorant person is confused, while the
knowledgeable person is not.

The apparent confusion of the latter is harmless, like
a snake that is dead.

His activity is like reflections in a mirror.

There is a
difference between the Wise Man and the ignorant.

The Wise Man possesses accurate
Knowledge and unerring judgment, while the ignorant operates with vague concepts,
and his judgments are distorted.

Knowledge of Truth never leaves the Wise Man, even
when he is immersed in activity.

All his actions are like reflections in a mirror,
for, being Self-Realized, he is no longer affected by ignorance.

"Incorrect knowledge, caused by complete ignorance, can be corrected by True
Knowledge; but incorrect knowledge, caused by error or fault, cannot be corrected
so easily.

When vision is impaired, sight will be blurred, and a single object will
appear to have many images.

Similarly, until residual karma has been exhausted, the
manifestation of the world (Yavi) continues for Jnani (the Wise), though only as a
phenomenon.

But it too will disappear as soon as praRABdha works itself out, and
then only the Pure and Unclouded Mind will remain.

Therefore, I tell you that there
is no stain on the Jnani, even though he seems active and involved in worldly
activities."
Hearing this, the Brahmin asked again:
27.

"O prince!

How can there be any remnant of past karma in Jnana?

Does not Jnana
(Wisdom) destroy all karma, just as fire burns a whole piece of camphor?"
28-29.

Hemangada replied as follows: "Listen, Brahman!

There are three types of
karma: 1) mature, inevitable; 2) pending, unfinished; 3) postponed for the future.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hemangada replied as follows: "Listen, Brahman! There are three types of
karma: 1) mature, inevitable; 2) pending, unfinished; 3) postponed for the future. These three types of karma are common to all, including Jnani. Only the first of
them remains for Jnani, while the other two types are burned. 30. "Karma ripens with the passage of time; such is the Divine Law. When it has
ripened, it is bound to produce its fruits. 31. "The karma of one who is active after Self-Realization becomes
ineffective due to his Wisdom. 32. "Karma that has already ripened and is now bearing its fruits is called
inevitable; it is like an arrow already released from a bow, which must fly along
its trajectory until its initial momentum is exhausted."
33-35. "The environment is only the result of karma: although everyone sees it as
the same, Jnanas react to it differently, according to their own stages of
Realization. "Manifestations of pleasure and pain are observed in the lowest category of Sages,
but they leave no trace on them, unlike the ignorant; pleasure and pain affect the
Sages of the middle category in the same way; however, they only react vaguely to
their environment, just as a sleeping person reacts to a gentle breeze or an insect
crawling on them; manifestations of pleasure and pain are again observed among the
best of the Sages, but they perceive them as a mirage.

--- PAGE BREAK ---36.

"The ignorant anticipate pleasure and pain before they occur, immerse
themselves in them again and again when they occur, and mentally return to
them after they are over, and therefore pleasure and pain leave a strong
impression on their minds.

37.

"Jnanis (wise men) of the lower order also enjoy pleasure and pain like the
ignorant, but their memory of these experiences is often interrupted by periods
of Realization.

Thus, worldly pleasures leave no impression on their minds.

38.

"Jnanis of the middle order, accustomed to restraining their minds through
long practice of austerities, keep their minds under control even when they
experience pleasure or pain, and thus their response to the world is as indistinct
as that of a sleeping person to a gentle breeze or an insect crawling over him.

39-41.

"Jnanis of the highest order remain unaffected, for they always remain like
a burnt skeleton of cloth after their Realization.

Just as an actor is not really
subject to the passions he displays on stage, so this Jnani, always aware of his
Perfection, is not subject to the apparent pleasures and pains, which he considers
to be mere illusions, like a mirage.

42.

"The ignorant do not realize the Pure Supreme Essence; they always see it as
clouded, and therefore they believe in the reality of objective knowledge and are
consequently subject to the influences of pleasure and pain that occur in life.

43-49.

"As for the lowest category of Jnanas, they realize the Supreme Being only
from time to time, and periods of ignorance overtake them whenever their
predispositions overcome them and they consider the body to be the Supreme Being
and the world to be real.

They are often able to overcome and reject old
predispositions, and thus there is a struggle within them between Wisdom and
ignorance—each of which prevails alternately.

Jnanis side with Wisdom and fight ignorance until falsehood is completely
destroyed and Truth prevails.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They are often able to overcome and reject old
predispositions, and thus there is a struggle within them between Wisdom and
ignorance—each of which prevails alternately. Jnanis side with Wisdom and fight ignorance until falsehood is completely
destroyed and Truth prevails. Therefore, Jnana (Wisdom) is indivisible. 50-57. "The representatives of the middle category of Jnanis never forget the
Supreme Essence, and false knowledge never takes hold of them. However, of their
own free will, they bring certain predispositions from the depths of themselves to
the surface in order to support their bodies in accordance with the action of
karma. Such is the behavior of the Perfect Jnani. "As for the seeker, there is no forgetfulness of the Supreme Being for him as long
as he remains in samadhi (Nirvana). But the Perfect Jnani never forgets the Supreme
Being, and he manifests his own predispositions according to his own choice. "The highest order of jnani makes no distinction between samadhi and worldly
affairs. He never perceives anything as separate from the Supreme Essence, and
therefore, for him, there is no apostasy. "The jnani of the middle category loves samadhi and voluntarily abides in it. Accordingly, there is a deviation, albeit slight, when he is engaged in worldly
affairs, or even in caring for the body. "On the other hand, the Jnani of the highest order remains in samadhi
unintentionally and naturally, and any deviation is impossible for him under any
circumstances. "But Jnanis of the middle and higher categories have no trace of karma in them,
because they are in Perfection and perceive nothing but the Supreme Essence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---"How can any karma remain when the unbridled fire of Jnana (Wisdom) rages, burning
everything in its path?

58.

"Such karma is merely a trick, although the viewer believes it to be real.

I
will now explain this point.

59-62.

"The state of Jnani (the Wise One) is considered identical to the state of
God.

There is not even the slightest difference between them.

Therefore, karma
cannot pollute Jnani."
"After this conversation with Hemangada, all of Vasumana's doubts were dispelled.

He gained a clear understanding of True Realization.

Vasumana and the prince said
goodbye to each other and parted ways."
Having heard all this, Rama still asked the Wise Dattā:
63-65.

"Teacher!

I have listened to Your Sacred words concerning Realization and
Wisdom.

My doubts are now clarified.

Now I understand the non-dual state of
Absolute Consciousness, permeating everything and abiding in the Supreme Essence.

Nevertheless, I ask You to convey to me the essence of the entire conversation in a
few words, so that I may remember them always."
66-68.

When asked about this, the Wise Dattā resumed his narrative:
"The One who abides as the Supreme Being is the Pure, Intelligent, Transcendental
Being, containing within Himself the totality of all egos (individuals) in a
complete and perfect measure.

He is Self-sufficient, and He performs the role of
maya (illusion) based on His own Perfection.

Being Non-dual, He causes even the
impossible to happen, and thus reveals the Universe as a sequence of images
(pictures) in a mirror (on a screen).

Now I will tell you how this happens.

69-71.

"He who is Transcendence, Perfection of Awareness, and the complete
aggregate of all egos, divides Himself in two of His own Will.

Imperfection is a
concomitant circumstance of such division; it leads to the appearance of an
inanimate aspect, which is the aforementioned external or unmanifested emptiness.

The intelligent animate aspect is man."
72.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Imperfection is a
concomitant circumstance of such division; it leads to the appearance of an
inanimate aspect, which is the aforementioned external or unmanifested emptiness. The intelligent animate aspect is man."
72. "Now God, being Perfect, sees man, but still knows that it is Himself, through
the awareness of 'I am also this'. 73-90. "Later, God identifies the irrational aspect with His body at the beginning
of Creation. Then He is called Ishvara. Now this clouded Supreme Self, namely
Ishvara, divides Himself into three aspects-qualities: Darkness (ignorance), Light
(Wisdom), and Harmony, which in turn manifest the Cosmos (Universe) consisting of
many worlds. The gods are innumerable, and they are all engaged in the creation of
worlds; innumerable gods sustain these worlds; and innumerable gods destroy them. Thus exists the Universe. But they are all merely images in the great mirror of
Absolute Consciousness. "They are only manifested and are not real, for they were never created. "The Creator is always the complete sum of all egos (creatures). Just as you fill
your body and identify yourself with various senses and organs, without departing
from the ego, so the transcendent Pure Mind similarly identifies itself with
everything, from the Supreme God (Archangel) to the most insignificant protoplasm
(the nucleus of an atom), and yet remains One. "Again, just as you cannot taste anything without the help of your tongue, nor
comprehend other things without the help of other senses or organs, so too does the
Creator act and know Himself through the medium of gods, humans, etc. Just as your
conscious Higher Self

--- PAGE BREAK ---remains pure and without qualities, although it forms the basis for all the
activities of the members, organs, and senses, so too is the Higher Mind unaffected
by anything, although it holds all egos within itself.

The Great Ra-M-Ha knows no
differences in the immensity of the Universe, and yet He makes no distinctions
among these egos.

"In the same way, the Cosmos (Universe) shines in Him like reflections in a mirror.

The radiance of the Cosmos is due to His reflection.

In the same way, all
individuals in the world, namely, you, I, and others—all of them—are glimpses of
His Consciousness.

Since they are all only aspects of the Supreme Mind, only He
alone will shine in purity, free from contamination or interference in the form of
objects.

"Just as a shining mirror is clear and pure when no images are visible in it, and
just as it remains unblemished even when images are reflected in it, so too does
Pure Mind exist Pure and unblemished regardless of whether we see this world or
not.

91-92.

"This unblemished Supreme Mind is one without a second, and it is filled
with Bliss, because there is not the slightest trace of unhappiness in it.

The
totality of all the happiness of all living beings takes the form of Mind, because
it is undoubtedly desired by all; and it is none other than the Supreme Being,
which consists of pure Bliss, because the Supreme Being is most loved by every
being.

93.

"For the sake of the Supreme Being, people engage in asceticism (fasting)
and restrain their desires; all sensual pleasures are but sparks of the Bliss
that is inherent in the Supreme Being.

94.

"For sensual pleasures are like the feeling of relief experienced when freed
from a heavy burden, or the feeling of peace in sleep.

Pure Mind is truly Bliss,
because it is the only one sought after."
95.

People are unaware of the Bliss that is inherent in them as their Highest
Essence because of their ignorance.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Pure Mind is truly Bliss,
because it is the only one sought after."
95. People are unaware of the Bliss that is inherent in them as their Highest
Essence because of their ignorance. They always associate pleasure with certain
events (alcohol, drugs, etc.). 96-98. "Furthermore, just as a person who sees images associated with objects in a
mirror ignores the presence of the reflecting surface, but after reflection
discovers that the images depend on the mirror and are inseparable from it, and the
mirror is found to be untainted by the reflected images, so too do the Sages know
that the Supreme Being alone is the One and only, real and untainted by its own
projections, namely, this world (Yavi). 99. "The relationship of the Cosmos (Universe) to Pure Mind, that is, to the
Absolute Essence, is like the relationship of a pot to clay, jewelry to gold, or a
sculpture to granite. 100. "O Rama! Denying the existence of this world (Yavi) does not speak of
the perfection of the denier. Denial is absurd. For it implies Mind, and
Mind reflects itself in the form of this Universe. 101. "The mind that denies or acknowledges this world shines above all this! Can
the world cease to exist and disappear simply because it is denied?"
102. "Just as images appear in a mirror and share its nature, so the universe
has the nature of the Supreme Being and abides in It, and is as real as the
Mind."
103-105. "This Wisdom in its Perfection is the Realization and Awareness of all as
the Supreme Being. The Mind manifests itself in the form of objects by its own
nature, like a mirror manifesting itself in the form of images on it. This is the
essence of the Shastras (Sacred Scriptures). There is no bondage, no

--- PAGE BREAK ---form of objects by its own
nature, like a mirror manifesting itself in the form of images on it. This is the
essence of the Shastras (Sacred Scriptures). There is no bondage, no

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Liberation, nor seeker, nor process of attainment. Only the Transcendental
Conscious Principle exists in the three states of existence. It abides as the One
and uniform Absolute Being and existence. It is ignorance; It is Wisdom; It is
bondage; It is Liberation, and It is its process.
106. "This is all that needs to be known, understood, and realized. There is
nothing more. I have told you everything in order."
The sage HaRi (Ari) concluded his exposition as follows:
107-111. "A person who knows this properly will never be overcome by suffering. O
Narada! This is the section on Wisdom, brought forth from the hidden and secret
depths through reasoning, subtlety, and experience. If someone does not attain
Wisdom after hearing or reading this text, continuing to wallow in ignorance, then
he should be considered as something no better than a log or a stone. Can he then
hope for anything? "Hearing this text even once should make a person Truly Wise;
they should undoubtedly become Wise. Sin or obstacles on the path to Wisdom are
removed when reading this text; Wisdom dawns when listening to it. Writing,
recognizing, and discussing its content destroys the feeling of duality, clears the
mind, and reveals the unchanging Truth.
112. "The Lord is called Liberation when He is clearly and directly realized
through inquiry as the One indivisible Supreme Essence of all and everything;
otherwise, He is called bondage. He is the One Consciousness permeating the three
states of being, remaining unstained and undivided by them. He is sound, word, and
meaning of the word; He is the Great Ra-M-Ha."
Book 10.
THE BOOK OF DEATH
I bear witness to my reverence for the Great Ra-M-Ha!
Chapter 1 ON THE SUFFERINGS OF SINNERS IN THIS WORLD AND THE NEXT
1. A tree whose root is the Law, whose trunk is the Vedas, whose numerous
branches
- Puranas, flowers - prayers to God, and fruits - Liberation (Immortality),
sprouted.
2. In the field of beings who do not close their eyes, the Sages, Shau, and
others performed prayers to reach the Heavenly Worlds.
3-5. One morning, while offering prayers to the Great Ra-M-Ha, the Sages politely
asked the venerable SuTu, who was sitting there: "You have described the path
leading to happiness (Immortality). Now we want to hear about the frightening path
of Yama (King Navi), as well as the sufferings in the world of birth and death
(Yavi) and the means to escape the cycle of birth and death (samsara). Please tell
us truthfully about the misfortunes of this world and the other."
6. SuTa said, "Then listen. I want to describe the path of Yama, which
brings happiness to the pious and sorrow to sinners.
7. As it was conveyed to Vaina-Treye (Ivan the Wise) by God Vishnu (the
Supreme) himself, so shall I tell you this to remove your difficulties.
8-9. Once, when Hari (ZaHariya/AzHariya), the Supreme Teacher (Rahman/Man of
God), was sitting, resting on the sacredhnu (the
Supreme) himself, so shall I tell you this to remove your difficulties.
8-9. Once, when Hari (ZaHariya/AzHariya), the Supreme Teacher (Rahman/Man of
God), was sitting, resting on the sacred

--- PAGE BREAK ---river (Jordan/Iriy-Don), the son of Vin-Anta (son of Veles from the Rod of
Atlanteans) approached, offered a respectful bow, and asked:
"You, O Teacher, have described to me various paths of devotion to God, and also
told me about the Highest Goal of those devoted to God.

10.

Now I want to hear about the terrifying path of Yama (King Navi),
which is followed by those who have strayed from serving God.

11.

The name of the Lord is easy to pronounce, and the tongue is under our
control.

Shame and disgrace on the unfortunate ones who do not pray to God and go
to Hell.

12.

Tell me, Teacher, what state do sinners reach and how do they find
misfortune on the path of Yama?

13.

The Blessed Teacher said: "Listen, I will describe to you the path of
Yama, which is frightening even to hear about, and along which sinful souls go
to Hell.

14-16.

O Tark, those who are mired in sinfulness, who are devoid of compassion
and righteousness, who are attached to immorality and reject the True Scriptures
and the company of the virtuous; the self-satisfied, who do not recognize
authority, poisoned by pride in their wealth, deprived of Divine qualities
(Spirit); confused by a multitude of thoughts, entangled in the webs of illusion
(maya), revelling in sensual pleasures - fall into the Abyss.

17.

Those inclined toward Wisdom go toward the Highest Goal (Immortality);
those inclined toward sin go the way of misfortune and suffering.

18.

Listen to how the sufferings of this world fall to sinners and how, after
passing through death, they encounter torment.

19.

Having done good or bad deeds in their lives, in accordance with their past
efforts, everyone receives certain illnesses - as the fruit of their actions
(karma).

20.

Mighty death suddenly creeps up like a snake and strikes, causing
physical and mental pain in a person who passionately desires to live.

21-24.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mighty death suddenly creeps up like a snake and strikes, causing
physical and mental pain in a person who passionately desires to live. 21-24. Still not tired of life, surrounded by the care of his relatives for his
frail body, he is on the threshold of death. He lies like a tame dog, eating whatever is placed before him out of mercy,
suffering from illness and indigestion, feeding on crumbs, moving little. With a lifeless gaze, chronic bronchitis, tormented by coughing and heavy
breathing, the gurgling of death itself in his throat, surrounded by grieving
relatives, unresponsive to questions, he is caught in the net of death. 25. In this state, with his mind preoccupied with the fate of his
family, with unbridled emotions, losing consciousness from pain, he dies
among his weeping relatives. 26. At this final moment, O Tark, a divine vision arises—
all Worlds are as one—and he does not try to say anything. 27. And when the destruction of the senses and the cessation of the mind
begin, the messengers of Yama approach, and life departs. 28. When the breath stops, it seems that the moment of dying lasts an eternity,
and intense pain, like the bites of hundreds of scorpions, torments the dying
person. 29. Now his mouth fills with foam and saliva. The sinner's life air
escapes through the lower gates of the body. 30-31. Then two terrifying messengers of Yama approach, with a frightening
appearance, holding ropes and nooses, naked, with sharpened teeth, black as ravens,
with bristling hair and ugly faces, with claws like blades. Seeing them, the sinner
trembles and empties his stomach beneath himself. 32. Yama's servants pull out of the body a creature the size of a thumb, which
cries out, "Oh, oh," and sees its body from the side.

--- PAGE BREAK ---33.

Pulling it out of the agonizing body, tightening the noose around its neck,
they drag it by force all the way, just as the king's guards drag a convict.

34-35.

As Yama's messengers drag the sinner away, they insult him and describe in
detail, over and over again, the terrible tortures of the underworld:
"Hurry up, wretched sinner.

You will go to the kingdom of Yama.

We will take you
to Hell and other hells without delay."
36.

Hearing these words and the lamentations of his relatives, he cries out
loudly, "Oh!

Oh!", beaten by the servants of Yama.

37-38.

With his heart frozen in fear, trembling from threats, torn apart by
vicious dogs, suffering, he remembers his unrighteous deeds.

Hungry and exhausted without water, scorched by the sun and burned by hot
winds, beaten with whips, overcoming pain, he walks almost without strength on
the scorching ground, where there is no shelter or source of water.

39-40.

From time to time, falling unconscious from exhaustion and rising again,
he walks this path through the darkness to the kingdom of Yama.

The sinner is brought there quite quickly, and Yama's messengers show him all the
monstrous tortures of Hell.

41.

Standing before the terrifying Yama, the sinner, at his command,
quickly returns through the air with the messengers.

42.

Returning, bound by past inclinations, wanting to be in the body, but
dragged away by the noose around his neck, suffering from thirst and cold, he
moans.

43.

He receives what he deserves, and this is part of the retribution for his
actions in the world of Yavi.

The sinner begs for mercy, but nevertheless, O Tark,
the sinner receives no leniency.

44.

Prayers, offerings, and handfuls of water do not save the sinner
from torment.

Although he eats waste, he always remains hungry.

45.

Those who have left their bodies and are deprived of scraps
wander in torment in an uninhabited forest until the end of time.

46.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Those who have left their bodies and are deprived of scraps
wander in torment in an uninhabited forest until the end of time. 46. Unfulfilled karma does not disappear even after hundreds of millions of
years. A being that has not experienced suffering does not obtain a human body. 47. Therefore, O twice-born, throughout life, a person must offer prayers to
God, the Great Ra-M-Ha. Each day is divided into three parts! 48. The first and second (at dawn and after noon) give nourishment to the
five elements of the body, and the third goes to the messengers of Yama. 49. For nine days and nights, the soul, separated from the body, receives food,
and on the tenth day, the being with a fully formed body gains strength. 50. When the old body is lost, a new one is formed by this food. The person
becomes the size of a hand, and through this body, they learn good and evil on
their path. 51. On the first day, the head is formed from the balls (atoms), on the second
day, the neck and shoulders are formed, on the third day, the heart is formed, on
the fourth day, the back is formed, on the fifth day, the navel is formed, on the
sixth day, the lower back and private parts are formed, on the seventh day, the
hips are formed, on the eighth day, the arms are formed, on the ninth day, the legs
are formed, and on the tenth day, hunger and thirst are formed. 54. Being in a body formed from balls (atoms), very hungry and suffering from
thirst, the deceased receives food on the eleventh and twelfth days. 55. On the thirteenth day, the sinner, bound by Yama's servants, walks the road
to Hell like a captured monkey.

--- PAGE BREAK ---56.

The length of Yama's path is measured at 86,000 yojanas (1 yojana = 8-9
miles) without Vaitarani.

57.

The deceased travels 247 yojanas per day, moving day and night without
rest.

58-59.

The sinner reaches the domain of the King of Justice (another form of
Yama) after passing through sixteen cities that lie along his path—all these places
of horror on the way to the city of Yama, the abode of Justice.

Having safely
passed through the sixteen cities that lie along his path.

60.

Dragging himself with a noose around his neck, uttering cries of "Oh,
Oh!", having left his home forever, the sinner walks this path to the city of
Yama.

CHAPTER 2 DESCRIPTION OF THE PATH OF YAMA
1.

Gar said, "What is the path of suffering in the Kingdom of Yama (the world of
Navi)?

Tell me, O Keshav (God-Ascetic), by what path does the sinner go there?"
3.

"On this path there is no shade from trees where a person could rest, and
there is nothing that could serve as food and sustain life.

4.

Nowhere is there water to drink for those suffering from thirst.

Twelve Suns
are unbearably hot, both at the end and at the beginning of the path.

5.

Thus does the sinful soul drag itself along, pierced by cold winds, pricked
by thorns in one place, bitten by vicious snakes in another.

6.

In one place, fierce lions, tigers, and dogs bite the sinner; in
another, scorpions sting him; in a third, fire burns him.

7-8.

In one place there is a terrible forest, two thousand yojanas long and
wide.

It is teeming with bees, mosquitoes, crows, owls, hawks, vultures,
and forest fires are everywhere;
the leaves on its trees are sharp as swords and they scratch and prick the
sinner.

9.

In one place he falls into a hidden well, in another he falls from a high
mountain, in a third he steps on razor blades and spearheads.

10.

In one place, he stumbles in pitch darkness and falls into water; in
another, into mud swarming with leeches; in a third, into hot slime.

11.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In one place, he stumbles in pitch darkness and falls into water; in
another, into mud swarming with leeches; in a third, into hot slime. 11. In one place, he encounters a plain of hot sand made of red-hot copper;
in another, a mountain of hot ash; in a third, a huge cloud of smoke. 12-13. In some places, he is hit by streams of coal, rockfalls, lightning
strikes, rain of hot water, blood, weapons, and streams of caustic mud. In some places, there are deep gorges on the way, in others, hills and valleys
that must be overcome. 14. In one place, there is darkness as thick as pitch; in another, there
are impassable rocks; in a third, there are lakes of pus, blood, and
excrement. 15-17. Halfway along the path flows the extremely terrifying river Vay, the sight
of which causes suffering, and the mere mention of which fills one with fear. It flows for a hundred yojanas—an impassable stream of pus and blood, with piles
of bones on its banks, with mud made of flesh and blood. There is no ford across it, the banks are swampy, and it is impassable for
sinners, as it is full of crocodiles and teeming with hundreds of terrifying birds. 18-20. When the river sees a sinner approaching, it spews flames and smoke,
boiling like oil in a frying pan, O Tark! It is covered all over with myriads of stinging insects, teeming with huge
vultures and crows with iron beaks, filled with

--- PAGE BREAK ---pigs (apostates of the Rod), crocodiles, leeches, fish, turtles, and other
carnivorous sea creatures.

21.

Very sinful people who have fallen into the stream cry out, "Oh, oh, oh!"—
screaming in pain again and again.

22-23.

Often, sinners who are thirsty and hungry drink blood.

This river, full of
blood and pus, is terrifying.

It flows with a loud roar, and it is frightening to look into it, and at the mere
sight of it, the sinner faints.

24.

Its entire surface is covered with scorpions and black snakes; there is no
salvation for those who fall into it.

25.

Hundreds of thousands of whirlpools drag the sinner to the bottom, where
he remains for a while and then floats back up again.

26.

O Wise One, this river was created so that sinners would fall into it.

It
is difficult to cross, and it is a source of unimaginable misfortune.

27.

Thus, the sinner walks the path of suffering, weeping and wailing,
overwhelmed by intense grief and experiencing numerous afflictions.

28.

With a noose around their necks, and some dragged by hooks, pushed in the
back with sharp weapons, sinners continue on their way.

29.

Others are dragged by a noose passed through their noses or ears; some are
tied with ropes until they are half dead, dragged along the road, and pecked at by
crows with their beaks.

30-32.

Some sinners have many heavy iron chains around their necks, arms, legs,
and backs.

And the terrible messengers of Yama beat them with hammers; blood gushes from the
sinner's mouth, but he is forced to swallow it again.

Mourning their karma, these utterly tormented beings, who have experienced the
extreme degree of all kinds of misfortunes, continue on their way to the kingdom of
Yama.

33-34.

And, dragging himself along this path, the fool constantly moans, "Oh!

Oh!" calling upon God and repenting, "With enormous, reward-worthy effort, life in
a human body was attained.

But having received it, I did not fulfill my duty.

Oh,
what have I done!

35.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Oh,
what have I done! 35. I did not offer gifts, I did not do good, I did not impose restrictions
on myself (I did not fast), I did not worship God (I did not pray), I did not
perform service in places of pilgrimage (I did not study the Vedas), as
prescribed. Oh, dweller in the body, receive retribution for what you have
done! 36. I did not properly show respect to my neighbors, did not visit sacred
places, did not serve the righteous, and did not perform a single good deed. O
dweller in the body, receive retribution for what you have done! 37. Alas, I did not dig wells in waterless places, did not do good for the
benefit of humans, animals, or birds, did not do even the smallest thing to support
those in need of help. O dweller in the body, receive retribution for what you have
done! 38. I did not give gifts daily, nor did I pray to God every day. I did not
follow the instructions of the Vedas and Shastras (Sacred Scriptures) properly,
did not listen to the Sages, and did not worship God. O dweller in the body,
receive retribution for what you have done! 39. I did not follow my husband's good advice, I was not faithful to my
husband, I did not pay due respect to my worthy ancestors. O dweller in the
body, receive retribution for what you have done! 41. I did not exhaust myself with fasting every year, I did not observe the
prescribed rituals. Because of my ungodly deeds in my previous lives, I
received a female body, which is a source of great misfortune.

--- PAGE BREAK ---42.

Thus, bitterly lamenting many times, remembering his past incarnation,
moaning, "How did I come to this state?" he goes on.

43.

For seventeen days, he moves at the speed of the wind.

On the
eighteenth day, O Tark, the deceased reaches the city of SauMya.

44.

A huge crowd of dead people dwells in this beautiful and perfect city.

A
river flows through it, and there you can see a delightful Tree.

45.

In this city, he rests together with Yama's servants.

Here he remembers the
best moments of his life spent with his wife, son, and loved ones, and grieves.

46-47.

When he begins to mourn his wealth, family, and other loved ones, Yama's
servants say to him, "Where is your wealth now?

Where are your children and wife
now?

Where are your friends and relatives?

You suffer only from the results of your
own karma, O fool.

Continue this endlessly.

48.

You know that for a traveler, the main strength is in his provisions.

You
make no effort to obtain them, O traveler to the lower world!

Nevertheless, you
must immediately go this way, where there is neither buying nor selling.

49.

Have you not heard, mortal, of this path, which is known even to children?

Have you not heard of it from the twice-born (the Sage), as it is said in the
Vedas?

50.

This is what Yama's servants say to him, striking him with hammers.

Stumbling and falling again and again, he is forced to run, held by them on a
rope.

51.

Here he eats the gifts for the first month, which the Righteous bring out
of love or compassion, and then goes on to Sau.

52.

There is a king there who looks like Death.

The sight of the king
fills the dead man with fear, and he decides to give up any attempts at
resistance.

53.

In this city, he dines on a mixture of water and rotten meat, and then
leaves the city.

54.

Then the deceased quickly goes to Rab, and he cries with grief when
he sees the terrible forests.

55-56.

Mercilessly beaten, with a noose around his neck, he moans again and
again.--- PAGE BREAK ---

55-56. Mercilessly beaten, with a noose around his neck, he moans again and
again. After two months, the unfortunate man leaves this city. Here he receives
food, water, and clothing from the Saints, and again he is dragged forward
by the servants of Yama. 57-58. The third month arrives, and he arrives in the city of Gand, where he sets
off again, having eaten the food offered for the third month. And in the fourth month, he reaches the city of Aipa. Here, stone rains fall in
abundance on the dead man. 59. After eating food for the fourth month, he becomes satisfied to a certain
extent. In the fifth month, the deceased goes on to the city of Kucha. 60. Staying in the city, the deceased eats food from his hands for the fifth
month and then moves on. 61. After five and a half months, a ceremony is performed before the sixth month
begins. The deceased is satisfied with meager food and a few cups of water, which
he receives for the good deeds he did during his lifetime. 62-63. After staying there for some time, beaten by Yama's servants, trembling
and miserable, he leaves this city. He goes to Rab, the kingdom ruled by Yama's younger brother, King Vichitra. 64-65. When the deceased sees his huge body, he runs away in fear. away. Then fishermen come to him and say, "We have arrived and brought a boat for
you, who wish to cross the great river Vai, if your merits are sufficient for this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---66-67.

The saints who see the Truth say that Ra-M-Ha is God, and the river is
called Vai (for what), because it can only be crossed by praying to God.

If you have brought prayer, then the boat will come to you, otherwise it
will not."
Hearing their words, the unfortunate man exclaims, "Oh Heaven!"
68.

Seeing him, the river rages, and the unfortunate man cries loudly.

A sinful
soul that does not offer prayers will truly drown here.

69.

Pushing a skewer through the unfortunate man's lips, the messengers soar
into the air and carry him across the stream like a fish on a hook.

70.

Then, having eaten the food of the sixth month, he continues on his way,
moaning sadly and suffering from hunger.

71.

After the seventh month, he arrives in the city of Bahvapadu.

Here he
receives what is given to him for the seventh month.

72.

Passing through this city, he arrives at the city of Duhkhad.

Traveling
through the air, he experiences terrible suffering.

73.

After eating the food for the eighth month, he moves on.

At the end of the
ninth month, he arrives in the city of NaYaakRandu.

74.

Seeing many people struggling in agony and losing his courage, he cries in
deep shock.

75.

Leaving this city, the deceased, beaten by Yama's servants, reaches
the city of Ptaab with great difficulty.

76.

Although he receives food and water as gifts here, he is unhappy.

At the end of the eleventh month, he arrives in the city of Rau.

77.

Here he enjoys what he receives for the eleventh month, and after half a
month he reaches Payo.

78.

Here, clouds gather, adding to the misfortune of the deceased.

And here,
suffering, he receives food until the end of the year.

79.

At the end of the year, he reaches the city of Shita, where he is overtaken
by a cold hundreds of times stronger than that of the Himalayas.

80.

Hungry and pierced by the cold, he looks in ten directions: "Is there anyone
who could free me from my suffering?"
81.--- PAGE BREAK ---

80. Hungry and pierced by the cold, he looks in ten directions: "Is there anyone
who could free me from my suffering?"
81. Then Yama's servants ask, "What merits do you have?" After eating the
food given on the anniversary, he regains his courage. 82. At the end of the year, approaching Yama's abode, he reaches the city
of BahubHiti and discards his body, which is the size of a hand. 83. The soul, the size of a thumb, in order to atone for its karma, having
received a body of torment, sets off on a journey through the air with Yama's
servants. 84. Those who do not worship God move as if painfully bound by chains. 85. Four roads lead to the city of the King of Justice, and I have described
to you the path to the southern gate. 86. I have told you how they travel this terrible road, exhausted by hunger,
thirst, and fatigue. What else do you want to hear?"
CHAPTER 3 DESCRIPTION OF THE TORMENTS IN THE KINGDOM OF THE PIT
1. Gar asked, "What are the sufferings that a sinner experiences after passing
through the Pit to his abode? Tell me about this, O KeShava (Spirit of the
Supreme God)."
2. The Blessed Lord (Teacher) said: "Listen, O descendant of Vin-Anta (Anta). I
will tell you this from beginning to end. But you will tremble even from the mere
description of Hell. 3. Forty-four yojanas away, O Kashyapa, from the city of Bhiti, lies
the huge city of the King of Justice.

--- PAGE BREAK ---4-5.

The sinner cries out when he hears the lamentations of the crowd of
fellow sinners—all those who are going to the city of Yama.

Everyone goes to the gatekeeper and reports to him.

The gatekeeper is always on
duty.

6.

After visiting Raghupt (the keeper of people's deeds), he reports on
their good and bad deeds.

Raghupt then tells this to the King of Justice.

7.

The godless, O Tarkashya, and people mired in sin are well known to the
King of Justice, as they should be.

8.

Nevertheless, he asks Raghupt about their sins.

Raghupt, although he is all-
knowing, asks the Vanas (the gods who record the deeds of men).

9.

The Vanas (Angels) - children of Light (Ingli) living in Heaven, on Earth,
and in lower realms - hear and understand from a distance and see very far.

10.

Their wives are of the same nature and are called Vanis (divine maidens).

They know absolutely everything that women do.

11.

They report to Raghupt everything that is said or done by each
person, openly or secretly.

12.

These courtiers of the King of Justice know exactly all the virtues and
vices of humanity and the karma generated by the mind, speech, and body.

13.

Such is the power of those who have authority over mortals and
immortals.

Thus, the Vanas, who always speak the truth, recount the deeds of
man.

14.

They are benevolent toward people who win their favor through asceticism,
charity, and honest speech, and they grant them Heaven and Liberation
(Immortality).

15.

Knowing the malicious actions of sinners and telling the King of
Justice about them, these truth-tellers become the bringers of suffering.

16.

God, the Sun and the Moon, fire, wind, sky, earth and water, the heart,
Yama, day and night, dawn and dusk, and Justice (Conscience) - all know the deeds
of man.

17.

The King of Justice, Raghupt, the Vanas, the Sun, and others know all the
sins and good deeds of an incarnated being.

18.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The King of Justice, Raghupt, the Vanas, the Sun, and others know all the
sins and good deeds of an incarnated being. 18. Then Yama, having ascertained the sins of sinners, sums them up and reveals
his terrifying image to them. 19-21. Very sinful people see the terrifying image of Yama—he has a huge body,
sits on a buffalo, and holds a staff in his hand. Thundering like a cloud during a pra-laya (storm), black as a mountain of soot,
terrifyingly flashing his weapons like lightning, in his divine form, three yojanas
tall, with eyes like wells, a gaping mouth from which huge fangs protrude, red
eyes, and a long nose. 22. Even Raghu is terrifying when surrounded by the King of Death, fever, and
others. Next to him, all the messengers, resembling Yama in appearance, roar. 23. Seeing this, the unfortunate soul cries out in fear. The sinful soul, which
has not borne good fruit, trembles and moans. 24. Then, at Yama's command, Raghupt addresses all these sinners who are
weeping and lamenting their karma. 25. "O you sinners, evildoers, polluted by selfishness (desires), unjust ones -
why did you commit sins? 26. O you foolish people, why did you commit these sorrowful sins, born of
lust, anger, and association with sinners? 27. Until now, you have committed sins with great pleasure, which is why you
are now destined to suffer. Do not turn your faces away. 28. You have committed many sinful deeds, and these sins are the cause
of inevitable misfortune.

--- PAGE BREAK ---29.

It is known that Yama treats the foolish and the learned, the poor
and the rich, the strong and the weak equally.

30.

Hearing these words of Ragupta, the sinners bitterly lament their karma and
remain silent and motionless.

31.

The King of Justice, seeing that they stand motionless like thieves,
assigns an appropriate punishment for each sinner.

32.

Then the harsh messengers, after beating them, say, "Go, sinner, to the
most terrible and terrifying worlds of Hell."
33.

The messengers, fierce and terrifying, carrying out Yama's sentences, tie
them all with a single noose and drag them to the underworld.

34.

There is a huge tree there, like a blazing fire.

It is five yojanas high and
one yojana thick.

35.

They beat the sinners, chaining them to the tree and hanging them upside
down.

The unfortunate ones, for whom there is no salvation, moan, burning in the
fire.

36.

Many sinners hang from this tree, emaciated by hunger and thirst,
beaten by Yama's messengers.

37.

"Oh, forgive my sins!" these very sinful people cry out to the messengers in
utter helplessness, folding their hands imploringly.

38.

Again and again, Yama's servants beat them with metal rods, maces, clubs,
sticks, and large pestles from mortars.

39-40.

Beaten, they fall into a lifeless state.

Then, seeing that they have
quieted down, Yama's servants address them thus: "O you sinners, servants of evil,
why did you commit such vile deeds?

You did not even make simple offerings of water
and food (alms).

41.

You did not even give half a handful of food to crows (pigeons) or dogs
(cats), you did not treat guests with respect, you did not pray to God.

42.

You did not focus properly on fulfilling your duty (Life Purpose), did
not repeat mantras (prayers) that relieve suffering.

43.

You never studied the Holy Scriptures (Vedas) or worshipped God.

Although you were householders, you did not even show compassion to the poor
and homeless.

44.

You have not performed any devoted service to God.--- PAGE BREAK ---

44. You have not performed any devoted service to God. Reap the fruits of your
own sins! Because you are deprived of righteousness, you deserve to be punished
with beatings. 45. Forgiveness of sins is given by the Lord - the Great Ra-M-Ha. We
only punish evildoers, as we are commanded."
46. Saying this, the messengers beat the sinners mercilessly, and from
such beatings they fall to the ground, hot as burning coals. 47. As they fall, they are scratched by sharp leaves, and when they reach the
bottom, they are bitten by dogs and cry out loudly. 48. Then the servants of Yama fill the mouths of those who scream with mud, tie
some of them with numerous loops, and beat them with hammers. 49. Some sinners are sawed with saws like firewood, others are chopped into
pieces with axes, spread out on the ground. 50. Some bodies are half-drowned in hot tar, and arrows are stuck into their
heads. Others, secured in the center of the machine, are pressed like sugar cane. 51. Some are burned with hot coals, surrounded by torches and
melted like a piece of ore. 52. Some are immersed in boiling oil, others in heated petroleum, and are
turned over like pancakes thrown onto a frying pan.

--- PAGE BREAK ---53.

Some are thrown onto the road in front of huge, raging elephants, while
others are hung upside down with their hands and feet bound.

54.

Some are thrown into wells, some are thrown from the top, others are
placed in pits with worms that eat them.

55.

Huge predatory crows and vultures with hard beaks peck at their heads,
eyes, and faces.

56.

Others protest loudly: "Give me back my wealth that you owe me.

I see that
you are enjoying my wealth in the kingdom of Yama."
57.

Such sinners, arguing in Hell, suffer a terrible punishment -
The messengers of Yama tear the flesh from them with pincers.

58.

By Yama's order, Yama's servants carry these disputants away and
throw them into the disgusting underworld.

59.

The hells, full of great suffering, are located here, not far from the
Tree; the misfortunes and sufferings in them are indescribable.

60.

There are 8,400,000 hells, at the center of which are twenty-one of the
most terrible of the most terrible.

61-64.

All are created from sorrows and diseases of various kinds, various fruits
of sin, and are inhabited by many servants of Yama.

65.

Foolish sinners, deprived of righteousness and fallen there, experience
various hellish torments until the end of the kalpa (a day of God, equal to 4.32
billion Earth years).

66.

Men and women experience torment in the underworld because of their
secret relationships (adultery).

67.

Those who have created a family to satisfy the desires of their womb will
reap the corresponding fruit, leaving both behind after death.

68.

Having shed his body, which he nourished at the expense of other
beings, he goes straight to Hell, where everything is completely opposite to
happiness.

69.

In the disgusting Hell, a person experiences what is prescribed for him by
the Court, like a cripple who has been deprived of his fortune and family support.

70.

Those who supported their families with money obtained by unjust means end
up in Hell, where impenetrable darkness reigns.

71.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Those who supported their families with money obtained by unjust means end
up in Hell, where impenetrable darkness reigns. 71. After experiencing the torments of Hell in due order, he comes here (to the
world of Yavi) again, but now purified. CHAPTER 4 DESCRIPTION OF THE SINS THAT LEAD TO HELL
1. Gar asked, "For what sins do they fall into this great path? Why do they fall
into the Vay River? Why do they go to Hell? Tell me this, O KeshaVa."
2. The Blessed Sage said: "Those who always enjoy ungodly deeds, who turn away
from good deeds, go from Hell to Hell, from suffering to suffering, from fear to
fear. 3. The pious enter the city of the King of Justice through three entrances, but
sinners only through the road leading to the South Gate. 4. The river Vay lies on this ill-fated path. I will tell you about the sinners
who walk on it. 5-12. Murderers of Brahmins (Wizards), drunkards, drug addicts, animal
killers, child murderers, murderers of women, destroyers of children in the womb,
and those who commit secret sins;
Those who steal the wealth of their neighbors, the property of the Temple or the
twice-born (Sages), who encroach on the property of women and who steal the
property of children;

--- PAGE BREAK ---Those who do not pay their debts, who appropriate deposits, who betray trust, and
who kill with poisoned food;
Those who take advantage of others' mistakes and belittle their achievements, who
envy worthy people, who associate with malicious individuals, who are foolish, who
reject the company of decent people;
Those who despise sacred places, good people, virtuous deeds, teachers, and God,
who speak disparagingly about the Vedas and other sacred scriptures;
Those who rejoice at the sight of misfortune, who try to make the happy unhappy,
who speak ill of others, who are always malicious;
13.

Those who do not listen to good advice and do not even heed the words of
the Shastras (Holy Scriptures), who are self-satisfied, stubborn, foolish, who
consider themselves enlightened—these and many others, very sinful, devoid of
righteousness, are definitely walking the path of Yama, to the river Vay.

I will
tell you what kind of sinners fall into it.

14.

Those who do not honor their fathers, mothers, teachers, mentors, and
priests—these people drown in it.

15.

Those who treacherously abandon their wives, who are faithful to them,
possess good qualities, noble birth, and are honest, fall into the river Vay.

16.

Those who attribute evil to a virtuous person and treat him disrespectfully
fall into the Vay River.

17.

Those who do not fulfill the promises made to Brahmins (Sages), and who,
having called them, say, "I have nothing for you" — for these two, their stay in
Hell lasts a considerable time.

18-24.Those who do not fulfill the promises made to Brahmins (Sages), and who,
having called them, say, "I have nothing for you" — for these two, their stay in
Hell lasts a considerable time.

18-24.

Those who take back what they have given, who regret their gifts, who take
away the means of livelihood from others, who prevent others from offering prayers
to God;
Those who prevent asceticism (fasting), who prevent the recitation of the Holy
Scriptures, who move the boundaries of fields, who plow pastures;
Those who sell and drink alcoholic beverages (Alcohol - son of the Spirit of
Goli), cohabit with women of another race or with women of lower status
(prostitutes), who kill animals for their own pleasure;
Those who have abandoned their duties (the Purpose of Life), who eat flesh (meat)
and drink alcohol (AlKoHol), who allow themselves to be promiscuous, who do not
study the Shastras.

Those who have not studied the Vedic scriptures, who have consumed alcohol or
drugs, and who have cohabited with a woman from another caste;
Those who molest the king's wife, who kidnap or deceive others' wives, who lust
after virgins (and children), and who defame virtuous women—these and many other
fools, lovers of forbidden paths and neglecters of prescribed duties—fall into the
river Vay.

26.

Having traveled their entire path, sinners fall into the realm of Yama, and
at the entrance, Yama's messengers, at his command, throw them into this river
again.

27.

O Brahman, they throw these sinners into the river Vay, which is itself the
worst of the hells.

28.

Those who do not give gifts (charity) or pray to God suffer the most
severe torment and go to the Tree standing on its bank.

28-30.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Those who do not give gifts (charity) or pray to God suffer the most
severe torment and go to the Tree standing on its bank. 28-30. Those who give false testimony, those who perform the duties of others,
those who earn their living by fraud, those who obtain income by theft,
Those who cut down or damage large trees, gardens, and forests; those who neglect
their vows and pilgrimages; those who violate the chastity of women;

--- PAGE BREAK ---A woman who despises her husband and thinks of another—these and others are
severely beaten at the woolly Tree.

31.

Those who fall from these beatings are thrown into the lower Hades by the
messengers.

I will tell you about the sinners who end up there.

32.

Godless people who deny and violate God's Laws, misers who are attached to
sensual objects, hypocrites (liars), ungrateful people - they will surely end up in
Hell.

33.

Those who destroy wells, springs, reservoirs, shrines, or human dwellings
will surely end up in Hell.

34.

Those who eat while neglecting their wives, children, servants, and
teachers, and who fail to make offerings to their ancestors (gods) and prayers to
God, will surely go to Hell.

35.

Those who block roads with various obstacles, dig them up, fill them with
logs, stones, or sprinkle them with thorns—they will surely go to Hell.

36.

Those who are too self-centered and do not worship God - the Great Ra-M-Ha,
do not respect the Wise Men and True Teachers (Prophets) - will surely go to Hell.

37-38.

A Brahmin (Wise Man) who lets a woman of easy virtue into his bed descends
to a lower level (step of Faith); having begotten offspring from a woman of easy
virtue, he immediately falls from the level (step) of Brahmin.

Such an unfortunate twice-born (Sage) is not worth greeting; those fools who
worship him will surely go to Hell.

39.

Those who love quarrels, who do not seek a way to end discord among
people, who love fights between people and animals, and who enjoy them, will
surely go to Hell.

40.

Those who, out of malice, commit sin during conception with a woman who
has no other refuge—they will surely go to Hell.

41.

Those men who are so blinded by passion that they engage in relations with
a woman during her monthly cycle, during the four days of the moon's change,
during the daytime, in water, or during funerals—they will surely go to Hell.

42.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Those men who are so blinded by passion that they engage in relations with
a woman during her monthly cycle, during the four days of the moon's change,
during the daytime, in water, or during funerals—they will surely go to Hell. 42. Those who throw the waste products of their bodies into drinking water,
food, or elsewhere will surely go to Hell. 43. Those who manufacture weapons—arrows, swords, and spears—and those who
sell them will surely go to Hell. 44. Vaishyas who tan hides, women who sell their hair, and those who sell
poisons will surely go to hell. 45. Those who do not feel compassion for the helpless, who hate the virtuous,
who punish the innocent—they will surely go to Hell. 46. Those who do not feed a guest who has come to their house with hope, even
if food is prepared, will surely go to Hell. 47. Those who are suspicious of all beings, who are cruel to them, who
deceive all living things—they will surely go to Hell. 48. Those who accept the rites and rituals of the Vedas, but later, lacking
control over their senses, renounce them, will surely go to Hell. 49. Those who do not respect the Teacher who imparts knowledge of the
Higher Self and the narrators of the Puranas will surely go to Hell. 50. Those who betray their friends, who break off friendships, who destroy
hopes — they will surely go to Hell. 51. Those who hinder the Prophets who carry the Word of God, or
groups of pilgrims, descend into the terrible Hell, from which there is
no return.

--- PAGE BREAK ---52.

The sinful person who causes a fire in a house, village, or forest
will be seized by the servants of Yama and roasted over a fire.

53.

When his limbs are scorched by the fire, he will beg for a shady place,
and then the servants of Yama will take him to a forest with leaves like swords.

54.

When his limbs are cut by these leaves, sharp as sword blades, they will
say, "Ha, ha!

Sleep comfortably in this cool shade!"
55.

When he begs for water, tormented by thirst, the messengers will give him
boiling oil.

56.

Then they will say, "Drink this liquid and eat this food." As soon as he
drinks it, he will fall to the ground, burning from within.

57.

Somehow getting up, he will wail pitifully.

Powerless and
breathless, he will not even be able to speak.

58.

Therefore, it is said, Tark, that there are many tortures for sinners.

Why
should I explain them in full, since they are mentioned in all the Shastras (Sacred
Scriptures)?

59.

After such tortures, thousands of men and women are roasted in terrifying
worlds until the Universal Flood (destruction of the universe).

60-62.

Having eaten the indestructible fruits of their karma there, they are born
again.

By the order of Yama, they return to Earth and become immobile or other beings:
trees, bushes, plants, reptiles, rocks, or grasses, which are referred to as
immobile beings immersed in the darkness of ignorance, insects, birds, animals, and
fish.

It is said that there are 8,400,000 forms of life.

63.

All of them evolve further into human life; returning from Hell, they are
subsequently born in the human realm among the lower castes, but even then, due to
the contamination of sin, they remain very unhappy.

64.

Thus, they become men and women slowly dying of leprosy, blind from birth,
afflicted with deadly diseases, and bearing the marks of sin.

CHAPTER 5 DESCRIPTION OF THE SIGNS OF SIN
1.

Gar asked, "Tell me, KeshaVa, what are the signs of certain sins, and
what kind of birth do these sins lead to?"
2.--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER 5 DESCRIPTION OF THE SIGNS OF SIN
1. Gar asked, "Tell me, KeshaVa, what are the signs of certain sins, and
what kind of birth do these sins lead to?"
2. The Blessed Sage said: "You will hear from me about the sins for which the
sinner, returning from Hell, again obtains a certain birth, and about the signs
that mark certain sins. 3. The murderer of a human being becomes a consumptive person, the murderer of
animals becomes a hunchback or a feeble-minded person, the murderer of a virgin
becomes a leper—all three are born as pariahs (outcasts, without rights). 4. A murderer of a woman and her unborn child becomes a cruel and evil person,
afflicted with numerous diseases; one who commits adultery becomes a eunuch; one
who courts his neighbor's wife will suffer from skin diseases. 5. Those who feed on the flesh (meat) of creatures become very red, drunkards
and drug addicts suffer from bad teeth; Brahmins who, out of greed, eat what they
should not eat, become pot-bellied. 6. Those who eat sweets without offering them to others are born with
goiters; those who offer unclean food during sacred ceremonies are born with
pimples or leprosy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---7.

A person who, out of pride, insults the Teacher (Sage), becomes
epileptic; those who despise the Vedas and Shastras will surely be
afflicted with jaundice and bile.

8.

A false witness becomes mute; one who breaks the prayer before eating is
born one-eyed; one who disrupts a wedding is born lipless; one who steals is born
blind.

9.

Whoever kicks an animal or strikes a person with his foot is born lame
and crippled; whoever lies is born a stutterer, and whoever listens to such a
liar is born deaf.

10.

A poisoner is born mentally ill; an arsonist becomes bald; those who sell
meat are born failures; those who eat the meat of others are born sick.

11.

Those who steal jewels are born into the lowest caste; those who steal gold
will have diseased nails in their next life; those who steal other metals will be
poor.

12.

Those who steal food will become rats; those who steal grain will become
locusts; those who steal water will become birds; those who steal poison will
become scorpions.

13.

Those who steal vegetables and plants will become peacocks; incense and
perfumes will become
a muskrat; honey - a blind man; meat - a vulture; salt - an ant.

14.

Those who steal betel (vegetables), fruit, and flowers will become forest
monkeys; those who steal shoes, grass, and cotton will be born from the womb of a
sheep.

15.

Those who live by violence, rob on the roads, and love to hunt
will undoubtedly become a goat in the butcher's house.

16.

Those who die from drinking poison will become black snakes in the
mountains; those with unbridled temperaments will be reborn as elephants in
uninhabited forests.

17.

Those twice-born (Raksasas) who do not make offerings to God and who eat
all their food without consecration (prayer to God) become tigers in the
impenetrable forest.

18.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Those twice-born (Raksasas) who do not make offerings to God and who eat
all their food without consecration (prayer to God) become tigers in the
impenetrable forest. 18. A Brahman (Rahman) who does not repeat the sacred mantra (prayer) repeated
every day by the twice-born (Sages) to the Great Ra-M-Ha, who does not meditate
at dusk (at night), who is inwardly cunning and outwardly pious, becomes a crane. 19. A person who performs service (work) for an unworthy person becomes a
village boar (pig), and if he performs many such offerings (works long hours), he
becomes a donkey; if he does not recite mantras (thanks to God) before a meal, he
becomes a crow. 20. A twice-born (magi) who does not pass on Knowledge (Vedas) to worthy
(people) becomes a bull; a priest who does not serve God properly becomes an
animal - a donkey or a cow. 21. Whoever intimidates and despises his Teacher or threatens a Brahmin
(Sage) is born as a RAK (evil spirit) in a waterless wild desert. 22. Those who do not give their neighbors what they have promised become
jackals; those who are not hospitable to good people become howling evil spirits. 23. Those who deceive their friends are reborn as mountain vultures;
those who cheat in trade are reborn as owls; those who speak ill of the
Varna-Ashrama system (the stages of Faith) become pigeons in the forest. 24. Those who destroy Faith and Love, those who abandon their wives when they
fall out of love,
becomes a reddish-brown goose for a long time. 25. Those who hate God, their mother, father, Teacher (Sage), those who
quarrel with their sister, brother, and neighbor will be killed in their
mother's womb for a thousand incarnations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---26.

A woman who treats her father-in-law and mother-in-law badly and causes
constant quarrels becomes a leech; and the one who quarrels with her husband
becomes a louse.

27.

A woman who leaves her husband and runs after another man is reborn as a
flying fox, a lizard, or a snake.

28.

The one who ends the family line by marrying a woman from his own family
is reborn from the womb of a bear.

29.

A lustful man who seduces a chaste woman becomes a spirit (ghost)
in the desert; one who commits adultery with an underage girl becomes a
huge snake in the forest.

30.

He who molests the Teacher's wife becomes a chameleon; he who molests the
king's wife becomes depraved; he who molests his friend's wife becomes a donkey.

31.

Whoever commits evil against nature becomes a village pig; whoever cohabits
with a woman of a lower caste becomes a bull; whoever is too passionate becomes a
lustful stallion.

32-33.

Whoever does not fast becomes a dog.

A person who worshipped God for the
sake of wealth is born from the womb of a chicken.

34.

Sinners, having passed through the most terrible hells, deserved as a
result of their numerous sins, are born here to atone for their karma.

35.

A murderer is born from the womb of a donkey, camel, or buffalo;
drunkards and drug addicts come from the womb of a wolf, dog, or jackal.

36.

A thief receives the body of a worm, insect, or bird.

Those who court
their neighbor's wife become grass, bushes, or plants.

37.

Those who steal another man's wife, embezzle deposits, or rob their
neighbors
is born a demon.

38-40.

Wealth that is plundered and obtained by dishonest means, even through
friendship, brings misfortune to the whole family for seven generations, and if it
is obtained through violence, then for as long as the moon and stars shine.

A person can digest even metal shavings, crushed stone, and poison; but is there
anyone in the Three Worlds (Puri, Yavi, and Navi) who can turn wealth into Brahman?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Wealth that is plundered and obtained by dishonest means, even through
friendship, brings misfortune to the whole family for seven generations, and if it
is obtained through violence, then for as long as the moon and stars shine. A person can digest even metal shavings, crushed stone, and poison; but is there
anyone in the Three Worlds (Puri, Yavi, and Navi) who can turn wealth into Brahman? Chariots and armies bought with wealth scatter in battle like sand falling on the
artificial sandy banks of a river. 41-43. Lives are destroyed as a result of appropriating someone else's property,
seizing the property of one's neighbor, and rejecting the Brahmins. Those people are called careless who, instead of bringing gifts to a sage who is
well versed in the Vedas and Shastras and turning to him for spiritual help, give
them to someone else. But this is not considered neglect if the Brahmin is deprived of the Knowledge of
the Vedas; it could be likened to offering firewood to ashes instead of to a nearby
burning fire. 44. Having failed to fulfill his duty (Life Purpose), O Tark, and having
suffered punishment for this in several hells, he is born blind and poor,
becoming a beggar instead of a giver. 45. Whoever takes away a piece of land that he or someone else has given away
is reborn as a worm in excrement for sixty thousand years. 46. A sinner who takes by force what he himself has given goes to Hell
until the Universal Flood. 47. Those who are given the means of subsistence and a piece of land must
defend them to the end. Those who do not defend them but rob them are reborn
as lame dogs. 48. Those who support their neighbors receive fruits equal to the value of
a hundred thousand cows; those who deprive their neighbors of their livelihood
become monkeys or dogs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---49.

These and other signs of birth, O Lord, as you can see, are nothing other
than the karma of a sinful soul, created by itself in this world.

50.

Thus, the creators of bad karma, having experienced the torments of
Hell, are born with the remnants of their sins in these established forms.

51.

Then, receiving the bodies of plants, insects, birds, and animals over
thousands of births, they suffer from various misfortunes.

52.

Having experienced the hardships of life as insects, birds, etc.,
suffering from cold, rain, and heat, they eventually attain the human condition
(body), where good and evil are balanced.

53.

When a man and a woman unite, he becomes an embryo at the right time.

Suffering from conception to death, he dies again.

55.

As the wheel of time turns, so Maya turns conditioned souls.

They appear on
Earth, then in Hell, quickly caught up in the loop of karma.

56.

Those who do not give alms become beggars, suffering from severe poverty,
and they commit sins; because of their transgressions, they go to Hell and are
reborn in poverty to become sinners.

57.

The karma that each person has earned, whether good or bad, must
inevitably be suffered.

Unsuffered karma does not disappear even in ten million
centuries.

CHAPTER 6 THE MISFORTUNES OF THE BIRTH OF A SINNER
1.

Gar said, "Tell me, Kesha, how does one who has returned from Hell appear in
the womb of his mother, and what misfortunes does he experience there?"
2.

The teacher said, "I will tell you how a mortal is born when the male and
female elements unite during the union of a man and a woman.

3.

In the middle of the menstrual period, the body of the sinner begins to
form over the course of three days.

4.

The mother of the one who returns from the underworld is considered on the
first day to be a part of him, on the second day to be the killer of his sins, and
on the third day to be the washerwoman.

5.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The mother of the one who returns from the underworld is considered on the
first day to be a part of him, on the second day to be the killer of his sins, and
on the third day to be the washerwoman. 5. Upon receiving a body, the creature, in accordance with karma and
under the supervision of the Gods (Angels), enters the womb of a woman,
where the male seed is already present. 6. In one night it becomes a lump, by the fifth night it becomes round, on the
tenth day it reaches the size of the fruit of the Yuyu Tree, and after that it
becomes the size of a flesh egg. 7-8. By the first month, the head appears; by the second, the arms and other
parts of the body; by the third, the nails, hair, bones, skin, linga, and
other cavities appear. By the fourth month, the seven bodily fluids appear; by the fifth, hunger and
thirst arise; by the sixth, surrounded by a membrane, it shifts to the left. 9. The body's substances are formed from the food and fluids eaten by the
mother, and by the time of birth, the baby lies in a disgusting lumbar cavity
filled with urine and feces. 10. All his limbs are constantly bitten by hungry worms; he occasionally
loses consciousness from the increasing pain, as the bites are very painful. 11. Thus, walled up in the womb, squeezed from all sides, he experiences pain
throughout his body caused by his mother eating various foods—spicy, bitter, hot,
salty, sour, and pungent. 12. His head is pressed against his stomach, his back and neck are
twisted, and he cannot move his limbs — like a parrot in a cage.

--- PAGE BREAK ---13.

And here he remembers — by divine command — the karma he has created over
hundreds of previous lives — and remembering, he weeps for a long time, feeling no
joy.

14.

Having received this insight, he folds his hands, bound by seven knots,
begging and trembling, and with a pitiful voice calls out to God, who placed
him in this womb.

15.

From the beginning of the seventh month, the fetus, although already
possessing consciousness, trembles and moves like a worm in the womb due to the
influence of internal life forces that contribute to the child's exit from the
body.

16-23.

This being says:
"I take refuge in the Supreme, Wise God, the support of creation, the destroyer
of evil, compassionate to those seeking protection.

I am confused by Your maya (energy) in relation to my body; led by my egoism, I
incarnate again and again, O Lord!

I have done good and evil deeds for the sake of my household, and as a result I
suffer, while they, enjoying the fruits, have escaped this.

If I am freed from this womb, I will fall at Your feet and do everything to
attain Liberation (Immortality).

Thrown into a pit of excrement, I suffer from the heat of stomach fire and thirst
to get out of here.

Oh, when will I get out?

Only in Him, who sent me this trial and sympathizes with all who suffer, will I
find refuge.

And may I never have to incarnate again.

But no, I do not want to leave this womb at all, where all suffering is
are the result of my sinful actions.

For by remaining here in terrible torment, turning to You for help, Lord, I will
be apart from the material world."
24.

The Blessed Teacher said: "And here he is, who thought this way and
remained in the womb for nine months, receiving enlightenment during these
prayers, suddenly coming out head first, pushed out by the inner life forces
of his mother.

25.

Pushed out (into the world of Yavi) by force, hanging his head, he
feels anxious, breathless with pain, his memory disturbed.

26.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Pushed out (into the world of Yavi) by force, hanging his head, he
feels anxious, breathless with pain, his memory disturbed. 26. Falling to the ground, he moves in excrement like a worm. His
condition changes, and he screams loudly, losing consciousness. 27. If the state of consciousness that arises in the womb, during illness, in
the crematorium, or while listening to the Puranas, were permanent, who would be
freed from this bondage (samsara)! 28. When he emerges from the womb after perceiving his karma, he again falls
into delusion due to the influence of the Lord's maya (energy). 29. And when this maya touches him, he is powerless and unable to speak. He
experiences the torments of infancy and childhood, arising from complete dependence
and lack of independence. 30. He is fed by people who do not understand his desires at all, and
he is unable to reject what is imposed on him against his will. 31. Lying in bed, unclean and sweaty, he is unable to free even his arms
and legs, sit up, stand up, or move. 32. Mosquitoes, gnats, bedbugs, and other insects bite him, thin-skinned,
crying, deprived of understanding, just as insects bite small worms. 33. Thus, having experienced the misfortunes of infancy and childhood,
he reaches adolescence and acquires bad habits.

--- PAGE BREAK ---34.

Then he develops evil thoughts, begins to associate with malicious people,
hates the Scriptures and pious people, and becomes wicked.

35.

When he meets a seductive woman, she captivates his senses with her
flattering words; driven mad by reckless passion, he descends into complete
ignorance, like a moth flying into a flame.

36.

The deer, the elephant, the bird, the bee, and the fish: these five are led
to destruction by one of their senses; how can a person intoxicated with love not
fall, if he enjoys five kinds of objects with the help of the five senses?

37.

He craves the unattainable and, due to ignorance, becomes angry and
irritable, and his pride and anger grow along with his body.

38.

The lover quarrels with his rivals, which leads to destruction, as the
stronger ones prevail over him—just as one elephant defeats another.

39.

Who is more sinful than a fool who is attached to objects of the senses and
wastes his human life, which is so hard to obtain!

40.

After hundreds of lives, a being manages to obtain a human birth on Earth;
but it is even more difficult to obtain the life of a Twice-born (Arya); one who
obtains this but indulges his senses out of foolishness allows the precious nectar
to slip through his fingers.

41.

Then, having reached old age, he suffers from many serious illnesses, and
when death comes, he goes to hell again.

42.

Thus, a sinner, firmly trapped in karma and confused by maya, is never
liberated.

43.

So, I have told you, Tark, how a sinner deprived of God's mercy goes
to Hell.

What else do you want to hear?"
CHAPTER 7 THE MYSTERY FOR THE DECEASED
1.

Su said, "Hearing this, Gar, trembling like a leaf of the sacred fig tree,
asked Kesha another question so that people could benefit from it."
2.

Garuda asked, "Tell me, by what means can people who have sinned through
ignorance or consciously be saved from the torments of Yama's servants?

3-4.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Garuda asked, "Tell me, by what means can people who have sinned through
ignorance or consciously be saved from the torments of Yama's servants? 3-4. For those people who are immersed in the ocean of reincarnation, whose minds
are weak and whose intellect is clouded by sin, whose consciousness is weakened by
attachment to sensual objects. For the sake of their upliftment, tell me, O Lord,
about the true meaning of life and the means by which people can attain happiness."
5. The Blessed Lord said: "O Tark, you are doing a good deed by asking for the
benefit of people. Listen carefully, and I will tell you everything. 6. Truly, as has already been said, the fate of sinners is difficult, especially
those who have no sons; but it is quite different for those who have sons and are
righteous. 7. If, due to some misdeed in a past life, a person does not have a son,
measures should be taken to obtain one. 8. After listening to the reading of the Vedas, or performing
austerities, or praying with devotion to the Blessed Lord, the wise should
conceive a son. 9. A son saves his father from hell, called Put. 10. Even one son, if he is righteous, will help the whole family. The
ancients say, "Through his son, he will conquer the worlds."

--- PAGE BREAK ---11.

The Vedas also affirm the great importance of a son.

According to them,
upon seeing the face of his son, a man is freed from his debt to his ancestors.

12.

By touching his grandson, a mortal is freed from a threefold debt.

With
the help of his sons, grandsons, and great-grandsons, he leaves these worlds for
Heaven.

13.

A son born of a marriage according to God's law elevates, but an
illegitimate son drags down.

Knowing this, one should avoid women of other castes
and races.

14.

Sons who have a father and mother of the same race and caste are
legitimate.

Only they, by offering prayers to God, can help their father reach
Heaven.

15.

I will tell you how the deceased reaches Heaven thanks to the
funeral prayers performed by the son when the deceased goes to Heaven.

Listen.

16.

Regarding this, I will give you an example from an ancient story about
the effectiveness of gifts for obtaining a higher body.

17-19.

Long ago, in the Tretayuga, O Tark, in the beautiful city of Mahodaya,
there ruled a king named Vahana, who was very powerful and pious.

He generously distributed gifts, made sacrifices, honored Brahmins (Wizards),
valued goodness, was virtuous and righteous, compassionate and skilled in his
deeds.

He duly protected his subjects as if they were his own children, always fulfilled
his duties as a Kshatriya (warrior) and punished the guilty.

20-21.

Once, this powerful king went hunting with his army.

He entered a dense
forest, rich in magnificent and diverse trees and animals, where the voices of
various birds could be heard.

Deep in the forest, the king saw a deer.

22.

The deer, seriously wounded by his heavy arrow, disappeared into the depths
of the forest, taking the arrow with it.

23.

The king, following the deer's bloody trail on the grass, entered another
forest.

24.

Separated from his escort, hungry, parched, and losing consciousness from
heat and exhaustion, he rode up to a lake and bathed in it with his horse.

25-27.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Separated from his escort, hungry, parched, and losing consciousness from
heat and exhaustion, he rode up to a lake and bathed in it with his horse. 25-27. Then, after drinking cold water scented with lotus pollen, Vahana emerged
refreshed from the water and saw a magnificent fig tree, under whose spreading
branches there was cool shade—birds were singing, and the tree itself stood like a
huge banner over the entire forest. The king approached and sat down at its roots. 28. And then he noticed a pretā (ghost) — a terrible, hunchbacked, fleshless,
dirty creature with bristling hair; its senses had been rendered useless by lack of
food and drink. 29-30. Seeing this terrible, half-decayed creature, Vahana was confused. Seeing
the king who had wandered into this terrible forest, and filled with curiosity, the
ghost approached him. And then, O Tark, the dead man said to the king: "I have
escaped the fate of a ghost and attained the highest state because I met you, O
mighty-armed one! Blessing has descended upon me."
32-33. The king asked, "O you, with blackness instead of a body and a hole
instead of a mouth, what evil deeds have brought you to this state? It is
impossible to look at you without shuddering. Tell me in detail the reason for
this. Who are you, and by what deeds can your situation be remedied?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---34-38.

The dead man said, "I will tell you everything from the beginning, O best
of kings!

You will undoubtedly feel compassion for me when you hear my story.

There is a city in the world called Vaida, which possesses all riches.

It has
many precious stones, it is huge, and numerous religious ceremonies are performed
in its beautiful gardens and palaces.

In it, O venerable lord, I lived, constantly
engaged in worshiping God.

Know that I belong to the Vaishya caste, and my name is Sudeva.

I won the favor
of God with my prayers and that of the Ancestors (Gods) with my offerings of alms.

I gained the goodwill of the twice-born (Sages) by offering them various gifts.

I
distributed food to the poor, the blind, and the destitute.

39-41.

But all this, O lord, by the will of evil fate, proved to be in vain.

Why my good deeds proved fruitless—I will tell you.

I have no offspring, no relatives, no loved ones, no friend like you who could
perform a ceremony for me to obtain a body in the higher worlds of Prav.

If sixteen memorial prayers are not performed within a month, O great king, then
my ghostly state will remain eternal, even if hundreds of prayers are performed
annually thereafter.

42-45.

Help me ascend, O lord of the earth, perform ceremonies for me to obtain a
body in the higher worlds of Prav.

It is said that the king is a relative to
representatives of any caste.

Therefore, king of kings, help me get rid of this condition and ascend
to the higher worlds, and I will give you the most beautiful gemstone in
return.

If you do not wish me harm, do so, O warrior!

Suffering mercilessly from the
torture of hunger and thirst, I can no longer bear this condition.

In this forest there is delicious and cool water, beautiful fruits, but I cannot
pick them, even though I am mercilessly suffering from hunger and thirst.

46-48.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In this forest there is delicious and cool water, beautiful fruits, but I cannot
pick them, even though I am mercilessly suffering from hunger and thirst. 46-48. If the great rites and other ceremonies for obtaining a body in the higher
worlds are performed for me, with the recitation of Vedic mantras, O king, then,
without doubt, I will be freed from this condition. Vedic mantras, asceticism,
charity, compassion for all living beings, study of the scriptures, worship of God,
and association with the virtuous—all these, as I have heard, are means for
destroying the ghostly condition. 49-50. Therefore, I will tell you about worshiping God, the deliverer of ghosts
from their fate. Take two pieces of honestly earned gold and melt them down to make
a vessel, O king. Decorate it with various ornaments, sprinkle it with many waters, and, having
placed it, worship God in the following manner. 51-56. Place the altar to the north. Worship God by offering sandalwood paste and
flowers to the altar in turn. Then, walking around the altar, make fire offerings
(light candles), offer prayers to the Lord of the Universe, and make offerings of
purified oil, milk, and curd. After that, having performed ablutions, in a calm and balanced state of mind, the
person performing the ritual must conduct a ceremony before God to give the ghost a
more perfect body. He must begin, as prescribed in the Scriptures, by subduing
greed and anger, performing all the ceremonies, and releasing the bull. Then he must make thirteen offerings (good deeds) and consecrate the vessel with
water.

--- PAGE BREAK ---57.

The king said, "How should this vessel be consecrated for bringing, and what
is the ritual for offering it?

I feel compassion for all who are in this situation,
so tell me more about the vessel of water that gives liberation to the ghost."
58-63.

The deceased replied: "O great king, you have done a good deed by asking
about this.

Please remember, and I will describe to you this offering that destroys
such a ghostly state.

The gift called "vessel for the deceased" destroys all evil.

In all worlds, it is difficult to obtain such a means of dispelling evil states.

Having prepared the vessel, consecrated it to God, who answers all and sees in
all directions, filled it with purified oil and milk, bowed to Him with devotion,
give it to the twice-born.

After performing the appropriate worship in turn with the burning of incense, the
offering of flowers and sandalwood paste, O King, to God, the eternal Source of
Happiness, as well as to the Guardians of the Universe (the Gods), it is necessary
to offer this vessel full of milk and purified butter to Brahman.

This offering, O king, which surpasses all others in purifying the greatest sins,
must be performed with Faith in order to Liberate the ghost."
64-65.

The Blessed Teacher continued: "While the king was talking to the ghost,
his army followed his path and was already approaching with all its multitude of
elephants, horses, and chariots.

Upon the army's arrival, the ghost presented the king with a huge diamond, bowed,
offered prayers to God, and became invisible.

66-68.

Having left the forest, the king returned to the city, remembering all the
time what the ghost had told him.

He did everything properly, observing all the
ceremonies and rituals for passing into another body, and the ghost, freed by these
sacred prayers, reached Heaven.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Having left the forest, the king returned to the city, remembering all the
time what the ghost had told him. He did everything properly, observing all the
ceremonies and rituals for passing into another body, and the ghost, freed by these
sacred prayers, reached Heaven. With the help of funeral prayers, even performed by a stranger, the deceased
receives a happier fate—what is there to be surprised about what the father will
achieve if it is done by his son? 69. Those who listen to this and those who pass on this Sacred History will never
suffer the fate of the ghost. CHAPTER 8 DESCRIPTION OF THE PATH LEADING TO LIBERATION
1-4. Gar said: "I have heard from You, O Ocean of Compassion, about the
reincarnation of the individual Soul in other changing worlds due to its ignorance. Now I would like to hear about the paths leading to Eternal Liberation. O Teacher, compassionate to those who seek refuge in God! In this terribly
changeable world, devoid of reality, immersed in all misfortunes and sorrows, an
infinite number of beings are born and die, placed in various types of bodies—and
there is no end to this. O Wise One, tell me, by what means can they, who are always suffering in this
world, who know no happiness, attain Liberation?"
5-7. The Blessed Lord said, "Listen, O Tark, I will explain to you everything
you wish to know. Anyone who merely hears about this will already be liberated from
this ocean of suffering. There is a God who is the nature of the Supreme Mind, the One, the Good, the
All-Knowing, the All-Creating, the Lord of all. Flawless, One without a second;
Self-illuminating, Beginningless and Endless, Supreme, without material
qualities. Filled with Being, Knowledge, and Bliss. Individual Souls are considered to be His particles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---8-10.

They are like sparks of fire; their ignorance has no beginning, they are
isolated from each other and confined in bodies by karma that has no beginning.

They are entangled in various kinds of good and evil, which bring happiness and
unhappiness, respectively; their life is limited, their body belongs to a
particular people, and their destiny is determined by karma.

Life is given to everyone.

They also possess a higher and more subtle body
called Linga, which is preserved until Liberation.

11-13.

Immobile beings, worms, birds, goats, animals, humans, the Righteous,
thirty-three Deities, as well as the Liberated - in order,
taking off and putting on four types of bodies thousands of times, end up in a
human body, and if they achieve Self-Awareness, they attain Liberation
(Immortality).

Even after living 8,400,000 lives before obtaining a human body, an incarnate
being may still not attain Knowledge of the Truth (God).

14-16.

After thousands of millions of births, a living being sometimes obtains
a human birth as a result of accumulating good deeds.

If, having obtained a human body, which is very difficult to obtain, and
through it the path to Liberation, a living being does not help itself, who else in
this world can be called more sinful?

A person who has received this high birth and higher senses, but has not
understood what is good for the Soul, is considered a murderer of Brahman.

17-19.

Without the body, no one can achieve the Goal of human Life; therefore,
everyone should take care of their body, cherish it, and perform deeds worthy of
reward.

A person should always protect their body, which is the means to achieve
everything.

For prosperity, every effort should be made to protect life.

A village, a field, wealth, and a house can be regained; good or evil deeds can
be done again, but not the body.

20-21.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A village, a field, wealth, and a house can be regained; good or evil deeds can
be done again, but not the body. 20-21. A wise person always does everything possible to preserve the body; even
those who are seriously ill, such as with leprosy, do not want to part with their
bodies. It should be protected for the sake of Duty (the Purpose of Life), Duty for
the sake of Knowledge, Knowledge for the sake of yoga meditation—only then
will a person approach Liberation. 22-23 If a person does not protect himself from danger, who else will do it? Therefore, everyone must take care of his own welfare. What will someone who does not take precautions against the diseases of hell
while still here do when they arrive in a land where there is no cure for
suffering? 24-25. Old age approaches like a pursuing tigress; life flows away like water
from a broken pot; diseases attack like enemies. That is why it is necessary to
strive for the best. While grief has not yet come, while disasters have not yet struck, while
the senses are still able to perceive—until then, one should strive for the
best. 26-32. While the body is still intact, one should seek the Truth—only a foolish
person begins to dig a well when his house is already on fire. The time of death is unknown to those who receive bodies in this world of
suffering. Alas, a person caught between happiness and hardship does not know his own good. Even though they see newborns, the seriously ill, the dying, the destitute,
and the unhappy, they are not afraid of any of this, having drunk the wine of
maya.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The rich live as if in a dream; the young as if they were flowers; life is as
impermanent as a flash of lightning—where is the discerning person who feels calm
and free?

Even a hundred years of life is too little, and yet half of it is spent in
sleep and idleness, and even the little that remains passes fruitlessly,
wasted on the infirmity of childhood, sickness, and old age.

A person does not do what he should do; when he should be awake, he sleeps;
where he should be cautious, he trusts.

Alas, who has not been beaten by life?

How can a being dwelling in a body like foam on water and attached to the
changing world of things be free from fear?

33-35.

He who does not know what is good for him takes what is harmful for
what is useful, what is fleeting for what is permanent, evil for good.

Even seeing the road, he stumbles; even hearing, he does not understand; even
reading, he does not know, for he is deluded by divine energy (maya).

This universe is immersed in an endless ocean of death, but even though man is
swallowed up by the monster of death, disease, and old age, he does not understand.

36-38.

Time, flowing away every moment, is imperceptible, just as a pot of
unfired clay dissolves imperceptibly in water.

Air can be confined to a limited space, ether can be divided into parts, waves
can be limited, but life cannot be permanent.

The earth is burned by time; even Meru is destroyed, turning to dust, the
waters of the ocean dry up—what can be said about the body?

"I did this, I still have to do that, and this is only half done." Death
overcomes those who talk all this nonsense.

"This must be done tomorrow, this must be done today, and this must be done in
the morning or by noon" — death does not take into account what has been done and
what has not.

39-41.

The wolf of death shamelessly kills the lamb of a man, who babbles: "Oh,
my offspring, my wife, my wealth, my relatives..."
42.--- PAGE BREAK ---

39-41. The wolf of death shamelessly kills the lamb of a man, who babbles: "Oh,
my offspring, my wife, my wealth, my relatives..."
42. You suddenly encounter the enemy—death—whose arrival is predicted by age,
whose approach is accompanied by numerous illnesses—can you not see the savior? 43-44. The victim of death is the one who is tormented by the passions of
desire, who is bitten by the snake of the objects of the senses, who burns himself
in the fire of desires and antipathies. Death attacks children, young people, and the elderly, even the unborn fetus—
such is this Manifest world. 45-48. Such a being, leaving his body, goes to the realm of Yama. What good is
his connection with his wife, mother, father, son, and others? This changeable world is truly the cause of all kinds of misfortunes. Those who find themselves in it are subject to misfortune. Only those who
renounce it become happy—there is no other way. This changeable world—the source of all misfortunes, the repository of
misfortunes, and the refuge of sinners—must be renounced immediately. A person bound by iron or wooden chains can be freed, but it is impossible to
be freed from the chains of a wife or son. 49-51. As long as a living being allows the mind to find pleasure in
attachments, the dagger of sorrow will pierce his heart. The desire for wealth destroys people every day. Alas! The objects of the
senses slip away from the senses of the body.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Just as a fish thirsting for food does not see the iron hook, so too does the
embodied being not see the sufferings of the realm of Yama in its greedy pursuit of
pleasures.

52-55.

Those people who do not understand what is good for them and what is
bad, who persistently follow sinfulness and care too much about filling their
stomachs, go to Hell.

Sleep, sexual pleasures, and food are common to all living beings.

Those who possess Knowledge are called human beings, while those who lack it are
called animals.

is called an animal.

Foolish people are tormented from dawn by the call of natural instincts, at
noon by
by hunger and thirst, and in the evening by passion and sleep.

All these beings, attached to the body, wife, wealth, and other such things,
are born and die, immersed in ignorance, alas!

56-57.

That is why one should always be wary of and avoid attachments.

It is
impossible to cast everything aside.

Therefore, as a means of getting rid of
attachments, one should cultivate friendship with the great.

A person who lacks attachment to virtuous people, insight, and purity of
vision is blind.

How can he avoid the sinful path?

58.

All misguided people who shirk their duties and responsibilities
corresponding to their class and spiritual disposition and do not understand the
Higher Purpose live their lives in vain.

59-60.

Some people are inclined toward ceremonies and attached to the practice
of vows; deceivers walk the earth, their true selves shrouded in ignorance.

People who observe only ceremonies are satisfied with mere outward
appearances, misled by the flowery language of the Vedas, the observance of
carefully designed rituals, offerings, and so on.

61-62.

Fools, deceived by maya, desire to attain the invisible by fasting,
eating once a day, exhausting the body, and observing other restrictions.

How can those who lack insight (knowledge) attain liberation merely by
torturing the flesh?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fools, deceived by maya, desire to attain the invisible by fasting,
eating once a day, exhausting the body, and observing other restrictions. How can those who lack insight (knowledge) attain liberation merely by
torturing the flesh? Can a huge snake be killed merely by stamping on the
ground? 63. Hypocrites, wearing the mask of righteousness, wearing a pile of ornaments
on their heads, using the skin of a sheep, wander the world as Sages and mislead
people. 64. One who is attached to the pleasures of the material world but says, "I
know God," without having known God, should be avoided more than a leper. 65-69. Donkeys roam among people, in forests and cities, completely devoid of
clothing and shame. Are they free from attachments? If a person can be liberated with the help of earth, ashes, and dust, then
isn't a dog that lives among dust, earth, and ashes all the time also liberated? Jackals, rats, deer, and other animals that feed on grass, leaves, and water
and live permanently in forests—are they ascetics? And crocodiles, fish, and other animals that live in water from birth to death—
do they become yogis? Pigeons sometimes eat stones, and some birds do not drink water from the
ground, but are they keepers of vows? 70. Thus, this aspect of Nature is only that which brings pleasure to people,
while direct Knowledge of Truth is the path to Liberation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---71-73.

Having fallen into the deep well of philosophies and not understanding
the highest good, fools become like animals in a trap.

They rush here and there in the terrifying ocean of the Vedas and Shastras;
caught in the waves, they remain sophists.

For one who knows the Vedas but does not know what the highest good
(Liberation) is, all this is equivalent to the cawing of a crow.

74-75.

"This is already known, and this must be learned,"—overcome by such
concern, they read the Scriptures day and night, distancing themselves more and
more from the Supreme Truth.

These fools, adorned with garlands of poetically crafted speeches, but
miserable in their preoccupations, cannot find peace.

76-77.

People are preoccupied in different ways, but the Supreme Truth is
elsewhere; the Vedas explain in various ways, but the best commentary on them is
elsewhere.

Some talk about the Supreme Spiritual experience without having experienced it
themselves.

Some stop preaching, absorbed in self-love and selfishness.

78-82.

They repeat the Vedas and argue with each other, but they do not
understand the Supreme Truth, just as a spoon does not smell the aroma of food.

Flowers are placed on the head, but the nostrils do not smell the fragrance.

They read the Vedas, but they cannot understand the Truth (God).

The fool, not knowing that Truth is within him, is confused by the scriptures,
just as a shepherd with a kid under his arm looks into a well, searching for the
kid.

Verbal knowledge cannot destroy the maya of the changing material world;
darkness will not dispel if one talks about a lamp.

The Vedas are to a person deprived of Wisdom as a mirror is to a blind man.

For
the self-aware, the Vedas are only a pointer to Knowledge of Truth.

83-84.

"This I know; this I still need to learn," he wants to hear about
everything.

Even if a person lived for 1,000 Heavenly years, he would not be able
to comprehend all the Vedas to the end.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"This I know; this I still need to learn," he wants to hear about
everything. Even if a person lived for 1,000 Heavenly years, he would not be able
to comprehend all the Vedas to the end. The Shastras are numerous, life is short, and there are tens of millions of
obstacles in life. Therefore, the essence must be understood as a swan selects milk
from water. 85-86. Having gone through the experience of the Vedas and knowing the Truth, a
wise man can abandon all the Scriptures; just as a rich man who has a lot of grain
throws away the straw. Just as food has no meaning for one who has tasted nectar, so there is no
benefit in the Scriptures for one who has realized the Truth (God), O Tark. 87-88. Neither studying the Vedas nor reading the Holy Scriptures gives
Liberation. Liberation is given only by knowing God, O son of Vin-anta, and in no
other way. Neither lifestyle, nor philosophy, nor actions are the cause of Liberation—only
Spiritual Knowledge is its cause. 89-90. A single word from the teacher brings Liberation; all teachings are a
masquerade. Among thousands of teachings, the True is the best. The undivided, good Truth is beyond all efforts and actions and can only be
attained through the word of the Teacher, not by studying tens of millions of
texts. 91. It is said that there are two kinds of Knowledge: study and insight. Study
pertains to the Mind; the Mind is attained through insight. 92. Some prefer the philosophy of non-dualism, others prefer the philosophy of
dualism, but they do not understand the One Reality, beyond Duality and Non-
duality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---93-94.

Two words lead to slavery: "I want" and "mine." A being who says "I
want" and "mine" is in slavery.

This is the karma that binds; this is the Knowledge that gives Liberation; any
other karma brings anxiety, any other Knowledge is a sophisticated deception.

95-97.

As long as activity is performed, as long as impressions of this
transient world remain, as long as the senses are impermanent, how can Truth be
comprehended?

As long as pride in one's body is not overcome, as long as there is a sense of
"mine," as long as there is attachment to the fruits of one's actions, as long as
plans are made;
As long as there is no peace of mind, as long as meditation on God has not
been achieved, as long as there is no love for God, how can Truth be comprehended?

98-99.

Until a person has attained Truth, he should perform auspicious actions,
make vows, visit sacred places, repeat prayers, give alms, worship God, and read
the texts of the Vedas.

Thus, O Tark, if anyone desires Liberation for himself, he should always, in
all circumstances, be devoted to Truth in all his efforts.

100.

Those who experience the three main misfortunes (the desire for wealth,
anger, and the thirst for all kinds of pleasures) must take refuge in the shade
of the Tree of Life (the Great Ra-M-Ha), whose flowers are Righteousness and
Knowledge (the Vedas), and whose fruits are Spiritual Peace (Svaraga) and
Liberation(Immortality).

101.

Therefore, one should learn the Absolute Truth from the mouth of the
blessed Teacher.

Through such knowledge, a being is easily liberated from the
terrible bondage of this material world.

102.

Listen!

I will now tell you about the last actions of one who has known
the Truth, through which he attains Liberation, called Nirvana.

103-107.

When his last days approach, a person must, freed from fear, cut off
with the sword of detachment all desires connected with the body.--- PAGE BREAK ---

103-107. When his last days approach, a person must, freed from fear, cut off
with the sword of detachment all desires connected with the body. Having courageously left his home, performed ablutions in the waters of the
sacred place of ablution, and sat alone in a purified place, as prescribed, he
should mentally repeat the supreme pure three-letter Word of God (Ra-M-Ha/AUM). He should restrain his mind, control his breathing, and not forget the Lord. With thoughts of God, he should distract his senses from material objects by an
effort of the mind, concentrating his mind, which is led astray by karma, on the
Supreme Purity with understanding. "You, God, are the Supreme Abode; You, God, are the Supreme Chain" — realizing
this and placing one's "I" within oneself, one must begin meditation. 108. He who leaves the body, uttering the monosyllabic OM (UM), which
personifies God, and at the same time remembers the Lord, attains the Highest Goal. 109-110. Hypocrites, deprived of Knowledge and renunciation, cannot get there. I will tell you about the wise who attain this Goal. Free from pride and delusion, having conquered the evil of attachment,
constantly mindful of the Supreme Soul (God), having conquered all desires, not
engaging in contacts that bring pleasure or pain—they, having overcome maya, walk
this eternal path. 118-120. Su said: "Hearing this from the mouth of the Teacher, Gar said,
folding his hands in prayer:
"O Sage, having heard this purest nectar of words, I have gained the strength
to overcome the ocean of existence!"

--- PAGE BREAK ---he mouth of the Teacher, Gar said,
folding his hands in prayer:
"O Sage, having heard this purest nectar of words, I have gained the strength
to overcome the ocean of existence!"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Now I am free from doubt. All my desires are completely satisfied," having
said this, Gar fell silent and entered into meditation.
121. So may God, whose remembrance protects from evil, who gives happiness to
those who worship Him, who gives Liberation (Immortality) to all who perform
devoted service to Him, protect us!
Om tat sat.
Book 11.
BOOK OF LIGHT ZoAR (parts 2 and 3)
PART 2.
1.
There is nothing in our world (Yavi) that does not exist and is not found in God
Himself. For He is the Source of everything, and before the Creation of the 3 (5)
Worlds, there was only Him. How can anything exist that does not have its origin in
Him!
But our entire language was constructed during the process of creation, so we have
no words to explain something that existed before and above man. We can think about
it as much as we want, but everything that exists within us comes from God. And
from whom else could it come? If man did not forget this for a moment, he would
quickly come into contact with God.
The belief that "there is no one but God" is the only thing that takes a person
from this world (Yavi) to the Spiritual world. That is, everything that a person
experiences, feels, everything that he himself is and is within him, all comes from
God. Therefore, if a person feels something, he must understand that God feels it
too.
There is a concept that John/Ivan (the Theologian) explained particularly well:
"Man is the shadow of God." Just as a person's shadow repeats all his movements, so
a person automatically repeats all of God's movements. Therefore, if a person feels
something, he must first think that he received this feeling from God.
And in accordance with this, he must simultaneously respond in his feelings. That
is, if he remembered that he received this feeling from God, it means that God
wanted him to remember it, God is calling him to Himself, drawing his attention to
Himself. And from this point of view, he can already continue to develop his
connection with God on his own. Until he remembered the Creator, he was considered
to be in a state of unconsciousness.
But as soon as God reminded the person of Himself in such a way that the person
suddenly remembered the Purpose of Life, the Spiritual, God — the person must
immediately follow the chain of thoughts to the realization that it is God calling
him. And so constantly, with every memory, thought, desire — until this thought
(about God) becomes so familiar, the desire develops to such an extent that he
becomes "sick with Love," thinking about Him all the time, so much so that he
"cannot sleep" — and then God reveals Himself to him.
Everything in us and around us comes down to us from Above, from God. There is
nothing that is not in Him. We have heard this many times before. But how can
everything in our world come from Him? Things that are opposite to each other in us
and around us are in Unity in the Spiritual worlds.not in Him. We have heard this many times before. But how can
everything in our world come from Him? Things that are opposite to each other in us
and around us are in Unity in the Spiritual worlds.

--- PAGE BREAK ---And in no way are they contradictory or opposite, as they are in our world (Yavi).

This applies to various objects, for example, to things as different as a thought
and something sweet.

Two completely different categories.

Or a thought and the
action and consequence that follow it — they also merge in His Unity, i.e., the
Intention, the Action, and the Result.

But more than that, there are also two categories in Him that are opposite to each
other.

Like, for example, sweet and bitter, etc.

Each of them is completely
separate and distant from each other in our world (Yavi).

This one is good for me,
let's say, and this one is bad.

That's how opposite they are for me.

We determine
everything based on our feelings and understanding.

If we didn't see the stars shining, we wouldn't call them luminous.

Sweet is sweet
because it tastes sweet to us.

Bitter is bitter because it tastes bitter to us.

But
is it really bitter or sweet?

In itself, it is neither: it causes me to feel that
way.

And if what gives me the sensation of sweetness is conveyed to another creature,
which is created differently, which has different sensations, it will perceive it
completely differently — not sweet and not bitter, but will find a completely
different taste, different qualities.

There are completely opposite things in our
world.

Then, if they are opposite for us, we can call one good and the other bad.

But how can we relate them to one, to the One Root (God)?

The fact is that in Him, in God, there are no differences in anything!

And
everything is in simple, undivided Light.

Simple Light—not because it is simple,
but because there is no differentiation (differences) in Him, because only the
receiver distinguishes certain qualities from this homogeneous Light according to
their properties.

And gives different names to his sensations of Light.

But in the
Light itself, these properties do not exist at all.

These are the properties of the perceiver, not of the Light.But in the
Light itself, these properties do not exist at all.

These are the properties of the perceiver, not of the Light.

That is, everything is
in Perfect, simple Unity.

Therefore, a person gives names (designations) not to
what is in the Light, in the world surrounding him (Yavi), but according to the
sensations that it evokes in him, according to how he perceives the Light.

Therefore, the names, titles, and characteristics given by man speak only of human
qualities, of the properties of the perceiver, but not of the properties of the
perceived object itself!

Man names not what he feels, but his own properties and
qualities.

God is One, but it is only man who, through his qualities, derives
various sensations from this absolute Oneness and thus names God.

But these are not
the names of God, but the names of human sensations.

As Moses gives the example of the taste of Heavenly manna: tasteless in itself, it
is perceived with the taste that a person desires to feel.

Such is the spiritual
property of Light: it contains everything, but man, to the extent of his likeness
to Light, perceives it as increasingly simple.

And also in God, the Plan, the
Action, and the Result are one, although in our world (Yavi) these are completely
different categories.

But in God, everything we can imagine: opposites, causes and effects, mutually
exclusive concepts — all these forms are united in simple Light, in a category
called "One, Only, United (Inglia)".

Why can't this quality be described in one
word?

"One"
means that He is beyond all change, everything in Him is absolutely equal.

"Unique"
means that in God Himself everything is one, although what emanates from Him evokes
different forms in the perception of the perceiver, depending on the properties of
the perceiver.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"One"
means that He is beyond all change, everything in Him is absolutely equal. "Unique"
means that in God Himself everything is one, although what emanates from Him evokes
different forms in the perception of the perceiver, depending on the properties of
the perceiver. "Unique" means that although He acts in all Creation (Worlds),
manifesting Himself in completely different ways in the perceptions of those who
perceive His actions, His one Power acts in all Creation

--- PAGE BREAK ---and it (the Power) encompasses everything that happens.

The entire Purpose of
human development consists in this correct perception of God's actions.

Although
He performs many different actions: kills or revives, causes suffering or joy,
raises or lowers in the material world,
brings life or death—all these extremes, everything comes from Him, but how does
all this constitute Unity?

No difference does not mean indifference.

But how can
one force act, trigger opposite actions?

The answer is the same again: opposites
exist only in our perceptions.

And everything returns and unites at the end of the correction of the ego, or
rather, at the end of the correction of our senses (desires), so that we can
perceive all of Creation (Svarog) in its true form.

Our state of Soul with
corrected senses and corrected qualities (desires) is called the end of correction
(Liberation).

What we perceive in them (the senses) is called the Goal of Human
Life (Immortality).

What we call life and perceive as life is called in the Vedas
the light from a candle compared to the radiance of the Sun.

Why is there such a
difference in perception in our world?

Because our selfishness (ego) completely
changes our perception.

Not only do we lose almost 100% of our perception of the
Light of Life (Ingli), but our egoism also distorts our perception of reality (the
picture of the world).

We can even observe in our world (Yavi) how differently
people perceive what is theirs and what is not directly related to them, i.e., what
does not affect their ego.

Within our world (Yavi), we do not perceive reality correctly, and we do not
perceive the Spiritual worlds, the Higher worlds (Prav), at all, because
selfishness (ego), which permeates all our senses, hides, absorbs, and does not
allow Spiritual, altruistic Forces to reach our Consciousness (Mind).We can even observe in our world (Yavi) how differently
people perceive what is theirs and what is not directly related to them, i.e., what
does not affect their ego.

Within our world (Yavi), we do not perceive reality correctly, and we do not
perceive the Spiritual worlds, the Higher worlds (Prav), at all, because
selfishness (ego), which permeates all our senses, hides, absorbs, and does not
allow Spiritual, altruistic Forces to reach our Consciousness (Mind).

And when a person acquires senses (mind) free from egoism, he discovers that God's
only Goal includes all the actions that previously seemed contradictory to him.

Thus, Yeshua (Jesus), who was a Saint and a Sage (Rahman), writes in the Book of
Splendor (Zohar): "There is a difference between the categories of One, United, and
Only." When God is about to act with one force, He gathers all His forces into One,
which means the manifestation of Unity, because there is no difference in His
actions—that is why God is called United.

And when He divides His actions, i.e., His actions are manifested in human
sensations that are different from one another, they are perceived as either good
or bad.

God is called One because of the quality of His actions, which have only
one goal and result — to delight His creations (human Souls).

Thus, He is One in
all His actions and does not change, even though His actions are perceived as
different.

And when He is completely homogeneous and all His actions are one, He is
called One.

That is, "Unity" refers to God Himself, in whom all opposites are equal and
indistinguishable from one another.

What does it mean that God unites forces to act
as one?

All His actions pursue only one Goal — to delight, which is worthy of His
Unity.

Why can't every brain (mind) comprehend this?

Take a random person off the
street: no matter how you try to explain something to them, they are unable to hear
you.

Not listen, but hear.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Take a random person off the
street: no matter how you try to explain something to them, they are unable to hear
you. Not listen, but hear. They will be able to listen if you tie them to a chair
and put a reward in front of them, but they will not be able to hear, because this
requires special inner qualities and desires. People hear not with their ears, but
with their hearts. And this quality has nothing to do with mental abilities. You
can be the smartest person in the world and still not hear. But take that same
person, take a stick, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---beat him thoroughly for days, months, years — as long as necessary — and he will
suddenly gain hearing.

And he will begin to hear, not because he suddenly gained Reason, but because his
heart (Soul) decided to listen in order to get rid of suffering.

That is why
Yeshua (Joshua) writes that "the heart understands," and the head, our mind, is
only an auxiliary tool for achieving what the heart desires.

But we understand
with our head, and that is why the Sages say: "Not everyone is capable of bearing
this."
It is not easy to agree and accept that opposites can be one whole, so far is our
mind from the possibility of understanding True Unity.

But in accepting this
spiritual concept — the unity of opposites — it is first and foremost a matter of
the heart (Soul), and the brain (mind) as an auxiliary tool will accept whatever
our heart (Mind) decides and agrees with.

After all, we can observe how different
laws exist in different countries, how a person changes their logic and beliefs.

This is not because they become smarter, but because their heart changes the
objects of their enjoyment, and the Mind changes its views and approaches
accordingly and reevaluates values, bringing its "rational" basis (mind) in line
with new desires.

In spiritual understanding, it is primarily the heart, the
"vessel of the Soul," that determines the extent of understanding by the mind.

At
the beginning of their studies of Faith (the Vedas), people learn mainly with their
minds, but then they become increasingly aware of how much their understanding and
mastery of the material depends on their inner, spiritual state.

And it is not a matter of mood, as in the study of other sciences or in any other
endeavor, but regardless of mood, it is the sharpness of spiritual perception that
determines the comprehension of the Mind.At
the beginning of their studies of Faith (the Vedas), people learn mainly with their
minds, but then they become increasingly aware of how much their understanding and
mastery of the material depends on their inner, spiritual state.

And it is not a matter of mood, as in the study of other sciences or in any other
endeavor, but regardless of mood, it is the sharpness of spiritual perception that
determines the comprehension of the Mind.

There are people who spend decades
studying Faith (the Vedas), but if their heart (Mind) is not "turned on," they may
become professors of Faith, but not Sages (Rahmans), because they lack the inner
need to find God.

This need is born from a point of Light in the heart (Mind), a
part of the Higher Mind, a part of God Himself, which He places at His discretion
in those whom He wishes to bring closer...

"From myself (Soul) I will comprehend
God."
We study so many Books (Vedas) on Faith (Knowledge of God), we spend so much time
studying, that we could have already mastered any science.

And by studying the Book
of Splendor (Zohar/Az Ra), we understand more and more that we understand nothing.

This is because Faith (Knowledge of God) is absorbed and assimilated only where the
desires of the learner coincide with what he is studying.

And since a beginner does
not yet have the corrected qualities (desires) corresponding to what he is
studying, knowledge constantly evaporates.

Furthermore, knowledge of the laws and rules of any science allows one to use
logical conclusions and construct theories.

However, this is not possible in Faith,
because until we reach our final state—perfect and complete correction
(Liberation)—we do not know the whole picture and all the Laws of the Universe, and
therefore we do not have the right to make assumptions ourselves.

Therefore, only a True Sage has the right to write books on Faith.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, this is not possible in Faith,
because until we reach our final state—perfect and complete correction
(Liberation)—we do not know the whole picture and all the Laws of the Universe, and
therefore we do not have the right to make assumptions ourselves. Therefore, only a True Sage has the right to write books on Faith. Those who do not
comprehend the Spiritual worlds write without having their own sensory, explicit
understanding, because they "think" that "there" things happen "this way."
Meanwhile, Faith (the Vedas) speaks of only nine stages of Faith, but how much has
been written about them! Tens of thousands of pages. Not even about the nine
stages, but about the four stages of the Soul's development. Or about the desire to
give (EGO) and the desire to receive (ego). There is only one Source that gives everything, but there are countless variations
that give rise to all Worlds, our world (Yavi), everything inside and outside it. And all this consists of only two elements: Light (Ingli) and Souls!

--- PAGE BREAK ---It is important to know that this science cannot be grasped with the mind or brain.

There are those who know by heart what is written in the Vedas.

This, incidentally,
is not commendable, because the main thing in studying is not knowledge of the
Vedas, but the efforts made by the student: in proportion to his efforts, he
receives help from Above for his correction (Liberation).

That is why, since ancient times, True Sages have extolled Comprehension
(Knowledge), and not simply knowledge of the Vedas.

They even asked God in their
prayers to forget what they had studied!

They wanted to become uneducated again!!!

How unlike today's smart alecks, who boast about the pages they know by heart.

Because they only know the Vedas by heart, but Faith has not entered their hearts,
they boast about it.

But if even a little bit of the Light they studied had entered
their hearts, they would not value what entered their brains (minds), but would
value what entered their hearts (Reason)!

Therefore, the material studied in the Book of Splendor (Zohar) evaporates
precisely because of our dissimilarity to the material being studied.

But to the
extent that a person becomes similar to the spiritual material being studied, he
understands it.

Therefore, when we suddenly feel that we understand more, it depends on our state
of mind: whether we are closer to God with our desires at that moment or further
away from Him.

So, let us return to the text: when He is divided in performing His actions, when
His actions, as we perceive or feel them, are different or even opposite, then He
is called One, because His various actions, good and bad, including those that we
perceive as enormous suffering, such that they are worse than death(because
sometimes even death seems like a relief).Therefore, when we suddenly feel that we understand more, it depends on our state
of mind: whether we are closer to God with our desires at that moment or further
away from Him.

So, let us return to the text: when He is divided in performing His actions, when
His actions, as we perceive or feel them, are different or even opposite, then He
is called One, because His various actions, good and bad, including those that we
perceive as enormous suffering, such that they are worse than death(because
sometimes even death seems like a relief).

Such immense suffering, which befalls
both an individual and an entire nation or nations, is all for the sake of
achieving one Goal: to create in the Soul sensations with which one can perceive
the pleasure that God desires to give.

It is precisely the opposite of His control in our perceptions that tells the
understanding person about the complete Unity in all of God's actions, about the
fact that He has no distinction either in the reason for His actions or in the way
He acts.

The difference lies solely in human perception, solely in relation to the
recipient, due to the "imperfection" of his ego—the instrument of perception.

A
person perceives a particular action of God as good or bad.

Meanwhile, the true
characteristic of His actions is Perfection and Absolute Good.

If we corrected our
instruments of perception, we would discover that everything a person receives from
God is Perfect and Good.

The more our ego and desires are defective, the worse our
condition seems to us, and the more we blame the Source of our suffering in our
hearts.

Moreover, these accusations are unconscious.

When the first Jews settled in the
Negev and asked Moses if they could live there, he replied that they could if their
prayers brought rain.

But, they objected, the Jews were unbelievers.

He replied
that a person's desire in their heart is their prayer to God, because God is their
only Creator, the Source of everything.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But, they objected, the Jews were unbelievers. He replied
that a person's desire in their heart is their prayer to God, because God is their
only Creator, the Source of everything. And regardless of a person's awareness of
the world in which they exist, their unconscious desires are also perceived by God,
just as a mother feels and understands the desires of a newborn baby. The One - says that everything in Him is Perfect, One, there are absolutely no
contradictions, there is no difference in relation to different creations (Souls). And the One Thought and the One Purpose permeate all Creation. And this is called
that all His actions are the same. We are too different from God in our properties
and desires to understand Him. Even within our world, we do not understand each other if we are not similar in our
characteristics and desires, which means we are spiritually distant. In such a case

--- PAGE BREAK ---case, two people are as if in different worlds, like completely different
creatures.

And the difference between us and God is billions of times greater.

Therefore, all our efforts to understand Him should not be aimed at understanding
Him with our minds, because this is completely useless; that is, it is impossible
to understand the spiritual world with the tools of our world.

Only our spiritual
efforts to become spiritually equal in qualities and desires are necessary, after
which we will be able to understand Him.

Therefore, all philosophies and sciences will continue to struggle with the mystery
of life for thousands of years and will not solve it, as all philosophies and
religions have been trying to do for thousands of years.

If a person reasons only
with his mind, how can he comprehend anything outside this world (Yavi) when the
mind itself is a product of our material world (Yavi)!

How can we claim that our mind can be objective when there are so many opinions?

Doesn't that already negate its objectivity?

After all, there can only be one
objectivity, absolute and independent of man, and man is incapable of transcending
himself unless he acquires the desires and qualities of God instead of his own
desires and qualities.

All fiction, art — everything that people call their
spiritual wealth — essentially glorifies "dust and ashes." What do they sing about?

The light of God, clothed in the objects of our world (sparks of light).

A person
perceives this shell (body) in which the Soul is clothed because it contains a
spiritual category that brings pleasure.

All our activities are aimed solely at
extracting maximum pleasure from this spark of Light.

And literature describes how each of us can extract the greatest pleasure from
"dust and ashes," from the tiny spark of Light that fell into our world.

And what
paths there are to do so.

And what suffering there is if this pleasure is absent.

Only pure science attempts to look at the world objectively.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And what suffering there is if this pleasure is absent. Only pure science attempts to look at the world objectively. But the problem is
that people cannot compare their bias with anything else and therefore cannot
correct their research. If scientists knew how much is filtered through a person, how much the results of
experiments depend on the person conducting them, they would understand that this
is given to us specifically so that we can ultimately reach the highest level of
scientific development, where science would help us realize the limitations and
closed nature of knowledge, realize the existence of God, and help us transition to
Faith. But there can be no connection between science and Faith. Science deals only
with rational calculations, while Faith deals with "heartfelt" ones, as it is said:
"the heart understands."
Since humans are created to love only themselves, the more something resembles
them, the more they love it. They say opposites attract, but that's only in
literature! People love their own qualities and desires. If they steal, they may
not love this quality, but they justify it in themselves because it brings them
pleasure and gives them what they want. But in another person, they may not like this trait because someone else enjoys it. In other words, we love our feelings, not our traits. And even if I condemn some of
my traits or desires, I still love them and cannot part with them because they
bring me pleasure. There is an apple tree in the garden with delicious apples. If you take an apple,
cut off a piece, and put it in your mouth, you will feel pleasure in your mouth. Do I enjoy the apple? Or a piece of apple? Where is the object of my enjoyment? The object of my enjoyment is the spark of Light that is in this apple, as in any
other object of our desires.

--- PAGE BREAK ---When the spark of Light, clothed in a piece of apple, comes into contact with my
sensory organs, my tongue and brain can somehow extract a certain signal that I
perceive as pleasure because the pleasure center in the brain is stimulated.

But
the stimulation of the pleasure center is not a spark of Light, and the sensation
of pleasure is the Spiritual part of perception.

It is not about the apple or the
piece of apple, but about a certain pleasure.

So, is love a certain kind of pleasure?

No, not that either!

I don't like
lightning.

So what is it that I love?

And who am I, who loves it?

Ultimately, if we
dig deep within ourselves, which anyone can do, we will discover our Soul and Light
(God).

There is nothing else.

No apple trees, no apples, no lightning.

Only Light
(God) and Soul, and everything else is their clothing, which they wear.

2.

How does Heavenly manna differ from bread?

- by its special property: in it,
everyone felt what they wanted to feel.

This is the only Spiritual property - it
has absolutely no properties, but reveals itself as the recipient can (wants to)
perceive it.

In the garments of our world (Yavi), people themselves determine the taste that
they create from the Spiritual Candle (Soul) within them, which has no taste but is
capable of manifesting itself in any property or desire, depending on the
limitations of the properties or desires of the recipient who comprehends it (the
Soul).

And it is precisely for this property that it is called manna — bread from
Heaven.

Because the recipient, the taster, feels in it (manna) what he wants.

And all his actions and manifestations are determined by the recipient, the
receiver.

It is not man who creates taste, but he discovers it for himself in
manna.

We speak of God: Merciful, Strong, You are the Father, Good.

We call God by the name that reflects how we feel His control over us.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We speak of God: Merciful, Strong, You are the Father, Good. We call God by the name that reflects how we feel His control over us. More
precisely, based on how we feel ourselves in the world that God created, we call
God, not with our lips, but with the feeling in our hearts, whether we want to or
not. Because only He is the cause and the force that creates everything around us. Our names for God change every minute, depending on how we feel. When we talk about the names of God, we do not mean how He is called, but how
a person feels. It is a person's inner feeling that is the name by which he
calls the Source of what is happening to him. This applies to all creatures, to any inanimate, plant, or animal nature, as well
as to a person who does not realize that there is a Source of what is happening to
him. But our goal is to feel this Source and call Him by His True Name: the Good
and the Doer of Good. But this problem is connected on both sides: until a person can call God by His
True Name, God hides from him, because it is not fitting for God to reveal Himself
to a person who supposedly does evil. And, on the other hand, a person cannot feel
God until he achieves a coincidence of properties and desires with Him, i.e., until
he himself becomes like God in his properties and desires, and thereby justifies
God's properties and desires, because a person justifies all his properties and
desires. Therefore, God appears to man as having various qualities and desires. But it is
man himself who distinguishes various qualities and desires in the One God, and
according to his own qualities and desires, divides them into good and bad. And
therefore, supposedly, opposite qualities and desires exist in God at the same
time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bad and good are usually called "evil" and "good" in the Vedas.

But do all these
qualities exist in God, and does man only distinguish them from all those that
exist in God?

There is no such thing in God, but His Light affects man in such a
way that a particular taste arises in him depending on the general qualities of man
and the Light of God.

The Light of God contains everything and nothing.

It contains
everything that a person can feel, and nothing specific, because without the
receiver, there is nothing.

Only the receiver can distinguish and feel one or
another influence of God within himself.

Therefore, we say that there is nothing
but the Light (Ingliya) that fills everything.

And everything that is revealed to
us is revealed only in relation to us, only in us, and only individually in each of
us.

But for those who are on the same spiritual level (Faith), God manifests Himself in
the same way.

For example, for those of us who are on the stage of Faith called this, our world
(Yavi), God manifests Himself in the same way: we all perceive the same picture of
the world around us.

But those who ascend to the Spiritual world perceive,
simultaneously with our world, another picture within themselves, another world.

And all those who are on the same Spiritual stage (Faith) perceive the same thing.

That is why people can exchange information and write books.

Otherwise, we would
not be able to say anything to each other.

And everyone who ascends to the level called "Immortality" becomes an Aryan,
because they have attained the qualities of God and therefore receive His name: for
in the Spiritual, nothing separates objects except their qualities and desires.

And
if the properties and desires coincide, then the objects also coincide.

The same is
true in the Vedas themselves: everyone can see what they want to see.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And
if the properties and desires coincide, then the objects also coincide. The same is
true in the Vedas themselves: everyone can see what they want to see. But there is Knowledge called Veda, which is revealed only to the person who
comprehends it, with the help of the screen of the Mind standing in the Spiritual
body of a person. Then Faith (the Knowledge of Light) from simple Light becomes for
a person possessing various tastes. And Light is then called the Light of Prav -
Light that spreads from the head to the navel of the Spiritual vessel (the upper
chakras). And then a person begins to feel different tastes in the sensation of God, but all
this, as in our world, is distinguished by him. God Himself is Spiritual Light. Thus, everything boils down to the concealment or revelation of God, since He is
the Source of Light (Ingliya), carrying everything within Himself. And in Him (the
Light), all possible properties and types are united in the form of simple Light. Therefore, we can always distinguish between:
1 - Simple Light - before it entered the recipient's senses, and it is still
simple because it has no properties or qualities, but includes everything. 2 - The same Light after it has entered the recipient's perception, as a result
of which it acquires a certain specific property according to the recipient's
desires. 3. The wise men (Rahmans) claim that the Soul is part of God. What does it mean that
the Soul is part of God? The wise are those who have ascended the spiritual steps
(of Faith), felt what Spirituality is, feel the Spiritual world (Prav), and receive
the Light of God. That is why they are called the Wise - from the word Wisdom,
because they receive the Light (Wisdom) of God. And as they felt the revelation of God, so they described it in their Books
(Vedas). This is how we received all the Books of Faith. After all, it is
impossible to

--- PAGE BREAK ---imagine that God descended from Heaven in some materialized form and handed over
some scroll or stone tablets.

They wrote one Book, then another, then a third, and so on.

The authors of all the
Books of Faith were Sages and therefore were able to describe what they described,
were able to speak on behalf of God.

Among these Sages there are people of
different levels.

They are named after the stages of Faith that they have attained.

They gave us our Faith.

And they described, among other things, that our Soul
is part of God Himself.

Moreover, they say that there is no difference between
the Soul and God Himself, only that the Soul is a part, and God is everything,
the Whole.

Since the difference in the Spiritual is only a difference in properties and
desires, this already indicates that there is no difference in properties and
desires between that part of God that is within us, which is called our Soul, and
God Himself.

What, then, is the difference between the Soul and God?

Only that He
is the Whole, and the Soul is a part!

But in the Spiritual there are no parts and
no Whole, no volumes, only differences in desires, because the Spiritual world is a
world of desires.

So perhaps what is meant is a part of a great desire?

The sages
say that the Soul is like a stone that has separated from a rock, where the rock is
the whole and the stone is a part.

But if everything in the Spiritual world is
separated from each other by differences in properties and desires, and here it is
said that there is no difference, only in size, then how can there be such a
difference in size in the Spiritual world, if in the Spiritual world a difference
can only be a difference in properties and desires?

After all, in the Spiritual
world, if two objects have the same properties and desires, which means that they
are made of the same material, have the same properties and desires, then how do
they differ from each other?But if everything in the Spiritual world is
separated from each other by differences in properties and desires, and here it is
said that there is no difference, only in size, then how can there be such a
difference in size in the Spiritual world, if in the Spiritual world a difference
can only be a difference in properties and desires?

After all, in the Spiritual
world, if two objects have the same properties and desires, which means that they
are made of the same material, have the same properties and desires, then how do
they differ from each other?

And if we say that these are not the same thing, but two different things, that
they are separate, and since there are no places or distances in the Spiritual
world, what separates them from each other?

Surely there must be some difference
between them?

How are they not equal to each other?

The Spiritual separates from its previous Form, or some part of a Spiritual object
is separated from it due to differences in properties and desires, just as in the
material world one object is divided into two parts with an axe, where the axe is
something foreign that divides one thing into two parts.

That is, there is
obviously something foreign in the Spiritual that can separate a part from God,
just as an axe separates a part from a material body.

But these parts, despite the fact that they are not in God, possess His properties,
similar to Him, like a stone and a rock.

The Faith (Vedas) says that the only thing
God created was the Soul of Adam (Mana), which then divided into many parts.

So,
perhaps there are many differences between these parts, each of which remains a
part of God?

The soul is a spiritual vessel (aura) that possesses a screen—the power to
counteract its selfishness (ego)—allowing it to receive the Light of God.

The
vessel of the Soul itself is a selfish desire (ego).--- PAGE BREAK ---

The soul is a spiritual vessel (aura) that possesses a screen—the power to
counteract its selfishness (ego)—allowing it to receive the Light of God. The
vessel of the Soul itself is a selfish desire (ego). Due to the influence of the
Light on it, it acquires the power to receive the Light for the sake of God, and
not for itself. This power is called a screen. With the help of the screen, the vessel of the Soul receives the Light from God
within itself. This Light is called the Soul. And, of course, this Light and the
general Light (Inglia) emanating from God are one and the same, and the difference
between them is that the Light received within the vessel of the Soul is a part of
the general Light (Inglia). And yet there is a difference between one part of the
Light (Soul) and another (Soul) and from the general Light (Inglia), in which these
portions of Light, these Souls, are clothed. It is precisely the specific property (desire) of each vessel of the Soul that
allows it to extract a specific property from the simple Light (Ingli),

--- PAGE BREAK ---a certain action depending on its properties (desires).

Therefore, only the power
to receive Light for God's sake, i.e., the screen, determines the likeness to God
in the Soul of the perceiver.

Only the screen divides the common Light of God
(Ingliya) into parts, each of which receives the part of the vessel of the Soul
that befits it.

4.

We know only one Law in the Spiritual world (Prav) - the LAW OF ABSOLUTE ALTRUISM
(EGO).

And only one law in our world - the LAW OF ABSOLUTE EGOISM (ego).

Since
there is nothing in creation (Yavi) except God and the creation
— man — we can only measure all dimensions of our states relative to the only
standard — God.

Since man constantly changes his states, in our initial state we
are at the absolutely opposite end of the Spiritual scale, polar opposites from God
with our selfish desires to receive pleasure only for ourselves.

Therefore, our previous question: how can the Soul remain part of God and at the
same time be separated from Him?

The answer is simple: the Soul is separated by
being placed in the human body, the vessel of the Soul, where it is given the
desire to enjoy (ego), selfishness.

And depending on how much its properties and
desires differ from the properties and desires of God—absolute altruism—the
creation is either closer to God or further from Him.

And besides that, there is
nothing else in the world.

But if there are only two things—God and man—then how
can we say, "There is a man inside whom there is a Soul—a part of God, i.e., God
Himself." Is it God existing in man?

Is His particle—the Light (Soul)—the same in
its properties as God Himself?

How can this be?

After all, God exists in man, which means that man is not separate
from God.

If he is separate from God, how can he, the Light (Soul), be part of Him?

A part means similarity to the whole in terms of properties and desires.

So, is
there a part of God in man, i.e., the properties and desires of God?--- PAGE BREAK ---

A part means similarity to the whole in terms of properties and desires. So, is
there a part of God in man, i.e., the properties and desires of God? After all,
apart from properties and desires, there is nothing else in the Spiritual. But in
the Spiritual, we separate parts from the Whole by changing properties and desires. So, the part of God that is separated must have different properties and desires? So, it can no longer be called a part of God. It must be given some other name. And
Yeshua (Jesus) told us earlier that the difference between the Soul and God is only
that the Soul is a part, and God is the Whole. That is, the Soul does not change its properties and desires, but only separates as
a part. How can this be in the Spiritual? After all, this contradicts the rule that in the
Spiritual, due to the absence of bodies, the difference between Spiritual objects
lies only in the difference in their properties and desires, as in our world
(Yavi), if we look more deeply at our surroundings. What separates a part from God? As soon as God decided to create man, everything He had conceived immediately
appeared in its final form, and everything else is auxiliary stages of Spiritual
Comprehension (Knowledge of God), existing only in man, for man to achieve his Life
Goal - Immortality. This is because in the Spiritual world there is no movement, no time, no action,
nothing but desires. Therefore, with the birth of such a desire in God: to create
man in order to delight him with Absolute Delight (Immortality), this desire
immediately became the final state. This is the state in which God perceives us. This is the state in which we all
exist, but we do not perceive it. This is only because our properties and desires
have not yet been corrected. But as soon as we correct them, we will feel the True

--- PAGE BREAK ---our state.

But for now, our egoism (ego) prevents us from feeling this, casting a
veil over all our senses.

The state in which God perceives us, which is perceived by corrected Souls, is
called the world of Infinity (Svaraga).

The opposite state is our perception,
called "our world" or "the world of Yavi." That is, the world of Yavi is not a
material space, but a collection of human perceptions.

And since there can be many such complexes of sensations, each of these sensations
is called the world of Yavi.

So, God's desire, His entire plan from beginning to
end, with all the intermediate and final states, all this already exists in its
most complete and perfect form.

And this completed state is called the world of Infinity (Svaraga), which means "no
end," no end to the enjoyment that the human soul receives from God.

Why is it
called Infinity?

According to God's plan.

He wanted to give infinite enjoyment, so
a state appeared where Souls are filled with the enjoyment that God decided to give
them.

God's desire to create Souls in order to delight them is called the 1st state
(receiving for oneself).

The state that Souls immediately attained by God's desire
alone is called the 3rd state (receiving for God).

But since the Souls themselves
do not yet feel this, they are in an intermediate state—2 (giving for the sake of
oneself)—on the way to feeling their true state (Immortality).

And it is only
possible to feel it (Immortality) by purifying oneself of selfishness.

Because only this distinguishes them (Souls) from God.

And by eliminating
selfishness, Souls will become like God, and therefore will feel themselves in
their Perfect, True state (Immortality).Because only this distinguishes them (Souls) from God.

And by eliminating
selfishness, Souls will become like God, and therefore will feel themselves in
their Perfect, True state (Immortality).

And then they will discover that before
that they were as if in a dream, for it is said: "When God returns us to the Light
(Ingliya), we will see that we were as if in a dream."
The gradual approach of a person from the most distant point, the lowest world of
Navi, to the third state (the world of Prav) is called ascending the Spiritual
ladder, called the steps of Faith.

God caused the separation of man from Himself by
a successive descent, a deterioration of Spiritual qualities, from Himself to the
opposite of Himself.

This gradual descent of the spiritual steps (Faith) is called the creation
(Creation of the 3 Worlds), the development of the (3) Worlds from top to bottom,
from the highest world of Prav (absolute altruism) to Navi (absolute egoism).

"Ascending" the steps of Faith means gradually correcting one's desires (ego).

And
up to the state called "the end of correction" (Liberation), the last Spiritual
step of the world of Prati, below which there is only our world, no longer
Spiritual, but material (Yavi), where we exist in complete isolation from
Spirituality (God), from altruism (Reason).

The difference between our world-stage (Faith) and previous worlds-stages (Faith)
is that in this world (Yavi), or at this stage (Faith), God is not felt at all.

At
this stage (Faith), material objects are born from spiritual objects: the bodies of
our world (inanimate, plant, animal, human), and they are not filled with the Light
of God, as on the previous (Spiritual) stages (Faith), but they contain only a
small spark of His Light, unrecognizable to the beings themselves, which gives
existence on this stage (Faith) and is called life in this world (Yavi).--- PAGE BREAK ---

The difference between our world-stage (Faith) and previous worlds-stages (Faith)
is that in this world (Yavi), or at this stage (Faith), God is not felt at all. At
this stage (Faith), material objects are born from spiritual objects: the bodies of
our world (inanimate, plant, animal, human), and they are not filled with the Light
of God, as on the previous (Spiritual) stages (Faith), but they contain only a
small spark of His Light, unrecognizable to the beings themselves, which gives
existence on this stage (Faith) and is called life in this world (Yavi). Therefore,
all Creation (the 3 Worlds) can be imagined as descending from God in stages, from
top to bottom: the world of Prav, the world of Yavi, and the world of Navi. Immortality—the World of Infinity—is states 1 (receiving pleasure for oneself)
and 3 (receiving pleasure for God).

--- PAGE BREAK ---From top to bottom, God gradually coarsened the property of altruism (EGO) to such
an extent that He created its complete opposite - egoism (ego), the desire for
self-enjoyment.

The rise of a person through the consistent correction of their
properties and desires from the bottom up is called the correction of the ego
(desires), state 2 (giving for oneself).

We must walk this path and reach state 3 (receiving for God's sake) in our
feelings, which we are already in but do not feel.

Everyone must go through this
Path, but how to go through it is the question: through the Path of Faith (Veda) —
relatively quickly, consciously accepting the Goal of Life (Immortality) as the
Highest Goal of one's life, or through suffering, unconsciously, involuntarily,
forced by the painful development of all humanity under the pressure of the Laws of
Nature.

We cannot comprehend God Himself.

Light emanates from Him — that property-desire
with which He decided to create us and which only we perceive from Him.

And by this
property-desire to create and delight us, we judge Him, i.e., by His actions.

But
the question of who He Himself is makes no sense, because there is no answer to it!

Therefore, He has no name.

After all, we can only give a name based on the
properties that characterize something.

And the names that the Sages, who sense
God, give Him are not given to God Himself, but to His Light, because they
comprehend not God, but the Light emanating from Him.

And based on the effect of this Light in man, in Souls, at various Spiritual
levels (of Faith), the Sages give names to the Light (God): Good, Merciful,
Perfect, etc.

Therefore, where it usually says God, it means the Light (Inglia)
that creates and gives birth to everything, but in no case God Himself.

All our
words are sounds that express something we can comprehend, feel, and realize.

There can be no words that name something completely unimaginable, something that
cannot arise in any imagination.--- PAGE BREAK ---

All our
words are sounds that express something we can comprehend, feel, and realize. There can be no words that name something completely unimaginable, something that
cannot arise in any imagination. For we first feel and imagine something, and then
we give a name to our imagination or feeling. And another person understands me
because I can explain to him what feeling this name (designation) evokes in me,
what kind of object, property, or action it is. Since we are all created with the same organs of perception and imagination, we can
convey our feelings and thoughts to others. Our entire vocabulary is based on our
achievements (knowledge). And if we do not feel (know) something, then we have no
words for it. Those who feel God call Him either Great, Perfect, or Merciful,
depending on what they feel. Those who do not feel can only recite what is written in the prayer book. But these
are dead words, behind which there are no clear feelings. True, a person's
imagination works so sharply that he paints a picture of the Spiritual world, of
God, similar to what he can imagine based on the images of this world (Yavi). And although there is no connection or similarity between these two pictures, it
is enough for them to fully satisfy their religious feelings and to feel that they
are in some kind of contact with the Higher Power. But in every generation there
are those who experience an acute lack of a clear feeling of the Spiritual, of
contact with God. This feeling of striving upward is called the feeling of the point of Light in the
heart. If a person feels this need acutely, he cannot find peace, he comes to Faith
(the Vedas) and with its help attains the sensations of the Spiritual worlds. 5.

--- PAGE BREAK ---What does the feeling of Infinity (Immortality) mean?

As we have already said, it
is not simply a feeling of Boundlessness, but Boundless Enjoyment: you feel exactly
as much as you desire.

In other words, Infinity is our subjective feeling of the
infinity of pleasure, a specific, desired pleasure that has no end, no limits
either from Above, from God, or from below, from us.

Those who have experienced this state, the highest state of receiving Light from
the Creator, the greatest thing He wanted to give, called this feeling "Infinity
(Immortality)".

This is exactly how a person feels with their Spiritual organs of
perception, which is why they call it that.

If we do not feel Him at all, then we
cannot say anything about Him.

Only about the One whose influence we feel on
ourselves.

Not Him, but our feeling of Him.

For example, how I imagine someone, how
I perceive all their external and internal properties, which I feel and evaluate
with my organs of sensation.

How I feel about myself depends on my qualities and on external causes that have
nothing to do with me personally.

But what am I really like?

Just as we cannot judge anything objectively, so we cannot say anything objective
about God.

Because it is impossible to perceive anything outside of ourselves, not
with our senses, to perceive an object as it is.

After all, to perceive something presupposes the existence of the one who
perceives, with all his desires and qualities.

Therefore, only God is both the
feeling and the perceiver, whereas in man these two concepts are separate: I and
what I perceive.

In Faith (the Vedas), this is stated as follows: The light of God
(Inglia) is in absolute peace (harmony), i.e., it has only one goal — to create
and enjoy creation.

And all the names by which His creatures call Him come from their perception of the
Light that they reveal to themselves through their senses.

They call Him according
to how they perceive Him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And all the names by which His creatures call Him come from their perception of the
Light that they reveal to themselves through their senses. They call Him according
to how they perceive Him. And this is the difference between God and His creation:
in creation, there is a difference between perception and the perceiver, between
concept and understanding. That is, there is the perceiver and his connection with his surroundings,
which is called external perception, and that which exists outside of the
perceiver is only God Himself. And therefore, He cannot be comprehended. For
man comprehends only through perception, through sensation. And the truth of
human perception can only be measured in relation to the perceiver. And we ourselves see how our assessments and perceptions of the world, our desires
and qualities change — but it is not the world that changes, but our senses and
assessments, i.e., it is not what changes, but how we perceive it. So there is a
difference between God Himself and how I perceive Him. The sensation of God is
called "Light," i.e., Light and God are one and the same for us. But, in principle,
we must understand that Light is a subjective sensation of God. And, perceiving
Light, we can give it all kinds of names. In accordance with the sensations we experience. Legii (Spirits), Arlegii (Angels),
Aranii (Archangels) — these concepts mean nothing to us, we only hear them. But if
we climb to the same step (of Faith) where those who gave these names to Light
stood, we will immediately understand what they are talking about. We will not just
say, for example, "The Light of the Arlegs in the sphere (world) of the Arlegs
(Angels) of the world of Infinity" — we will feel what is meant by the name that
was given to it. In our world, if you read a book about the Light, it is not enough
to be filled with what it says.

--- PAGE BREAK ---But if you are in the Spiritual world, i.e., if you have a screen for your egoistic
desires (ego), and you read a book about the Light, you can immediately be filled
with the Light.

Wise people, reading the Book of Splendor (Zohar), simultaneously
perform a spiritual action: receiving Light into the screen.

That is, they turn
thought into action.

Therefore, a sage may pray using a standard prayer book, but he understands the
spiritual actions contained in the words of a "simple" prayer book written in
"human" letters.

There are also Vedic prayer books that explicitly state the
spiritual actions that must be performed.

Knowing what this means, one can simultaneously perform the corresponding action.

A
wise man can read what is written in runes in the Aryan Vedas, letters with all
their meanings — and all this is a sign of spiritual actions (steps) for him.

The Aryan Vedas indicate what a person should do spiritually.

To fulfill the
prescriptions of the Vedas, you must rise to the level of the Legs of the world of
Prav, attain its great state — then you will have Light in the vessel of your Soul,
which is called the "Light of the Soul." This will happen in your Spiritual vessel.

And this is called "awakening" in Faith.

The physical body of a person fulfills the physical prescriptions of the Vedas, and
if a person has a Spiritual body, then he fulfills the Spiritual prescriptions of
the Vedas with it.

The Spiritual body of a person is born with the appearance of a
screen on his egoism.

The size of the screen (the strength of opposition to one's
egoism) determines the size of the Spiritual body.

Therefore, the Spiritual body can be in various states, called similarly to the
physical body: embryo, small, large.

The Light that fills this corrected desire
(EGO) is called the Spirit.Therefore, the Spiritual body can be in various states, called similarly to the
physical body: embryo, small, large.

The Light that fills this corrected desire
(EGO) is called the Spirit.

Therefore, before the appearance of the Spiritual body,
a person does not have a human Soul, but only an animal Soul, a small spark of
Light that animates his physiological body.

The size of the screen—the strength of resistance to selfishness—determines the
degree of coincidence in properties with God, the amount of filling with Light,
which we call God.

This means that to this extent, you coincide with God in your
properties.

God is within you, as it is said in Faith (Beliefs): "God clothes
Himself in the body of man." He shines with His properties (desires) in man, and
therefore man feels pleasure from the sensation of God.

God enters a person to the extent that the person's desires resemble God's desires.

Through his efforts to correct his egoism, a person has brought himself closer to
God, from the opposite state to merging with Him.

To the extent that a person
resembles God, God fills him with Himself.

In the place (chakras) from the "head"
to the "navel" in your Spiritual body, where the Spiritual desire (EGO) and the
Light that fills it are one and the same.

"God and His Light (Inglia) are One," because to this extent a person has become
equal to God, and God, the Light (Inglia), is how a person feels Him.

And this
state is called "Unity" — "Listen, man, our Creator is ONE" — when a person feels
that there is only One Creator in everything.

And the end of all correction is defined as the state described as "And on that Day
(in that state called Judgment Day, because the full Light will be revealed) God
and His Light are One" - for all Souls, parts of the First Soul "Adam (Mana)," will
comprehend completely and only one thing - complete Perfect Infinite delight, i.e.,
the boundless sensation of God, in His sole attribute (desire) - to delight Souls.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And this
state is called "Unity" — "Listen, man, our Creator is ONE" — when a person feels
that there is only One Creator in everything. And the end of all correction is defined as the state described as "And on that Day
(in that state called Judgment Day, because the full Light will be revealed) God
and His Light are One" - for all Souls, parts of the First Soul "Adam (Mana)," will
comprehend completely and only one thing - complete Perfect Infinite delight, i.e.,
the boundless sensation of God, in His sole attribute (desire) - to delight Souls. And they will comprehend this because the Soul will be completely equal to the
Light (God) in its properties. The very inner desire of man, i.e., man himself,
will be completely like God.

--- PAGE BREAK ---And in this way, a person achieves his destiny, because God set as the goal of His
creation to create a person who is completely opposite to Himself, and to give a
person the opportunity to create himself in the image of God from the nothingness
in which God created him.

That is, God created something absolutely imperfect, and
man must strive to achieve Absolute Perfection.

And although this Perfect state
already exists, and we already exist in it, we cannot feel our existence in it.

And we need to fix that.

As it is said: "There is nothing new under the sun."
— a single action took place, according to God's thought, man (the Soul) was
created in his final state of Infinite Bliss.

Now it is up to man to feel this
state or not.

And all the progress of civilization exists so that we understand
that everything is possible: existence outside of time, outside of space, double
spaces, the addition of spaces.

How can we imagine simultaneous existence "there" and "here"?

It all depends on our
feelings: to be transported there or to be here.

This is our freedom of choice.

Question: Does a higher level (of Faith) include greater enjoyment, everything that
is on lower levels?

Obviously, this question asks whether our final state includes all the small
pleasures.

Naturally, everything that is on the higher level (Faith) includes everything
lower, because everything that is lower passes through the higher level (Faith).

But this does not mean that the higher level (Faith) has all the nuances of the
sensations that are below it.

In order to reveal each pleasure, each nuance of a
sensation, it is necessary to embrace it with knowledge, to accept it into oneself,
to feel it within oneself.

Otherwise, it will remain in potential, but not
revealed.

The end of correction is called the end because it means the completion of the
revelation of all the shades of pleasure prepared for us by God.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Otherwise, it will remain in potential, but not
revealed. The end of correction is called the end because it means the completion of the
revelation of all the shades of pleasure prepared for us by God. An adult man cannot experience the same thing when reading a novel as a teenager. He must descend again to the teenage level, but this is already impossible because
he has grown up, acquired greater desires, and cannot be satisfied with small,
"unreal" pleasures. But each spiritual level has its own complete set of Inglia Lights. And each level
(of Faith) carries within itself shades of all the others. The Teacher gave this example: if I have three opportunities to enjoy myself, I
will not say, "Give me three portions." I will say, "Give me salad, soup, salt,
and bread."
Why do I need all this? Can you compare a salad with bread? Each object has its own
taste. One complements the other. The Light of Infinity (Inglia) ultimately gives
the Perfection of sensation. But you cannot experience the Perfection of sensation
only with the Light of Prav. You must also feel Nav. Only together can they give
you the perfection of sensation. Therefore, although the higher step (Faith) includes all the lower, smaller steps,
you cannot experience all the lower ones while standing on it. When Inglia must
give Light to a person, She grants the person's request or prayer and then
transmits this Light to him. God Himself has no one to ask on behalf of a person,
because it is only the desire of a person, not of God. By fulfilling all the Commandments, passing through all three stages of Faith, and
completing the nine stages of trials from our world to the end of correction
(Immortality), a person receives into themselves, into their Spiritual vessel, all
the Light (Delight) prepared for them by God, all the Higher Light (Svarog). This
is the number of stages that a person must

--- PAGE BREAK ---a person must overcome in order to merge with God.

That is, a person must pass each
test in its full spiritual meaning: create a screen—correct their egoism, make an
EGO, receive the Light for the sake of God, called Faith.

And so it is at every step (of Faith).

And upon reaching the last step, a person
receives all of their Light, all of their Faith.

That part of the Light that enters
a person's spiritual vessel is called Faith, or a part of God.

There is nothing but
the desire to enjoy (EGO), corrected by the screen—the desire to be like God and
the Light of God.

From this, it becomes clear why it is said that Faith and God are one and the same.

We do not study what happens after reaching complete correction (Liberation).

Our
task is to achieve it.

We have no words to describe what is felt in the state of
Infinite Enjoyment.

The Book of Splendor (Zohar) deals with this to some extent.

But this cannot yet be the subject of our conversations.

6.

Perhaps a somewhat strange phrase catches the eye: labor is given to us as a
reward.

It should be the other way around: reward for labor.

But the fact is that
those who comprehend Spiritual nature (essence), replacing their own desires with
God's desires, begin to perceive the opportunity (desire) to give (EGO), to
delight, to do something for God as a great mercy bestowed by God.

And so labor turns into reward.

As we said earlier: nothing changes in the
Universe, we are already in our final state (Immortality), but we just need to open
our eyes to our surroundings.

The same applies to labor and reward: concepts are
reversed: what was considered an effort becomes a joyful opportunity, what was
considered pleasure is now perceived as evil and abomination.As we said earlier: nothing changes in the
Universe, we are already in our final state (Immortality), but we just need to open
our eyes to our surroundings.

The same applies to labor and reward: concepts are
reversed: what was considered an effort becomes a joyful opportunity, what was
considered pleasure is now perceived as evil and abomination.

The Sages say that God created all Worlds, Higher and lower, only for a person who
has the desire to become like God, who fulfills Faith and the Vedas, who
comprehends the Higher Light within himself, who receives Faith by fulfilling the
prescriptions of the Vedas, by correcting the screen (the force of opposition to
his egoism).

How can this be reconciled with what is said, that the purpose of Creation (of the
3 Worlds) is to delight in creatures (Souls)?

If God wanted to delight His
creations (Souls), then why did He create this world (Yavi), full of suffering, and
place us in it, where we are unable to exist for a single moment without making an
effort to survive, not to mention the unattainability of lasting, complete Delight?

The Sages answer this: to create the possibility of reward.

Because the recipient
of the reward is undeservedly ashamed to look the giver in the eye.

Because every time he receives something undeserved, he feels enormous shame.

And
in order for Souls to get rid of this feeling of shame, God created all Worlds and
our world, in which it is possible to work (create) and enjoy the fruits of one's
labor in the future without feeling shame.

God is the First Source of everything
and could, of course, have created beings (Souls) that do not feel shame.

But there
is nothing in the Worlds, including ours (Yavi), that was created by Him in vain;
everything was created only because He has a certain responsibility to bring man to
the end of correction (Immortality).

There is nothing in the world of Yavi that acts without a specific purpose.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But there
is nothing in the Worlds, including ours (Yavi), that was created by Him in vain;
everything was created only because He has a certain responsibility to bring man to
the end of correction (Immortality). There is nothing in the world of Yavi that acts without a specific purpose. Man
must constantly remember this and try to understand through it

--- PAGE BREAK ---everything that happens: everything that appears before us, everything that
happens, everything around us — is by no means a coincidence!!!

7.

The sages (Rahman) ascended the spiritual steps (Faith) above our world (Yavi) and
felt and saw that everything in our world (Yavi) has a Cause, Purpose, and
Consequence — it happens according to a clear program.

And this program is created
for a person who follows Faith and the Vedas.

These great Spiritual personalities,
who ascended and looked at our world, called righteous the person who follows the
prescriptions of the Vedas.

We know that in the Vedas, each word (runa) implies
certain concepts that not only have a place in our world (Yavi), but also have
their Spiritual Root (in the world of Prav).

Philosophers ask: "If God's desire is to create all Worlds and creatures for the
purpose of enjoying these creations, then why did He create our material world
(Yavi), full of suffering, injustice, and humiliation?" Of course, God could have
delighted Souls on higher levels (Faith) without clothing them in the bodies of
this world (Yavi).

So why did He create such a lowly body and instill the Soul, a
part of Himself, into such an impure body?

Why is it necessary to put a person through such a terrible state as our world
(Yavi)?

Doesn't this negate the Perfection of His actions?

This is incomprehensible
to anyone.

And even if we can somehow justify God's actions with our minds, it is
impossible with our hearts (Souls).

Because you cannot command the heart.

And if it
feels bad in the world, it blames God for this feeling.

Therefore, only those who have corrected themselves (their ego) and thus experience
the Truth of the Purpose of Creation (Immortality) in their new, corrected
sensations are called righteous, because they justify God's actions with their
hearts.

But this feeling is only a consequence of the level (Faith) that he has
attained.Therefore, only those who have corrected themselves (their ego) and thus experience
the Truth of the Purpose of Creation (Immortality) in their new, corrected
sensations are called righteous, because they justify God's actions with their
hearts.

But this feeling is only a consequence of the level (Faith) that he has
attained.

And until he comprehends God's deeds as absolutely good, any person
accuses Him and is in conflict with Him.

As long as a person remains within the confines of our world (Yavi) and has not
entered the Spiritual world, he cannot internally, with his heart (Mind), agree
with God's governance — for in his selfish desires he feels suffering, the absence
of what he desires.

And the whole world around him also cries out to him about its
suffering.

But only those who have corrected their senses (ego) discover that
everything in the world is beautiful, and everything around them is the garment of
Light (Ingliya).

How does this relate to free bread and the shame felt by those who receive it?

God
made it so that the gift would cause a feeling of shame.

We see that if a person
finds something on the street and there is no one around, he picks it up and can
use it without shame.

The same is true of the Law of Faith (God) in the case of a
find: if the owner is unknown, the find remains with the finder.

From this we can see that it is not the gift itself that causes shame and
discomfort in the recipient, but the feeling of the Giver.

And since God desires to
reveal Himself to us, for this is the highest pleasure, He desires to reveal
Himself without any unpleasant side effects in us.

But as soon as we feel the Giver, we experience shame!

Moreover, we know from our
experience in this world that the giver feels such impatience and shame that it
then turns into hatred, and the gift is met with disgust instead of desire.

This is because receiving in such a case suppresses selfishness, which is
completely unbearable for a person.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Moreover, we know from our
experience in this world that the giver feels such impatience and shame that it
then turns into hatred, and the gift is met with disgust instead of desire. This is because receiving in such a case suppresses selfishness, which is
completely unbearable for a person. Since selfishness is the only human essence
(the property-desire of the body), we can go to any lengths, except for the
humiliation of the ego. Even to death, but with the awareness of our own

--- PAGE BREAK ---I.

The feeling of shame depends on the value of the gift and on how the giver can
alleviate your sense of shame at receiving it.

The question arises: why is this done?

If God can do anything, let him make it so
that we do not feel shame!

He did just that — he put us in such a state that we do
not feel the Giver (God).

If a person is not sufficiently spiritually developed,
they do not feel like a receiver.

They are like a child who feels no shame when
receiving.

But God wants us to rise in our development to match Him.

Therefore, He created the
feeling of shame in the receiver.

Only to help the receiver change his properties-
desires—to become a giver.

Shame is a special creation that God created.

Egoism and
the feeling of shame are two manifestations of one property-desire.

Egoism cannot fully enjoy itself if it feels that it is receiving.

And in a
spiritually developed person, the feeling of receiving completely nullifies the
enjoyment of receiving.

At first glance, it seems very logical that this world was
created in the unity of egoism and the feeling of shame.

A person works against his selfishness, for God, fulfilling His desires, thereby
earning a reward that he can receive honestly and therefore without shame.

It seems
to be said that in order to "exclude" the feeling of shame from the Soul, God
created this world in which there is the possibility of activity (work, creation).

And for the efforts that a person makes now, he will receive pleasure-reward in the
future.

Because what he receives from God will already be a reward for what he has
done, and not just a gift.

And thus he gets rid of shame.

But if we felt God, we
would not be able to accept anything from Him: for example, I give you a gift.

You feel that you are receiving something, but you refuse the gift because, in
receiving it, you completely erase the pleasure, for the shame in you arises to the
same degree as the pleasure.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But if we felt God, we
would not be able to accept anything from Him: for example, I give you a gift. You feel that you are receiving something, but you refuse the gift because, in
receiving it, you completely erase the pleasure, for the shame in you arises to the
same degree as the pleasure. You no longer feel pleasure from the gift itself, no
matter how good it may be. What can be done? The answer is as follows. The giver, in addition to giving pleasure (a gift), also provides an opportunity to
get rid of shame, i.e., to do something and then you can consider that you deserve
this gift yourself. That is, as if you created it completely, made it with your own
hands. You become, as it were, the Creator of your own state, your own pleasures. You do not feel at all that there is a Giver to you. And within yourself, you have
both the Source of effort and the sensations that you receive for your efforts,
creating pleasure for yourself. You do not feel the Giver as a giver, but become his partner. The question is, why
is working on ourselves so difficult and causes suffering? If we do not feel
suffering from our efforts, we will not be able to "overcome" the suffering from
shame for receiving, i.e., must one suffering correspond to another? What does suffering mean when working on ourselves? Since our whole nature
(essence) is the desire for pleasure, suffering is what goes against our desire for
pleasure. If our desires are directed in one direction and the goal of our activity
is in another, we feel suffering accordingly. If desires are directed toward the
same thing as the activity itself, then a person, or rather, egoism, does not feel
suffering from the activity. The activity coincides with the reward, and therefore the reward is felt instead of
labor and effort. Suffering during our spiritual work arises from the fact that the
spiritual goal (immortality) and the goal of our body (ego), against which we must
act, are opposite, which isof
labor and effort. Suffering during our spiritual work arises from the fact that the
spiritual goal (immortality) and the goal of our body (ego), against which we must
act, are opposite, which is

--- PAGE BREAK ---causes us to feel suffering.

As the body (ego) is corrected, instead of suffering
during the work on oneself, one feels pleasure.

And nothing changes in the activities you do now and will do in the future.

They
may even become a billion times greater.

But they will not seem a billion times
harder; rather, they will be a billion times more pleasant to you because they
coincide with your intention (desire).

Therefore, a righteous person is one who
desires to give everything to God.

In this case, his aspiration and his work
coincide in direction, and he does not experience any effort, but on the contrary,
experiences pleasure.

Give everything to God?

Many people cannot even imagine what that means!

But for
the righteous, it is a great pleasure.

Therefore, our entire purpose in life is to
change our desires.

Apart from "giving (EGO)" and "taking (ego)," there is nothing
else in human nature (essence).

But just look at how many different shades and
complex relationships there are in these two simple actions.

Because these two
concepts contain all of Infinity.

And besides "giving (EGO)" and "taking (ego),"
there is nothing else.

There is only the Giver and the taker.

How can we achieve Perfection in the
relationship between them?

To make the taker Perfect — this is the Goal of human
Life.

Shame is a creation, independent and separate.

If someone who wants to enjoy
feels no shame at all, it means that they do not feel that they are receiving
anything.

Like an inanimate object, a plant, or even an animal.

But we see that,
for example, animals already distinguish between the giver and the taker.

But there is still no reaction to receiving—shame, due to low development.

And a
person has all levels of development, from inanimate to human.

And whether he
experiences shame depends on his development.

Because shame is a reaction to the
feeling of the giver.

And if a person clearly saw everything that God gave him, his
egoism would not be able to bear it.Because shame is a reaction to the
feeling of the giver.

And if a person clearly saw everything that God gave him, his
egoism would not be able to bear it.

This feeling is hellish punishment.

In our
world, any person can be put in such circumstances that he will burn with shame.

And there is nothing worse than this, because shame is the direct antagonist
(enemy) of selfishness.

And only with the help of shame can a person be educated
and nurtured.

Shame is a consequence of developed selfishness.

A child does not
feel that he is receiving something.

He will approach anyone and take it.

But give
an adult what he really needs.

How hard it is to take!

It is preferable to make any
effort than to humiliate oneself.

Because the feeling of receiving kills
selfishness, since it is against its nature.

Receive—yes, but don't feel like a recipient!

And since nothing has been created
except selfishness (the desire to receive), shame is a direct weapon against
selfishness, the original creation.

With the help of shame, like a gun, you can fix
everything in creation (man) and achieve "Immortality." Selfishness and shame are,
in principle, one and the same.

Shame is a consequence of feeling your own
selfishness, your own Essence, feeling yourself.

Shame is a manifestation of a
person's Conscience.

When does shame arise?

When I feel like I am receiving.

That is, when I use my
ability to receive.

If I don't use it, then I don't receive.

I may be given
millions, but if I do not feel that I am being given them, i.e., if it does not
matter to me, as in the worlds of Prav, for example, it does not mean that I am
taking them.

Or I may be given something insignificant that I am interested in, and
I will not be able to receive it because I will experience burning shame.

It is not simply a matter of the gift in the abstract, objectively, but rather
subjectively, in relation to whom, what feelings the gift evokes in them.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Or I may be given something insignificant that I am interested in, and
I will not be able to receive it because I will experience burning shame. It is not simply a matter of the gift in the abstract, objectively, but rather
subjectively, in relation to whom, what feelings the gift evokes in them. Shame,
like selfishness, is measured only in relation to the person themselves — how much
they feel these qualities or desires within themselves. And the more a person feels
selfishness within themselves, the stronger the feeling of shame is within them. And those who

--- PAGE BREAK ---feels shame is equally aware of their selfishness.

And those who do not feel shame
for their own selfishness are like underdeveloped children.

Shame is a quality of developed selfishness.

And when a person begins to feel
shame, to the extent of this feeling, they begin to correct themselves; shame
inevitably forces their ego to correct itself.

Therefore, in order to correct
ourselves, we need only one thing: to feel the Giver.

After all, according to God's
plan, we are already created ready to do everything so as not to feel like takers,
because this feeling kills our egoism.

If God gives us a gift, but we cannot receive it because we are ashamed, then He
gives us a task so that we can earn this gift, as it were, i.e., as if we "made it
ourselves" rather than "received it." This is called exchange.

And therefore, there
is no feeling of inferiority, no feeling that you are receiving something for free.

And this would be true if the purpose of human life were to receive something from
God, neutralizing our shame, or to earn what we receive from Him.

Either for Him,
or to calm ourselves.

But the Purpose of Life (Immortality) is not to receive from
God.

Therefore, by mechanically following the prescriptions of the Vedas for reward
in this or the next world, we do not achieve the Purpose of Life (Immortality).

We
pass through this state (the world of Yavi) only as a preparatory stage.

The Purpose of Life for a person is not to earn for themselves both this world and
the next.

Work is slave labor.

How can one earn Eternal Bliss in 100 years?

No
matter how much I work in this world, I will not be able to balance His "Infinite
Gift" with any limited period of work.

It will always remain a gift.

Could there be a greater and more generous gift than this?

And not to work it off
for 10,000 years.

To exchange work for eternity, and activity must be eternal,
dedicated to eternity — to God.And not to work it off
for 10,000 years.

To exchange work for eternity, and activity must be eternal,
dedicated to eternity — to God.

So why did God create this world (Yavi) and our
short-lived existence in it?

Is it really possible in 120 years to achieve the Goal
of Life — to receive boundless pleasure without shame, in its absolute form
(Immortality) — by fulfilling any of His desires in this world?

What does this condition of God resemble?

It resembles one person's offer to
another: "Work for me for a moment, and then I will repay you for the rest of your
life with whatever you desire." Is there a greater gift than such a condition?

Because there is no correspondence between a person's efforts and what they will
receive for the rest of their (eternal) life.

And since the Spiritual is the True, and there is no place for deception and lies
in it, a person would feel ashamed of such an agreement with God.

After all, this
transient world (Yavi) has no value compared to the Eternal Bliss in the future
world (Prav)!

For, as it is said, "God has prepared Paradise for every righteous
person" for fulfilling the prescriptions of the Vedas.

But we cannot say that we
work for part of it and receive the rest as a gift.

Otherwise, we would still feel shame.

And even more so if we take into account not
only the quantity but also the quality of the gift: can we compare our efforts in
this world (Yavi) with the reward in the future?

The Sages also said that the
feeling of shame is not given to everyone, but is reserved only for special, High
Souls who do not often descend into this world (Yavi).

So, not everyone who lives
is destined to feel shame?

And what does it mean to feel shame?

It means to feel
the Giver, as we have already said.

So, the Sages say that this is not for
everyone, but only for special Souls.

And for the rest?

Faith (the Vedas) considers all Creation (the world of Yavi) to
be static, in which only human perception changes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And for the rest? Faith (the Vedas) considers all Creation (the world of Yavi) to
be static, in which only human perception changes. In Faith (the Vedas), the "world
of Yavi" refers to a person's present perception, their current state. And the
"future (spiritual) world" refers to a person's future state

--- PAGE BREAK ---that a person will experience in their next, or more distant, moment.

A person who works on himself in this moment, knowing why, and receiving immediate
reward for his efforts, does not feel shame.

With the help of Faith (Veda), a
person realizes the Purpose of Human Life, receives aspirations and strength from
Above, feels what he needs to correct in himself, asks God for this, and therefore
receives the reward he deserves for his labor — the properties of God, His desires,
the opportunity to give to Him.

As a person ascends in their qualities and desires from one spiritual level (Faith)
to another, they receive what they deserve without feeling any shame.

Not because
they supposedly earned everything fairly themselves, but because everything that
has been done has been done by God.

Everyone who ascends the steps of Faith understands this.

And then God does
everything else.

But since a person's efforts consist in striving to become a
giver, like God, this is their reward, and therefore there can be no room for
shame.

At first, a person works on his correction in the "world of Yavi," going
through all the sensations of awareness of evil step by step, until he enters the
sensations of the "future world," the Spiritual.

And when he enters the Spiritual
world, there he receives his reward in the form of the Light of Infinity and
merging with Him.

But each subsequent, higher step (of Faith) is the result of work on the previous
one.

And so it is all the time, and it makes no difference where a person is in
this world in his physical body, or, having already left his body, he continues his
Spiritual ascent.

As Yeshua (Jesus) said when he appeared to his disciple: "I
continue to ascend the steps of Faith, and what was Heaven for me yesterday is my
Earth today."
8.

The creation of worlds is continuous.

Only God and the person who comprehends Him
exist, regardless of which world they are in.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The creation of worlds is continuous. Only God and the person who comprehends Him
exist, regardless of which world they are in. It seems to us that we are in this
world in vain, without purpose, but this is not so. We unconsciously carry out the
program of creation. No state, no moment is created by God in vain. His creation is
Perfect. Everything moves optimally towards the Goal (Immortality). But we have been given Free Will in order to become Conscious children of God. And
if we look at all Creation (Souls) as continuous and unified, then there can be no
thought that this world (Yavi) was created only to WORK in it, and after
physiological death to receive selfish rewards. Activity should be perceived as a
reward, and the opportunity to do something for God as a reward! Creation (the 3 Worlds) was created by a single thought of God, because His thought
is already action. This thought is everything that exists. It is the reward and the
effort that neutralizes the feeling of shame. Everything we can imagine is the
Light of God, or His thought. But we see (or the Vedas tell us about their
existence) many worlds, many creations, many states of each of the creations. Even
within ourselves, we observe a huge number of contradictory qualities, properties,
desires, and thoughts. What is the essence (purpose) of the worlds that have been created? This includes
the essence (purpose) of our world (Yavi), where we see four types of nature
(inanimate, plant, animal, human) and many types within each type. We observe an
infinite multitude of often contradictory thoughts, desires within us, and actions
in the universe. If all this is the result of His one thought, how can these
actions be contradictory?

--- PAGE BREAK ---How can one thought give rise to contradictory actions and thoughts that neutralize
each other?

When we try to find the laws by which God governs us in our world, we
cannot find them.

On the contrary, we find everything that denies His existence and
control.

This is evident from our surroundings, since there is no immediate obvious
punishment, we cannot find any system, any logical connection between actions and
consequences.

If there is a precise program, precise laws of control, then such a
"system" must exist.

But what we see contradicts this.

The same applies to God: people behave badly, but are lucky and rewarded as if they
were great righteous people, while the latter suffer in front of everyone.

Our
world: everything I see around me
is a manifestation of one degree or another of Light, clothed in selfish garments,
which thus paints for me in my subjective sensations the whole of reality, my
world.

What we comprehend is vast and diverse.

And what we have not yet comprehended, what is in the Spiritual worlds?

The
relationship between the Spiritual levels (Faith) is such that each subsequent
level of the Spiritual world (Prav or Navi) is billions of times greater than the
previous one in terms of the quantity and quality of the sensation of pleasure or
suffering, the manifestation of God, in terms of its Spiritual Power.

As Yeshua (Joshua) writes in the Book of Splendor (Zohar): like a grain of sand
compared to the entire universe, such is the spiritual relationship between the
lowest and highest spiritual levels (of Faith).

And there are nine levels, from
the lowest level of the world of Navi to the level of the end of correction—the
Immortality of the world of Pavi.

In our world (Yavi), we can only imagine our
entire universe with all its multitude of elements of the material level of
development.

We cannot compare the material parts of our universe, either in quantity or
quality, with the lowest Spiritual level (Faith).In our world (Yavi), we can only imagine our
entire universe with all its multitude of elements of the material level of
development.

We cannot compare the material parts of our universe, either in quantity or
quality, with the lowest Spiritual level (Faith).

Because these categories are
incomparable.

Although, based on the diversity of even what we see in our universe,
on our Earth, we can already judge how multifaceted the Spiritual worlds, their
connections and dependencies are.

That is, we judge not the essence of the Spiritual worlds, but their infinite
diversity.

Because although the material of our level (Faith) "the world of Yavi"
and the Spiritual levels of the Spiritual worlds are different, there is an exact
similarity of all levels (Faith), and the difference is only in their material
(matter).

Therefore, we can use the words of our world to describe Spiritual
objects, their sources, and their roots.

We do not distinguish any particular fragment or part of God's Light that
surrounds us.

There are no such parts in Him.

The picture we perceive is a
creation of our selfish qualities and desires (ego) alone.

If we had other senses, we would perceive a completely different world from the
surrounding Light, perceiving a completely different essence (nature).

The same
Light of God would exist around us, which would include, as it does now, an
infinite number of details in one Unified form.

As an example, but no more than that: simple light (from the Sun), we say, consists
of 7 (9) colors (lights), but in reality it is not composed of 7 (9) colors
(lights) — it can be broken down into 7 (9) colors (lights).

Then these 7 (9)
colors (lights) can be combined into one common Light.

(8 and 9 are infrared and
ultraviolet light.)
If instead of our 5 senses we had 5 other senses, we would see a different world
around us from the same simple Light (Inglia).

Other 5 senses - again a different
world in the same Light emanating from God.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(8 and 9 are infrared and
ultraviolet light.)
If instead of our 5 senses we had 5 other senses, we would see a different world
around us from the same simple Light (Inglia). Other 5 senses - again a different
world in the same Light emanating from God. On the one hand, we say that the higher the level (of Faith), the brighter the
Light on it. As a result, reaching the highest level (of Faith), we

--- PAGE BREAK ---We perceive only one Light (Ingliya), indivisible into parts, about which it is
said: "The Creator and His Light are One," "Listen, man, your Creator is One and
Many." On the other hand, we say that each higher degree (of Faith) is billions of
billions of times greater than the previous one.

This is not about the quantity of
components, but exclusively about their quality.

In the Spiritual worlds, it is impossible to speak of quantity.

Everything consists
of 9 levels (of Faith), everything consists of the Higher Light (Ingliya), each
level (of Faith) is similar to the previous one, consisting of the same 9 levels
(of Faith).

The difference between the degrees (Faith) is only in quality
(development): in the strength of the screen — the strength of suppression of one's
original properties (ego) and the strength of transforming the ego into altruistic
properties (EGO).

The reason we perceive God's control as bad is because of the
malfunction of our sensory organs.

Therefore, we perceive the absolutely good influences of God's Light as painful,
bad, and causing suffering.

Only our properties determine where we are.

And only
our properties are responsible for the fact that we perceive God's Light as the
imperfection of the surrounding world.

We extract from the Light exactly what our
egoistic qualities can feel: everything negative.

In reality, the Light (Inglia)
has only one quality—to delight.

With this property, He (Light) comes from God.

Everything else is how people see
Him.

All the names and labels we give to Light are how God affects us: good, bad,
fair, scary—everything positive or negative—is what we feel right now.

And I cannot
force myself to feel good or bad right now — you cannot command the heart.All the names and labels we give to Light are how God affects us: good, bad,
fair, scary—everything positive or negative—is what we feel right now.

And I cannot
force myself to feel good or bad right now — you cannot command the heart.

The only thing I can ask for is for God to raise me to another level (of Faith) so
that I can feel His influence on me in its True form, which is possible if God
corrects my selfish senses (ego) to altruistic ones (EGO), which means raising me
to a higher level (of Faith), then I will naturally be able to feel Him in my
senses corresponding to the Light (Inglia) as something good.

And only then will I
be able to thank Him in my heart, which I am currently unable to do.

Feeling good
or bad is not something a person can control.

The task is to believe that God
exists and that He can correct and change a person's state, raising him to such a
level (Faith) that he can thank God instead of cursing Him with his feelings in his
heart.

The world (Yavi) is concealment.

The world (Yavi) is a certain image of partial comprehension of God — to the extent
that the properties of the comprehender resemble those of the Comprehended.

In our
world, God is called Nature.

Therefore, the word Nature in the Vedas — Inglia — is
one of the names of God.

Through the Nature of our world, through ourselves, our qualities, properties, and
our surroundings — this is how God appears to us at our current level of Faith.

And all worlds, Higher (Puri) and lower (Navi), are simply the Light (Inglia) of
God.

- The One and Only, who has only one property—to enjoy.

Any object in our world
(Yavi), animate or inanimate, including ourselves, the Higher Worlds (Prav), the
Management of them and the systems of this Management, the Forces and that to which
they are applied, the result of the action of these Forces and the Purpose for
which they appeared — all this is laid down in the Light (Inglia) emanating from
God.--- PAGE BREAK ---

- The One and Only, who has only one property—to enjoy. Any object in our world
(Yavi), animate or inanimate, including ourselves, the Higher Worlds (Prav), the
Management of them and the systems of this Management, the Forces and that to which
they are applied, the result of the action of these Forces and the Purpose for
which they appeared — all this is laid down in the Light (Inglia) emanating from
God. That is, there is practically nothing except God. Everything else
- is an illusion of the existence of creations relative to the creations
themselves. The fact is that all Worlds are created for us, for the Soul of man,
which is at the lowest level (Faith), "at the end" of Creation (Worlds).

--- PAGE BREAK ---And man must connect the opposite "ends" of Creation (Prav and Navi), reach such an
inner Spiritual level (Faith), the very highest point, the Light (Inglia) emanating
from God, the very primary Thought of Creation - the enjoyment of creation (Souls).

Only as a result of experiencing this stage (Faith) does a person develop absolute,
infinite love for God, which is the Goal of his Spiritual development.

And this
Goal must be achieved while living in this world (Yavi).

A person (Soul) must go through all nine stages of Faith, ascend while still in
our world (Yavi) to the highest stage of Spiritual development (Faith), i.e.

"lower" everything Spiritual to the level of development of our world, and then
let Spiritual qualities and properties (EGO) into themselves, displacing their
egoism, completely filling the vessel of the Soul with this simple Thought and
Light (Inglia) emanating from God.

"Lower" does not mean to reduce the Spiritual
to the properties of our world (Yavi), but by replacing one's own properties with
Spiritual ones, a person can transform the whole world around them into the
likeness of the world of Prav.

Therefore, beginning their Path of Spiritual elevation (Faith), a person must
understand, constantly remember, and tell themselves that there is no one but God,
and the Goal of a person's Spiritual elevation is to reach such a Spiritual level
of Comprehension (Knowledge) of God that a person, God, and the Light (Inglia) of
God would merge into one Whole.

There are no differences between these three: man, his Path to God, and God
Himself.

And in order to achieve the Goal of Life (Immortality), it is necessary to
constantly unite Them within oneself.

The point is that in order not to stray from
the Path, a person must know in advance, while still on the lowest step (Faith),
that he, God, and all the steps (Faith) he ascends are all One.And in order to achieve the Goal of Life (Immortality), it is necessary to
constantly unite Them within oneself.

The point is that in order not to stray from
the Path, a person must know in advance, while still on the lowest step (Faith),
that he, God, and all the steps (Faith) he ascends are all One.

And there is no difference, no distinction between him, God, and Faith — the steps
(Faith) by which a person ascends.

If he does not follow the prescriptions of the
Vedas in his spiritual actions (prayers), he will inevitably stray from the Path
(Faith), figuratively speaking, to the right or to the left.

And having made a
mistake, taking the wrong direction, the further he moves, the further he will
stray from the True Path (Faith).

Therefore, Yeshua (Joshua) writes that everything must be connected to the primary
Purpose of Creation.

And this rule is for beginners, moving from the lowest level
(Faith).

As Yeshua (Joshua) says: "I will reveal to you what the middle path is,
along which you must draw closer to God.

And this is necessary to know, because it
is better not to move at all than to go wrong."
To do this, you need to constantly refresh your memory of two principles: "There is
no one but God" and "Man (striving for God), Faith (the Way to God), and God are
One." Therefore, under no circumstances should you imagine that God has two
Thoughts in Creation.

Such duality arises in the understanding of a beginner as a
result of studying the basics of Creation (the 3 Worlds), such as the following:
"The One who gives birth to Light and gives birth to Darkness," "The One who
controls reward and punishment," "The One who created the good and evil principles
in man," and so on.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And this is necessary to know, because it
is better not to move at all than to go wrong."
To do this, you need to constantly refresh your memory of two principles: "There is
no one but God" and "Man (striving for God), Faith (the Way to God), and God are
One." Therefore, under no circumstances should you imagine that God has two
Thoughts in Creation. Such duality arises in the understanding of a beginner as a
result of studying the basics of Creation (the 3 Worlds), such as the following:
"The One who gives birth to Light and gives birth to Darkness," "The One who
controls reward and punishment," "The One who created the good and evil principles
in man," and so on. At the lowest level (Faith), at the beginning of one's Spiritual Path of
development, it is impossible to reconcile all contradictions, to understand how
Everything is One, including suffering, the lowest manifestations of selfishness,
all the baseness of human behavior, how all this comes from One Source and exists
together in one Purpose of human Life. 9.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Since there is only one God from the beginning (we must use the word "exists"
because there are no words in our vocabulary that mean Eternal, timeless, Being),
what then is man?

It is a gradation of the feeling of the absence of God, Light
(Ingli).

Therefore, Yeshua (Joshua) begins his main Book on Faith (Zohar) as
follows: "Know that before the beginning of creation, there was only the Supreme,
all-pervading Light (God)." If Light filled everything, it would mean the presence
of only one God.

Therefore, in order to create a "place" for man, God reduced His
presence in relation to His creations, as if hiding from them.

And this action of
God is called the reduction, the concealment, of Light.

That is, 100% presence of
Light
- is the complete presence of God.

In this case, there is no place for man—no other quality, property, or desire
(ego).

After all, concealment in the Spiritual does not mean physical absence, as
in our world (Yavi), but inaccessibility to the senses, due to the difference in
qualities and properties between the perceiver and the perceived.

And at the end of
correction, when all the qualities and properties (ego) of a person become similar
to the qualities and properties of God, God will be fully manifested, and creation
(Soul) will be fully manifested, and they will not occupy "place" one instead of
the other, but will completely merge, because they will not interfere with each
other with their qualities and properties.

Meanwhile, until the ego is completely corrected (until Liberation), to the extent
that the qualities and properties (desires) of man and God coincide, man occupies
the "place" of God.

That is, as stated in Faith (the Vedas), God is hidden due to
the difference in qualities and properties (desires), and this "place" is occupied
by selfishness, the "I (ego)" of man.Meanwhile, until the ego is completely corrected (until Liberation), to the extent
that the qualities and properties (desires) of man and God coincide, man occupies
the "place" of God.

That is, as stated in Faith (the Vedas), God is hidden due to
the difference in qualities and properties (desires), and this "place" is occupied
by selfishness, the "I (ego)" of man.

Therefore, it is said: "I (God) and he (man)
cannot be in the same place." And that is why the concept of Faith is what a person
imagines instead of God who fills everything, and comes from the words "Knowledge
of God"
- the revelation of Light, the Knowledge of God.

How does the manifestation of the picture of the world occur instead of the
sensation of the Light of God?

As in our world, if we place some object in the path
of a ray of light, we will get its reflection, which will draw a certain picture of
the world, let's say, the world of Prav, put another screen in front of it, and we
will see the picture of the world of Yavi.

Add another egoistic quality or
property, and we will see the picture of the world of Navi.

Add yet another
egoistic quality or property, and the perceiver will see the world of Hades
(Tartarus) instead of God.

That is, we do not see the Light (Inglia), but only that (the screen) which
obscures the Light, delays It, and is painted for us as the world (Yavi).

That is,
the world (Yavi) is not a partial manifestation of God, but a manifestation of
qualities and properties that delay the Light, a manifestation of the opposite of
Him.

In our world, 100% of Light is blocked.

So, this object that blocks the Light—our
selfish qualities and traits (ego)—paints a picture of our world (Yavi).

Our world
(Yavi) is enlivened by a spark of Light that fell, contrary to all the Laws of
completely selfish Nature, by the grace of God into our world (Yavi) to give us the
opportunity to rise from this state.

The absence of Light also comes from God.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Our world
(Yavi) is enlivened by a spark of Light that fell, contrary to all the Laws of
completely selfish Nature, by the grace of God into our world (Yavi) to give us the
opportunity to rise from this state. The absence of Light also comes from God. He created a reduction of His
manifestation, called the 1st reduction (state). And it, like all His other
actions, is only for the sake of achieving the Goal—the delight of His creations
(Souls). All Creation (the 3 Worlds) is contained in one Thought, which means that
all shortcomings, all kinds of suffering—all of this comes from God—He radiates
Light and, by hiding It, creates Darkness. How can suffering come from Him when His only Goal is to delight us (Souls)? We do
not understand what Spiritual "suffering" is because we evaluate suffering and
delight according to our selfish desires. But if

--- PAGE BREAK ---If we could compare our suffering with the pleasure that God has prepared for
us, our entire existence in this world would seem unbearable.

And not because the pleasures prepared for us are many times greater than all the
pleasures of this world (Yavi), but because they are completely different
pleasures, altruistic, incomparable to ours in either measure or quality.

Therefore, whatever we experience is complete darkness compared to the Supreme
Light.

10.

The entire Universe consists of two components: Souls and Light, desire and Light
emanating from God and filling that desire.

In the beginning, the Supreme Light
spread throughout the nine levels of the world of Prav in the form of Souls,
because spreading means the coarsening of Light relative to what it was before.

We
find that the nine levels of Faith are nine desires, qualities, and properties that
were created by the spreading of the Light of Infinity (Ingli).

The Light coarsened
as a result of spreading and turned into desires.

After the nine desires arose, the
Light of Infinity clothed itself in them.

And this is the mystery of Light and
desires.

Light spreads from the World of Infinity from top to bottom, i.e., it moves away
from God.

What does moving away from God, from the Spiritual, mean?

Light gradually
becomes coarser, creating increasingly coarse desires, increasingly distant from
God, and filling them with itself.

That is, as Light creates new and increasingly
coarse desires, it fills them less and less.

And thus, desires move away from God,
and the Light perceived by them (Souls) becomes increasingly dim, increasingly
distant from its original state.

There are only 9 qualities-properties (desires) in the entire Universe - 9
degrees (of Faith).

We divide these 9 degrees (of Faith) into 3 (5)
Worlds: (The World of God/Svarog)
1.

Puri is the world of Light.

2.

Yavi is our world.

3.

Navi is the world
of Darkness.

(Hell/world of
Darkness)
What does the concept of "concealment" mean?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Navi is the world
of Darkness. (Hell/world of
Darkness)
What does the concept of "concealment" mean? And why do we call these nine steps
(of Faith) or group of three steps (of Faith) "concealment"? Concealment comes from
the word "concealed." That is, the steps (of Faith) conceal the true Light of God. The Light that passes through them feels dimmer, taking on their form, and each of
the worlds and steps, passing the Light through itself, gives it its own qualities
and properties (desires). For example, when we go outside on a sunny day, we protect our eyes with dark
glasses. This helps us because direct sunlight would be too strong for us, but in
the light that passes through the glasses, we can see normally. Similarly, the
worlds conceal the Upper Light in order to weaken it as much as necessary for the
benefit of the creatures (Souls), so that they can perceive it correctly and
benefit from it. It is revealed to them to the extent that they can gradually
accept it: receiving the Light not for pleasure, but for correction, so that with
its help, they can correct themselves and come closer to God. The concealment of Light is necessary; it was created specifically, even before the
appearance of creation (man), by the creation of 3 (5) worlds or 9 degrees (of
Faith) from top to bottom, in order to prepare a "ladder (of Faith)" by which
creations

--- PAGE BREAK ---can gradually ascend from the bottom up, revealing more and more Light as they
correct their ego.

Why is the world of Prav called Infinite?

The world of Yav limits the spread of
Light and does not allow it to pass any further.

It (Yav) puts an end to, limits
the reception of Light.

But in the state of Infinity, it (the Universe) does not do
this, and then Light spreads in it (throughout the Universe of the world of Yav)
completely without any restrictions.

The concept associated with place speaks of a change in the qualities and
properties of Light.

The spread of Light is a removal from God.

What does this
consist of?

In the gradual coarsening of Light in relation to the Light that came forth from
God.

What does the emergence of Light from God and its further spread mean?

It
means that Light ceases to be Infinite Light, spreading without any limitations,
and begins to spread with limitations, with coarsening and removal of its qualities
and properties from the qualities and properties of God.

This coarsening of Light
represents a change in its form, i.e., Light acquires a different quality-property
as it fills creation (the vessel of the human Soul).

We can never speak of Light existing on its own.

We can only speak of Light as
perceived in the ego.

Light outside the ego — Light that no one can feel — has no
definition, since there is no one to feel it, define it, or describe its
perception.

When Light fills the vessel of the Soul, it (the ego) feels what is in
this Light.

More precisely: filling the vessel of the Soul with Light means that
the Soul, due to its similarity to Light, reveals the very part of Light that is
similar to it (the Soul), its ego.

Let us assume that the ego (Soul) is inherently selfish, while the Light (Inglia)
emanating from God is entirely altruistic.More precisely: filling the vessel of the Soul with Light means that
the Soul, due to its similarity to Light, reveals the very part of Light that is
similar to it (the Soul), its ego.

Let us assume that the ego (Soul) is inherently selfish, while the Light (Inglia)
emanating from God is entirely altruistic.

In this case, the ego is completely
incapable of revealing any qualities or properties in the Light; their qualities
and properties are entirely different, opposite, and polar opposites, and they are
completely unaware of each other.

To what extent can the ego (Soul) perceive the Light?

Only to the extent that
it acquires some quality or property of the Light.

As the ego (Soul) acquires
the qualities and properties of the Light, it can begin to perceive it.

Therefore, the EGO (light Souls) are higher in their qualities and properties,
closer to the Light, and feel Him (God) more, while the ego is lower, further from
the Light (God), and feels Him less.

Studying the Vedas, we can say that there is a
lower and coarser Light or a purer and Brighter Light, but in principle, we are not
talking about Light, but about the ego and its corrected qualities and properties
(EGO).

We cannot speak about Light even when it is in the ego (the vessel of the Soul),
because we do not know what Light is and will never be able to know it.

Light is
the Essence of God.

We can only feel our reaction to it, to the fact that it fills
us, and we feel it in qualities and properties similar to it.

That is, we do not
determine and feel the qualities and properties of God, but our similarity to Him,
to His qualities and properties.

But we call these the qualities and properties of
Light, or God.

It is this quality or attribute of ours that we feel, and we say that it is an
attribute of Light, because if it were not in us, we would feel nothing in
ourselves.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But we call these the qualities and properties of
Light, or God. It is this quality or attribute of ours that we feel, and we say that it is an
attribute of Light, because if it were not in us, we would feel nothing in
ourselves. That is, if a person attains some altruistic quality or attribute in
the form of mercy, he begins to feel the mercy of the Light in this quality or
attribute of mercy. Therefore, it is said: "From Your actions I know You" — from
Your actions upon me, that is, corrections, I know You. It is because of this feeling that a person can say that God possesses the
quality of mercy. Therefore, as soon as I attained the quality

--- PAGE BREAK ---mercy, I began to perceive God as merciful, because this quality-attribute is
within me.

That is, once again, we perceive not the Light, and not even our
reaction to It, but only our corrected quality-attribute.

This corrected quality-
attribute is our inner Light.

The same is true in our world (Yavi): we perceive something that supposedly happens
outside of us.

But there is nothing outside; we perceive only what is generated by
our organism, our sense organs, our "I (Mind)".

And only our inner illusion tells
us that the picture that arises in our imagination, our impression, comes to us
from outside.

All the mechanisms we create work in the same way — from the simplest
measuring devices to the most complex ones.

In other words, everything we feel
is an internal reaction of the Soul to something unknown outside of us, and we
judge the external based on this reaction.

Therefore, all worlds, all levels (of Faith), everything is within us.

These
are our reactions to the Higher Light.

They change not because the Light
changes, for the Light is unchanging, but because we change internally.

By dividing the Light, God created three parts (Soul, Spirit, Conscience).

These
parts are the offspring of the Light itself, because as it spreads from top to
bottom, the Light descends through three levels: the worlds of the Aranim
(Archangels), the Worlds of Arlegs (Angels), Legs (Spirits/Jinn), and down to the
world of Yavi (humans), i.e., until it evokes in creation (humans) the desire to
receive It (the Light), the "desire for oneself (ego)," the desire to enjoy It (the
Light) specifically.

And this desire to receive (ego) is the first step in the spread of Light and is
called ego.

This first step (Faith) is the vessel of the Soul, creation (human),
true desire, and this step of Faith is called ego, selfishness.

In principle, we can consider both Light and ego as Light, since ego is a
consequence of the spread of Light.This first step (Faith) is the vessel of the Soul, creation (human),
true desire, and this step of Faith is called ego, selfishness.

In principle, we can consider both Light and ego as Light, since ego is a
consequence of the spread of Light.

Light creates something that perceives it
(Light).

Only the last stage (the world of Yavi) of the spread of Light from top to
bottom is perceptive, while the three previous stages (the worlds of Prav) are only
the cause of the appearance of the last stage (Yavi), which will perceive Light.

And this last stage (Yav) is called creation (the Universe), the created world, and
the previous three stages (the worlds of Pavi) are the preparatory stage of the
creation of the vessel of the Soul (man) by the Light.

Garment, from the word clothing.

Garment means concealment, just as clothing in our
world (Yav) conceals the one who is in it.

It is impossible for the lower ones (ego) to comprehend if they do not have a
prepared vessel of the Soul, a corrected desire to feel this Light.

Therefore, the
Light must first hide, and then the lower one (ego) gradually reveals It through
the created garment.

Thus, garments help to reveal the Light.

The steps of
concealment of the Light (Faith) descend from top to bottom so that Souls,
creations, can gradually reveal this Light from bottom to top.

Each step differs from the previous one in its combination, proportion, and
measures of concealment-revelation of the Light.

At the lowest step (Navi), there
is 0% revelation and 100% concealment; at the highest step (Prav), there is 0%
concealment and 100% revelation; and in the middle, there is a degree of
concealment depending on the degree of correction of the ego.

This proportion
determines the height of the spiritual step.

We have studied with you that the world of Yavi is only one of the stages (of
Faith), the first one.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This proportion
determines the height of the spiritual step. We have studied with you that the world of Yavi is only one of the stages (of
Faith), the first one. The Higher Light passes through all nine stages (of Faith),
builds them, clothes itself in them, and descends through them into Yavi. When it
takes on a certain coarse form, it can create Yavi and does so, and Yavi acquires a
special quality called a "screen."
The formation of the screen is necessary so that the Higher Light, which has spread
through the first nine steps (Faith), does not pass into the Souls

--- PAGE BREAK ---Yavi.

This screen is located at the beginning of the world of Prav, so that
the Light that has come from the World of Infinity to the world of Yavi is not
allowed to spread below this place (Yavi) into the worlds of Navi.

The screen does not allow the Higher Light to enter the vessel of the human Soul
and separates the world of Prav from the other worlds.

11.

And so, when the Light (Ingli) had spread through all the previous worlds from the
World of Infinity to the world of Yavi, God saw that the lower beings did not have
the strength to receive the Light if it continued to spread with the same intensity
as before, and decided to weaken it.

And then, when the last, 9th level of the
world of Yavi ended, a screen (a force opposing egoism) and a curtain (a filter)
were created there (in Yavi), which separates the Light between the world of Yavi
and all other worlds (Prav and Navi).

We usually talk about the place of development of Creation (the Soul) where the
decision was made that caused what is happening now.

This decision was made by the
Soul on the level (Faith) of the World of Infinity, which corrected the EGO and
desires to receive Light only for the sake of God.

The level (of Faith) of the
World of Infinity, which spread to the levels (of Faith) of the world of Yavi, saw
that it could no longer spread according to the same system of coarsening the Light
as before.

After the Light of the World of Infinity (Inglia) spread in the first three worlds
of Pira, called the worlds of Aran, Arleg, and Leg, now the Light is completely
ready to spread in the degrees of Faith of the world of Yavi.

In each world, the
Light (Inglia) recreates all these stages (Faith), and they are arranged in such a
way that they create a vessel for the Soul, the ego, i.e., the body, which is able
to receive Light from them (the worlds of Prav).After the Light of the World of Infinity (Inglia) spread in the first three worlds
of Pira, called the worlds of Aran, Arleg, and Leg, now the Light is completely
ready to spread in the degrees of Faith of the world of Yavi.

In each world, the
Light (Inglia) recreates all these stages (Faith), and they are arranged in such a
way that they create a vessel for the Soul, the ego, i.e., the body, which is able
to receive Light from them (the worlds of Prav).

That is, as it was in the four stages of cognition of Light (Ingli/God), so here,
in the world of Yavi, and in each of the worlds: spreading, Light essentially
constructs human sensations, sensations from the lower side, onto itself (part of
Light), onto Light (God/Ingli).

Why can't a person receive Light?

The soul is unable to receive Light because it
lacks a screen, i.e., desires and intentions through which Light can fill it.

The
vessel of the Soul and the Mind within it are two different Forces, because the
ego-desire itself is Light that has become coarse.

That is, our original egoistic
desire is, in essence, the reverse side of Light — Darkness.

This means that our egoistic desire and Light are two sides of the manifestation of
pleasure: its presence or absence.

So, we have Light, generated by the Light itself
(Inglia) and being its consequence (creation), i.e., the ego is the initial
egoistic desire for Light, for Pleasure.

Then, a screen arises in us for this
desire (ego) — the force of opposition to egoism.

The world of Yavi arises as the 10th stage of the initial spread of Light (Ingli).

In order to create ego, true desire, Light must go through 9 stages of development,
coarsening, and descent.

Only then does He (Light) create upon Himself true desire,
opposite to Himself.

The Light (God) hides itself so much in nine garments that something arises that
desires to know Him, desires to enjoy Him, feels an absolute lack, an absence of
Him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Only then does He (Light) create upon Himself true desire,
opposite to Himself. The Light (God) hides itself so much in nine garments that something arises that
desires to know Him, desires to enjoy Him, feels an absolute lack, an absence of
Him. Thus, the 10th stage (Reality), arising behind these nine garments, passionately
desires Him, it "lacks" Him. The Light does not simply hide from this desire so
that His creation does not feel it, but hides in such a way that the Soul

--- PAGE BREAK ---feels what the Light is, that He exists, but not in her, and she passionately
desires Him.

That is, concealment must arouse the desire for revelation.

Let me explain what the concept of a screen means.

It is a Force (Energy) that
limits the spread of Light, like a barrier protecting the Soul: the barrier has
become as if higher than the Soul and protects it from the Higher Light breaking in
and forcibly penetrating it.

On the other hand, the Soul passionately desires the Light, and if it weren't for
this screen, it would not be able to restrain itself and would receive it.

This
means that the Soul has another desire that is opposite to it—a force that
counteracts selfishness called a screen, and this force (screen) allows the Soul to
protect itself from its own desire (ego).

A person has a desire to enjoy, and in addition, he has a force opposite to this, a
force that opposes egoism (a screen), which protects him and gives him the
opportunity to resist this desire (ego).

The selfish desire to enjoy oneself, to be
filled with Light in its natural form, is the opposite side of the Light (Prav)
created by God—Darkness (Nav).

The force (screen), or the magnitude of Faith, which opposes this desire (ego), is
called a "screen." And this screen protects the Soul so that the Light does not
penetrate it, so that it is not forced to receive It.

Because the desire exists,
and it compels, it causes a corresponding action in the ego.

If there is only one desire and no screen, then there is no way to control one's
actions, movements, or anything else.

Everything happens according to the law of
that desire, as we see in nature: the laws of attraction and repulsion.

Animals,
plants, and all of nature at all levels exist in the same way.

We also exist within
ourselves in a similar manner.

We are only the product of the desires that are within us.

We weigh all these
desires, choose the best ones with which we can act, and thus act.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We are only the product of the desires that are within us. We weigh all these
desires, choose the best ones with which we can act, and thus act. And there is no
way to act otherwise. Power (screen) is a Spiritual Power that enables us to act not on the basis
of selfish calculation, not on the basis of our nature (essence), but on the
basis of God's Higher calculation. In addition to protecting the Soul from receiving Light contrary to the Law, the
screen has another quality: it stands between the world of Prav and other worlds. What does this mean in spiritual terms? It should not be understood that these
worlds exist, and there is some distance between them, and there is some kind of
screen, some kind of wall, and that is why the Light does not pass through. We have
discussed that the screen is inside a person (the Soul). It (the screen) must be
literally inside the person, in the very thickness of the person (the vessel of the
Soul), and counteract it. There are hundreds of desires within me. If there is a screen, then in every
desire, where it (the ego) manifests itself, where it is felt, there is a screen,
i.e., limiting, protective forces that do not allow it to use the desire itself in
its "pure" form. This screen stands in the thickness of the steps of Faith of the
world of Prav, and besides protecting the world of Prav, it does not let the Light
pass through to the lower worlds of Navi. All worlds are one and the same Inglia (Light) — the steps (Faith) of the World of
Infinity, which is clothed in various garments, in different worlds that manifest
themselves in different ways. Apart from the World of Infinity, Yav is the only one
created by God through four stages of the spread of direct Light; nothing else has
been created.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Everything else is all kinds of changes on the steps of Faith that She (Inglia)
makes in order to liken herself to God, i.e., She takes on various external forms,
using her desire to enjoy with the intention of enjoying for the sake of God.

But
all these desires are the same ego; there is no other creation.

She (Inglia) is in
all worlds, only manifesting herself in different ways, with varying degrees of
intensity and depth.

If She dresses in weak garments, if She is still intense, then She is the stages of
the world of Prav; if She is more hidden, more limited, then She is already the
stages of the world of Yavi, and so on.

That is, it is the same Inglia that has
divided herself into the stages of the Worlds, the stages of Faith — the external
Yavi (the Universe) and the Souls — her internal part.

The part of Inglia, or the manifestation of Light in the world of Prav, does not
operate in the world of Yavi; in the world of Yavi, another manifestation of Light
operates.

That is, after Inglia put on her first garment and became known as the
Light of the world of Prav, she puts on the next, coarser garment and is now called
the Light of the world of Yavi.

And this is the same desire, which manifests itself in a coarser form, similar to
light passing sequentially through a series of nine protective glasses, so that a
person standing behind the tenth of these glasses could perceive this light without
hurting their eyes, and see everything correctly, and even make such filter glasses
for himself to remove these protective screens standing before him and see the true
Light in its correct form—as it exists in the World of Infinity.

Learn to ask questions.And this is the same desire, which manifests itself in a coarser form, similar to
light passing sequentially through a series of nine protective glasses, so that a
person standing behind the tenth of these glasses could perceive this light without
hurting their eyes, and see everything correctly, and even make such filter glasses
for himself to remove these protective screens standing before him and see the true
Light in its correct form—as it exists in the World of Infinity.

Learn to ask questions.

It doesn't matter that the answer won't come right away,
but the desire is already there, and even if you forget about the question, it
doesn't matter that you forgot it, even if it doesn't come to mind at the moment,
it still exists within you, the desire has already been created, and when the time
comes, you will immediately receive the answer with the filling of Light.

Therefore, the question is, in principle, the most important thing.

Do not be
afraid that many questions arise; on the contrary, each of them must be considered
carefully.

The answer to them may be obtained now or years later.

In practice,
there is only one question—desire—and one answer—Light.

12.

After the Light of Infinity strikes the screen (Yavi), this Light returns in the
form of reflected Light and envelops the Higher Light to the height to which the
Ray of the Light of Infinity can spread, called the Heavenly Iriy or the Golden
Path.

And so the Light of Infinity struck the screen (Yavi) as the Light descended from
above and began to rise upward in the form of the mystery of reflected Light (the
steps of Faith), returning to the place from whence it struck.

And then the world
of Yavi in the form of desire (ego) ended, and the Infinite Light returned and
clothed itself in these desires in the form of the mystery of Yavi (the steps of
Faith).

Therefore, the place to which the Infinite Light spreads is called the
world of Yavi.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And then the world
of Yavi in the form of desire (ego) ended, and the Infinite Light returned and
clothed itself in these desires in the form of the mystery of Yavi (the steps of
Faith). Therefore, the place to which the Infinite Light spreads is called the
world of Yavi. Because the Light itself only passes through its coarsening. Light, passing from top to bottom, to the end of the world of Yavi, only becomes
coarser. In fact, the Light that has reached the world of Yavi is the Light of
Infinity, and as it passes through the world of Prav and the entire world of Yavi,
it has experienced virtually no attenuation. Let us clarify what an "impact" is. The encounter of the Light of Infinity with the
screen (Yavi) is similar to the interaction of two solid things, objects, each of
which wants to penetrate the other, while each of them resists the entry of the
other and in no way allows it to penetrate through its

--- PAGE BREAK ---outer boundaries.

The interaction between such solid objects is called a
"collision," in contrast to the interaction between two liquids, which do not
prevent each other from breaking through their boundaries and mixing with each
other, and therefore there is no such thing as a mutual collision between them.

The same is true of two soft things: the impact between them is so weak that they
allow each other to penetrate their boundaries slightly, one into the other.

But
two solid objects do not allow one to violate the other's boundary at all, and
therefore their encounter is defined as a mutual impact.

Let us translate this example into our terms.

We have only three components: God's
desire, human desire, and the screen (the force opposing the Light).

That is
Light, the desire to enjoy, and the screen standing between them.

Now let's try to
understand the interaction between them, called a blow.

Why does neither of them
allow the other to penetrate it, and what happens as a result?

Let's say the Soul allows the Light to enter it.

Then it is like two liquids freely
penetrating each other.

The Light fills the Soul, mixes with all its desires, and
fills them with the desire for God.

There is absolutely no resistance, i.e., one
completely fills the other.

Is there a problem of interpenetration in this case?

What is mixing here?

Nothing.

The Light simply fills the Soul.

There is no
collision.

If there is a screen, then there is a clash, i.e., the desire of the Light to give
pleasure and the desire of the Soul to receive nothing are completely opposite.

Neither of them wants to give up their goal, their desire.

Therefore, the
boundaries of the Light, the desire to enter the Soul, and the boundaries of the
Soul, the screen, which is the refusal to receive the Light, are two goals, two
desires that never mix, never allow each other into their boundaries.Neither of them wants to give up their goal, their desire.

Therefore, the
boundaries of the Light, the desire to enter the Soul, and the boundaries of the
Soul, the screen, which is the refusal to receive the Light, are two goals, two
desires that never mix, never allow each other into their boundaries.

If the Soul begins to receive for the sake of God, then a collision occurs, the
Light enters the Soul, and then they mix.

Why is mixing possible?

Because there is
already a likeness of the Soul in the Light (Inglia).

When the Light directly fills
the Soul, without striking the screen, i.e., without the screen (refusal of the
Light), the Soul and the Light remain opposite in their desires: one desires to
give, and the other desires to receive; there is no mixing, only the filling of the
vessel (the Soul) with Light.

When the Soul, acquiring a screen (rejection of the Light), acquires the same
desire (EGO) as the Light (God), then the Light fills the Soul, and the Light of
the Soul fills the Light (Inglia/God) — each gives, and there is an absolutely
complete merging of one with the other.

This is the difference between filling the
vessel of the Soul before the First Coming of Age (18 years) and filling the vessel
of the Soul with the help of a screen (rejection of the Light).

Since the First Coming of Age, the receipt of Light came from the human being (ego)
rather than from the Creator.

The Light emanating from God, called the Light of
Infinity (Inglia), completely disregards the Coming of Age that the Soul has
brought upon itself (achieved) for its desires (ego).

The Light still strives to
spread throughout the entire Soul, as it did before Coming of Age, because it was
not the Soul that made Coming of Age.

The Soul resists, takes some action, but the Light is unyielding, and it spreads
with the same intention as before.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Light still strives to
spread throughout the entire Soul, as it did before Coming of Age, because it was
not the Soul that made Coming of Age. The Soul resists, takes some action, but the Light is unyielding, and it spreads
with the same intention as before. And so it is understandable that it spreads with
the same force as before, wanting to give and delight, because in the World of
Infinity before Coming of Age, it (Inglia) completely filled the vessel of the
Soul, the Soul. And so a person should not completely change their desire-
intention, but should find their Path (of Faith) and stick to it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Light descends into the Soul with the intention of completely filling it, but
the screen and filters of the Light that are in the Soul limit its progress, stop
it, do not allow it to spread in any way in the Soul itself, and therefore this
meeting of the Higher Light with the Soul is called a blow.

And the blow occurs
precisely where the screen (the boundaries of the vessel of the Soul) is located.

When you study the Vedas, after a while you will see that there are hundreds of
different types of Light, and they do not mix with each other.

Faith (the Vedas)
gives an example: a river, starting from a lake, enters the lake, flows through it
without mixing with the lake water at all, flows out of it, and goes to the sea.

The Book of Splendor (Zohar) explains only a small part of the Universe.

Faith is
the science of HOW to comprehend the Spiritual world (God), not WHAT the Spiritual
world is.

What is not told to us about Him (God) is billions of billions of times
greater than what the Vedas explain to us.

But there is meaning in the fact that
Yeshua (Jesus) wrote precisely this and not something else, and what he wrote is
truly worth studying, while the rest should not interest us now.

Yeshua (Joshua)
gave us the key to what he wrote here, because it is with this key that I (a human
being) can achieve the Goal of Life (Immortality).

PART 3.

1.

Man's Place in the Universe
Distancing oneself from God means distancing oneself from the feeling of the
Spiritual, from the feeling of the True Universe in which we find ourselves.

Instead of feeling all the Worlds and the Creator, a person feels only a small
fragment of the entire Universe.

And we call this fragment "this world" or "the
world of Yavi."
In a state of distance from God, without feeling the higher Spiritual forces, a
person is completely helpless because they do not see the reasons, the beginning of
all actions, since they all begin in the Higher Worlds.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Instead of feeling all the Worlds and the Creator, a person feels only a small
fragment of the entire Universe. And we call this fragment "this world" or "the
world of Yavi."
In a state of distance from God, without feeling the higher Spiritual forces, a
person is completely helpless because they do not see the reasons, the beginning of
all actions, since they all begin in the Higher Worlds. And then, having originated
in the Higher World (in Svarog), everything descends from there into our world. And
it appears before us in its finished form, usually unexpectedly and unpleasantly,
suddenly appearing before us, and we do not know why it suddenly descended upon us. Accordingly, we usually react inappropriately to events that come upon us out of
nowhere. But more than that, we do not see the results of our actions, our
reactions to what comes down from Above, because the results of all our actions go
to the Higher World, to the place from whence they came down upon us. What we perceive as the consequence of our actions (karma) is not a consequence at
all, but only a side effect. The main result of our actions is invisible to us. Therefore, when a new misfortune befalls us out of nowhere, we cannot connect our
actions with their consequences, and therefore we must learn how to react to all
situations in life, how to act. It turns out that we are an intermediate link between the beginning and the end of
an action. The final result, all the consequences of our actions, really depend on
us. And without seeing the whole chain of causes and consequences, we are deprived
of any opportunity to act wisely! After all, the consequences of our actions come
down from us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Based on our place in the entire Universe, it would seem that we are in a position
to rule over all of nature, over the entire Universe.

But in terms of our
intellect, we are like blind kittens: we cannot see either the beginning of actions
or the consequences of everything that happens, and therefore we constantly make
mistakes and receive punishment from God instead of reward.

It turns out that the
only thing we lack is a vision of the entire Universe in its true, complete form.

This is the state of a person when the entire Universe is completely hidden from
them, and it is called separation from God, separation from the Spiritual, from all
the Higher worlds.

In other words, separation from the Creator is called the state
of a person when they perceive only our world (Yavi).

How to enter into the feeling of the entire Universe, see all actions from
beginning to end, understand everything that is happening, control it, connect all
your states before birth in this world, your entire life in this world, with life
after death — this is what the Vedas teach.

The Vedas essentially open a person's
eyes, allowing them to see the Higher World, and therefore to act and live in a
completely sane manner.

The beginning of a person's perception of the Higher World is called liberation
from the captivity of the material world.

From the beginning of the perception of
the Higher World and onwards, a person's entire path is the mastery of the entire
Higher World.

Upon leaving this world, a person receives a Soul—a spiritual vessel (Aura)
consisting of three qualities, or parts.

Each of the three parts, in turn, consists
of three properties.

However, a person receives these nine properties uncorrected.

As a result, a person must correct nine different qualities within themselves.

The
attainment of the Upper World occurs gradually, step by step, as the nine inner
qualities of a person are corrected.As a result, a person must correct nine different qualities within themselves.

The
attainment of the Upper World occurs gradually, step by step, as the nine inner
qualities of a person are corrected.

This happens as follows: a person begins to feel the Spiritual World.

In
comparison with the properties of the Spiritual World that has opened up to him, he
sees his true properties—his petty earthly selfish desires—as despicable.

In contrast to the perception of himself and the Spiritual, a person begins to
hate his qualities.

Even those who have experienced clinical death and only
glimpsed the Higher World become kinder, better, and more altruistic.

Hatred for one's qualities detaches a person from them; rather, he begins to
transform them, to use them to do good deeds.

By correcting each of his nine
qualities, a person, accordingly, rises in his understanding of the Spiritual
world, climbing the steps of Faith — the Knowledge of God.

Those who are only aware of our world (Yavi) are naturally not yet able to correct
themselves spiritually.

To do this, it is necessary to first study the Vedas in
order to begin to perceive the Higher World, to begin to perceive the Creator, that
man and God are one and the same.

In general, prayer is a spiritual act of self-correction that a person performs on
themselves.

The gradual correction of one's egoistic desires (properties) is possible only
after a person has emerged from the captivity of the material world, from general
egoism.

This emergence is called Passover, from the word "transition." The periods
of gradual correction of all nine egoistic properties are called the steps of
Faith.

In our world (Yavi), we perform actions mechanically because we are not yet able
to correct ourselves spiritually, since we have not yet emerged from material
captivity, from our egoism (ego).--- PAGE BREAK ---

This emergence is called Passover, from the word "transition." The periods
of gradual correction of all nine egoistic properties are called the steps of
Faith. In our world (Yavi), we perform actions mechanically because we are not yet able
to correct ourselves spiritually, since we have not yet emerged from material
captivity, from our egoism (ego). But despite this, we celebrate Easter in the hope
that we will be able to fulfill it in its true form when we enter the spiritual
world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The spiritual world is called the world of Prav.

This world is called the world of
Infinity.

Therefore, it is said in the Vedas that a person can observe all the
Commandments only in the world of Prav, and beyond its borders, i.e., while being
in our world (Yavi) with its properties, he can only mechanically imitate their
spiritual fulfillment.

Only after a person has left his egoism, i.e., passed Passover and corrected his
nine egoistic qualities to altruistic ones, does he reach such a level of internal
correction that the entire Higher Light, called "Inglia," enters him.

2.

The Highest Pleasure
It is said: "Know (Veda) the Creator of your fathers and serve Him."
To "know" God means to understand Him, to comprehend Him, to feel Him as the
closest being.

Woe to the soul that does not feel the Creator!

One who strives to
draw closer to God, to give Him all his intentions, because there is a point of
Light in his heart, a future Spiritual vessel, the embryo of the Soul, but who has
not yet known or felt the Creator, feels only his desire (ego), Spiritual hunger.

The point of Light in the heart—the embryo of the future Soul—is not given to a
person immediately upon their birth into this world.

It is placed in the heart of a
person directly by the Creator Himself, in the heart of the person whom He wishes
to bring closer to Himself.

And a person feels this "point of Light" within
themselves as a desire for something higher than this world.

We say that this point of Light is in the heart because it is with the heart
that a person feels his desires.

All human desires are essentially spiritual.

They are desires for the Light of the Creator.

But if a person is in our world, i.e., still feels only selfish desires, then he
sees not the Light of the Creator, but its small spark, clothed in various garments
of our material world.

Why do we say that desires are in the heart?--- PAGE BREAK ---

But if a person is in our world, i.e., still feels only selfish desires, then he
sees not the Light of the Creator, but its small spark, clothed in various garments
of our material world. Why do we say that desires are in the heart? Simply because the heart, like a
muscle pump, feels all of a person's sensations in their blood pressure and nerve
contractions and clearly reacts to all changes in their behavior and aspirations by
supplying more blood, increasing pressure, and accelerating contractions. And since a person feels the consequences of their emotions in the work of their
heart, they say that their desires are in the heart, even though it is nothing more
than a biological pump. All human desires are not located in any physiological
organ: a person can have all their organs replaced, but their
The "I" will still remain with him, i.e., this "I" will already exist in another
body, but will remain unchanged. However, despite the fact that the Creator has placed a spiritual aspiration, a
"point of light," the embryo of a future soul, within man, man is incapable, even
under its pressure, of beginning to draw closer to God. And only if Spiritual inspiration descends upon him from Above, only if God
Himself personally inspires him to Spiritual search and elevation — only in this
case will man stir and raise his head from all earthly vanity to God and make an
effort to listen to the words of the sages — the Aryan Vedas. "Only good things have followed me all my life!" said the long-suffering John
(Ivan) the Theologian, because he realized that God constantly, at every moment,
sends him only the best for his spiritual elevation. Precisely that good things are
not simply sent by the Creator, but

--- PAGE BREAK ---It haunts me!

But how can a simple person agree with this in a life full of
suffering?

This can be understood by following the words of the great Yeshua (Joshua): "Man
is the shadow of God." Just as a shadow pursues a person and constantly follows
him, pursuing his every movement and repeating all his movements, so man, in all
his desires, aspirations, and impulses, follows the will of God.

In other words, as soon as a spiritual desire arises in a person, he must
immediately understand that this desire is sent to him by God.

Likewise, if a person suddenly feels a desire for the spiritual, he must realize
that this desire in him is caused by the Creator's desire to bring him closer, that
even before this desire arose in him, it arose in God and was sent to him, and that
is why he feels this desire.

Let us assume that a person has developed a love for God.

This indicates that God
loves him and desires to manifest His love openly.

God Himself now strives for a
mutual manifestation of love with this person.

But the process of bringing a person closer to God happens gradually.

At first,
God sends a person such desires, seeking out special opportunities, as soon as He
sees that the person is in a suitable state.

Moreover, from a human point of view,
these states may be completely unsuitable, arising, for example, from great
suffering.

And the desire for God that appears in a person in response to God's desire for
him, the suffering of love, the longing for the feeling of God, are precisely what
speak of God's call.

But a person perceives only his own feelings, and it seems to
him that he alone suffers and does not receive what he desires, that God does not
respond to him.

People selfishly forget that even before they feel their desires, God has already
felt them, and that the Creator feels these desires much more intensely than people
do.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But a person perceives only his own feelings, and it seems to
him that he alone suffers and does not receive what he desires, that God does not
respond to him. People selfishly forget that even before they feel their desires, God has already
felt them, and that the Creator feels these desires much more intensely than people
do. But if a person can comprehend that the source of all his desires is God, then
what John the Theologian said seems natural to him:
"Only good things have followed me all my life!" This is because John represents
the common Soul of all those who strive for God. And each of those who ascend to
God is spiritually part of the common (Unified) Soul. But in order to begin to draw closer to God, it is necessary to know that it is
God Himself who pursues man, desiring to draw closer to him, just as much as man
now desires to draw closer to God, and therefore pursues God. Therefore, one must not forget this in any of one's experiences, even when one has
such great desires for God that one cannot believe that God has the same desires,
and it seems to one that only one desires closeness, and that what God sends is not
felt as the cause of one's desires. And if a person constantly remembers that all his desires for God are a
consequence of God's desires for him, then the greater his desires for God, the
more he feels God in them. Thus, both sides of love—longing and suffering—are felt
in a person, and both constantly increase, without any break between them:
constantly feeling within himself a longing for God, he does not lose sight of the
fact that this feeling is, in general, nothing other than God's longing for him —
and so he feels this within himself constantly and increasingly, until he is worthy
of merging into a common mutual feeling of mutual love with God. And this perfect
state of union between man and God is called Immortality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---But in reality, everything does not happen so smoothly, and the person's awareness
that the desire for God is sent to him by God Himself is interrupted.

This is
because he does not feel God.

And as the desire for God grows, when the sufferings
of love accumulate to a certain extent, it seems to the person that God rejects
him!

How false and deceitful this feeling is!

Not only does a person stop moving
forward to fulfill both their own desires and those of God—to unite them in a
measure that reveals Eternal Love— but, forgetting that his feeling comes from God,
he sees that only he strives for God, and God repels him by not responding to his
desire with His revelation.

This is because man forgets the principle: the Creator responds only to complete
feeling, and if man's desire has not yet reached its full measure, God hides
Himself even more from man, calling him to Himself and thereby arousing in man an
even greater desire.

A person also forgets that he is the shadow of God and that
what he feels toward God, God feels toward him.

But it is impossible for God to reveal Himself halfway, when man's desire for Him
has not yet fully matured.

This is because all these feelings of desire for the
Creator, of striving toward Him, and of rejection by God are necessary for a person
in order for the true feeling of love to fully mature within him, so that he can
feel Him when God reveals Himself to him.

The division of desires in the Upper Worlds (Prav) occurred even before the
creation of our world (Yavi), precisely so that altruistic qualities could
penetrate absolutely selfish ones, making it possible to control selfishness not
only through judgment, but also through mercy.

And when a person strives toward his
Source, he must gather all his sensations into one and attribute them to God as the
cause of everything that happens to him and within him.The division of desires in the Upper Worlds (Prav) occurred even before the
creation of our world (Yavi), precisely so that altruistic qualities could
penetrate absolutely selfish ones, making it possible to control selfishness not
only through judgment, but also through mercy.

And when a person strives toward his
Source, he must gather all his sensations into one and attribute them to God as the
cause of everything that happens to him and within him.

In this way, a person
justifies all of God's actions in relation to himself and all of creation—he
"weighs the whole world on the scales of mercy."
As a result, a person achieves unity (Oneness) with God.

Precisely by
completely filling the cup of aspirations and desires for God.

This process of a person achieving a true desire to merge with God, leading to the
spiritual birth of a person, is similar to the process of the birth of a new
organism in our world, which occurs as a result of animal desire.

And only after a person reaches such a spiritual desire does he give birth to his
new spiritual state, because he unites in one spiritual impulse, united in all
three spiritual properties:
"Soul," "time," and "space."
Soul means a certain degree of aspiration and longing.

Time means the sum of all attempts to merge that have not led to unity.

Because
true unity is possible only with true desire; only it leads to unity, just as they
were merged before separation at the birth of a person in this material world.

But a person does not immediately achieve a state of spiritual readiness for such
a high level of unity, called perfect merging (Unity), but matures gradually under
the influence of the feeling descending upon him from Above that "Only good pursues
me throughout my life!", that God continuously sends him calls to come closer.

It
is up to each person to listen to these calls every moment!--- PAGE BREAK ---

But a person does not immediately achieve a state of spiritual readiness for such
a high level of unity, called perfect merging (Unity), but matures gradually under
the influence of the feeling descending upon him from Above that "Only good pursues
me throughout my life!", that God continuously sends him calls to come closer. It
is up to each person to listen to these calls every moment! And since it is not possible for such a high desire to mature in a person
immediately, God sends him the sufferings of love, called "The righteous man, but
it is bad for him," when it seems to a person that God does not want to merge with
him. And therefore, in his anguish of love, he does not feel God's reciprocal love,

--- PAGE BREAK ---necessary for spiritual unity, for merging in "space." And the bitterness of
unrequited love arises in him, but in the future it is precisely this that turns
into delight!

And God will not answer a person until true feeling matures within them.

And
gradually, but surely, true feeling for God matures within a person.

Because "what the mind does not do, time does." And this is because God gathers all
of a person's feelings, all of their sufferings of love, bit by bit, until He
gathers them into a complete feeling, and then transmits it to the person.

As a result, a true spiritual desire arises in a person.

And this happens at the
right time.

Because man and God were merged together before the descent of the
human soul into this world.

But that was a merger (union) from Above, from the
side, by the will of God.

And now it happens by the will of man.

And the Soul is the desire of a person to merge with God, gathered piece by piece,
when he pursues God with all his efforts, trying not to part with the awareness
that everything is sent by Him, until he reaches a state when, constantly, day and
night, revolves only around this thought—until all sufferings and desires are
gathered into one whole.

Because passionate, ever-increasing, but unrequited
desires leave behind bitter, great sufferings corresponding to the strength of the
passion.

And these sufferings are felt many times over by God, and in this, too, "man is
the shadow of the Creator." But why all this?

Why, no matter how high a person has
risen spiritually, if he has not yet attained the true desire for union with God,
does he fall into the bitterness of unrequited love?

God knows the measure of true feeling in each of His creations and the measure of
feeling that has not yet matured, which is why it breaks off, because it has not
yet matured.

And that is why God creates in man a feeling of bitterness of suffering.God knows the measure of true feeling in each of His creations and the measure of
feeling that has not yet matured, which is why it breaks off, because it has not
yet matured.

And that is why God creates in man a feeling of bitterness of suffering.

But if a
person listens to the voice of God, remembering that "man is the shadow of God,"
this feeling becomes the beginning of unity (immortality).

Then a person does not
fall into the feeling that only he strives for God, that only he suffers from
separation, but feels in his sufferings how God Himself suffers to the same extent.

And then all of a person's suffering leads them to feel not their own suffering,
but the suffering of God, and they desire only to extinguish it in order to please
God, — and only then does true suffering arise in him and the correct attitude
toward merging with God, and all of God's suffering accumulates in man, and man
gathers all his desires into one point of Light in his heart, in a true and
constant measure.

And therefore Yeshua (Jesus), the author of the Book of Splendor (Zohar), said: "I
am to my Beloved, and to Him are all my desires." And when all desires are gathered
into one true desire—when it is unchanging and only in the right place—then the
"Great Trumpet Blast" will occur—the Soul will be established in its place.

As a result, a person attains perfect knowledge of Spiritual greatness in eternal
unity, called "Knowledge of God." And then he sees that all the suffering and
difficulties he has experienced for so long were felt by him precisely for the
Knowledge of God, which means "at the right time," because God knows that time
will accomplish in a person what he cannot accomplish himself, and he will rise as
a Perfect righteous man.

"At the right place" means the Soul's return to its rightful place.

But before
descending into this world, the Soul was in that place in its Immortal state.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"At the right place" means the Soul's return to its rightful place. But before
descending into this world, the Soul was in that place in its Immortal state. And
God creates nothing new in creation, as it is said: "you are all the same as
before" — there is nothing new at the end of creation, nothing that distinguishes

--- PAGE BREAK ---it from the beginning — except that man says, "I desire!" — I myself desire, and
precisely that which God originally created.

"The same woman—as it is said: lies are beauty, and dust is attractiveness, only
the God-fearing are praised." And just as during spiritual ascent, beauty still
seems to a person to be the perfection to which he must strive, so at the end of
his correction, when he comprehends God with all his senses, he discovers that he
has "seen the opposite world," that only Faith and the sufferings of love are the
most important things, and that this is the Perfection to which one must strive.

In the process of striving for God, he discovers that he has deceived himself, and
therefore becomes a "righteous man who is well," achieving complete union (Unity)
with God, and becomes an absolute righteous man.

3.

Altruism is the highest level of Faith
In the process of forming four successive stages of Faith from the Light, a desire
to enjoy (ego) was created, called the vessel of the Soul, which in its quantity
and quality exactly corresponds to the Light entering it.

When the Soul began to receive the Light of God, it immediately understood and
felt that God was giving it pleasure, and it was receiving and enjoying it.

On the one hand, this is not so bad: a small child receives everything from its
mother.

She enjoys giving to it, and it receives and enjoys receiving.

What is
wrong with that?

There is complete unity between God and the Soul: one gives, and
the other receives.

When the Soul receives everything that God gives, it is called
the stage (of Faith) of the world of Infinity, i.e., the unlimited reception of
the Light that comes from God.

God and the Soul are completely connected.

So what is the difference?

The
difference is that the Soul in this world (Yavi) is not independent; it is not
equal to God because it cannot truly enjoy.

And the enjoyment it receives is
impermanent and disappears immediately as it is received.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The
difference is that the Soul in this world (Yavi) is not independent; it is not
equal to God because it cannot truly enjoy. And the enjoyment it receives is
impermanent and disappears immediately as it is received. In order to develop the Soul to a state of constant and complete enjoyment, i.e.,
for enjoyment to be perfect, it is necessary to bring the cause of enjoyment out of
the Soul. Only then will the Soul not be limited by the magnitude of the desire to
enjoy. Otherwise, the enjoyment received immediately extinguishes the desire to
receive it. Desire and enjoyment cancel each other out. Both desire and enjoyment
disappear. How can Souls be made such that the more they enjoy, the more they want and are
able to enjoy? This is only possible when the source of enjoyment, its cause, lies
outside the Soul. Then the Soul will enjoy what it gives. The more it gives, the
more enjoyment it will receive from giving. This process is endless. From this, it is clear that altruism is not an artificial invention, but a natural
necessity to create perfect Souls. Only in altruistic desire can one experience,
along with the pleasure one feels, an even greater desire to enjoy. The Creator, having created the desires of the world of Infinity, has done only a
small part of the work. Now it is necessary to develop this desire to its perfect
form: so that, while continuing to receive, it begins to give, and to give
infinitely, unlimitedly, beyond itself. Then this new desire, aimed at giving, will
receive infinitely. The infinite development of this process is possible only on the condition that
both give: God gives directly by virtue of His desire and ability; He has
something to give. Creation gives in the opposite direction—it receives,

--- PAGE BREAK ---To give is to enjoy, because it is the only way to give pleasure to God.

Receiving is a consequence of love for the giver.

In our world, existing by fulfilling small selfish desires, we receive small
pleasures, and once we are filled with them, we immediately cease to desire them.

What to do next?

From above, we are given another desire, which we immediately
pursue, trying to fulfill it.

The successive birth of desires in us and their fleeting satisfaction are
necessary for our development.

This can be clearly observed in children: nature
constantly gives them new desires, forcing them to move and learn.

Otherwise, a
person would not develop.

The more curious a species is, the greater its
development.

This is a gradual path of desire development—a very long one, occurring naturally
over thousands of years.

Throughout the ages, all of humanity has been engaged in
nothing but moving from one desire to another, and upon achieving one, immediately
desiring more.

If a person had no new desires, they would immediately die.

Without the desire to
satisfy new desires, a person cannot exist.

Because the anticipation of future
pleasure drives everything, giving us motivation, mood, and energy.

The light of
future pleasure shines from afar, promising to enter our desires and fill them.

There are four common desires:
1) Animal pleasures — what animals strive for: safety, peace, satiety,
sex, family, children.

2) For wealth.

This desire is already absent in animals, but it is still very
primitive because the very concept of wealth is abstract, but it is presented to
humans as a means of acquiring the same animal pleasures.

However, in its pure
form, it is already an abstract concept of wealth.

3) Power.

The desire to rule over one's fellow humans, the feeling of needing to
be above one's natural level, but not by rising above oneself, but above others.

4) To knowledge that elevates a person above others, but not above themselves.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The desire to rule over one's fellow humans, the feeling of needing to
be above one's natural level, but not by rising above oneself, but above others. 4) To knowledge that elevates a person above others, but not above themselves. Every person has this set of desires. The difference between people is only in the
combination of these desires that each person has. There is a gradual development
from lower desires to higher ones; desires drive a person forward. If a person realizes that they lack the desire to enjoy, and understands what
pleasure they are deprived of, they suffer greatly in proportion to the pleasure
they imagine themselves to be deprived of. People who do not strive for wealth, power, or knowledge cannot move forward and
then transition to the desire for perfection in everything. That is why we are
given our small desires in this world, so that by developing them, we can
ultimately come to God. The desire of the Wise Man is much stronger and more selfish, because it develops
as a consequence of these four natural desires. Man himself creates a new desire—
the desire to give (EGO). God did not create this! This is the perfection of God,
who created man and gave him the opportunity to change himself by creating in
himself a new desire—to give, which was not originally created in him by God. By
doing this, man becomes like God and attains complete Perfection. The exaltation of the giver, God, makes it possible to multiply the pleasure of
receiving from Him. The magnitude of the pleasure found in what is received
"weighs" as much as the giver of this pleasure "weighs" in my eyes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Here, everything depends on the person, on how much they exalt the giver, i.e.,
God.

And since God is infinite, this process of increasing the desire to give to
Him, and therefore the enjoyment of receiving, is also infinite.

In terms of their spiritual qualities, all people are equal.

By discarding the
inner content and measuring only by animal standards, we evaluate only the body.

People can only be distinguished by their inner content, mind, and properties.

These properties cannot be "transplanted" from one person to another.

Our memory is
only the experience of the body within the framework of our world.

A person who leaves our world and returns to it again changes nothing except their
"shirt": the soul remains, but its "shirt" has changed.

This is the transmigration of Souls.

There are Souls that have corrected all their
qualities but, due to a special purpose, must return to Earth, but in a different
guise — this is recognized by a Sage upon reaching the level of previous Sages,
when he reaches the Spiritual level of his previous rebirth.

But everyone is born
with selfish desires, and no one is born a Sage or a Prophet right away.

The first action a person takes toward God is to reduce the reception of Light.

Light—enjoyment—is completely removed from the person, who says that he will
receive Light only to the extent that he can give it to God.

Such reception is
called giving.

In every drop of Light received, a person must see that the pleasure they receive
comes from God, and they enjoy it because God desires it, and they enjoy it because
by doing so, they give pleasure to God, as He desires to give it to a person.

In
this case, God's desire to give pleasure to a person and a person's desire to enjoy
in order to give pleasure to the Creator coincide.

In order to become like God, the human soul is divided into three conditional
parts and distances itself from God to such an extent that it does not feel Him.In
this case, God's desire to give pleasure to a person and a person's desire to enjoy
in order to give pleasure to the Creator coincide.

In order to become like God, the human soul is divided into three conditional
parts and distances itself from God to such an extent that it does not feel Him.

The distance between it and God is divided into nine degrees (of Faith), each of
which holds the Light within itself.

Beyond the last, ninth degree, the Light is not
felt.

This is where our world (Yavi) is located.

Our world is not the world in which we live, but rather a spiritual state in which
a person begins to feel that he is completely isolated from God, completely distant
from the Creator, knowing that God exists but feeling His absence.

It is from this state, when a person independently develops within themselves the
desire to give pleasure to God, to obtain for God's sake through their own efforts,
that they create a likeness to God from within themselves.

The descent of the Worlds through 9 steps was created by God Himself.

Here, there
is still no independent desire or action on the part of man.

Only from the lowest
point, being completely cut off from God, does man himself, of his own desire,
begin the path upward, through the same 9 steps, toward God, toward the state of
the world of Infinity from which he came.

The step of the world of Infinity is divided into many Souls, each of which must
independently walk its own path from our world, cultivating within itself an ever-
greater vessel of the Soul — to the world of Infinity.

And each such particle of God that has already begun to walk this path is called a
Sage.

These particles must walk the entire path while residing in our biological
body.

And each of the particles will clothe itself in its biological body as many
times as necessary to pass through all Spiritual states.--- PAGE BREAK ---

These particles must walk the entire path while residing in our biological
body. And each of the particles will clothe itself in its biological body as many
times as necessary to pass through all Spiritual states. Then, even at the lowest
level, the animal level, the world of Infinity will be revealed, the so-called
"earthly Paradise."

--- PAGE BREAK ---The number of existing biological bodies has nothing to do with the number of Soul
particles, called the point of Light in the heart, of which there may be only a few
dozen at a time, "clothed in bodies." The rest of the bio-bodies wander like cows
in a pasture, without a point of Light.

The multitude of Souls is a conditional number of Soul particles into which the
stage of Faith of our world has broken up and which must correct themselves.

There
is a resettlement, a transfer of these particles, which occurs
"every second" (we do not understand what "outside of time" means, but in the
Spiritual there is no concept of time, and therefore it is difficult to explain
this process).

It is necessary to acquire a sense of the true structure of the Universe, then
there will be no questions, we will be able to see everything ourselves.

The structure of the Spiritual Steps is such that the lower step of Faith contains
a part of the higher one.

This structure of Spiritual levels is present in all Spiritual worlds.

The last
step of the world of Yavi is called “this world” or “our world.” This step is
special in that those who are on this step do not feel the part of the Higher
within themselves.

And although they receive all their sensations from Above, i.e.,
from a higher step of Faith, it seems to them that these sensations are their own.

The entire mass of people inhabiting our world is on this level of Faith.

Everyone in our world is born this way, unable to feel the higher level.

But there
are special individuals who have been able to feel the part of the Higher that is
within them.

This part of the Higher, felt by such a person, is called
"my God," "my Creator," because that is how they perceive the highest level of
Faith—as their Creator.But there
are special individuals who have been able to feel the part of the Higher that is
within them.

This part of the Higher, felt by such a person, is called
"my God," "my Creator," because that is how they perceive the highest level of
Faith—as their Creator.

The Book of Splendor (Zohar) discusses in detail four types of manifestations of
the higher level of Faith, or, as it is commonly called, God, in relation to man:
1) Double concealment is when a person completely fails to understand that
everything within them comes from a Higher Power that they are completely unaware
of.

2) Simple concealment is when a person understands that everything within them,
all their qualities and feelings, come from the Higher, both the good — as a reward
— and the bad — as punishment for their actions and thoughts.

3) Revelation – when a person clearly feels the influence of a higher level
of Faith, feels their God, and sees how God loves them.

4) Merging (Unity with God) – when the highest level of Faith (God) reveals its
actions to a person's awareness and feelings to such an extent that the person
changes their properties so much that they completely merge with the highest level
of Faith (God) in complete, eternal love.

Thus, Faith (Knowledge of God) is like a ladder on which are located — from God
Himself to our world — Spiritual levels that sequentially merge into one another.

The only creation is man.

When born, man does not feel God at all.

He perceives
everything around him as his world, not understanding that all this is drawn for
him by the step of Faith, that this is how God wishes to appear before him.

With the help of the Teacher, a person can begin to realize that what he feels is
God Himself, but only at the furthest stage of perception from Him.

If a person begins to study the Book of Splendor (Zohar), the power hidden in the
texts affects him in such a way that he begins to realize that all his sensations
come from God.--- PAGE BREAK ---

With the help of the Teacher, a person can begin to realize that what he feels is
God Himself, but only at the furthest stage of perception from Him. If a person begins to study the Book of Splendor (Zohar), the power hidden in the
texts affects him in such a way that he begins to realize that all his sensations
come from God. And although he does not yet clearly feel the source of his
sensations and thoughts, he already realizes His presence. As has been said many times, the Book of Splendor (Zohar) is a description of a
person's path to the Goal of Life—to spiritual elevation, up to

--- PAGE BREAK ---merging with God (Immortality).

There is no other purpose for human existence in
the world; everything that happens in the world happens only to fulfill this
Purpose.

Naturally, God does not need humans to fulfill His plans and can control humans
through the laws of nature, unconsciously and involuntarily leading us to the state
He desires.

But God's desire is for man to consciously and deliberately choose the path of his
spiritual ascent, so that man himself creates himself as a spiritual being from the
selfish material with which he appears in our world from the hands of the Creator.

4.

Man and God
It is said that God is clothed in man.

Even those who have not yet begun to feel
the Higher forces, who have not seen the Light with their inner vision, can
imagine: there is a Higher Being, whatever name we give it, and this name will
reflect our perception of Him, not Him Himself.

For example: the Higher Being in
relation to us is God, because He created us.

The Higher represents a homogeneous
field, similar to a force field.

Within Himself, the Higher has set aside a place where He does not manifest Himself
in any way.

Therefore, this place is called empty (void).

In it (the void), the
Higher power created man: something that feels itself.

Man is capable of sensing
the God that surrounds him, but only to the extent that the properties of both are
similar.

In his initial state, man senses only himself, and perceives his distorted
perception of God as the world around him, which he therefore calls
"our world" (Yavi).

In relation to God, we exist in absolute union (Oneness) and harmony with Him, and
He completely controls us, permeating and filling us and all space.

The concealment
of God exists only in relation to the unbeliever.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In relation to God, we exist in absolute union (Oneness) and harmony with Him, and
He completely controls us, permeating and filling us and all space. The concealment
of God exists only in relation to the unbeliever. The task of a person: starting from their initial Spiritual level (the stage of
Faith), in which a person is born and feels only themselves, and through their
subjective perception, their world — what they feel around them — to reach in their
sensations the full comprehension of God, when the desire to enjoy in no way
interferes with their merging with the Creator, as it was before the Soul was
clothed in egoistic, Spiritual, and material shells. The concealment of God is a consequence of the egoistic qualities created by God in
man. If, despite the presence of these qualities in himself, a person returns to a
state of complete perception of God, he merges with Him to a greater extent than in
his original state of existence in God before the concealment began. The process of gradual discovery, of feeling God by a person, is similar to the
feeling of a forceful, spiritual field entering the human body, filling it from
within, like the introduction of a cloud from above, giving a person the properties
and feelings of the sublime, purified, timeless, Higher, and good. A person feels
the need to act in accordance with what they feel, although they understand that
their actions are a consequence of the Higher being entering them. In other words:
1. The whole essence of a person is their sensations. Take away your sense of
yourself and your surroundings, and you are nothing and no one. Only our subjective
sensations of ourselves and the objects around us create the picture we call
"our world." This picture depends entirely on our senses and perceptions, and not
on what this external reality is like in itself. We do not know what this external
world is like in itself. It

--- PAGE BREAK ---is simply what we imagine it to be based on our sensations, how we perceive it.

For example: two people see an unfamiliar flying object in the sky.

One claims that
it is 10 meters long, and the other claims that it is 20 meters long.

Who is right?

Both of them.

Because there is nothing to compare it with.

But if there is a third
person who sees the same object in a different part of the spectrum or with
different senses, and he is right in claiming that the object is not at all what it
appears to be to the first two observers.

What does it really look like?

This question is meaningless because it looks
different to different senses.

Therefore, the picture of the world we always
receive is completely subjective.

This is because we are deprived of true senses.

Otherwise, we would see that nothing exists except God, and the measure of Light
received from Him paints us this picture, which we call "our world."
As a person develops spiritually, they begin to feel the subjectivity of their
ideas and sensations, both in scientific and personal understanding, but they will
never be able to comprehend the true picture of the Universe, all the Worlds in
their true form, because they exist only in relation to a person, only in our
sensations.

In reality, there is only one God, and the degrees of His concealment
from us represent in our sensations what we call Spiritual worlds.

2.

A person's understanding of themselves, their purpose, their fate, their
destiny in the Universe, both from the perspective of nature itself and from their
own perspective: if we believe in the perfection of God, and hence in the
perfection of creation, then there should be no contradiction between the purpose
and actions of each individual person at every moment of their life and the purpose
of the entire Universe: every movement, desire, and moment of a person and every
object in the Universe must fulfill God's purposeful control solely in the name of
His Purpose.2.

A person's understanding of themselves, their purpose, their fate, their
destiny in the Universe, both from the perspective of nature itself and from their
own perspective: if we believe in the perfection of God, and hence in the
perfection of creation, then there should be no contradiction between the purpose
and actions of each individual person at every moment of their life and the purpose
of the entire Universe: every movement, desire, and moment of a person and every
object in the Universe must fulfill God's purposeful control solely in the name of
His Purpose.

Nothing can be purposeless if God is perfect.

Therefore, if a person does not understand God's Purpose and does not live in
accordance with it, this does not mean that he does not fulfill God's desire —
everyone consciously or unconsciously fulfills His desires.

The difference lies
only in conscious or unconscious existence: to consciously desire to feel how God
changes a person and leads them to His Purpose — merging with Himself.

This is the Goal: to reveal God to His creatures so that in every spiritual,
mental, and physical movement, a person rejoices, feeling how God, having entered
into him, controls him.

But in any case, the Creator does everything, either secretly, if a person is not
yet ready to agree with His Will, or openly, if a person desires with all his being
only to blindly feel the passage of the Higher control through him.

In this case—in
complete agreement with God's desires—the Creator gives a feeling of Himself in
every desire and action of a person.

God's goal is for His actions to be fully revealed to all who inhabit our world.

This is possible only with the complete correction of human nature, so that it
becomes similar to God's nature—absolute altruism.

3.

A person is his desires.

They determine his actions and thoughts, forcing the
Mind to seek ways to satisfy desires.

The brain (mind) plays only a supporting role
in how to achieve what is desired.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They determine his actions and thoughts, forcing the
Mind to seek ways to satisfy desires. The brain (mind) plays only a supporting role
in how to achieve what is desired. A person lives only by what he desires at a
given moment. This determines his attitude toward life, toward himself, toward
everything around him; in accordance with his desires, he evaluates everything
around him and chooses how to act. Desires are primary in a person, i.e., they
determine all his thoughts and actions. Desires are not a product of our world;
they do not arise in

--- PAGE BREAK ---human beings themselves or under the "accidental" influence of circumstances.

Desires come to a person from outside, from Above.

The spiritual purity of desires
arising in a person is determined by the degree to which God is hidden or revealed
to that person.

Desires are a consequence of the radiation of God's Light upon a person or, in
other words, the degree to which a person feels God, the degree to which God
manifests Himself to a person in a person: hidden, then a person unconsciously
fulfills God's desires, accepting them as their own, as practically the entire
population of our planet does, or manifest, when God shines the surrounding Light
on a person, attracting them to the Spiritual, or, if a person is already prepared
by the inner Light, God begins to gradually and manifestly clothe them in it, and
the Light enters the person tangibly.

But in any case, only the measure of the
Light received, whether explicit or still hidden, determines a person's desires and
their spiritual purity.

4.

A person's location on the ladder of material and spiritual values within the
limits of the selfish desires of our world, or when a person has already left the
sensations of our world alone and is ascending in the sensation of God on the
ladder of Spiritual Worlds, their location in relation to the Creator is a
consequence of God's influence on them, a consequence of the influence of a certain
amount of Light that enters them as inner Light, or that shines on them from
outside as surrounding Light.

There is nothing but God, and man must comprehend this Truth.

The only thing
created by God is the desire to enjoy Him Himself.

Therefore, only the magnitude of
the desire to enjoy determines both the spiritual and physical properties of any
person.

Only the magnitude of this desire distinguishes all people from each other,
and by changing the magnitude of this desire, they change themselves.Therefore, only the magnitude of
the desire to enjoy determines both the spiritual and physical properties of any
person.

Only the magnitude of this desire distinguishes all people from each other,
and by changing the magnitude of this desire, they change themselves.

Therefore, only by changing the influence of the Spiritual Light on a person in
terms of quantity, intensity, or type, filling creation or shining from outside,
does God completely control us, creating in us certain desires for the Light with
which He shines on us at that moment.

By placing a particle of this Light in various objects of our world, God causes us
to desire these objects.

This is enough to completely control each of us, forcing
us to desire, and therefore act, as He pleases.

By placing a tiny fraction of Light in certain objects, objects of our world, God
causes a person to desire them, to want to attain them, to obtain them, to exert a
certain amount of effort, and upon attaining what is desired, to enjoy or be
disappointed, in order to accumulate experience, even though it is worthless,
because a person is incapable of learning from past experience, even though a
memory of it remains.

But if the attractive Light shines again, a person is unable to resist its pulling
force, and again, like a moth flying into a flame, even knowing in advance that it
will burn.

But experience means the accumulation of a certain quantity and quality
of the Soul, the striving and suffering that accumulate outside of a person and
then manifest themselves in a single moment — and then a person can use it to
obtain qualitatively new information and sensations.

Therefore, the best desire of a person is for God to clothe Himself in him and
manifest His properties through him, so that the person becomes a conduit for God's
Will, according to his own greatest desire.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But experience means the accumulation of a certain quantity and quality
of the Soul, the striving and suffering that accumulate outside of a person and
then manifest themselves in a single moment — and then a person can use it to
obtain qualitatively new information and sensations. Therefore, the best desire of a person is for God to clothe Himself in him and
manifest His properties through him, so that the person becomes a conduit for God's
Will, according to his own greatest desire. And even with just a little light from God shining on them, people can already feel
this Light coming into them as it enters them from Above. They even physically feel
it as a beam of Light coming into them from above,

--- PAGE BREAK ---instantly changing his selfish (ego) properties into the opposite (EGO).

This feeling of dependence on the Light is the most pleasant and reliable, because
a person immediately begins to realize that it is not he, but God who creates and
controls everything and him, and therefore, already understanding that he is not
able to change or even slightly correct himself, a person is glad that the decision
and the power of correction are with God, because he has already realized that he
himself has neither the strength nor the desire — everything is a consequence of
the Light of God.

All spiritual worlds exist only within man.

Apart from man, everything that
surrounds him is a manifestation of God.

Spiritual worlds are the inner world of
man.

Apart from man's inner feelings, there is nothing else in the Universe.

Man's
inner feelings come from our source — God.

The measures of God's feelings are
called the steps of Faith (Knowledge of God).

There is no need for physical movement to feel the Spiritual world instead of our
own: everything depends on a person's inner preparation.

The difference between our current state and the highest spiritual state lies
solely in our inner feelings: our physical body remains in place, while our
spiritual body travels in its feelings.

If a person does not feel God, it is
considered that they are in a state called "our world." If a person begins to feel
God, it is considered that they have "risen" from our world to the Spiritual world:
if they feel that everything comes from God, both good and bad, then they are in
the worlds of Legs, Arlegs, and Aranos.

If they feel that God is absolutely good,
it is considered that they have "risen" to the world of Infinity (Svarog).

All ascents or descents exist only in a person's inner feelings.

Moreover, what a
person feels in the present is called this, our world (Yav).

What a person will
feel in the next state, the next feeling of a person, is called the future world.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Moreover, what a
person feels in the present is called this, our world (Yav). What a person will
feel in the next state, the next feeling of a person, is called the future world. God desires that man feel Him completely, as before the descent of man's "I," his
Soul, into the sensations called "our world." So that, despite the interfering
obstacles of egoism, he may once again feel God as before the separation of the
Soul from the Creator. All the Vedas are given solely for the advancement of man in
his sensations from the state of our world to the highest state—complete union with
God (Immortality). Everything we know about the Universe and God is what is conveyed to us in the
Vedas by those great personalities who:
– were able to rise spiritually and go beyond the limits of our world's perception,
– Felt the spiritual world, sensed the existence of a Higher Power,
– Approached it and felt that it created us, and therefore called this Higher
Power God, from whom comes enjoyment;
– From this, they concluded that the Supreme Power created us for
enjoyment. This is what we know about God, this is what great personalities have understood,
this is what a person can understand in general: God created us in order to enjoy
us. From the above, we can understand the darkness (stupidity) and ignorance found in
our generation, which has never been seen before. This is because even the servants
of God have ceased to engage in the mysteries of Faith (Veda). As my Teacher, the Righteous One (Prophet) John (the Theologian), the only son and
successor of his father, the great Teacher, the Righteous One Zachariah (who was
killed between the Temple and the altar), explained, before the beginning of our
era (Kali), all the great Teachers (Prophets) were also Sages (Aryans), but in
general,

--- PAGE BREAK ---since the time of the Teacher (Prophet) Enoch, not even all of them, and even less
so the authors of books, have been able to comprehend the Spiritual stages (of
Faith).

Yeshua (Joshua) speaks about this in his true example: "If a column of thousands of
blind people is walking along a road, but there is at least one sighted person at
the head of the column, then all of them can be sure that they will reach their
destination, because they are following the one who can see the way." He sees the
Path in the full sense of the word, i.e., he who has walked it has achieved his
personal correction (Immortality/Liberation), which is possible only through the
study of Faith and the Vedas, and therefore is able to lead the masses behind him.

But if there is no sighted guide at the head of the column, it is natural that they
will stray from the Path and get lost.

This is what is happening in our time, when several generations have already
strayed from the Path of recognizing Faith (God) as Truth, and we are forced to
walk the path of suffering to the Goal of creation (Immortality).

So it is in our
generation, if only the servants of God were engaged in the core, the inner part of
Faith, i.e.

Faith-Veda, rather than spreading heresy, they would have attracted
Light from Above into our world from Infinity (Svarog), from God, and the whole
generation would have followed them, and everyone would have been confident in
their Path.

By the power of God's Light, such leaders would have been able to
convince and lead the whole generation.

But if even God's servants have strayed from the Faith (God), it is no wonder that
the entire generation is mistaken because of them.

And because of my great sorrow,
I am no longer able to continue talking about this!

Unfortunately, it is not only
because of my great sorrow, but also because of the fear of persecution that has
befallen great people, and because those who truly rule the world prefer to remain
silent!--- PAGE BREAK ---

And because of my great sorrow,
I am no longer able to continue talking about this! Unfortunately, it is not only
because of my great sorrow, but also because of the fear of persecution that has
befallen great people, and because those who truly rule the world prefer to remain
silent! The Book of Splendor (Zohar) was translated from the Jewish Kabbalah (the book
Sefer Yetzirah, also known as the Book of Creation). Book 12. MANUSCRIPT OF COLBRIN
This will not be revealed until the last days... The destruction and recreation of the Earth has occurred more than once. During the
great destruction of Egypt, God created a dragon (a fiery star) from the sky. The
dragon was terrifying and lashed its tail, breathing fire and hot coals, and a
great catastrophe befell humanity. The Dragon's body had a bright red glow, and
behind it was a tail of smoke. It threw out ashes and hot stones, its arrival
caused thunder and lightning, and the seas overflowed their banks, spreading
everywhere..."
THE DESTROYER
Part 1. The Great Scroll
People have forgotten the days of the Destroyer (Shiva). Only the wise remember and
know where he went, so that he may return at his appointed hour. He raged in the
heavens during the Days of Wrath, and he was like a billowing cloud of smoke,
shrouded in fiery heat, behind which his limbs could not be seen. His mouth is an
abyss spewing flames, smoke, and hot ashes. When the time comes, the secret laws of
Heaven begin to control the stars, forcing them to move

--- PAGE BREAK ---inconsistently along altered paths, then a great reddish light appears in the sky.

When blood falls on the Earth, the Destroyer will appear, and the mountains will
open up and spew fire and ashes far and wide.

Trees will be felled and all living creatures will perish.

Waters will be
swallowed up by the earth, and the seas will boil.

The heavens will burn with
reddish fire, and the face of the earth will have a coppery hue.

And the Day of
Darkness will come.

The moon that has appeared will shift and fall.

People will scatter in madness.

They will hear the trumpet blast and battle cry of
the Destroyer and seek refuge in caves.

Fear will consume their hearts, and courage
will leave them like water from a cracked jug.

They will be consumed by the fire of
wrath and dissolve in the breath of the Destroyer.

So it was in the Days of Heavenly Wrath that have passed, and so it will be in the
Days of Doom when He comes again.

The times of His coming and going are known to
the wise.

These are the signs that must precede the time of the Destroyer's return.

One hundred and ten generations must pass before the Sunset.

There will be the rise
and fall of kingdoms.

People will fly through the air like birds and swim in the
seas like fish.

Men will negotiate peace with one another, and these will be their
days—days of hypocrisy and deceit.

Women will be like men, and men like women; man
will be a plaything of passion.

The country of the prophets will rise and fall, and
its language will be studied and understood.

The country that does not respect the
law will rule the Earth and perish into oblivion.

The One Faith will come to all parts of the Earth, leading peace talks that bring
war.

The country of the seas will be more majestic than the rest, but it will be
like an apple rotten at its core and will not stand.

The country of merchants will
kill the magicians (Wise Men), and that will be its day.The country of the seas will be more majestic than the rest, but it will be
like an apple rotten at its core and will not stand.

The country of merchants will
kill the magicians (Wise Men), and that will be its day.

Then the upper classes
will fight the lower classes, the North will fight the South, the East will fight
the West, and Light will fight Darkness.

People will be divided into tribes, and
they will have children who will be strangers to them.

Brother will fight against
brother, and husband against wife.

Fathers will cease to instruct their sons, and
sons will be wayward.

Women will become accessible to anyone and will not strive to
maintain honor and respect.

Confusion will arise in the hearts of men; they will
search without knowing what for, and uncertainty and doubt will trouble them.

They
will possess great wealth, but they will be poor in spirit.

Then there will be a
shift and trembling in the movement of the Earth and the Heavens.

People will
tremble in fear.

And at that time, the Harbinger of Doom will appear.

He will
arrive unnoticed, like a grave robber.

People will not know who he is; people will
be deceived.

The hour of the Destroyer will be near.

In those days, the Great Book
of Wisdom will be revealed to people, and few will be gathered for salvation.

This
is the hour of trials.

The fearless (immortals) will survive, and the brave
(believers) will not perish.

The Great God of Eternity, like all who test man, will
be merciful to children in the Days of Destruction.

Man must suffer in order to
grow up, but there is a time for this.

The great harvest will not be directed only
at the lesser ones among men.

For the son of a thief has become your shepherd.

Part 2.

The Great Scroll
O Guardians of the Universe, who watch over the Destroyer, how long will your watch
last?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Part 2. The Great Scroll
O Guardians of the Universe, who watch over the Destroyer, how long will your watch
last? O mortal men, who wait without understanding, where will you hide in the
terrible Days of Doom, when the Heavens are split in two, in the days when children
turn gray? This is Something that will be seen, this is the horror that your eyes will behold,
this is the image of the Destroyer that will rush upon you: There will be a great
amount of fire, a flaming head with many constantly changing mouths and

--- PAGE BREAK ---eyes.

Terrible teeth will be seen in shapeless mouths, and a frightening dark belly
will blaze with crimson fire inside.

Even the bravest person will tremble with fear
and their stomach will relax, because this Thing will be incomprehensible to
humans.

It will be a huge, writhing form covering the sky of the Earth, its wide-
open mouths blazing with many shades.

They will descend to rush across the face of
the Earth, capturing everything with their gaping mouths.

The greatest warriors will rise up against this Thing in vain.

From these mouths
will fall fangs, large stones that inspire icy terror, which will be thrown at
people, crushing them into red dust.

As the great salty waters rise at its coming and roaring rains fall in torrents
upon the earth, even heroes among mortal men will fall into madness.

Like moths flying swiftly toward their death in the burning flames, these men will
rush toward their own destruction.

The fire that comes first will consume all the
deeds of men, and the waters that follow will sweep away what remains.

The dew of death will fall like a gray carpet on the devastated Earth.

People will
moan in their madness, "O Omnipresent One, save us from this horror, save us from
the gray dew of death."
Part 3.

The ADEPHA Scroll
The Herald of Doom, called the Destroyer, was visible in all the lands of Egypt.

It
was bright and flaming in color, constantly changing its appearance.

It spun like a
spindle, like water bubbling in a pool with an underground source, and all people
agreed that it was the most powerful and terrifying vision.

It was not a large
comet or a faint star, but more like a fiery tongue of flame.

Its movements in the
sky were slow.

Smoke swirled beneath it, and it was close to the Sun, which hid its
face.

Everything was stained with blood, which then changed color as he (the Destroyer)
made his way.

And all this caused death and destruction as he ascended and appeared
in the sky.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Everything was stained with blood, which then changed color as he (the Destroyer)
made his way. And all this caused death and destruction as he ascended and appeared
in the sky. He enveloped the Earth in a gray rain of ash and caused many epidemics,
famines, and other evils. He bit the skin of people and animals until they were
covered with spots and wounds. The Earth was restless and trembled, hills and
mountains shifted and swayed. Dark, smoke-filled heavens fell upon the Earth, and
the wings of the wind carried a loud howling to the ears of men. It was the cry of
the God of Darkness, the Lord of Fear. Thick clouds of flaming smoke went before
him, and there was a terrible hail of hot stones and burning coals. The Destroyer
roared in Heaven, sticking out his fiery tongue. When the Earth tilted, streams of water flowed backwards, and large trees were
thrown to the ground and broken like twigs. Then a voice like ten thousand trumpets
was heard across the wilderness, and fiery breath was like tongues of flame. The
whole Earth moved, and the mountains melted. The sky itself roared like ten
thousand lions in agony, and bright bloody arrows flew swiftly back and forth
across His face. The Earth swelled like bread in an oven. The Herald of Doom, who appeared in the distant past, was called the Destroyer. So
it was recorded in the ancient chronicles, few of which have survived. It is said
that when he appears in the heights of Heaven, the Earth cracks from the intense
heat, like a roasted nut before the fire. Then the fire rises and bursts through
the surface like blood from veins. All moisture in the earth dries up, pastures and fields disappear in the fire, and
they and all the trees become white ashes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Herald of Doom resembles a whirling ball of flame that scatters small flaming
offspring around it as it flies.

It covers a fifth of the sky and stretches its
snake-like fingers down toward the Earth.

Before its appearance, the sky seems
frightened, falling apart and scattering far and wide.

Noon becomes like night.

It
gives rise to terrible events.

These events and the Destroyer are mentioned in
ancient manuscripts.

Read them with a solemn heart, knowing that the Herald of Doom has his appointed
time and will return.

It would be foolish to allow these records to go unheeded.

People now say, "This cannot happen in our day.

The Creator cannot allow such a
thing to happen." But wait, such a day will come, and man, according to his
character, will be unprepared.

DARK DAYS
People mistakenly revered the evil horned star and its retinue.

Then came the day when all was silent and filled with fear, for God commanded a
sign to appear in Heaven so that people would know that the Earth would be
destroyed, and that sign was a wandering star.

The star grew and increased in brightness until it was terrifying to behold.

It
extended horns and hummed, becoming unlike any other ever seen before.

Then God appeared in Heaven, His voice sounding like thunder, and He was clothed in
fire and smoke.

In His right hand He carried lightning, and His breath descended
upon the Earth, bringing with it heat and sulfur.

Dark days began with the Destroyer's last visit, and they were foretold by strange
omens in the heavens.

All the men fell silent and walked with pale faces.

The
leaders of the slaves who built the city in honor of Tom stirred up unrest, and no
one could stop them.

They predicted great misfortunes that the people of Egypt did not know about and
that the seers of the Temple kept silent about.

These were days of ominous calm, when people waited, not knowing what to do.

The
hearts of men were struck with a sense of foreboding.

Laughter was no longer heard.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The
hearts of men were struck with a sense of foreboding. Laughter was no longer heard. There was grief and weeping throughout the land of Egypt. Even the voices of
children fell silent; they no longer played together and became quiet. The slaves became bold and arrogant, and any man could take possession of the
women. Fear was everywhere, the land and women became barren, they could not
conceive, and those who were pregnant had miscarriages. All men withdrew into
themselves. The days of immobility were accompanied by a time when the sound of
trumpets and noise was heard in Heaven, and people became like a frightened herd
without a shepherd, with lions roaming nearby. People talked to each other about
God, and some of them joked carelessly, "If we knew where this God was, we would
bring him a sacrifice." But God was not with them. He did not need to be sought in
swamps or stone pools. He appeared in Heaven for all people to see, but they did
not understand the sign. At the same time, other gods (the Wise Men) remained
silent because of the hypocrisy of the people. The bodies of the dead were no
longer considered sacred and were thrown into the water. People neglected burial
and left the dead in the streets. They lay unprotected from theft by thieves. Those
who once worked all day long, pulling the yoke of cattle, now owned oxen. Those who
did not grow grain now owned the entire pantry. Those who once lived carefree among
their children now thirsted for water. Those who once sat under the scorching sun
and ate soup with

--- PAGE BREAK ---crumbs, now lay reclining in the shade with a swollen belly.

Horned cattle were
left unattended and grazed wherever they pleased, and people, disregarding the
owner's brand, slaughtered their neighbors' cattle.

Everything lost its owner.

Public records were abandoned and destroyed, and no one could tell a slave from his
owner.

The people cried out to Pharaoh in their distress, but he remained deaf and acted
as if he had not heard.

There were those who had false gods and told Pharaoh that
bloody sacrifices were needed to calm the land.

These were false priests who
continued to preach unhindered, even though they were courtiers of Pharaoh and
brought strife instead of peace to the land of Egypt.

Clouds of dust and smoke darkened the sky and stained the waters they fell on with
a bloody hue.

There was suffering throughout the land of Egypt.

The rivers ran red
with blood, and blood was everywhere.

The water was foul, and people suffered from stomach ailments.

Those who drank
from the river vomited because the water was poisoned.

The dust caused wounds to
the skin of humans and animals.

The heat of the Destroyer stained the Earth red.

A multitude of repulsive creatures filled the air and the face of the earth.

Wild
beasts, tormented by the scorching sand and ashes, came out of their lairs in the
wastelands and caves and came to the dwellings of men.

All the domestic animals
bellowed, and the land was filled with the cries of sheep and the moans of cattle.

Trees throughout the land of Egypt were destroyed, and no grass or fruit could be
found.

The face of the land of Egypt was broken and devastated by a hail of stones, which
crushed everything in their path as they fell.

They rushed down in burning streams
and fell, and a strange slow fire ran after them on the ground.

Fish died in the poisoned waters.

Worms, insects, and reptiles came out of their earthly shelters in huge numbers.

Strong gusts of wind brought clouds of locusts that covered the sky.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Worms, insects, and reptiles came out of their earthly shelters in huge numbers. Strong gusts of wind brought clouds of locusts that covered the sky. As the Destroyer flew across the sky, strong gusts of wind scattered ashes across
the land of Egypt. The darkness of the long night obscured all lights. There was
not a ray of light. No one could distinguish between day and night, for there was
no shadow of the sun. The darkness was not the darkness of night, but a thick gloom
that made it difficult to breathe. People suffocated in the hot cloud of vapors
that enveloped the whole land of Egypt and extinguished all lamps and lights. People were paralyzed and lay moaning on their beds. No one spoke to each other or
touched their food. Everyone was broken with despair. Ships were thrown ashore far
from the docks and destroyed by huge whirlpools. It was a time of destruction. The
earth was turned upside down like clay on a potter's wheel. The whole earth was filled with the sound of the Destroyer's thunder coming from
above and the cries of the people. There were moans and complaints all around. The earth spewed forth its dead, embalmed corpses were thrown from their burial
places and were visible to all. Pregnant women had miscarriages, men lost their
seed. The master abandoned his craft, the potter abandoned his wheel, the carpenter
abandoned his tools, and they went to live in the swamps (to the east). Crafts
became unnecessary, and slaves lured the masters to them. It was impossible to collect tribute for Pharaoh, for there was no wheat, no
barley, no birds, and no fish. Pharaoh could not manage either the granaries or the
pastures. Both nobles and commoners begged for death to escape such a life and disorder and
the incessant roar that pounded in their ears. Fear

--- PAGE BREAK ---haunted people during the day and terror at night.

People went mad, they were
overwhelmed by what was happening.

During the long night of the Destroyer's wrath, when his anger was at its
strongest, there was a hail of stone blocks, and the earth swelled as if its
insides were aching.

The gates, walls, and columns (of temples) were destroyed by
fire, and the statues of the gods (Sages) were overthrown and destroyed.

People fled their homes in fear and were killed by the hail of stones.

Those who
found shelter from the hail were swallowed up by the earth as it opened up.

People's homes collapsed on those inside, and there was panic in every house.

But the slaves who lived in reed huts and dugouts survived.

The earth burned like
tinder, people ran out onto the roofs of houses, but Heaven hurled its wrath upon
them and they died.

The earth writhed under the wrath of the Destroyer and groaned
along with the torments of Egypt.

The temples and palaces of the nobility shook and
collapsed to the ground from their foundations.

Noble people perished among the ruins, and the whole land was struck.

Even
Pharaoh's adult firstborn son perished along with the courtiers amid the
destruction and falling stones.

The children of the nobility were thrown into the
streets, and those who were not thrown out perished in their homes.

There were nine days of darkness and upheaval, and during this time a storm raged
like never before.

When it was over, everywhere in the land of Egypt, brother
buried brother.

The people rose up against their rulers and fled the cities to live
in tents in the suburbs.

Egypt lacked people who could measure time.

The people were weakened by fear and
gave their slaves gold, silver, lapis lazuli, turquoise, and copper, and their
priests bowls, urns, and jewelry.

Only Pharaoh remained calm and strong amid this
chaos.

Weakness and despair made people angry.

Prostitutes walked the streets
shamelessly.Weakness and despair made people angry.

Prostitutes walked the streets
shamelessly.

Women flaunted themselves and showed off their nakedness.

Women of
noble birth walked around in rags, and commoners teased them.

The slaves who survived the wrath of the Destroyer hastily left the cursed land of
Egypt.

Many of them disappeared into the dawn twilight.

Under the cover of swirling
gray ash, they departed, leaving behind burned areas and destroyed cities.

Many
Egyptians joined the one who could rule them—the adopted son of Pharaoh.

Above the Egypt that had been abandoned by its enemies, the fire grew in strength.

It rose from the ground like a fountain and hung in the sky like a curtain.

After seven days, the accursed ones came to the waters.

They crossed the wild
mountain slopes, and the hills around them grew lower, with lightning
flashing in the sky above them.

Fear drove them, but their feet stumbled on the ground, and wild terrain surrounded
them.

They did not know the way, for there were no signs before them.

Before
reaching the place of Neshari, they turned and stopped at the place of Shokos, the
place of quarries.

They crossed the waters of Meya and arrived at the valley of
Picaros north of Mara.

They encountered waters that blocked their path, and their
hearts were in despair.

The night was a night of fear, for there were moans in the
heights and black winds of death blew, and fire arose from the earth.

The hearts of
the slaves were gripped with fear, for they knew that Pharaoh's wrath was following
them, and there was no way to escape it (because the slaves had stolen the Vedas).

They attacked those who had brought them there.

Strange rituals were performed that
night on the shore.

The slaves argued among themselves, and there was violence.

Pharaoh gathered his army and followed the slaves.

After he left, chaos ensued
behind him, as cities were looted.

Laws were thrown out of courtrooms and trampled
underfoot in the streets.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After he left, chaos ensued
behind him, as cities were looted. Laws were thrown out of courtrooms and trampled
underfoot in the streets. Warehouses and grain stores were broken into and
plundered. Roads

--- PAGE BREAK ---were flooded, and no one could show the way.

Dead bodies lay everywhere.

The palace was destroyed, and the courtiers and officials had fled, so there was no
one to rule.

Records were destroyed, public places were ruined, and households were
abandoned and lost their owners.

The pharaoh hurried forward, for behind him there was only devastation and death.

He encountered things he could not understand, and he was frightened.

But he
behaved well and bravely in front of his steward.

He sought to bring back the
slaves, for it was said that their magic was greater than the magic of Egypt.

Pharaoh's commander encountered the slaves on the seashore, but was stopped far
from them by a breath of fire.

A large cloud spread over the army, covering the
sky.

No one could see anything except the fiery heat and continuous lightning that
emanated from the cloud above.

A whirlwind arose in the east and swept across the Egyptian camp.

The storm raged
all night, and at red twilight, the earth moved, the waters receded from the coast,
and, lowering, exposed the bottom.

A strange silence fell, and in the darkness,
people noticed that the waters had parted, forming a passage.

Land appeared, but it was uneven and trembling, and the path was not straight and
clear.

The waters were like a whirlpool in a circle, only the swamp at the bottom
remained calm.

The high-pitched, piercing sound of the Destroyer's horn deafened the people.

The
slaves desperately made sacrifices, their moans loud.

What they saw made them
doubt, and they hesitated, stopping to catch their breath.

There was chaos
everywhere and the cries of some who rushed into the water, defying those who
wanted to flee back from the temporary dry land.

Still, many sought to return to
the Egyptians who were behind them, while others fled along the empty shores.

Everyone began to return across the sea to the shore, but behind them the earth
trembled and the rocks split from the loud rumbling.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Still, many sought to return to
the Egyptians who were behind them, while others fled along the empty shores. Everyone began to return across the sea to the shore, but behind them the earth
trembled and the rocks split from the loud rumbling. Then their leader stepped
forward and led them through the middle of the parted waters. The wrath of Heaven receded and hung over both rulers. Nevertheless, Pharaoh's
governor held his ranks with firm determination in the face of the unusual and
terrible events that raged on their side. Their stern faces were illuminated by a
gloomy, fiery veil. Suddenly, everything fell silent, and stillness spread across the land of Egypt. Pharaoh's steward stood motionless amid the red heat. Then the commanders
moved forward with shouts, followed by Pharaoh's steward. The curtain of fire rolled up into a dark, billowing cloud that rose like a
curtain. The waters raged, but the Egyptians followed the fugitives, bypassing the
large whirlpools. At the bottom of the passage that had formed, the water mixed
with the earth. Here, amid the roar of the waters, Pharaoh fought against the
rearmost of the slaves and defeated them, and there was a great slaughter among the
sand, the swamp, and the water. The slaves cried out in despair, but no one noticed their cries. They left their
possessions behind to make it easier to flee from their pursuers. And then the
stillness was broken by a mighty roar, and through the swirling pillars of cloud,
the wrath of the Destroyer fell upon the Egyptians. The heavens roared like a
thousand thunders, the bowels of the earth opened up, and the land of Egypt groaned
in agony. Rocks were shifted and destroyed. The land sank below the waters, and
great waves piled up on the shore, moving between the rocks from the sea. A great wall of stones and water crushed the chariots of the Egyptians who were
ahead of their servants. Pharaoh's chariot was thrown into the air as if by a
mighty handween the rocks from the sea. A great wall of stones and water crushed the chariots of the Egyptians who were
ahead of their servants. Pharaoh's chariot was thrown into the air as if by a
mighty hand

--- PAGE BREAK ---and he found himself defeated amid the turbulent waters.

The news of the disaster
was brought by Rajab, the son of Tom, who led the frightened survivors of the fiery
storm.

He brought the people the news that their ruler had been destroyed by the
explosion and the flood.

The military leaders departed, the strong men lost heart, and no one remained to
rule.

Therefore, the people rebelled because of the calamities that had befallen
them.

The cowards emerged from their hiding places and boldly advanced to take the
highest positions of those who had perished.

Beautiful and noble women, deprived of
their protectors, became their prey.

A large number of slaves perished at the hands
of Pharaoh's steward.

The ravaged land of Egypt lay helpless, and the invaders emerged from the darkness
like scavengers.

Unknown tribes moved on Egypt, and no one hindered them, for
strength and courage had disappeared.

Because of the wrath of Heaven that fell upon
the land of Egypt, invaders led by Elkanan came from the Land of the Gods (Asia).

Everywhere there were clouds of reptiles and ants, evil omens and earthquakes.

Everywhere there was panic and disaster, disorder and famine, and the gray breath
of the Destroyer, which enveloped the land of Egypt and stopped the breath of men.

Anturah gathered the remnants of his warriors and the warriors who remained in
Egypt and lined them up to meet the Children of Darkness who came from the
wilderness of the eastern mountains through Esnobis.

They attacked the ravaged
lands of Egypt from the gray darkness before dawn, before the cleansing winds blew.

Rajab went with Pharaoh and met the invaders at Heroshi, but the hearts of the
Egyptians were weary.

Their spirit was broken, and they were defeated before the
battle was lost.

Abandoned by the gods in Heaven and on Earth, with their homes
destroyed and their livelihoods ruined, they were as good as dead.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Their spirit was broken, and they were defeated before the
battle was lost. Abandoned by the gods in Heaven and on Earth, with their homes
destroyed and their livelihoods ruined, they were as good as dead. Their hearts
were still filled with fear and the memory of the wrath that had fallen upon them
from Heaven. They were still overwhelmed by the memory of the Destroyer's fearsome
appearance, and they did not know what to do. The Pharaoh did not return to his city. He had lost his inheritance and was
overcome with apathy for many days. His women had been dishonored and his property
plundered. The Children of Darkness defiled the Temples with animals and raped the
women, who were mad and did not resist. They captured all who remained—the old men,
the young men, and the boys. They mocked the people, finding pleasure in
humiliation and torture. The pharaoh abandoned his hopes and withdrew to a wild area near a lake located in
the west to the south. He lived a free life among the nomads of the sand and wrote
books. But even with the invaders, the time came when the ships sailed upstream (on
the Nile). The air cleared, the Breath of the Destroyer disappeared, and the earth was once
again covered with plants. Life was revived throughout the land of Egypt. Kair
taught these things to the Children of Light in the days of darkness, after the
construction of Rambidos, before the death of Pharaoh Enked. P.S. Russian Alphabet (49 letters):

--- PAGE BREAK ---1.

Az Gods Vedi 2.

Verb Good Is Is 3.

Live Zeal Earth 4.

Ize Izei Init Gerv 5.

Kako
People Think 6.

Our He Peace 7.

Rtsy Word Firm
8.

Uk Ouk Fert Her 9.

Oto Tsy Chervl 10.

Sha Shty Ero 11.

Ery Er Yatt
12.

Yun Ary Edo 13.

Om Eno Od 14.

Yo-ta O-ta Ksi Psi 15.

Fita Izhitsa Izha.

1.

The Gods of the Vedas gave to humans
2.

Do Good and live in Harmony, for this is the purpose of the human world.

3.

Eternal Life (Immortality) through knowledge of God is achieved in the world of
Yavi.

4.

Unity with God (Immortality) is the Truth, consisting of a multitude of
beautiful and unknown, but manifested things.

5.

How people will think (positively or negatively)
6.

Such will be the world of people (people themselves shape the events of
their lives with their thoughts).

7.

Carry the Word (Truth), affirm the Word (Truth) on Midgard-Earth.

8.

This message fills the noble heart with LadOm and Harmony.

9.

The Knowledge received depends on the definition of the Higher Purpose.

10.

The space of the world Yavi was created for creative
activity (creativity, labor).

11.

Unity with God (Immortality) is the highest Goal of human Life,
confirmed in Heaven.

12.

Only through knowledge of the unknown can the Warrior of Light know himself
and the World.

13.

Pure Mind is human nature; it is a Gift from God.

14.

Knowledge nourishes the Spirit and the Soul.

15.

One must achieve Unity with God (Immortality) within the allotted time.

The Book of Wisdom is based on the Ancient Sacred Texts (Vedas) and is dedicated
to the Ancient Faith of the Aryans.

For thousands of years, the Vedas have been the
bearers of the Aryan Faith: the Ancient Knowledge of God.

The Vedas say: ALL THAT
EXISTS came from a Single Immeasurable Source — the Independent Principle, the
First Cause of all things and all that exists, called the Great Ra-M-Ha.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For thousands of years, the Vedas have been the
bearers of the Aryan Faith: the Ancient Knowledge of God. The Vedas say: ALL THAT
EXISTS came from a Single Immeasurable Source — the Independent Principle, the
First Cause of all things and all that exists, called the Great Ra-M-Ha. The One
God-Creator of all that exists, the Great Ra-M-Ha, separated the dark particles of
Inglia from the light ones, thus creating Three Worlds: Prav (Light), Yavi (our
[Manifest] world) and Navi (Darkness). THE GREAT RA-M-HA - The Supreme Unknowable Essence, the One Creator God, the
Creator, radiating the Original Life-Giving Light of Joy (Love) and the Primary
Fire of the Universe - Inglia. INGLIA: The Primary Life-Giving Fire of the Universe - the Life-Giving Energy from
which all currently existing, as well as past visible and invisible Universes and
all kinds of Worlds inhabited by various intelligent beings came into being. FAITH: VE (Knowledge) is Knowledge; RA (Highest Light) is Shining (Highest)
Wisdom. Faith is the Knowledge of the Highest Wisdom, i.e., God. CULTURE: The cult of RA (Light). ARIUS: a person who is in Spiritual Unity with God (the Creator) — this is God (an
Angel) incarnated in a human body, knowing (aware of) the Truth on a universal
scale and the Truth of the World of people. PASCHET (Easter) is the day of remembrance of the 15-year TRANSITION (migration)
of our Great Ancestors (Arians) from Daaria (Hyperborea) to Asia (Holy Rus). ASIA is the land of the Gods. In ancient times, Asia occupied the lands of the
modern continent of Eurasia and was called the land of the Holy Race or the land of
the ASes (Gods). Asia was also called the land of the Great Race (RUSA MIGHTY) and
Holy Rus.

--- PAGE BREAK ---RUSA MIGHTY - 1) descendants of the Aryans; 2) Rasseni (sons of Rasa/Sara)
- [P], Aryans - [A], Holy Rus (Light Rus) - [C], Kh'Aryans - [A] - abbreviation
[P][A][C][A].

GREAT: because with the courage of its fearless Warriors and the best
weapons in the world, it kept the whole Earth in obedience and submission for
millennia!

RUSSIAN (RUS-SK-IY): RUS (descendant of the Great Race) - SK/ASK (human-God) - I
(Knowing the Truth of the world Yavi) - Y (Knowing the Truth of the 3 Worlds
[God]).

Since ancient times, the Rus people have inhabited Asia - the land of the
Gods.

Russian people should know that all people are brothers and sisters (spiritually).

We are all equal, we all have equal rights and the same responsibilities.

We are
all children of the One and Many God - the Great Ra-M-Ha.

Gods (angels), humans,
and the universe are interconnected parts of Unity with God (the Great Ra-M-Ha).

Unity with God is the highest goal of life for a Russian person.

The Russian faith
is the recognition that God (the Great Ra-M-Ha) is the foundation of the entire
universe and the awareness of the existence of a single life, of which all gods
(angels) and people are particles.

A Russian person is someone who sincerely believes in God (the Great Ra-M-Ha),
observes His Commandments — the prescriptions of the Vedas — prays to God on
their knees (for Angels fall prostrate when they praise the Creator) with their
head facing North (Darya): at dawn, after noon, and at sunset, and one should
also praise God (pray) before eating and after eating.

A Russian person should
not eat meat, for meat makes one savage.

PROHIBITED: animal meat (especially pork), carrion (rotten meat), blood, food with
blood, and anything for which thanks (praise) to God has not been given.

It is forbidden to consume alcohol and drugs.

Cannabis (marijuana) is not a drug.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is forbidden to consume alcohol and drugs. Cannabis (marijuana) is not a drug. A
Russian person does good deeds for others (selflessly helping those in need); works
(i.e., creates, because he is part of the Creator) for the benefit of the Nation
(the people) and observes FASTING. FASTING is a ritual of purification of the body and Spirit (Mind) of a person:
Complete Purification of One's Own Body. Fasting is VOLUNTARY abstinence from food. During Fasting, during the daytime, from sunrise to sunset, it is necessary to
refrain from eating, drink only water, and avoid intimate relations. At night, from
sunset to sunrise, the prohibitions are lifted. Abstinence begins at dawn and ends
at sunset. There are four fasts in Russia: two long fasts lasting 18 days and two
short fasts lasting nine days. The long fasts begin 18 days before the Spring and
Autumn Equinox holidays (March and September). The minor fasts begin nine days
before the summer and winter solstices (June and December). For example, if the
summer solstice falls on June 20, then the minor fast (nine days) begins at dawn on
June 11 and ends at sunset on June 20. The Essence of the Russian Faith
I believe in Almighty God — the Great Ra-M-Ha, the One and
Many-Manifested. He is the Source of all that exists and
sustains, the Eternal Spring of all things. I know that the Universe is the Great Ra-M-Ha. and all the many-named Gods and Ancestors are one in Him. I believe in the Unity of being
Prav, Yavi, and Navi, and that Prav
is true

--- PAGE BREAK ---know that the Universe is the Great Ra-M-Ha. and all the many-named Gods and Ancestors are one in Him. I believe in the Unity of being
Prav, Yavi, and Navi, and that Prav
is true

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and has been recounted by our Forefathers.
I know that Prav is with
us, and we do not fear
Navi,
for Nav has no power against us.
I know that life in Prav is eternal,
and people must care for the eternal,
walking the path of Prav.
I believe in the Power and Wisdom of
the Ancestors, which is reborn among
us, leading to goodness through our
Prophets.
I know that Strength lies in the Unity of the Great
Race, and that we will become glorious, glorifying
our Native God!
Praise to the Great Ra-M-Ha! Now,
forever and ever! Aum.
The Foundations of the Russian Faith:
1. Enlightenment - the first foundation states that a person must study
the Holy Scriptures and Holy Traditions, the Wisdom of the Ancestors, and
the Wisdom of other peoples. Fill your life with Holiness and good deeds
for the glory of God and the Ancestors of your Family.
2. Spirituality - the second foundation tells us that every person should
develop their spiritual side of life and bring other people closer to
spirituality.
3. Compassion, the third foundation, tells us that every person should have
compassion for all living things (including the Earth, plants, animals, birds,
insects, aquatic life, etc.) created by God.
4. Repentance - the fourth foundation tells us that every person must realize
their sins and repent for them, because only then can they find inner peace.
Repentance leads to harmony (balance) of the body, Soul, and Spirit.
5. Patience - the fifth foundation tells us that a person must be patient and
understanding towards the actions of others, for every person is free, but their
personal freedom ends where another person's freedom begins. No personal freedom
can be above the Laws of God.
6. Peacefulness - the sixth foundation tells us that we must show peacefulness to
all kinds of people, but at the same time not spare the lives of enemies who come
to our lands with evil intentions and weapons (including false information, drugs,
money, etc., for all these are weapons of enslavement).
7. Love for one's neighbor - the seventh principle tells us that we must treat
people and all living things created by God with love and kindness, as well as the
memory of our ancestors and the heritage of the human race.
8. Trial - the eighth foundation tells us that in order to reach Heavenly
Viriya and Heavenly Asgard, we must follow the path of Spiritual Perfection.
And trials in our lives are given to us in order to test and strengthen our
Spiritual Powers.in order to reach Heavenly
Viriya and Heavenly Asgard, we must follow the path of Spiritual Perfection.
And trials in our lives are given to us in order to test and strengthen our
Spiritual Powers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---9.

Purposefulness - the ninth foundation tells us that everything in life and
life itself has its own meaning, its own purpose, its own goal, and every person
must strive toward their goal in order to fulfill their destiny and for their life
to attain the Highest Spiritual meaning.

The Steps of the Russian Faith
Any system of religious belief is based on the gradual ascent of a person through
the steps of spiritual development in the World of Yavi, called the Steps of Faith,
and further progress along the Golden Path of spiritual development and improvement
towards Svarog.

The most important thing for a person is not to get hung up on themselves, their
feelings, and their reasoning.

At the very beginning of their ascent up the Steps of Faith, people mainly listen
only to themselves, indulging their desires and whims, but the higher they climb
the steps of Spiritual Development, the less they listen to their mind, their
desires, and their feelings, and the more they begin to listen to their inner voice
and the surrounding world of Nature.

Therefore, the most important thing for a
person's Spiritual Development is to learn to see and listen to the surrounding
external world.

When a person learns to listen to their inner voice and see the
external world, the external world will reveal Spiritual qualities in them that
they never even suspected they had.

Following the harmonious development of the
surrounding world through the Steps of Faith, acting and creating for the benefit
of the surrounding world with Love in your Heart, is called following Destiny.

For their spiritual development, the younger generation of the Race's Clans
ascended the Three Steps of Faith, completing 9 Lessons.

Ascension to the First Step of Russian Faith.

1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ascension to the First Step of Russian Faith. 1. The first lesson of climbing the steps of spiritual development begins with
inner silence, i.e., when a person stops listening to themselves and opens their
ears and eyes to the world around them, thereby beginning to perceive all the
diversity of life, the diversity of colors and sounds of the surrounding world. 2. The second lesson begins with a person looking deep within themselves to see
all the diversity of colors and sounds inside themselves, as well as to experience
the Ancient Wisdom that they received at birth. The key to this great treasure
trove of Wisdom is known to every person from the Races of the Human Race; it is
contained in the Vedas and in the ancient instruction: "Go there, not knowing
where, and you will learn what is unknown to you."
3. The Third Lesson begins with comparisons of the diversity that exists outside
and the diversity that exists inside, and the realization of the Unity of all these
images and diversities provides the key to understanding that man is an integral
part of God, and God and the Universe are an integral part of man. The first three Lessons help a person climb the first step of the ladder of
Spiritual development, while a person should not perceive themselves as an
inseparable slave part of anything or anyone, but should perceive themselves as a
full-fledged and full-blooded particle of God, the Universe, capable of
independently creating new Universes. In order to ascend to the Second Step of Faith, one must master the first three
Lessons perfectly, then the next three Lessons. Ascending to the Second Step of Russian Faith.

--- PAGE BREAK ---4.

The Fourth Lesson reveals to a person that greatness can be found in small
things, and small things can be found in greatness.

This Lesson begins with
complete relaxation and concentration on one's external image.

After that, the created image recedes at such a speed that the city, country,
Earth, solar system, galaxy, etc.

disappear from view.

5.

The fifth lesson is a continuation of the fourth, but with a visual deepening
into oneself.

An organ, cell, molecule, nucleus, etc., approaches the gaze until it
reaches the Energon (atom).

6.

The sixth lesson is called "Two Hands." This is because we focus the entire
image of the microcosm on the palm of our left hand, and the entire image of the
macrocosm on the palm of our right hand.

By joining the two palms together, we
unite these two Images into a Single Image.

(Imagine that the Sun is the nucleus of
an atom, and the planets of the Solar System are electrons moving in their orbits.)
Ascension to the Third Step of the Russian Faith.

7.

The Seventh Lesson helps a person perceive the Images of the Ancient Runes
(Vedas) inscribed in the Santyas and Haratyas, helps to understand them and bring
these Images to life through the Living Word.

8.

The Eighth Lesson informs human consciousness that the Ancient Image, which
conveys Knowledge about the Living structure of the Universes described in the
Vedas, cannot be reduced to the modern criteria of existing science, since modern
scientific thought is degenerate and backward in relation to the Ancient Wisdom
preserved in the Vedas.

9.

The Ninth Lesson gives a person the opportunity to realize the previous
eight Lessons as a Single Image.

Those who realize the Single Image will open
the Spiritual Eye of Knowledge within themselves, which will help a person
achieve Immortality.

When a person figuratively imagines an event or an action, he thereby creates a
new Image in his Reality, which will exist forever.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Those who realize the Single Image will open
the Spiritual Eye of Knowledge within themselves, which will help a person
achieve Immortality. When a person figuratively imagines an event or an action, he thereby creates a
new Image in his Reality, which will exist forever. In the Manifest World, all of
that person's ideas and dreams are embodied. And in the process of Spiritual ascent
through the Steps of Faith, a person increases and develops the form of existence
of this World, and after death, they become the Creator of a new Reality. The more
harmonious the newly created Reality is and the more it is filled with Love and
Creation, the more harmonious the World on the Golden Path of Spiritual Development
a person enters after death. The basis for the Ninth Lesson: people should never create dark, hellish, and
chaotic images, i.e., images in which evil and cruelty, parasitism and idleness,
hatred and selfishness, bloodshed and violence, lies and deceit, fear and unbelief
are manifested. The most important thing is not to create dark final forms and
types of existence for the new reality, because the latter can destroy not only the
newly created reality, but also the very person who created such a Dark World. When a person completes all the lessons and climbs to the very top of the steps of
Faith, they will attain Immortality — which is the Highest Goal for a person. The Keys of the Ancients
Using the same words, people can mean different things, so in order to return to
the source, we need to restore the original images that the Ancients put into these
words...

--- PAGE BREAK ---It is not worth helping if you are not asked for help, but it is also not worth
sitting idly by...

Knowledge of the images hidden in ancient forms of writing is the key to restoring
imaginative thinking, imaginative thinking is the key to ancestral memory,
Ancestral memory is the key to understanding oneself, understanding oneself is the
key to understanding one's destiny, understanding one's destiny is the path to God,
the path to God is the White Path...

Ignorance and unawareness are the key to the loss of imaginative thinking, the loss
of imaginative thinking leads to the filling of the voids of consciousness with
alien images, alien images are not perceived by the Soul and the meaning of life is
lost, the meaning of life is lost - Death appears, Death appears - a person
perishes, and the Soul, filled with foreign images, goes to the Dark Worlds of Navi
for purification, taking the Spirit with it - this is the Dark Path...

The whole diverse World opens up to those who know...

A child is born to be
raised by parents.

If there are no children, it means that the parents are not
developed enough for such upbringing...

The will of God extends to the entire World, the will of man extends to the layer
of the World that he is capable of embracing...

The difference between a saint and a sinner is that a saint knows who he is, but a
sinner does not...

The difference between a wise man and a fool is that the former walks the path,
while the latter searches for it...

The wisdom accumulated and everything done with one's own hands remains with a
person forever...

Those who know the foundation will be able to see what is changing, while those who
know what is changing may not see the foundation...

To find a way out of a vicious circle, you need to step aside...

If you want
to remove the burden from your soul, see this burden and release it in a
soulful conversation...--- PAGE BREAK ---

To find a way out of a vicious circle, you need to step aside... If you want
to remove the burden from your soul, see this burden and release it in a
soulful conversation... The limits of human perception lie where the unknown begins, and internal
contradictions serve as harbingers of these limits... It is not the masks that should be removed, but that which prevents us from using
them consciously... The dark path: divide and rule... The light path: unite and be
well... The dark path: anyone but me! The light path: who, if not me?... You should give gifts to others because, in essence, you are giving a gift to
yourself... Those who do not walk toward the light gradually sink into
darkness... Do not demand from others what you yourself do not do... Allow a flower to bloom before picking it, and when you pick it, do not regret what
you have done... By learning, a person learns to create; by not learning, a person learns to
destroy... The concepts of GOOD and BAD are relative and individual; what is good for one
person may be bad for another, and vice versa... A person calls good what he accepts, what brings him pleasure... A person calls bad what they do not accept, what brings disappointment... Starting from little, a person arrives at little... It doesn't matter who you were before, but it matters who you are now, at this
moment...

--- PAGE BREAK ---Living constantly in the past or future, a person gradually ceases to live in the
present moment, immersing themselves in the world of their own experiences...

Not everything that is offered should be consumed...

In each case, one should act according to the situation...

In life, we learn
to do things...

You can harmoniously influence a community or a specific person through the EXAMPLE
of your own actions and judgments, and then the Soul, dwelling in darkness (with an
untuned filter (mind), and further closed off by distorted images of worldview),
will itself be drawn to the light that you yourself will be for it.

But for this,
you yourself must become the light...

Another way is through forceful influence.

To do this, you need to create a mental
image of a sober person or a sober Russia (it must be carefully worked out in
detail) and play it over and over again in your own mind as often as possible.

This
will create a ripple effect, and your personal consciousness will begin to
penetrate the public consciousness, gradually changing it.

And here it all depends
on the strength you put into these images...

To be happy, find and describe in words what makes you unhappy...

There is no need to impose on others what you find interesting, because everyone
has different interests...

A leader is not someone who elevates themselves above others, but someone who knows
how to take responsibility for others and create images of beginnings...

Understanding is only possible when using figurative thinking...

Emotions are
just ill-conceived images in a person's mind...

Everything that comes from the surrounding world is a key to self-knowledge...

Once, a lazy person settled in with me and said that thinking and contemplation are
types of action.

I began to doubt this when I noticed the dirt and obvious mess
that was taking over my home...

One should not treat lightly what should be treated seriously.

One should not treat
seriously what should be treated lightly...--- PAGE BREAK ---

One should not treat lightly what should be treated seriously. One should not treat
seriously what should be treated lightly... A place stores all the images that come into contact with it, whether they are
images of action or images of thought... The earth cannot feed 6 billion civilized slackers and parasites... A person cannot help someone who does not ask for help... As or God can help
someone who does not ask for help... Accumulated wisdom and everything done with one's own hands remains with a person
forever... Let go of the desire to prove yourself... The best way to fight evil is to stop doing evil yourself... Above all, among
those striving for the summit of the Spirit, inner peace is valued... For things to go well, you need to start living by them... Light
and Darkness are directions for the movement of the Spirit... The most evil dream that an ignorant child of God can follow is the dream of making
the world a better place... In all your deeds and thoughts, you should seek the golden mean... No one but
you will do what you need to do... Outer beauty is a reflection of inner beauty... Life educates us constantly and continues to do so even when it seems to some that
it is too late to educate...

--- PAGE BREAK ---Every destiny and every event in it is unique, and what happened to one person will
never happen to another...

In the World of Yavi, only those who follow their own path, relying on the keys
left by their Gods and Ancestors in all their endeavors and deeds, gain strength
and Wisdom...

Beauty should never leave a person's surroundings...

A heartfelt conversation is a conversation of Souls.

One Soul tells itself to
another Soul...

In the turbulent ocean of life, one must not lose oneself...

Teach your children to seek Wisdom before teaching them to wield Power, because a
powerful child without Wisdom is a weapon in the hands of others...

God has amazing abilities — not to see himself...

not to believe in himself...

not
to trust himself...

not to hear himself...

Laziness is not a cause...

Laziness is a consequence of following a dream (goal)
that is alien to oneself or the loss of it...

The ability to embody natural movement is an indicator of perfection in any
endeavor...

One of the reasons for leaving a harmonious state is the elevation or humiliation
of oneself...

Teach by doing, not by imposing, without wanting to impose...

Dark people are afraid of losing confidence that their views can explain
everything, so they listen to no one but themselves...

To climb to the next step of development, replace the desire to believe with the
desire to know...

To do any task, enter a state that is completely appropriate for
that task...

If you want to convey knowledge, convey your inner state that corresponds to this
knowledge...

Your inner state is what others feel when they look at you; it is their first
impression of you; it is the embodiment of your Soul...

Fear is a protective image created by the essence when it refuses to accept
something new into its individual consciousness...

God is a very strict teacher; he spares no one, as life shows, but everything he
does is for the best...

Do not teach what you yourself have not experienced...--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is a very strict teacher; he spares no one, as life shows, but everything he
does is for the best... Do not teach what you yourself have not experienced... Once you have firmly decided to embark on the path of spiritual development, know
that there is no turning back for you, and attempts to return to your previous
state will simply throw your soul into the Dark Nav exactly as much as you were
able to develop it on the path to the Light... You have to pay for everything, but not everything with money... On the path to yourself, do not forget to listen to others... People see what they want to see. People see what they can see. People see what
corresponds to their inner World... People also notice other things, perceiving
them as exceptions to the rules, not understanding that they themselves created
these rules in their own consciousness... The education of a child should proceed from complex to simple, so that when
studying the simple, the mind already has a complete picture of what is being
discussed... The spoken word interacts with the surrounding world and influences it in the
original way that it contains within itself, and in the thought form that the
speaker of the word intended...

--- PAGE BREAK ---n word interacts with the surrounding world and influences it in the
original way that it contains within itself, and in the thought form that the
speaker of the word intended...

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A state of inner harmony is achieved through the unity of thoughts, words, and
deeds, so thoughts must coincide with words and be embodied in deeds...
The White Path
Only a return to one's ancient roots helps the human soul return to the White
Path.
People walk the path of their lives
And do not know why they were born?
Why God sent them into the world,
What is the purpose of life and what comes
after it? Where will this path of life lead
them, To the White Light or to Darkness?
Such thoughts do not leave people,
From birth to death.
And these thoughts are not surprising
at all, For now is the time of
Darkness.
The time of Darkness is not outside,
But lies in the hearts of men. And
if anyone forgets his God, Darkness
will fall upon his soul.
And no one, except for humans themselves,
Is able to dispel the Darkness.
And until people experience the Light, And
follow it along the White Path, Until that
very moment, this Darkness
Will live in human hearts.
For the most evil enemies of humans dwell
in their hearts and souls. And only humans,
through their actions directed toward
good,
Can tear out of themselves all the evil
That has settled in their souls and hearts.
Laziness and gluttony, drunkenness and covetousness
cloud the entire human mind.
And people no longer see the White Path,
but wander aimlessly through the world.
And all their searches are in vain, for
behold, the Cold of Darkness has bound
their Hearts and Souls.
Great Despair and mortal Longing Begin to
gnaw at people from within. Only Faith and
Repentance
Can help them return to the White Path.
The Lord begets the Souls of men,
Granting them Great Wisdom for life. Souls fly
swiftly
To the blossoming Earth.
Souls choose their families for life,

--- PAGE BREAK ---return to the White Path.
The Lord begets the Souls of men,
Granting them Great Wisdom for life. Souls fly
swiftly
To the blossoming Earth.
Souls choose their families for life,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In order to be born into those families.
And to be under the supervision of God the
Guardian, Whose protection guards the Soul and
Decides the Soul's Destiny.
The Lord bestows a strong Conscience. The
birth of Souls leads to Creation,
And gives Aspiration to Spiritual life.
Knowledge of the Earthly World,
For mankind begins with Ancient Wisdom. This
wisdom is not applied, it is eternal,
It has its roots in the beginning.
But only God guides everyone toward the
future, Toward the White Path.
Different peoples have their own Path-
Destiny And in different Worlds they await
their return. For the Great Race, the White
Path is prepared And only it ascends along
it.
To glorious worlds filled with light
To worlds where descendants are met by their ancestors.
The connection between the worlds is unbreakable,
And the primordial Light was given to them
from the beginning. Souls strive for it
from birth,
But not every soul reaches those worlds. For
the dark forces, from the primordial worlds,
Seek to lure all souls into their hell.
With injustice and flattery, drunkenness and
lust They try to fill Souls every day. So
that Souls would lose their way and wander in
Darkness, And not find their cherished White
Path.
And this path is not easy; it is renowned for its
diligence, creative labor, and faith.
Everyone who is born begins to create
their own world.
In childhood, it is a hut made of tree
branches, Or a sand castle on the
riverbank. And later, according to God's
Will,
they begin to create for the good of people.
Only through labor, creating only goodness, does
the Born White Path find itself.
Walking the White Path, he listens to his
conscience, And God guides him in every way.
From the elders he learns all the Wisdom
That God has placed in his Soul.
Only after learning Wisdom and strengthening his
body Does he begin to create a family union.
Love, Joy, Happiness, and Faith in Godelders he learns all the Wisdom
That God has placed in his Soul.
Only after learning Wisdom and strengthening his
body Does he begin to create a family union.
Love, Joy, Happiness, and Faith in God

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Wisdom
That God has placed in his Soul.
Only after learning Wisdom and strengthening his
body Does he begin to create a family union.
Love, Joy, Happiness, and Faith in God

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Grant offspring in the family union. God
fills children with the Light of Wisdom.
Parents teach the Purest View.
With which they embrace this beautiful
world And know the secret Meaning of
the Universe.
This reveals in those born the Light of
Power, Which illuminates the White Path of
Ascent.
From this world, he enters the Heavenly Svarog,
Where his ancestors will joyfully welcome him.
And there he will continue the creation That he
began in this World.
But all the Dark Worlds dislike the
foundations Upon which all those born in the
Light live. They dislike the White Path of
Ascent, And black Envy clouds their entire
gaze.
It is hard and cramped for them in that
Hellish World, Where Greed and Malice are
legalized everywhere. There is no Love,
Prosperity, or Happiness there, Only
Selfishness and the pursuit of Profit.
Coveting what belongs to others, Deception,
and Debauchery are the only meaning of life
in Hell.
They do not know in that world, that life
without malice, That only Creation grants a
way out.
And they leave their Hell, the Dark Forces,
Their gaze fixed on the Light Worlds. Where
the bowels of the Earth are filled with
riches, And the inhabitants there have
never known Lies or Deception.
And they rush across the boundless expanses,
And secretly arrive on the flourishing
Earth. Using lies and very flattering words,
They gain the trust of the inhabitants.
As soon as they gain the trust of the
inhabitants, they begin to comprehend their
ancient heritage.
Having learned everything they can about the
ancient heritage, they begin to interpret it
to their advantage.
They declare themselves to be messengers
of God, but they bring only strife and war
to the world. Using cunning and wicked
deeds, they turn young people away from
wisdom.
They teach them to live in idle idleness,
to disregard the traditions of their
fathers.
And those who listen to the messengers
from Hell lose their way and their
immortal souls. They wander aimlessly in
their world, but then they cast their
souls into Hell...
Only those who did not listen to the hypocrites from Hellngers
from Hell lose their way and their
immortal souls. They wander aimlessly in
their world, but then they cast their
souls into Hell...
Only those who did not listen to the hypocrites from Hell

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Will see the White Path.
Those who walk in darkness dwell in
darkness; those who strive for light will
know light. Every living being chooses
their own path; through their deeds, they
open the gates.
To some, Veles will open the Gates to
Svarog, To others, Viy will show the way
to Hell. Only those who live by God's
foundation Are helped in every way by all
the Light Gods...
And humans invariably move to Svarog, along the
White Path, according to God's Laws.
Their conscience helps them walk this
Path, guiding them to accomplish deeds.
For the glory of the Clan, for the
greatness of the Fatherland,
And it turns them away from all unseemly
deeds. All the ancestors of the Clan help
those who walk,
So that their ancestral line is not broken.
There are no paths beyond the mortal realm
For those who were born under the light of
the Sun. And therefore, only the Great Ra-M-
Ha will show a person the White Path!
"I will praise the Most High in my life, I will pray to my God as long as I live."
PRAYER:
O Great Ra-M-Ha,
You are One and Many, You are my
Light and Justice, You are the
Source of Eternal Life, the Source
of Boundless Love, the One who
heals the Soul and body. I praise
You, Almighty God,
And every day I work on my Soul, To be
Wise and Strong, A strong support for
Holy Russia
And a defender of my Ancient Lineage. I
praise You, Almighty God,
For You give me Inspiration and Joy, You give me
Courage and Fortitude,
You give me Knowledge and teach me Patience, So
that I may walk the Path of Life with Honor,
Inspiredly fulfilling Your Holy Will.
Prayer:
Almighty God, be merciful to me and forgive all my sins and misdeeds, cleanse me
from ignorance and delusion, and grant me Your Light and Radiance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---filling Your Holy Will.
Prayer:
Almighty God, be merciful to me and forgive all my sins and misdeeds, cleanse me
from ignorance and delusion, and grant me Your Light and Radiance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Prophecy of AdoniRama
Listen, my son! A son will be born to you whom you will not see, and he will
produce countless offspring (a race) from you. And your race will be immeasurably
superior to that race, but that race will subjugate your race under its feet. And
for many centuries, your noble family will devote all its courage and genius to the
benefit of an ungrateful and senseless race. But the day will come when the best
and strongest of your family will appear and restore the Faith of the Lord of the
Universe. Your children, united under the name of God, will shatter the power of
earthly kings like a clay vessel, for they are representatives of the tyranny of
evil on Earth. Go now according to your destiny, My son, and may the Geniuses of
Fire (the Gods of Inglia) be with you!
Abraham, he is also God Rama, God Brahma, Abraham, God Bor (Bor), God Rod...
Abraham was from the Three-Moon Clan (the Ancient Aryan Clan), his wife was named
Sarah, she was also the Goddess Makosh, the Divine Maiden SarahSwati (ApSara), the
Goddess Lada, the Goddess Bestla (Vesta)... Abraham had a son, Ishmael, by the
Egyptian woman Hagar, and a son, Isaac (Isa[Asia] Ak[God]), by Sarah, who was also
the god Svarog, the god Gor, the god Odin (Wotan), the sage Pulastya... Isaac had
two sons:
1- Esau (Vasily), also known as the god Veles (Volos), the god Thor (Perun), the god
DonAR...
2- j: Jacob (Yakov), also known as Loki (Kali)...
Epochs of humanity:
• Wolf 2012—3632 AD (7520-9140 Summer from S.M.Z.H.).
• 7527 Summer since the Creation of the World in the Star Temple (5508 years BC).
• 13027 summers since the Great Frost (11,008 years BC).
• 40023 summers since the 3rd arrival of the White Man of the God Perun (38,004
years BC).
• 44,563 summers since the Creation of the Great Circle of Rasseniya (42,544 years
BC).
• 106,797 summers since the founding of Asgard (104,778 years BC).
• 111,825 summers since the Great Migration from Daaria (Hyperborea) (109,806
years BC).
• 143,090 Summers from the Three Moons period (140,990 years BC).
• 153,385 summers from Assa Dei (151,336 years BC).
• 165,049 summers from the Time of Tara (163,030 years BC).
• 185,785 summers from the Time of Tule (183,766 years BC).
• 211,705 summers from the Time of Svaga (209,686 years BC).
• 273,916 years from the Time of H'Arra (271,894 years BC).
• 460,537 summers from the Time of Dara (458,518 years BC).
• 604,393 summers since the Time of the Three Suns (beginning
of the Da'Arian calendar) (602,374 summers before Christ).
• 957,527 years since the Time of the Appearance of the Gods (955,508 years BC).
• 1.5 billion years ago - the beginning of the calendar: Summer from the
arrival of the first Vaitmara Gods on Midgard (Earth).
Author unknown.