July 25, 1978


Dear Harold,

Thanks for your letters of 7/14, 7/15, and 7/20. I don't have much
to report; everyone here Is recovering from a cold.

The Dallas documents are interesting. Enclosed is my listing. As we
agreed, I'm keeping fckx this all totally confidential for kw now.

I don't think I have much to contribute in the way of analysis of these
documents. I'm surprised that some of them (// 2, #15) aren't in the HQ files-
may e they are. In #18, re Jim Bishop, the file dex category 80 indicates
S&uibiex 'Public Relations matters.” In #19, the name of the author, a SA
is deleted, but apparently his initials (FVC) are not.

Also enclosed: a list of Dallas and N.O. file numbers which might be
relevant. Plus, a couple of clippings (one about a FOIA suit against the
SS, presumably by a Webermarr crony, which I hadn't heard of), and pp. 26-27
of my "Epstein" notes.

I don't recall whether I mentioned this before, but I don't think it would
be worth going to the effort of copying a lot of the inventory worksheets for
me now - at least until I'vea seen a few of them, and can tell if they are
all aw worth getting. Hopefully I'll be able to see you in September, if I
do make it there for the hearings, and we can work some further arrangements
out then.

You asked if I have made a FOIA-PA request for records on me. Yes but
they managed to interpret it very narrowly, sending me only the two items which
kx± contained background info on me. I've written back, asking for at least
citations to all serials indexed to me, but I haven't heard yet.

You sent me a classified ad from "Seven Days" for a JFK documentary on the
tramps. Hunt & Sturgis, etc., which originated in S.F. This is almost certainly
from Paul Kangas, whom I have met a couple of times. He is quite sincere and
a rather nice guy, but the Hunt-Sturgis stuff is, of course, loony. (The’
differences between the tramp photos and the Hunt-Sturgis photos are accounted
or by retouching. With that approach, you can't lose!) I've stayed away from
him as much as possible. He represents an offshoot of an wal offshoot of the
Weberaan people.

If you want a summary on "D" for use in court, I fcih think what's in the WR
is as good as anything I could provide. (If necessary, supplemented by pp. 28-30
and 41-43 of the Schweiker Report.)

You asked If I knew of a 4-volume Gemberling report of 5/16/64, i2 Sfc 1266 pp
This sounds link like CD 1107, dated 5/15, which goes through p. 1266*.

The name Mark Allen gave you re Mexico CIA, Tarrascoft, rings no bells with me.

The 130 pp. of pre-ass 'n documents I allegedly got are in fact- 64 pre-ass'n
pages (18 new, the rest published or released long ago), piys plus some post-ass'n
stuff, as described in the list 1 sent you earlier (PLH FBI documents #490-526).

The JDs cover letter made no reference to a specific request of mine (in fact,

I hadn't formally requested the post-ass'n stuff). It doesn't even describe the
records sent, but i* if you still think you can use it, I'll send a copy.

f think if Guinn's NAA work had been able to dixx disprove the single bullet
theory, we would have ha heard about it by now. I'm a bit concerned that the HSC
didn't give him the mandate, or the material, to do proper control studies - for
which you need qHKa quite a few bullets from the same lots as "Oswald's."

M JKKXIHK [Re those 132 pp. from the FBI: on 5/17, McCreight wrote, saying
"Reference is made to your RHI FOIPA requests for information pertaining to LHO
in the investigative files maintained at FBIHQ. The records which you requested
have been processed, and the documents are available for release."... Send $13.20.
[Obviously, it's only part of what I requested!] The cover note with the documents
themselves said "The enclosed documents are copies from the files maintained at
FBIHQ... captioned (1) LHO, (2) Funds Transmitted to Residents of Russia and (3) FPCC."]

Best, regards ,

ftlJ

PLH
