C H A P T E R
5
Principles of Counterdeception
Chapters 1 through 4 provided a general introduction to deception by describing its
increasing role in the global security environment, the various models and theories
that have been developed in order to describe and understand it, the various biases
that contribute to its seemingly almost certain success, and the variety of technical
and nontechnical methods that support the conduct of deception operations. We
also proposed that there are four fundamental principles that form the foundation
for the different models and methods of strategic deception. Now, we turn our
attention to the topic of counterdeception and attempt to answer several questions.
What is counterdeception? What guidance can be found in the literature for coun-
tering deception? Is there a corresponding set of fundamental principles of
counterdeception that can guide analysts and decision-makers? What can be done
to overcome the various biases that we saw contribute to deception’s success? What
technical and nontechnical means can be employed to counter strategic and tactical
deception operations? And, perhaps the most intriguing question of all: Is Barton
Whaley right? Is deception almost always successful as the historical evidence
implies? This chapter addresses the first three of these questions. After defining
what we mean by counterdeception, we will examine the variety of models, con-
cepts, and approaches found in the literature related to counterdeception in the
national security context. We will then examine the common themes that emerge
from this work, and derive a set of basic principles of counterdeception.
5.1
What Is Counterdeception?
The U.S. Department of Defense [1] defines counterdeception as: “Efforts to negate,
neutralize, diminish the effects of, or gain advantage from a foreign deception oper-
ation. Counterdeception does not include the intelligence function of identifying
foreign deception operations.” This is an operationally oriented definition that
emphasizes mitigating deception’s effects (like surprise) and exploiting knowledge
of the adversary’s deception. Our focus will be primarily on the intelligence func-
tion part of that definition, but the concept of counterdeception goes beyond
just “identifying foreign deception operations.” We believe that the purpose of
counterdeception is to find the answers to two fundamental and highly interdepen-
dent questions. First, counterdeception must make it possible for analysts and
decision-makers to penetrate through the deception to discern the adversary’s real
capabilities and intentions, in other words, to answer the question: What is real?
Simultaneously, analysts and decision-makers must determine what the adversary is
trying to make them believe in order to consider the second question: What does the
143er the question: What is real?
Simultaneously, analysts and decision-makers must determine what the adversary is
trying to make them believe in order to consider the second question: What does the
143

--- PAGE BREAK ---adversary want you to do?

The answers to these two questions are absolutely
essential to the success of one’s own strategies, policies, and operations.

The intelligence aspects of counterdeception are aimed at detecting, characteriz-
ing, and penetrating foreign deception operations.

It is important to keep in mind
that there is no sharp demarcation line between normal intelligence activities and
counterdeception intelligence activities.

This is because no such line exists between
the adversary’s normal security activities and his calculated deception operations.

Although large, sophisticated deception operations (like Plan FORTITUDE in
World War II) are rare, as we saw in Chapter 2 deception itself is a phenomenon that
everyone experiences in one form or another on a daily basis.

This presents intelli-
gence analysts and decision-makers with a paradox: Deception is simultaneously
both common and rare.

As a result, analysts face a continuum of deception ranging
from basic security activities aimed at the deliberate concealment of facts, to sources
who engage in deceit and misrepresentation for personal reasons (e.g., a human
asset who fabricates information in order to remain on an intelligence organiza-
tion’s payroll), to deliberate ad hoc official deceit, and finally, to deliberate
well-planned, well-coordinated deception operations.

This is why counterdeception
in the national security context is more than just detecting deception.

Just what kind
of deception are we trying to detect?

How do we distinguish between deliberate
deception and the types of misperceptions that Jervis describes?Just what kind
of deception are we trying to detect?

How do we distinguish between deliberate
deception and the types of misperceptions that Jervis describes?

As Rossa points out
[2]: “Faced with an array of information on a subject, the analyst who is to put the
pieces of the puzzle together must first determine which pieces to use and which to
discard or reshape on the basis of whether it was obtained despite foreign denial
operations, as a result of foreign deception operations, or in the absence of either.”
This leads us to conclude that counterdeception is characterized by three dimensions
of action: awareness, detection and exposure, and discovery and penetration.

Awareness primes the observer to register cues in the environment that signify
either a threat or an opportunity.

Anyone who has ever taken a personal security
training course knows that awareness is considered the first line of defense; being
aware what is happening around you often allows you avoid trouble before it even
happens.

Awareness is also analogous to the activation step in the Johnson et al.

fraud detection model.

The auditor is aware of certain cues that, if detected, lead to
further questioning of the financial statement.

A simple example of awareness in the
intelligence context is when an analyst recognizes that a situation presents the adver-
sary both the opportunity and motive to employ deception.

The detection and exposure dimension involves intelligence collection and anal-
ysis activities that are aimed at determining what the adversary is trying to make you
believe and, as a result, what he wants you to do [3].

In essence, the objective is to
accurately reconstruct the deceiver’s deception story from the data and information
available.

The discovery and penetration dimension, on the other hand, focuses on
revealing what is real.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In essence, the objective is to
accurately reconstruct the deceiver’s deception story from the data and information
available. The discovery and penetration dimension, on the other hand, focuses on
revealing what is real. In this case intelligence collection and analysis assets are used
to sort out the relevant from the irrelevant and the real from the false in order to
determine what are the adversary’s real capabilities and intent [4]. These two dimen-
sions are not independent. They are highly coupled and interdependent and both
employ similar processes and methods to reveal that which is concealed, separate
deliberate distortions from unintentional misperceptions, and disentangle the real
from the false in order to determine what really to believe. 144
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
In Chapter 2 we saw that much of the literature related to military and strategic
deception concentrates on the historical description and analysis of deception oper-
ations and their associated methods.

The 1970s saw the beginnings of a theoretical
phase of deception analysis where several authors used basic principles from psy-
chology, systems engineering, communications theory, and other fields to begin the
development of conceptual models of the process of deception itself.

In this litera-
ture, the subject of counterdeception is, if addressed at all, treated almost as an
afterthought.

An author might devote a few paragraphs or perhaps a section of a
chapter or paper to the topic.

As Harris [5] observed in 1973, “There is hardly an
adequate theory of deception, much less a theory of counterdeception.” Events in
the late 1990s (e.g., the 1998 Indian nuclear test and especially Iraq’s efforts to hide
its WMD program) generated significantly more interest in counterdeception; how-
ever, the literature on topic is still relatively sparse.

This section mirrors the
approach taken in Chapter 2 and summarizes the various counterdeception concep-
tual models, theories, and approaches that can be found in the literature.

Like
Chapter 2, they are presented in rough chronological order so that the reader can
see how the thinking about counterdeception has changed over the years.

5.2.1
Early Pioneers [6]: “Is there, then, no way by which the target of
stratagem can untangle the web of deceit?”
In 1942, R.

V.5.2.1
Early Pioneers [6]: “Is there, then, no way by which the target of
stratagem can untangle the web of deceit?”
In 1942, R.

V.

Jones wrote [7]: “No imitation can be perfect without being the real
thing [7].” The implication of this observation is that imitations should differ from
the real thing in one or more ways, that is, observations made of the imitation
should be inconsistent with those of the real object or event, thus leading to Jones to
the conclusion that [8], “If there is inconsistency between the impressions derived
from the several channels, the potential deceivee would do well to suspect a decep-
tion.” Jones goes on to offer advice on what the target can do in this situation.

First,
he recommends [8] a “critical reappraisal of the intelligence picture” that “should
include examining afresh the evidence coming in through each channel in turn, and
particularly those channels giving conflicting evidence.” In addition, there are other
actions that analysts can take based on two principles that Jones offers for unmask-
ing deception [9], “(1) in any channel of intelligence through which you may be
deceive, arrange to work down to a greater level of sophistication than your oppo-
nent expected you to adopt, and (2) bring all other possible channels of intelligence
to bear on the problem, to see whether the evidence that they can provide is consis-
tent with the evidence in the channel through which you suspect you are being
deceived.” The first principle involves going beyond the obvious conclusions
offered by an observation and subjecting the data to further scrutiny in search of
clues that might reveal inconsistencies.

Examining the Doppler characteristics of
radio navigation signal is an example of this “deepening” examination of an infor-
mation channel.--- PAGE BREAK ---

First,
he recommends [8] a “critical reappraisal of the intelligence picture” that “should
include examining afresh the evidence coming in through each channel in turn, and
particularly those channels giving conflicting evidence.” In addition, there are other
actions that analysts can take based on two principles that Jones offers for unmask-
ing deception [9], “(1) in any channel of intelligence through which you may be
deceive, arrange to work down to a greater level of sophistication than your oppo-
nent expected you to adopt, and (2) bring all other possible channels of intelligence
to bear on the problem, to see whether the evidence that they can provide is consis-
tent with the evidence in the channel through which you suspect you are being
deceived.” The first principle involves going beyond the obvious conclusions
offered by an observation and subjecting the data to further scrutiny in search of
clues that might reveal inconsistencies. Examining the Doppler characteristics of
radio navigation signal is an example of this “deepening” examination of an infor-
mation channel. If the source of the deceptive signal is ahead of an aircraft while the
source of the authentic signal is behind it, the frequency of the real signal should be
slightly lower than that of the deceptive one, thus, in principle, unmasking the
deception [10]. An example of the second principle might be to double-check the
5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
145

--- PAGE BREAK ---observations of the radio navigation signal with other channels of information such
as inertial guidance systems or dead reckoning methods using magnetic compass
and clock.

Once again, the detection of inconsistencies is cause for suspecting
deception.

Jones also offers two maxims that are also quite relevant to counterdeception.

The first [11] is “Crow’s Law: Do not believe what you want to believe until you
know what you ought to know.” As we saw earlier, knowing what you ought to
know will undoubtedly involve reappraising any evidence that is inconsistent with
what you want to believe.

The second is Occam’s Razor: Hypotheses are not to be
multiplied without necessity.

Given missing, ambiguous, and contradictory infor-
mation, analysts should seek the simplest hypotheses that will account for the infor-
mation on hand.

Jones points out that this will not necessarily produce the correct
explanation, but that it provides the best basis to start from.

Only rarely, he says,
has Occam’s Razor failed him.

This is sound advice in the face of our human ability
to make too much out of too little, as Jones [12] subsequently points out with
“Crabtree’s Bludgeon: No set of mutually inconsistent observations can exist for
which some human intellect cannot conceive a coherent explanation, however
complicated.”
Barton Whaley briefly addressed the question of counterdeception in his famous
1969 book.

In the chapter where he describes his theory of stratagem, he also pro-
poses a decision-making model analogous to the one he describes for stratagem itself
(see Section 2.2.2).

Whereas a stratagem decision-making model is used to create a
set of signals that the target observes and fits to a plausible alternative, a
counterdeception decision-making model should be designed [13] “to analyze the
signals of stratagem rather than the one designed to synthesize their false signals.”
Whaley offers two examples only one of which we will discuss here.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the chapter where he describes his theory of stratagem, he also pro-
poses a decision-making model analogous to the one he describes for stratagem itself
(see Section 2.2.2). Whereas a stratagem decision-making model is used to create a
set of signals that the target observes and fits to a plausible alternative, a
counterdeception decision-making model should be designed [13] “to analyze the
signals of stratagem rather than the one designed to synthesize their false signals.”
Whaley offers two examples only one of which we will discuss here. While intelli-
gence analysts consistently strive to expose an adversary’s attempts at camouflage,
Whaley observes that he could find no example of where the deceiver’s attempts at
camouflage were reported [13] “for their own sake.” Whaley concludes that [13],
“having done their work to identify camouflage, the analyst uses his findings only to
correct the regular situation reports, order-of-battle maps, or traffic analysis studies. He does not use these findings to analyze the patterns of camouflage or ‘noise’ to see
if they could imply a positive deception plan or campaign.” In other words, the exis-
tence of camouflage becomes a signal of deception and such signals can be analyzed
in order to detect patterns that might suggest the alternative objective of the
adversary. Harris, who, according to Whaley, coined the term counterdeception in 1968
[14], proposes that countering deception involves three related concepts [5]:
• The detection of an adversary’s deceptions;
• The adoption of countermeasures that reduce the likelihood and adverse con-
sequences of those deceptions;
• The coordination of both of these into a counterdeception system. Harris concentrates primarily on the first two concepts and leaves it to the
reader to “read between the lines” in order to identify the organizational implica-
tions of creating a system to coordinate the two activities. Therefore, we will con-
146
Principles of Counterdeceptionder to “read between the lines” in order to identify the organizational implica-
tions of creating a system to coordinate the two activities. Therefore, we will con-
146
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---the lines” in order to identify the organizational implica-
tions of creating a system to coordinate the two activities. Therefore, we will con-
146
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---

centrate on the three techniques that Harris describes for detecting the existence of
deception operations and for uncovering the facts. These are: reconstructive infer-
ence, incongruity testing, and vulnerability assessment (see Figure 5.1). The first,
reconstructive inference, involves attending to the patterns of misleading and decep-
tive signals that are transmitted by the deceiver. These spurious signals, or sprignals,
appear to be directly analogous to the “signals of stratagem” that Whaley suggested
looking for and therefore reconstructive inference—analyzing patterns of sprignals
and their relationships—should make it possible to identify the “stratagemic plans”
of an adversary. The analysis of sprignals also makes it possible to identify those
channels that that are most likely to be used to disseminate disinformation at critical
times. It may also be possible to correlate masses of sprignals with different decep-
tion styles. Of course, separating sprignals from real signals and noise is no easier
than separating signals for noise and Harris suggests concentrating on separating
sprignals from signals while recognizing the fact that some noise will wind up con-
taminating both categories. Sprignals are also likely to be sensitive to both time and
context. Making things even more difficult, patterns of sprignals may provide clues
that are only relevant to past encounters but not necessarily future ones. In addition,
even if sprignals analysis yields insights into an adversary’s initial plan, that analysis
might not be relevant in a fluid situation (e.g., situations where a commander
changes his plans and the deception plan winds up becoming the real plan).
The second technique is incongruity testing, which Harris defines as the match-
ing and testing of alternative patterns for internal and interpattern consistency. He
does not offer much detail regarding the methods for such testing, but simply states
that [15]: “at least theoretically” incongruities could be discovered “given sufficient
data and hypothesis testing.” Reading through Harris’s section, one comes to the
5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
147
Reconstructive
inference
Incongruity
testing
Vulnerability
assessment
Detection of spurious
signals (sprignals) that
indicate the presence of
deception.
Alternative pattern
matching and testing for
internal and interpattern
consistency.
Predict the likelihood of
deception as a function of
modes and conditions,
based on simulation,
historical data, and gain to
the deceiver.
Detect
sprignals
Detect
incongruities
Compute
likelihoods
Historical
data
Simulation
Deception detected
Method
Function
Operation
Source
data
Figure 5.1
Harris’s deception detection techniques.eiver.
Detect
sprignals
Detect
incongruities
Compute
likelihoods
Historical
data
Simulation
Deception detected
Method
Function
Operation
Source
data
Figure 5.1
Harris’s deception detection techniques.

--- PAGE BREAK ---conclusion that it involves the generation of alternative hypotheses that represent
“alternative perceptual patterns” of the signal and sprignal data.

Harris notes that incongruity testing faces two main limitations: disjointed
incongruities and false incongruities.

Disjointed incongruities [16] “involve incon-
sistencies that have become, in the perceptions of the viewer if not in fact, separated
or mismatched.” The incongruities are not recognized because the different sets of
inconsistent patterns are never paired.

Jokes, hoaxes, and deceptions all rely on dis-
jointed incongruities.

Jokes are funny because the question sets up an incongruity
and the punch line reveals the hidden resolution to the incongruity—a surprising
alternate interpretation [17].

Deceptions work if the incongruities between the real
and false situations are not resolved.

Harris calls these clandestinely disjointed
incongruities.

The challenge to incongruity testers is that deception planners do their
best to prevent their target from detecting the incongruities.

Another form of dis-
jointed incongruity that has counterdeception implications are mutually disjointed
incongruities.

In this case, observer A perceives situation A and observer B perceives
situation B.

It may be the case that situations A and B are representations of the same
situation, but unfortunately this situation is not the true situation, C.

The other limitation to incongruity testing is the need to deal with false incon-
gruities.

Harris defines false incongruities as [16]: “The pairing of two or more
apparently inconsistent patterns that represent a consistent underlying reality.”
These complicate the task of incongruity testing by adding clutter to the process.

They can result from different perspectives of the underlying pattern or as the result
of our ability to detect order in random patterns.Harris defines false incongruities as [16]: “The pairing of two or more
apparently inconsistent patterns that represent a consistent underlying reality.”
These complicate the task of incongruity testing by adding clutter to the process.

They can result from different perspectives of the underlying pattern or as the result
of our ability to detect order in random patterns.

Some of these apparent but unreal incongruities are a matter of different per-
spectives; some are a consequence of the random distribution of noise in perceptual
systems.

In either case, they must be identified.

The third technique, vulnerability assessment, uses statistical approaches to pre-
dict future vulnerabilities to deception.

Bayes’ theorem, multivariate statistical anal-
ysis, game theory, and other modeling and simulation methods can all be used to
explore the likelihood of encountering deception in different situations and under
various conditions.

Likewise, these methods can be used to assess the risks and costs
of making Type I (failure to detect the deception) or Type II (false positive) errors.

In
addition, Harris suggest that rigorous studies of the deception styles and practices of
prospective adversaries can help assess both one’s own potential vulnerabilities as
well as provide potential indicators of deception through the reconstruction of
sprignal patterns.

In 1976, Robert Jervis concluded his book, Perception and Misperception in
International Politics, with a chapter on minimizing misperception [18].

Although
his focus was on misperception, not deception, his suggestions for minimizing
misperception are equally applicable to situations where deliberate deception is
involved.

Jervis suggests four broad themes for compensating for perceptual errors:
• Making assumptions and predictions explicit;
• The use of devil’s advocates;
• Making sure that identities and missions do not become linked with specific
theories and images;
• Awareness of common misperceptions.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Although
his focus was on misperception, not deception, his suggestions for minimizing
misperception are equally applicable to situations where deliberate deception is
involved. Jervis suggests four broad themes for compensating for perceptual errors:
• Making assumptions and predictions explicit;
• The use of devil’s advocates;
• Making sure that identities and missions do not become linked with specific
theories and images;
• Awareness of common misperceptions. 148
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---When considering deception, the first theme might be restated as making
assumptions, preconceptions, and beliefs explicit.

Jervis writes [19]:
The failure to examine the plausibility of crucial beliefs, especially those relating to
ends and means, is evident when the environment changes in a way that should, but
does not, lead to changes in beliefs and policies.

For example, one reason why the
United States was taken by surprise at Pearl Harbor was that the initial analysis of
Japan’s alternatives had led to the reasonable conclusion that Japan would not
attack American territory.

But as the situation changed, American decision makers
realized that Japan might strike at the Philippines.

Since such an attack meant war
with the United States, Americans should have noted that one of the major reasons
why the Japanese would not attack Pearl Harbor was now removed and should
have looked at the dangers again.

Jervis states that making beliefs and assumptions explicit requires not only
understanding the elements that make up those beliefs and assumptions but also an
examination of what evidence would confirm or disconfirm them.

He suggests that
[20], “If they are aware of what they expect, or rather what their images and beliefs
should lead them to expect, actors will be more apt to heed unsettling incidents.”
Such awareness also extends to thinking about what events are excluded by the
actor’s assumptions and beliefs with the hope that he would be more likely to notice
and react to those events if they occur as well as heighten his sensitivity to discrepant
information.

Jervis [21] uses the concept of devil’s advocates to emphasize the need for
encouraging the “formulation and application of alternative images” noting that it
is often politically and psychologically difficult for any one person to consider mul-
tiple alternatives.He suggests that
[20], “If they are aware of what they expect, or rather what their images and beliefs
should lead them to expect, actors will be more apt to heed unsettling incidents.”
Such awareness also extends to thinking about what events are excluded by the
actor’s assumptions and beliefs with the hope that he would be more likely to notice
and react to those events if they occur as well as heighten his sensitivity to discrepant
information.

Jervis [21] uses the concept of devil’s advocates to emphasize the need for
encouraging the “formulation and application of alternative images” noting that it
is often politically and psychologically difficult for any one person to consider mul-
tiple alternatives.

Jervis also has an interesting perspective on cognitive bias in
this regard [22]: “Rather than seeking ‘unbiased’ treatments of the data, decision-
makers should seek to structure conflicting cognitive biases into the decision mak-
ing process to help themselves maintain their intellectual freedom.” In other words,
instead of trying to eliminate cognitive biases altogether, decision-makers should
take advantage of them in order to produce differing perspectives of a given situa-
tion.

In that same vein, Jervis continues [22], “To make it more likely that they will
consider alternative explanations of specific bits of data and think more carefully
about the beliefs and images that underlie their policies, they should employ
devil’s—or rather devils’—advocates.” Jervis admits that a devil’s advocate is
unlikely to produce the correct image; however, incorporating devil’s advocacy into
the process has two major benefits.

First, it exposes decision-makers to alternative
explanations of events, thereby forcing them to exercise judgment as opposed to
seeing one view as the only possible alternative.

Second, devil’s advocacy helps to
expose the assumptions and beliefs discussed earlier.

Jervis offers less detail regarding the last two themes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Second, devil’s advocacy helps to
expose the assumptions and beliefs discussed earlier. Jervis offers less detail regarding the last two themes. The third theme addresses
the potential dangers that arise when the mission and identity of individuals and
organizations becomes too closely tied to specific theories and images of other
actors. He cites as an example the U.S. Air Force’s post–World War II resistance to
guided missiles [23]: “The members of the organization had come to see its distinc-
tive mission not as carrying out strategic bombardment, but as carrying out strate-
gic bombardment by means of manned bombers.” The deception implications
5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
149

--- PAGE BREAK ---should be obvious.

If mission and identity are too closely tied to specific beliefs, a
deceiver can manipulate those beliefs knowing that it is likely that information
about other alternatives will be made to fit those beliefs or will not even be consid-
ered.

Finally, Jervis [24] concludes his chapter on minimizing misperception with a
general call “for decision makers to take account of the ways in which the processes
of perception lead to common errors.” The hope is that if decision-makers are aware
of these biases and errors, they will be more likely to take measures to decrease
misperception by avoiding or compensating for common perceptual errors, decrease
their overconfidence in prevailing beliefs, become more sensitive to alternative per-
spectives, and perhaps reduce the amount discrepant information required to make
them reconsider those beliefs.

5.2.2
The Theoretical Work of the 1980s
As we saw in Chapter 2, the 1980s saw the publication of a number of journal arti-
cles and books marking the start of a more theoretical approach to the study of
deception.

In 1980, the CIA’s Mathtech Deception Research Program published a
report, Deception Maxims: Fact and Folklore, which described the 10 deception
maxims summarized previously in Figure 2.7.

That report also addressed the
counterdeception implications for three of those maxims in a single paragraph at the
end of their report.

Maxim 1 states that it is easier for the target to maintain preex-
isting beliefs even in the face of evidence that contradicts those beliefs implying that
it is important to examine one’s own beliefs for exploitable weaknesses in order to
be less susceptible to deception.

Maxim 4, Jones’ Lemma, suggests that the deceiver
should try to control as many of the channels available to the target as possible.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Maxim 1 states that it is easier for the target to maintain preex-
isting beliefs even in the face of evidence that contradicts those beliefs implying that
it is important to examine one’s own beliefs for exploitable weaknesses in order to
be less susceptible to deception. Maxim 4, Jones’ Lemma, suggests that the deceiver
should try to control as many of the channels available to the target as possible. The
counterdeception implication is that the target should not rely on only one or two
channels of information but should employ redundant sensors to increase the likeli-
hood that incongruities can be detected. Finally, Maxim 6 counsels the deceiver that
there are situations where deception assets should be husbanded until they can be
put to more fruitful use. The implication of this maxim then is for the target to con-
sider the stakes involved in any situation when evaluating the adversary’s options:
higher stakes may warrant the adversary using those husbanded deception assets. Shortly thereafter, Richards Heuer published his landmark article, “Strategic
Deception and Counterdeception: A Cognitive Process Approach.” Although his
article dealt primarily with the cognitive biases relevant to the problem of deception,
Heuer also addresses the subject of counterdeception by reviewing three “commonly
advocated approaches” and suggesting two more approaches of his own. The first
three approaches are:
• Improved intelligence collection;
• Increased alertness to deception;
• Weighting of tactical indicators. With regard to improved intelligence collection, Heuer notes [25] that advances
in technical collection systems have improved the intelligence community’s overall
capabilities but that such systems “have contributed little toward improving
estimates of intentions, strategy, or political dynamics.” While improvements in
150
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---intelligence collection are desirable, Heuer offers his belief [25] that such improve-
ments are unlikely to significantly reduce one’s vulnerability to deception and goes
on to state, “Any systematic counterdeception program must focus primarily on
problems of analysis, only secondarily on collection.” Ideally, increased alertness to
deception would stimulate a more thorough review of the information available and
Heuer concedes that this is possibly the case if the possibility of deception has not
already been considered.

In such a case, Heuer [26] notes that “simply focusing on
this possibility may be sufficient to identify overlooked information or prompt a
change in analytical perspective.” Nevertheless, he is generally pessimistic about the
ability of alertness alone to detect deception and makes the case that such alertness
is more likely to detect deception where it does not exist, lead analysts to be overly
skeptical of all the information on hand, and when deception is present, cause ana-
lysts to dismiss the wrong evidence.

The weighting of tactical indicators approach is
based on Abraham Ben-Zvi’s [27] study of surprise military attacks.

Ben-Zvi found
that tactical indicators of an impending attack were often discounted because they
did not agree with the preconceptions and strategic assumptions held by analysts
and commanders.

Although Heuer agrees that analysts and decision-makers should
be more open to changing their minds in the fact of discrepant information, giving
more weight to such indicators will increase the false alarm rate and it is often
difficult or impossible to know whether in any given situation it is better to heed the
indicators or hold on to the established view.

Heuer’s own suggestions fall into two categories: cognitive aids to analysis and
organizational measures.

The first category consists of alternative hypotheses and
breaking mental sets.Heuer’s own suggestions fall into two categories: cognitive aids to analysis and
organizational measures.

The first category consists of alternative hypotheses and
breaking mental sets.

What has become to be known as Alternative Competing
Hypotheses (ACH) is in response to the fact that research shows that people do a
poor job of generating a sufficiently full set of hypotheses when analyzing a situa-
tion.

As Heuer notes [28], “If the correct hypothesis is not even formulated for con-
sideration, there is clearly little chance of making an accurate judgment.” This
failure to generate sufficient hypotheses is aggravated by other biases such as confir-
mation bias.

Evidence tends to be evaluated in terms of how well it supports a
hypothesis and the fact that such evidence may be consistent with other alternative
hypotheses is often overlooked.

For Heuer [28], “The systematic identification,
examination, and testing of alternative hypotheses is one of the keys to the success-
ful uncovering of deception.” We will examine ACH in more detail in later chap-
ters.

Heuer [29] also proposes that “methods for breaking mental sets are
particularly relevant for counterdeception analysis.” He suggests methods such as
the devil’s advocate, interdisciplinary brainstorming, and “other techniques that
facilitate the identification and systematic analysis of alternative perspective” [29].

The organizational measures that Heuer proposes focus primarily on the creation of
a counterdeception staff as a form of “deception insurance.” Heuer bases this sug-
gestion on research showing that one of the most difficult cognitive tasks that a per-
son can be called upon to perform is to reorganize information that they are already
familiar with in order to view it from a totally different perspective.

The more com-
plex the information and the longer that one has held certain beliefs about what the
information means, the more difficult this task becomes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The organizational measures that Heuer proposes focus primarily on the creation of
a counterdeception staff as a form of “deception insurance.” Heuer bases this sug-
gestion on research showing that one of the most difficult cognitive tasks that a per-
son can be called upon to perform is to reorganize information that they are already
familiar with in order to view it from a totally different perspective. The more com-
plex the information and the longer that one has held certain beliefs about what the
information means, the more difficult this task becomes. Heuer suggests that a
dedicated counterdeception staff is necessary to address complex questions
5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
151

--- PAGE BREAK ---concerning deception that cannot be handled by an individual analyst using
cognitive aids.

In 1982 two books were published that addressed deception and surprise: Stra-
tegic Military Deception, edited by Daniel and Herbig, and Military Deception and
Strategic Surprise, edited by Gooch and Perlmutter.

In Strategic Military Deception,
Daniel and Herbig [30] describe two groups of factors that influence the likelihood
of deception.

The first group is related to the different situations that confront a
would-be deceiver, while the second group reflects certain characteristics of the
deceiver.

Although Daniel and Herbig do not mention that these factors could be
used for counterdeception, we suggest that these factors represent potentially useful
cues for analysts and decision-makers to be aware of.

The situational factors
include:
• High-stakes situations.

Such situations encourage an adversary to use every
capability at his disposal to ensure success or avoid defeat.

• Lack of confidence in a situation’s outcome due to military weakness.

Decep-
tion is a useful way of compensating for an adversary’s superior strength.

• Lower the costs of even an optimistic situation.

In addition to using deception
in order to avoid human and material losses, an adversary may employ decep-
tion in order to avoid the political and economic costs of being viewed as an
aggressor.

• Uncertain situations.

A deceiver may use deception in order to keep his
options open and to test his adversary’s reactions to different actions.

The second group consists of factors related to the deceiver’s previous condi-
tioning or personal predilection and includes:
• Cultural norms.

Cultural factor may affect when and how deception is used.

• Political leaders that play a strong, central role in military decisions.

Decep-
tion may be more common in situations where this is the case, particularly in
dictatorships and authoritarian regimes.

• Bureaucratic and psychological pressure.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Decep-
tion may be more common in situations where this is the case, particularly in
dictatorships and authoritarian regimes. • Bureaucratic and psychological pressure. This factor is based on two traits
common to many bureaucracies. The first trait is that organizations trained
for particular tasks will seek to perform them. The second trait is related to the
availability heuristic—people tend to think in terms of what is available to
them. The first trait implies that an adversary that maintains the capability to
plan, organize, and execute deception operations is more likely to use decep-
tion than one that is not. The second trait suggests that, even if not incorpo-
rated formally as doctrine, an adversary that has some familiarity with
deception is more likely to use it than one that is not. • Personal predilection. Leaders and commanders who appreciate deception
and have relied on in the past are likely to do so again. Paul Moose’s chapter in Strategic Military Deception [31] presents an elemen-
tary systems model that envisions a dynamic relationship between two adversaries
(Green and Purple) and their environment. This produces an “event stream” that is
152
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---the result of each side’s actions in response to the other as well as the environment.

Moose’s concept of counterdeception [31] involves a plan where the target (Purple)
“hypothesizes two measurably different near-term event streams, depending on
whether a deception is present or not” and initiates activities that precipitate some
action on the deceiver’s (Green) part in one of these streams which may reveal the
deceiver’s real intentions.

The target then uses his own feedback channels to observe
how the deceiver reacts to the target’s reaction.

Of course, the risks of waiting while
the counterdeception plan unfolds versus acting on one of the hypothesized event
streams must be considered.

Moose also provides some general prescriptions
regarding counterdeception.

He states that [31], “The most effective way to prevent
deception is to be continually aware of one’s vulnerabilities as a target.” He also
notes that one should be skeptical about signals that encourage procrastination or
inactivity and that the “leaky” nature of the adversary’s internal communications
(i.e., unintentional signals that might reveal the adversary’s true intentions) should
be exploited.

Also in Strategic Military Deception is a chapter by Theodore Sarbin, a narra-
tive psychologist [32].He states that [31], “The most effective way to prevent
deception is to be continually aware of one’s vulnerabilities as a target.” He also
notes that one should be skeptical about signals that encourage procrastination or
inactivity and that the “leaky” nature of the adversary’s internal communications
(i.e., unintentional signals that might reveal the adversary’s true intentions) should
be exploited.

Also in Strategic Military Deception is a chapter by Theodore Sarbin, a narra-
tive psychologist [32].

He proposes a theory of counterdeception that assumes that
[33] “human beings think, perceive, and imagine according to a narrative struc-
ture.” As we saw in Section 3.2.2.2, he suggests that the authors of strategy emplot
narratives and observes that [33], “The task of the counterdeception analyst of
strategy is like the task of the literary critic or the dramatic critic—to fathom the
intentions of the author, to ‘understand,’ to decipher the meaning of the creative
work.” Given that deception typically represents a unique case where the context is
a critical determinant of the actors’ behavior, the target of deception cannot rely on
statistical approaches or case studies (sagacity) to predict the deceiver’s real inten-
tions due to the lack of meaningful base rates.

Therefore, the counterdeception
analyst must rely on acumen—the empathic skill to take on the role of another.He proposes a theory of counterdeception that assumes that
[33] “human beings think, perceive, and imagine according to a narrative struc-
ture.” As we saw in Section 3.2.2.2, he suggests that the authors of strategy emplot
narratives and observes that [33], “The task of the counterdeception analyst of
strategy is like the task of the literary critic or the dramatic critic—to fathom the
intentions of the author, to ‘understand,’ to decipher the meaning of the creative
work.” Given that deception typically represents a unique case where the context is
a critical determinant of the actors’ behavior, the target of deception cannot rely on
statistical approaches or case studies (sagacity) to predict the deceiver’s real inten-
tions due to the lack of meaningful base rates.

Therefore, the counterdeception
analyst must rely on acumen—the empathic skill to take on the role of another.

This ability is related to the person’s ability to decenter—the ability to switch from
one’s own egocentric perspective and see things from another’s perspective—and
Sarbin suggests that [34], “From literary and autobiographical sources, one can
infer that the person who is successful in taking the role of another is able to con-
struct a scenario, a story, and place himself in relation to the other features of the
story, physical features such as geography and climate, social features, such as role
relationships with multiple role players.” Such abilities help the person gifted
with acumen succeed in consistently predicting the actions of others and are “the
stock in trade of someone who can penetrate the masks or expose the lie of the
adversary” [34].

Acumen is therefore an important skill for intelligence and counterdeception
analysts to possess and Sarbin offers the hypothesis that analysts possessing the skill
of acumen are more likely to identify the form of the narrative contained in the stra-
tegic plans of an adversary.

He also poses two interesting questions in this regard.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Acumen is therefore an important skill for intelligence and counterdeception
analysts to possess and Sarbin offers the hypothesis that analysts possessing the skill
of acumen are more likely to identify the form of the narrative contained in the stra-
tegic plans of an adversary. He also poses two interesting questions in this regard. Are certain kinds of plots related to kinds of ethnic origins or national heritages? Can acumen be taught and learned? Sarbin asserts that literary historians are able to
successfully identify the different forms of emplotment they encounter but admits
that they have the benefit of hindsight. On the other hand, analysts face the problem
of having to construct a plot from antecedent events and try to predict the outcome
making their task tremendously more difficult. The difference is that [35], “Unlike
5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
153

--- PAGE BREAK ---the historian who emplots a narrative about events that have occurred in the past,
the analyst of strategy must emplot concurrent events, events that are not frozen but
fluid.” With regard to teaching and learning acumen, Sarbin suggests that there may
be ways to recognize “optimal cognitive strategies” for identifying the events associ-
ated with a specific plot structure [36], that is, “When is an ‘event’ an event?”
In the mid-1980s three closely related books by British authors (see the Haswell,
Dewar, and Latimer portion of Section 2.2.3) appeared, but only one specifically
addressed the topic of counterdeception.

In The Art of Deception in Warfare, Dewar
devotes a chapter to counterdeception [37], in which he summarizes Whaley’s con-
cepts of deception and uses them to make a number of points.

These can be catego-
rized into two broad areas:
• Macroscopic knowledge of the adversary;
• Microscopic analysis aimed at discovering inconsistencies.

Dewar notes [38], “A detailed knowledge of the enemy is as important in coun-
tering deception as it is in achieving it.” This knowledge must extend to [39] “a mac-
roscopic appreciation of the enemy’s fears, aims, prejudices, and habits” and
analysts “must also be able to see things from the enemy’s point of view, think as the
enemy thinks, list the options open to him and decide what is most probable” [40].

At one point Dewar goes as far as stating [41], “Thus the main, almost the only,
weapon of the deception analyst is to put himself in the mind of the deceiver.” This
knowledge includes recognizing that the adversary’s deception plans are themselves
seldom flawless thus creating the opportunity for the “microscopic” search for the
flaws in the pattern of the deceiver’s deception plan.Dewar notes [38], “A detailed knowledge of the enemy is as important in coun-
tering deception as it is in achieving it.” This knowledge must extend to [39] “a mac-
roscopic appreciation of the enemy’s fears, aims, prejudices, and habits” and
analysts “must also be able to see things from the enemy’s point of view, think as the
enemy thinks, list the options open to him and decide what is most probable” [40].

At one point Dewar goes as far as stating [41], “Thus the main, almost the only,
weapon of the deception analyst is to put himself in the mind of the deceiver.” This
knowledge includes recognizing that the adversary’s deception plans are themselves
seldom flawless thus creating the opportunity for the “microscopic” search for the
flaws in the pattern of the deceiver’s deception plan.

Here Dewar seems to be advo-
cating a kind of analytical preparedness [42], “Defence against deception therefore
requires a sustained questioning of evidence, a search for its corroboration and a
review of previous deductions as fresh evidence is produced.

In particular, it is help-
ful to look for small and obscure clues which are missing and which would prove or
disprove the authenticity of the existing evidence.” For Dewar, the golden rule of
counterdeception is to avoid jumping to conclusions.

He warns that deceivers thrive
on the pressure that analysts labor under to provide timely assessments and predic-
tions and urges analysts to resist the temptation to jump to conclusions whenever
possible.

Dewar acknowledges the difficulty of looking at a situation from different per-
spectives noting that “increased alertness” to the potential for deception is largely
ineffective, but suggests that a devil’s advocate is one way that the data can be sub-
jected to competitive analysis.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He warns that deceivers thrive
on the pressure that analysts labor under to provide timely assessments and predic-
tions and urges analysts to resist the temptation to jump to conclusions whenever
possible. Dewar acknowledges the difficulty of looking at a situation from different per-
spectives noting that “increased alertness” to the potential for deception is largely
ineffective, but suggests that a devil’s advocate is one way that the data can be sub-
jected to competitive analysis. Dewar summarizes his approach to counterdeception
by reminding analysts that “first impressions are difficult to change and different
starting points lead to different conclusions” and concludes [43]: “That is why com-
petitive analysis should be undertaken whenever possible. Or to put it more simply,
two heads are better than one.”
The end of the 1980s saw the publication of Michael Handel’s War, Strategy,
and Intelligence. This book includes work that appeared as journal articles or as
chapters in other books (e.g., Gooch and Perlmutter) and several of these address the
topic of counterdeception both directly and indirectly. Handel is strongly pessimistic
with regard to the possibility of preventing or forestalling surprise attack and this
154
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---pessimism is reflected in his general skepticism regarding counterdeception.

Never-
theless, he offers six possible deception countermeasures, noting that [44], “Some
can be suggested, although their effectiveness cannot be guaranteed.” The first sug-
gestion, avoid overreliance on one source of information, emphasizes that poten-
tially valuable information collected in one channel should be independently
verified by sources in other channels.

As we saw in Chapter 3, German over reliance
on one channel of information (their network of agents in Britain—all controlled by
the Allies) was a major factor in the success of Allied deception efforts.

The next
four suggestions address what can perhaps be the most important channel of infor-
mation available to the deceiver—the double agent.

His suggestions reflect several
lessons that can be drawn from Germany’s experience as the target of the Allies’
Double Cross operations in support of the Fortitude deception.

These include:
• Never rely exclusively on nonmaterial evidence.

Handel quotes Clausewitz’s
remark that [44], “Words being cheap, are the most common means of creat-
ing false impressions.” In other words, written or verbal information that an
agent provides about physical entities must be checked and verified by other
sources (e.g., an agent report about the location of a missile battery should be
verified by imagery or signals intelligence).

This suggestion also applies to
information obtained through communications intercepts.

• Never rely on agents who have not been seen or directly interviewed.

Much of
the success of the FORTITIDE SOUTH deception is credited to the double
agent GARBO and much of GARBO’s success as a double agent was due to
his ability to convince the Germans that he controlled a network of subagents.

Unfortunately for the Abwehr and the German high command, this entire net-
work was fictitious.

All of GARBO’s subagents, including his deputy, were
notional.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Unfortunately for the Abwehr and the German high command, this entire net-
work was fictitious. All of GARBO’s subagents, including his deputy, were
notional. Handel [44] notes that this suggestion carries even more weight if
the information that is received from possibly notional agents “dovetails
nicely with one’s own preferences or needs, or when it fits without contradic-
tions into the reports of other possibly notional agents.”
• Check and double-check discrepancies in agent reporting. Handel suggests
that there are two situations where extra caution should be exercised when
relying on agent reporting. First, there is the situation in which an agent’s
reports initially appear to be correct but then turn out to be wrong on an
important issue and yet somehow the agent always seems have a good expla-
nation for each discrepancy. The second situation calls for even more caution. Here Handel even suggests a special investigation of any agent who supplies
high quality information of the greatest importance [44, 45], but “only when
it is too late to be of any use—even if it arrives before the action it warns
against has taken place.”
• Controllers of agents should also be encouraged to heed more closely the
opinions of lower-level intelligence analysts. Since the target of most strategic
deception operations are top-level decision-makers, commanders, and intelli-
gence managers, Handel suggests that deception has a better chance of being
detected by lower level (not necessarily lower expertise or experience) analysts
since they are less likely to be biased by any specific strategy, wishful thinking,
or political interests. Handel cites examples from World War I, World War II,
5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
155

--- PAGE BREAK ---and the 1973 Yom Kippur War noting that many of the “negative or unpleas-
ant conclusions” reached by lower level analyst were often ignored [46].

Handel’s sixth suggestion makes it clear that it is necessary to know the adver-
sary’s limitations as well as his capabilities.

This suggestion has its roots in mirror
imaging and ethnocentric biases.

The failure to analyze information about an adver-
sary’s capabilities and intentions must be done in accordance with the adversary’s
political and military needs—not one’s own.

Projecting one’s own preferences, fears,
and doctrine onto the adversary only increases the likelihood that one will be
deceived or surprised.

Handel provides other direct references to the problems associated with
counterdeception using a puzzle metaphor.

For example [47], “Under certain cir-
cumstances, the more perfectly an intelligence puzzle fits together, the greater the
danger of a possible deception ploy.

This is particularly true when information—the
solution to an important and complex intelligence puzzle—is received in the absence
of much noise or contradictory evidence, and when the resulting conclusions con-
form neatly to one’s hopes and expectations.” Other “precautions” for avoiding
deception are related to anticipating surprise attack and include asking [48]: “what
are the most likely directions from which an adversary might attack, even if the
available evidence contradicts these contingencies.”
Handel’s writings on strategic surprise and intelligence also indirectly address
important counterdeception issues.For example [47], “Under certain cir-
cumstances, the more perfectly an intelligence puzzle fits together, the greater the
danger of a possible deception ploy.

This is particularly true when information—the
solution to an important and complex intelligence puzzle—is received in the absence
of much noise or contradictory evidence, and when the resulting conclusions con-
form neatly to one’s hopes and expectations.” Other “precautions” for avoiding
deception are related to anticipating surprise attack and include asking [48]: “what
are the most likely directions from which an adversary might attack, even if the
available evidence contradicts these contingencies.”
Handel’s writings on strategic surprise and intelligence also indirectly address
important counterdeception issues.

For example, Handel discusses the roles that
preconceptions, ethnocentrism, and misperception play in the problem of strategic
surprise, and he attributes perceptual errors [49] to “projecting one’s own culture,
ideological beliefs, military doctrine, and expectations on the adversary (i.e., seeing
him as a mirror image of oneself) or of wishful thinking….” To counter these
ethnocentric biases, Handel makes the general suggestion of “know thine enemy,”
that is, develop a thorough and in-depth knowledge of an adversary’s language, cul-
ture, politics, and values, as well as devoting more time and resources to knowing
“thyself.”
In addition, Handel discusses two mechanisms that are related to the subject of
improving the objectivity and variety of input into the intelligence process.

These
mechanisms are also relevant to the challenge of countering deception.

The first is
multiple advocacy.

The idea behind this concept is that multiple, independent intelli-
gence agencies do a better job of providing decision-makers with a wider spectrum
of views than does a single, centralized intelligence organization.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The first is
multiple advocacy. The idea behind this concept is that multiple, independent intelli-
gence agencies do a better job of providing decision-makers with a wider spectrum
of views than does a single, centralized intelligence organization. The pros and cons
of multiple advocacy are beyond the scope of this chapter; however, the contribu-
tion that it makes to counterdeception is to counteract a number of factors that tend
to make the deceiver’s job easier (e.g., the tendency to jump to conclusions and
groupthink). The second mechanism is the devil’s advocate. The purpose of a devil’s
advocate is to help ensure that dissenting, possibly unpopular, opinions are heard
and evaluated. Again, the pros and cons of devil’s advocacy are outside the scope of
this chapter, but it is interesting to imagine what the results might have been in May
1940 if the French had an effective devil’s advocate to warn them of the possibility
of a German offensive through the Ardennes. The end of the 1980s also saw the end of the Cold War, and as we noted
in Chapter 2, deception research entered a hiatus period that was to last until the
156
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---revelations of Operation Desert Storm and other events like the Indian nuclear test
in 1998 made it clear that the need for understanding deception and improving
ways to counter it had not disappeared.

Interest in deception surfaced once again
and has resulted in new practical and theoretical work by both some familiar early
researchers and some new faces.

5.2.3
Current Directions
On the practical side, there is the 1997 CIA release of a set of analytic tradecraft
notes that are a standard counterdeception reference for analysts both inside and
outside of the CIA [50, 51].

Note 10, Tradecraft and Counterintelligence begins
with an admonition to analysts “to show increased respect for the deceiver’s ability
to manipulate perception and judgments” and then describes two sets of warning
signs that signal the possible existence of a deception operation.

The first set goes by
the acronym MOM, which stands for means, opportunity, and motive, and
addresses the likelihood that a potential adversary is deliberately trying to distort
the analyst’s perceptions.

Means addresses the adversary’s experience and capabili-
ties with regard to planning and executing sophisticated deception operations,
while opportunity is related to the sources (channels) of intelligence available to the
analyst.

If the adversary is known to have knowledge of a source (e.g., a technical
collection system), then he may likely have the opportunity to conceal information
from that source or to deliberately distort the information the source collects.

Finally, does the adversary have a motive to use deception?

If all three warning signs
are present, the analyst is wise to suspect that an adversary may resort to deception
in order to achieve his goals.

The second set of warning signs focus on anomalies that analysts should be on
the look out for regarding what they know, how they know it, and what they don’t
know.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If all three warning signs
are present, the analyst is wise to suspect that an adversary may resort to deception
in order to achieve his goals. The second set of warning signs focus on anomalies that analysts should be on
the look out for regarding what they know, how they know it, and what they don’t
know. These warning signs include suspicious gaps in collection, contradictions to
carefully researched patterns, and suspicious confirmations. Gaps in collection can
be considered suspicious when information received through one channel is not
supported by other channels especially when such confirmation would be consid-
ered normal. If new information contradicts well-supported trends and patterns,
analysts need to critically examine such new information if it signals “inexplicable
change” in the adversary’s priorities, behaviors, and practices. Information received
from one or more sources that seem to conveniently reinforce the rationale for or
against one’s own strategy or policy might also be considered suspicious. In such
cases, the fact that multiple sources seem to corroborate one another may not
necessarily mean the information is authentic. Finally, Note 10 offers analytical tradecraft tips for dealing with the risk of
deception when making intelligence assessments on complex issues. In the case of
“regular” issues (those where there is no specific reason to suspect deception), the
analyst is advised to employ a two-step process as insurance against the risk of decep-
tion. The first step is to organize information important to his conclusions and then
critically examine it using the six warning signs mentioned previously. The second
step calls for the analyst to play the role of devil’s advocate and develop a hypotheti-
cal argument that deception is in fact taking place. In the case of “suspect and sensi-
tive” issues, the note recommends undertaking an even more in-depth evaluation of
5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
157deception is in fact taking place. In the case of “suspect and sensi-
tive” issues, the note recommends undertaking an even more in-depth evaluation of
5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
157

--- PAGE BREAK ---taking place. In the case of “suspect and sensi-
tive” issues, the note recommends undertaking an even more in-depth evaluation of
5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
157

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the information at hand and annotating any resulting reports with a text box or
annex that conveys to the reader that the possibility of deception has been considered
seriously, appropriate analytic testing to determine the likelihood of deception has
been done, and any reasonable doubts about the resulting analysis are noted.
The scientific community’s interest in deception, which had been primarily
focused on lying and deceit, also began to attract attention in national security cir-
cles in the 1990s. For example, Johnson et al. [52] have investigated the processes
used by accounting auditors to detect the fraudulent manipulation of information in
financial statements. They use Whaley’s model of deception (i.e., masking, repack-
aging, dazzling, mimicking, inventing, and decoying) as the basis for the tactics that
a deceiver can use to manipulate the target’s processes of searching, processing, and
interpreting information. They then propose a process for detecting deception that
consists of three components:
• First the deception target identifies inconsistencies between his observations
and his expectations for the observations.
• The target then determines that those inconsistencies are functional to the
goals of the deceiver.
• Finally, the deception target identifies the potential actions of the deceiver that
can be associated with one or more deception tactics and assesses the
deceiver’s ability to create the observed inconsistencies.
They then develop a competence model based on this process for detect-
ing financial statement fraud. This model (see Figure 5.2) consists of four steps:
158
Principles of Counterdeception
Activation
Compare cues and
expectations
Activation
Compare cues and
expectations
Hypothesis
Evaluation
Assess impact
Evaluate materiality
Hypothesis
evaluation
Assess impact
Evaluate materiality
Hypothesis
Generation
Apply detection
tactics
Hypothesis
generation
Apply detection
tactics
Global
Assessment
Aggregate
Global assessment
Aggregate
Cues
(financial
statements)
Inconsistencies
Initial
hypotheses
Material
hypotheses
Diagnostic
outcome
Figure 5.2
Fraud detection method. (From: [52]. © 2001 Cognitive Science Society. Reprinted with
permission.)cial
statements)
Inconsistencies
Initial
hypotheses
Material
hypotheses
Diagnostic
outcome
Figure 5.2
Fraud detection method. (From: [52]. © 2001 Cognitive Science Society. Reprinted with
permission.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---activation, hypothesis generation, hypothesis evaluation, and global assessment.

The activation step produces the expectations for the values of the various cues that
might be found when an auditor examines a financial statement (e.g., an inventory
balance value).

These expectations are then compared to the actual observed values.

Observed values that exceed expectations by some amount are then labeled as
inconsistencies.

The next step is to generate a set of hypotheses that explain the
inconsistencies.

In the auditing process examined by Johnson and his team, there are
three possible hypotheses: accounting errors, insufficient disclosure, and, of course,
deception.

In this model, the deception hypothesis is generated when the inconsis-
tencies satisfy the additional conditions of the detection process described earlier
(i.e., functionality and feasibility).

In step three, the hypotheses are evaluated on the basis of their materiality.

Materiality is an accounting term that is defined as [53] “…the magnitude of an
omission or misstatement of accounting information that, in the light of surround-
ing circumstances, makes it probable that the judgment of a reasonable person rely-
ing on the information would have been changed or influenced by the omission or
misstatement.” The error and disclosure hypotheses are evaluated primarily on the
magnitude of the difference between the expected and observed values of the finan-
cial statement cue.

The basis for evaluating materiality for the deception hypothesis
though depends on the deception tactic that is suspected to have been used (e.g., if
the repackaging deception tactic is suspected, then the items that have been deliber-
ately miscategorized should be recategorized using a worst-case scenario assump-
tion).Materiality is an accounting term that is defined as [53] “…the magnitude of an
omission or misstatement of accounting information that, in the light of surround-
ing circumstances, makes it probable that the judgment of a reasonable person rely-
ing on the information would have been changed or influenced by the omission or
misstatement.” The error and disclosure hypotheses are evaluated primarily on the
magnitude of the difference between the expected and observed values of the finan-
cial statement cue.

The basis for evaluating materiality for the deception hypothesis
though depends on the deception tactic that is suspected to have been used (e.g., if
the repackaging deception tactic is suspected, then the items that have been deliber-
ately miscategorized should be recategorized using a worst-case scenario assump-
tion).

The global assessment step “aggregates and evaluates confirmed hypotheses”
to produce the final rating of the company’s financial statement—unqualified (the
statement is “clean”), unqualified+ (the auditor adds a paragraph noting a lack of
consistency or some other concerns or uncertainty), or misleading.

Finally, the
model was implemented as a computer program that uses various data from finan-
cial statements to produce the final rating.

The program successfully issued the
correct global assessment rating for each of six cases it was given.

Even while counterdeception was attracting the interest of new researchers like
Johnson and his associates, some familiar names were still active in field.

It should
probably not be a surprise that, over 30 years later, Barton Whaley was still active,
contributing two chapters (one with magician Jeff Busby) to a book, Strategic Denial
and Deception: The Twenty-First Century Challenge [54].

In the chapter coauthored
with Busby, Whaley focuses entirely on counterdeception.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It should
probably not be a surprise that, over 30 years later, Barton Whaley was still active,
contributing two chapters (one with magician Jeff Busby) to a book, Strategic Denial
and Deception: The Twenty-First Century Challenge [54]. In the chapter coauthored
with Busby, Whaley focuses entirely on counterdeception. Whereas many authors in
the field of strategic deception are quite pessimistic about the prospects of successful
counterdeception, Whaley (the principal author) offers a surprisingly optimistic per-
spective on the topic [55]: “I am optimistic that deceptions can be detected regardless
of the field in which they occur. In theory, deception can always be detected, and in
practice often detected, sometimes even easily.” He proposes a general theory of
counterdeception based on a wide range of sources, including results from case stud-
ies of different types of professionals who regularly deal with deception (e.g., intelli-
gence analysts, police detectives, forensic scientists, art experts, and magicians). Whaley found that all the professionals who were highly successful at detecting
deception used a common set of methods and that those same methods were never or
only infrequently used by those who did poorly. In addition, he found these methods
to be largely intellectual rather than technological in nature. Technology in the form
5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
159

--- PAGE BREAK ---of sensors that extend our natural senses and information technology that extends
our ability to recall and manipulate information is important; however, deception
detection remains a subtle, human intellectual process, as we will see when we exam-
ine the different elements of his theory.

This theory of counterdeception starts with two general components (see Figure
5.3): a taxonomy of “detectables” and the Plus-Minus Rule.

Five of the nine catego-
ries of detectables (intention, time, place, strength, and style) have their origins as
modes of surprise in Whaley’s original work on stratagem [56].

The remaining four
(pattern, players, payoff, and channel) make their appearance in Bell and Whaley’s
Cheating and Deception [57] in 1991.

Together they represent the set of things that
the deceiver will either conceal or reveal and they provide the counterdeception ana-
lyst with a checklist for the kinds of questions that must be considered when trying
to determine the existence and form of a deception operation.

The Plus-Minus Rule,
on the other hand, is the cornerstone of their theory.

This rule is based on the fact
(noted by R.

V.

Jones in 1942) that [58], “No imitation can be perfect without being
the real thing.” Therefore, even though the imitation may share many of the charac-
teristics of the original, it must lack at least one characteristic marking the original
and it will often have at least one characteristic that the original does not possess.

According to Whaley [59], “If either a plus (added) or a minus (missing) characteris-
tic is detected, the imitation stands revealed.Jones in 1942) that [58], “No imitation can be perfect without being
the real thing.” Therefore, even though the imitation may share many of the charac-
teristics of the original, it must lack at least one characteristic marking the original
and it will often have at least one characteristic that the original does not possess.

According to Whaley [59], “If either a plus (added) or a minus (missing) characteris-
tic is detected, the imitation stands revealed.

Note that a most important corollary of
this rule is that the detective need not discover all the discrepancies or incongruities,
a single false characteristic, whether plus (added) or (minus) is quite enough to prove
the fakery.”
Whaley is quick to note, however, that the Plus-Minus Rule demands total cer-
tainty about the added or missing characteristic and that while this is always possible,
it is seldom likely in the real world.

With this in mind, the next components of their
counterdeception theory can be thought of as applied theory suitable to decision
making under uncertainty.

The first element, the Congruity-Incongruity Rule, flows
from the Plus-Minus Rule and appears to be based on the results of Whaley’s case
studies of deception detection professionals.

He found that these professionals clus-
tered into two groups: congruity testers (e.g., scientists, internists, and historians) and
incongruity testers (e.g., police detectives, interrogators, trial lawyers, and forensic
pathologists).

In the Congruity-Incongruity Rule, the emphasis is obviously all on
incongruities [60]: “Every deception operation necessarily leaves at least two clues:
incongruities about what is hidden; and incongruities about what is displayed in its
stead” and “because neither simulation nor dissimulation can ever be done flaw-
lessly, however, their detection also is always possible.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He found that these professionals clus-
tered into two groups: congruity testers (e.g., scientists, internists, and historians) and
incongruity testers (e.g., police detectives, interrogators, trial lawyers, and forensic
pathologists). In the Congruity-Incongruity Rule, the emphasis is obviously all on
incongruities [60]: “Every deception operation necessarily leaves at least two clues:
incongruities about what is hidden; and incongruities about what is displayed in its
stead” and “because neither simulation nor dissimulation can ever be done flaw-
lessly, however, their detection also is always possible. In other words, discrepancies
(incongruent clues) inevitably suggest alternative patterns (hypotheses) that them-
selves are incongruent (discrepant, anomalous, paradoxical) at some point with real-
ity.” In other words, detecting incongruities is the key to detecting deception. The next several elements of the Busby and Whaley theory represent a portfolio
of methods applicable to detecting deception:
• Locard’s Exchange Principle. Although normally associated with physical evi-
dence, Whaley suggests it can also be applied to deception by adding “psycho-
logical perceptions” to the principle. Unfortunately, he does not offer any
insights into how these perceptions are to be added. 160
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---adding “psycho-
logical perceptions” to the principle. Unfortunately, he does not offer any
insights into how these perceptions are to be added. 160
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
161
Description
Decision making under uncertainty
Categories of detectables
Real entities are completely congruent with all of their characteristics; therefore, every false entity will
display at least one incongruity.
A perpetrator always leaves some physical evidence at the crime scene and always takes some away.
It is always possible to find a way to verify a hypothesis.
Genearl
theory
Multiple sensors will almost always prove more effective than a single one, even when each is less
precise.
The ability to not only discover the meaning of chance events but to also make effective use of that
knowledge depends wholly on systematic mental preparation. Such mental preparation also makes
intuition possible.
The goal of indirect thinking is to come up with an indirect answer—the third option that the adversary
was not expecting.
“The essence of the Ombudsman Method is to force one to confront straight on that nagging, almost
subliminal, sense of unease about a situation or person that somehow does not seem quite right, that
does not quite fit as it should those little incongruities that signal a deception in progress” [66, p. 217].
The adversary’s deception plans can be discovered through the use of
penetrating the
adversary’s organization with human agents or technical collection devices, and
discovering the deceiver’s double agents within one's own organizations.
espionage,
counterespionage,
The plus-minus rule
The congruity-incongruity rule
Locard’s exchange principle
Verification
The law of multiple sensors
Passive and active detection
Predetection
The prepared mind and intuition
Indirect thinking and the third
option
Busby’s ombudsman
Penetration and counterespionage
Deception may be detected by analysis (passive) supported by active intervention aimed at collecting
missing key facts. This intervention takes the form of defining new collection requirements or by
running controlled experiments, including the use of traps and tripwires, to trick the adversary into
betraying himself.
Predicting an adversary’s deception plans by analysis of his deceptive style, capabilities, and goals.
A single false characteristic—either one the real entity does not possess (a plus) or one it lacks (a minus)
—is sufficient to prove the entity is fake.
Pattern, players, intention, payoff, place, time, strength, style, and channel
Figure 5.3
The Busby-Whaley theory of counterdeception.ne it lacks (a minus)
—is sufficient to prove the entity is fake.
Pattern, players, intention, payoff, place, time, strength, style, and channel
Figure 5.3
The Busby-Whaley theory of counterdeception.

--- PAGE BREAK ---• Verification.

Once the Congruity-Incongruity Rule, Locard’s Exchange Princi-
ple, or some other method provides evidence of deception, Whaley suggests
that it is “always” possible to find a means of verifying the deception hypothe-
sis.

Of course, the costs of doing so may be prohibitively high, but it could be
done.

• The Law of Multiple Sensors.

This law is based on the insights of R.

V.

Jones
who noted that [60], “The ease of detecting counterfeits is much greater when
different channels of examination are used simultaneously.” Whaley notes
that multiple sensors are almost always more effective than a single one and
are also less vulnerable to countermeasures.

• Passive and active detection.

To Whaley [61], passive detection is synonymous
with the “straightforward analysis” of evidence and “always leads to incon-
clusive results unless all the key facts are available.” Therefore, active detec-
tion must be used to collect the missing facts.

Active detection involves levying
new collection requirements on the various INTs (e.g., HUMINT, IMINT,
and SIGINT) or by running “controlled experiments” to provoke the adver-
sary into creating new evidence that might reveal the deception.

• Predetection.

J.

C.

Masterman of World War II Double Cross fame was also
the author of two detective novels.

In the second of these, The Case of the Four
Friends: A Diversion in Pre-Detection, the detective in the story, Ernest
Brendel, is persuaded [62], “…to tell the tale of how he ‘pre-constructed’ a
crime, rather than reconstructing it in the detective’s normal fashion.

As he
says, ‘To work out the crime before it is committed, to foresee how it will be
arranged, and then to prevent it!

That’s a triumph indeed, and is worth more
than all the convictions in the world.’” Whaley makes the connection that
predetection is a method whereby an adversary’s deception plans can be dis-
cerned and defeated by analysis of the adversary’s deception style, capabilities,
and goals.--- PAGE BREAK ---

As he
says, ‘To work out the crime before it is committed, to foresee how it will be
arranged, and then to prevent it! That’s a triumph indeed, and is worth more
than all the convictions in the world.’” Whaley makes the connection that
predetection is a method whereby an adversary’s deception plans can be dis-
cerned and defeated by analysis of the adversary’s deception style, capabilities,
and goals. • Penetration and counterespionage. Espionage is a powerful form of active
detection that can be used to penetrate the adversary’s intelligence, military,
and command organizations. A well-placed asset in the right place is all that
may be needed to reveal the adversary’s deception plans. Counterintelligence
(CI) and counterespionage (CE), on the other hand, seek to identify and neu-
tralize the adversary’s intelligence collection efforts, especially agents who
have penetrated one’s own organizations. CI and CE activities can cut off
important paths through which the adversary obtains information about the
target’s preconceptions and beliefs as well as the feedback needed to know
how his deception operations are doing. In addition, CI and CE operations can
reveal the existence of double agents being used as a channel for feeding the
adversary’s disinformation to the target. • The prepared mind and intuition. The prepared mind refers to a famous quo-
tation by Louis Pasteur: “Dans les champs de l’observation le hasard ne
favorise que les esprits prepares.” Pasteur made this comment at a lecture
given at the University of Lille in December 1854. Translated into English, it
means “In the fields of observation, chance favors only the prepared mind,” or
more succinctly, “chance favors the prepared mind.” The essence of Pasteur’s
162
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---remark is that the ability to recognize the significance of chance events and
make effective use of that knowledge depends wholly on systematic mental
preparation.

On the other hand, intuition is [63] “our capacity for direct
knowledge, for immediate insight without observation or reason.” It is the
police detective’s hunch, Irwin Rommel’s fingerspitzengefühl, or the scien-
tist’s sudden awareness of the solution to a difficult problem while taking a
shower.

It is not unreasonable to think that accurate intuition is also a result
of the same systematic mental preparation associated with the prepared mind.

• Indirect thinking and the third option.

Whaley uses the term indirect thinking
in honor of B.

H.

Liddell Hart’s theory of the indirect approach to strategy
[64].

The essence of this theory is to avoid direct confrontations with the
enemy but instead upset his equilibrium—keeping him uncertain about the
situation and your intentions—and confront him with what he does not
expect and is therefore not prepared for.

Such an approach often yields a third
option—one that the adversary was not expecting.

The German advance
through the Ardennes in 1940 is an excellent example of the indirect approach
and the third option.

The French expected a German attack against either the
Maginot Line or through Belgium.

Instead, the Germans came up with a third
option—the attack through the Ardennes and the Battle of France was over in
just 44 days.

Whaley is suggesting that the purpose of indirect thinking is to
come up with an “indirect answer”—that third option—and that this ability
to envision options available to an adversary that would be otherwise hidden
or ignored is an essential method of counterdeception.

The final component of Whaley’s overall theory of counterdeception is a spe-
cific method—the Jeff Busby Ombudsman Method.Whaley is suggesting that the purpose of indirect thinking is to
come up with an “indirect answer”—that third option—and that this ability
to envision options available to an adversary that would be otherwise hidden
or ignored is an essential method of counterdeception.

The final component of Whaley’s overall theory of counterdeception is a spe-
cific method—the Jeff Busby Ombudsman Method.

This method was developed by
Busby in 1978 as a means of teaching casino employees to detect cheating without
teaching them how to cheat at the games themselves.

Whaley does not describe any
of the details of the Busby Method; however, it is apparent that it is based on look-
ing for discrepancies, irrelevancies, and misdirection [65] as well as some indirect
thinking.

He does state that [66], “The essence of the Ombudsman Method is to
force one to confront straight on that nagging, almost subliminal, sense of unease
about a situation or person that somehow does not seem quite right, that does not
quite fit as it should those little incongruities that can signal a deception in prog-
ress.” Whaley suggests that the method “seems the most promising of several sug-
gested approaches” for use in training analysts about deception as well as in the
analysis of both current and historical cases of deception.

In another chapter of Godson and Wirtz’s book, Paul Rossa identifies several
key issues germane to counterdeception [67].

The first of these affirms the second
principle of deception we proposed in Chapter 2: denial.

Rossa notes that [68],
“Uncovering secrets also is key to exposing deceptions.

Consequently, counteract-
ing foreign denial efforts is critical to countering foreign denial and deception.”
Even identifying the deceiver’s denial operations helps the counterdeception effort
by helping to task collection resources where they are most likely to do the most
good.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rossa notes that [68],
“Uncovering secrets also is key to exposing deceptions. Consequently, counteract-
ing foreign denial efforts is critical to countering foreign denial and deception.”
Even identifying the deceiver’s denial operations helps the counterdeception effort
by helping to task collection resources where they are most likely to do the most
good. An adversary’s efforts to conceal information about a subject can also suggest
the possibility that deception operations associated with the subject may also exist,
thereby by affecting how all information on that subject is interpreted. 5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
163

--- PAGE BREAK ---Other issues are related to recognizing the existence of a deception operation.

Rossa points out that determining what information the analyst decides to use, dis-
card, or “reshape” is hard enough, but it is even more difficult when deception is
involved.

Rossa makes the point that recognizing the existence of a deception
operation depends heavily on the metadata (data about data) that is available.

Examples of metadata include the way in which the data was acquired and the cir-
cumstances surrounding the acquisition.

The metadata, along with the content of
the information, may provide some hints regarding the presence or absence of a
deception operation.

Unfortunately, these hints are all too often ambiguous or
contradictory.

Another important part of recognizing deception is paying close attention to
information about a potential or suspected deceiver.

What are his motives?

Would
the use of deception increase the likelihood of achieving his objectives?

Has the
adversary demonstrated a strong predisposition to the use of deception in the past?

Does he possess the knowledge and capabilities to mount an effective deception
operation?

Finally, Rossa addresses the issues of reducing one’s own “susceptibilities” to
deception.

One of the most important factors affecting the deception target’s suscep-
tibility to deception is the extent of the adversary’s knowledge about the target’s
strategies and methods of collecting intelligence, his analytic methodologies, and
how the resulting intelligence is used to form judgments and make decisions.

Such
knowledge can come from a variety of sources, including the adversary’s espionage
operations or the unauthorized disclosure of secret information [69].

Reducing that
susceptibility depends on counterintelligence and counterespionage operations as
well as the development of information gathering and processing methods that are
unknown to potential deceivers or that are difficult to manipulate.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Such
knowledge can come from a variety of sources, including the adversary’s espionage
operations or the unauthorized disclosure of secret information [69]. Reducing that
susceptibility depends on counterintelligence and counterespionage operations as
well as the development of information gathering and processing methods that are
unknown to potential deceivers or that are difficult to manipulate. Nevertheless,
such efforts do not entirely eliminate the risk of deception. Deception can still suc-
ceed even when the deceiver’s information about the target is incomplete and secret
intelligence collection and analysis methods may still be affected by deception oper-
ations. Better analytic methods and tools can also contribute to reducing susceptibil-
ity to deception. Rossa suggests that [70]: “The intelligence community would profit
by development of conceptual frameworks, indicators, and analytic techniques that
hold promise for recognizing and countering foreign D&D as it occurs.” He calls for
qualitative and quantitative analysis of historical cases of deception and the need for
D&D analysis to continue to evolve in order to keep pace with the issues and
technologies associated with the post–Cold War world. Scott Gerwehr and Russell Glenn represent a new generation of national secu-
rity analysts whose focus is on strategic deception. In their report Unweaving the
Web, Gerwehr and Glenn also address counterdeception and hypothesize that [71],
“the most effective approaches to penetrating deception entail (1) combining more
than one category of counterdeception and (2) applying the right category of
counterdeception.” They then identify five categories of counterdeception, three of
which focus on defeating deception by emphasizing the collection and processing of
data. The first three categories are:
• The type or amount of data collected (e.g., using radar or hyperspectral sen-
sors to defeat camouflage paints and netting). 164
Principles of Counterdeceptiondata. The first three categories are:
• The type or amount of data collected (e.g., using radar or hyperspectral sen-
sors to defeat camouflage paints and netting). 164
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---• The methods for collecting data (i.e., the methods by which the sensors are
employed).

For example, changes to collection plans or search plans may dis-
rupt an adversary’s attempts to conceal his movements.

• The analysis of the data collected (for example, can alternative scenarios be
developed using the same data?)
The fourth category focuses on unmasking deception through the use of one’s
own deceptions.

For example, a feint or demonstration might force concealed units
to maneuver or engage.

The final category consists of strategies for rendering the
adversary’s deceptions moot.

This is often the U.S.

military’s approach to counter-
deception.

For example, if an adversary has deployed numerous decoys among its
real units (e.g., tanks or surface-to-air missile), the U.S.

ability to employ over-
whelming firepower makes it possible to target all potential targets without
bothering to tell them apart.

Effective counterdeception therefore depends not only on applying the right cat-
egory of counterdeception methods but also on applying methods from more than
one category.

Gerwehr and Glenn suggest that much more research needs to be
done to resolve the issues raised by questions such as:
• What counterdeception methods should be matched to particular types of
deception?

• Which of those methods are the most effective against individual deception
techniques or are effective against the broadest range of deception techniques?

• What are the situational factors that affect their use?

• Which methods require the most time or manpower to use effectively?

• Which methods complement or interfere with each other?

• Do any of the methods work against one type of deception technique but in
turn increase the vulnerability to another?

Even more recent work has been done by Stech and Elsässer who extend John-
son et al.’s model to develop a counterdeception “business process” [72].--- PAGE BREAK ---

• Do any of the methods work against one type of deception technique but in
turn increase the vulnerability to another? Even more recent work has been done by Stech and Elsässer who extend John-
son et al.’s model to develop a counterdeception “business process” [72]. The pro-
cess links previous work done by Whaley, Jones, and Heuer to the Johnson model
(see Figure 5.4) and Stech and Elsässer then use this process to in an effort to
improve the effectiveness of Heuer’s alternative competing hypothesis (ACH)
method as a counterdeception tool. The first step of the process addresses the detec-
tion of anomalies using techniques based on Whaley’s congruity-incongruity rule. One challenge for analysts though is that the detection of anomalies (incongruities)
is not necessarily evidence of detection of deliberate deception. They may result
from sensor malfunctions, unintentional distortion or corruption of data or infor-
mation during transmission, or analytical error. In fact, deception is often successful
because the deception target explains away such anomalies and failing to correctly
attribute them to deception. That is where the next step in the process comes in. There must be some way of linking anomalies to deception, and Stech and Elsässer
propose that R. V. Jones’s concepts of deception masking provides such
means—analyzing the anomalies through multiple information channels. The third
and fourth steps use ACH to assess the likelihood that the observed anomalies are
5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
165

--- PAGE BREAK ---through multiple information channels. The third
and fourth steps use ACH to assess the likelihood that the observed anomalies are
5.2
The Search for Ways to Counter Deception
165

--- PAGE BREAK ---

associated with a probable deceptive course of action (COA) and to evaluate the
level of support for each identified hypothesis.
Stech and Elsässer have also developed what they call alternative competing
hypotheses for counterdeception (ACH-CD). Their most significant adaptations to
Heuer’s original eight-step outline for the analysis of competing hypotheses are [73]:
• Adding the “other” or “unknown” hypothesis to step 1 (i.e., “Identify the pos-
sible hypotheses to be considered”). This modification supports further
Bayesian analysis of the alternative hypotheses.
• Making sure that step 2, “Make a list of significant evidence and arguments
for and against each hypothesis,” considers not only the case where evidence
supports a hypothesis, p(E|Hi), but also the likelihood that observing that
same evidence if the hypothesis is not true, p(E|¬Hi).
• Specifically considering deception-related COAs in steps 4 (“Refine the
matrix”) and 5 (“Draw tentative conclusions about the relative likelihood of
each hypothesis”).
• Adding the concept of conducting operational “experiments” to step 8 (“Iden-
tify milestones for future observation that may indicate events are taking a dif-
ferent course than expected”) in order to provide additional intelligence that
would reveal evidence of deliberate deception.
166
Principles of Counterdeception
Finding the dots
Connecting the dots
Seeing the picture
Characterizing the dots
Linking anomalies to D&D
R. V. Jones: Theory of spoof
unmasking
Assessing support for D&D hypotheses
Johnson et al.: Cognitive model of
fraud and deception detection
Linking evidence to
D&D hypotheses
Heuer: Analysis of competing
hypotheses
Detecting anomalies
Whaley and Busby:
Congruity theory and
ombudsman method
Hypotheses generation
Local and
global
deception
Hypotheses support and
sensitivity
Figure 5.4
The Stech-Elässer counterdeception business process. (Source: [72].)ongruity theory and
ombudsman method
Hypotheses generation
Local and
global
deception
Hypotheses support and
sensitivity
Figure 5.4
The Stech-Elässer counterdeception business process. (Source: [72].)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ombudsman method
Hypotheses generation
Local and
global
deception
Hypotheses support and
sensitivity
Figure 5.4
The Stech-Elässer counterdeception business process. (Source: [72].)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The first two adaptations support Stech and Elsässer’s work on developing
Bayesian belief networks to model the alternative COAs, perform sensitivity analy-
sis in order to analyze the diagnosticity of the evidence (part of Step 3 in ACH), and
to suggest possible key indicators to look for that would reveal the adversary’s
intentions.
5.3
Searching for Common Themes
In Chapter 2 we saw that there was considerable agreement on a range of topics in
the deception research community, which we then organized into six general themes
(Figure 2.15). We then examined these themes in the context of a generalized decep-
tion cycle (Figure 2.13) and Waltz’s three-level hierarchy of information. In this
chapter, we propose to take a similar approach and organize the various
counterdeception concepts, approaches, models, and methods presented in the
previous
sections
into
general
themes
using
a
framework
based
on
the
counterdeception definitions presented in Section 5.1. These counterdeception
themes are then compared to the deception themes of Chapter 2 and used to synthe-
size a set of fundamental principles of counterdeception.
5.3.1
A Holistic Approach to Counterdeception
In Section 5.1, we saw that counterdeception consists of both intelligence and oper-
ational functions. These can be broken down as follows:
• Intelligence functions. Awareness of deception cues, detection and exposure
of deception operations, and discovery and penetration the adversary’s real
capabilities and intentions;
• Operational functions. Negate or mitigate deception’s effect and exploit the
adversary’s own deception plan.
These five functional dimensions form a simple, yet useful framework for think-
ing about counterdeception; however, keep in mind that these dimensions are not
mutually exclusive. They are, in fact, highly interdependent and form more of a con-
tinuum of functions than a set of independent activities. This suggests that
counterdeception requires a more holistic approach than is suggested by the tradi-
tional intelligence cycle. As we will see, the themes that emerge from the
counterdeception literature reinforce this idea.
Our examination of the research suggests that there are nine themes represent-
ing processes and methods that would ideally work together synergistically to iden-
tify and defeat the adversary’s attempts at deception. Figure 5.5 shows these themes
arranged within the framework of the five intelligence and operations functions.
Like the functional dimensions of our counterdeception framework, these themes
are themselves interdependent and reflect a holistic approach to counterdeception.
The first theme, human reasoning capabilities, is probably the most important
since it binds the other themes together. All of the authors we have reviewed,
whether in Chapter 2 or this chapter, have either explicitly or implicitly recognized
5.3
Searching for Common Themes
167since it binds the other themes together. All of the authors we have reviewed,
whether in Chapter 2 or this chapter, have either explicitly or implicitly recognized
5.3
Searching for Common Themes
167

--- PAGE BREAK ---that the success or failure of deception occurs in the minds of the analysts, com-
manders, and decision-makers who are its targets.

Heuer is often quoted in this
regard [74]: “Deception is, above all, a cognitive phenomenon; it occurs in our
minds.” Likewise, it is clear that many of these same researchers believe
counterdeception is primarily a cognitive phenomenon as well.

As Whaley con-
cludes after examining 47 categories of real-life professionals who deal with decep-
tion [75], “Successful detection procedures were found to be largely or entirely
intellectual rather than technological in nature.” All of the counterdeception con-
cepts dealing with human reasoning emphasize the role that broad, subtle powers of
awareness, discernment, and discovery play in distinguishing between what is real
and what is deceptively constructed by the adversary.

This is why this theme covers
all five dimensions of our framework in Figure 5.5.

This emphasis on concepts such as acumen and intuition has interesting implica-
tions for how one goes about implementing these ideas in real organizations.

For
example, Johnson et al.

found that none of the 24 auditors in their study successfully
identified the presence of fraud in all of the four cases they were given and, in fact,
20 auditors failed to detect fraud in at least three out of the four cases.

In addition,
two auditors failed to detect any fraud in any of the four cases and seven auditors
failed to give an unqualified opinion on the clean cases they were presented.found that none of the 24 auditors in their study successfully
identified the presence of fraud in all of the four cases they were given and, in fact,
20 auditors failed to detect fraud in at least three out of the four cases.

In addition,
two auditors failed to detect any fraud in any of the four cases and seven auditors
failed to give an unqualified opinion on the clean cases they were presented.

Obvi-
ously, not only is detecting deception difficult, but auditors also differ significantly
168
Principles of Counterdeception
Awareness
Detection &
Exposure
Discovery &
Penetration
Negate or Mitigate
Effects
Exploit
Intelligence
Operations
•
•
Awareness
Detection and
exposure
Discovery and
penetration
Negate or mitigate
effects
Exploit
Intelligence
Operations
• Threat assessment
–Cultural,
organizational, and
personal factors
–Deception styles,
practices, and
experience
–Capabilities and
limitations
•
• –
• –
•
• –
• –
•
• –
• Human reasoning capabilities
–Acumen and predetection
–Intuition and indirect thinking
–Increased alertness
•
•
•
• Collection methods
–Control as many channels as possible.

–Avoid relying on a single source.

–Use new collection methods unknown to the
adversary.

•
•
•
• •
• Analytic methods
Incongruity testing
Alternative competing hypotheses
Reconstructive inference
Weighting of tactical indicators
Narrative analysis
Metadata
Bayes' theorem
Game theory
Modeling and simulation
Historical case studies
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
• Self-assessment
–Examine one’s own
assumptions,
preconceptions,
expectations, beliefs, and
biases for exploitable
weaknesses.

–Examine which of own
strategies and methods
of intelligence
collection, analysis, and
decision making have
been compromised.--- PAGE BREAK ---

•
•
•
• •
• Analytic methods
Incongruity testing
Alternative competing hypotheses
Reconstructive inference
Weighting of tactical indicators
Narrative analysis
Metadata
Bayes' theorem
Game theory
Modeling and simulation
Historical case studies
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
• Self-assessment
–Examine one’s own
assumptions,
preconceptions,
expectations, beliefs, and
biases for exploitable
weaknesses. –Examine which of own
strategies and methods
of intelligence
collection, analysis, and
decision making have
been compromised. •
• –
• –
• –
• –
• –
•
• –
• –
• –
• –
• –
• Organizational measures
–Devil’s advocates and multiple advocacy
–Competitive analysis
–Counterdeception staffs
–Decouple identities/missions from theories/images
•
•
•
•
• Situation assessment
–Likelihood of
deception in
different situations
• High stakes
• Asymmetric
power
differences
• Human and
material costs
• Uncertainty
•
• –
• –
–• ––
––• –
––• •–
––• •–
––• –
––• •–
––• –
• Counterespionage and counterintelligence operations
• Counterdeception operations
Figure 5.5
Counterdeception themes in the deception literature.

--- PAGE BREAK ---in their fraud detection capabilities.

In addition, if there is considerable variation in
the counterdeception performance of highly skilled auditors examining relatively
well-structured data in the form of financial statements, what must the situation be
like for the analysts in the intelligence and military community who have to deal
with information that is far more unstructured and ambiguous?

How then can con-
cepts like acumen and intuition be operationalized in those settings and applied to
the problem of counterdeception?

We will look into what approaches might
provide some answers to this difficult question in the next chapter.

The next three themes working together also have the potential to make human
reasoning capabilities more effective when it comes to counterdeception.

These
themes are themselves characterized by yet another theme (i.e., the concept of an
assessment process).

These three themes, self-assessment, threat assessment, and sit-
uation assessment, focus on what Handel referred to as “knowing thine enemy” and
“knowing thyself.” Of course, Handel was not the first to draw this conclusion.

The
ever-quotable Sun Tzu observed [76], “Therefore I say: ‘Know your enemy and
know yourself; in a hundred battles you will never be in peril.

When you are igno-
rant of the enemy but know yourself, your chances of winning or losing are equal.

If
ignorant of the enemy and of yourself, you are certain in every battle to be in peril.’”
What was true over 2,000 years ago is amazingly still true today.

Perhaps that was
why the FORTITIDE deception was successful; Hitler was ignorant of both his
enemy and himself.

The need for self-assessment, to know thyself, is a response to the empirical evi-
dence that deception is almost always successful especially when the deception
operation exploits the target’s own preconceptions and expectations (M-1 type
deceptions).Perhaps that was
why the FORTITIDE deception was successful; Hitler was ignorant of both his
enemy and himself.

The need for self-assessment, to know thyself, is a response to the empirical evi-
dence that deception is almost always successful especially when the deception
operation exploits the target’s own preconceptions and expectations (M-1 type
deceptions).

Given this obvious vulnerability, several authors advocate conducting
such assessments as an important means of negating or mitigating deception’s
effects and their work suggest that this should be a two-pronged process.

First and
foremost is the need to make both analysts and decision-makers aware of their own
assumptions, preconceptions, beliefs, and biases.

This type of awareness is not quite
the same kind of vigilance implied in the awareness dimension of our framework,
which involves an awareness of the presence or absence of external environmental
cues.

Rather it is inwardly focused and stresses consciousness of one’s own self.

As
Jervis notes [77]:
People often not only have a limited understanding of the workings of other’s argu-
ments, they also do not know the structure of their own belief systems—what values
are most important, how some beliefs are derived from others, and what evidence
would contradict their views.

Particularly dangerous is the tendency to take the
most important questions for granted.

Analysis of policies that failed indicates that
many crucial errors occur not because decision-makers arrive at the wrong answers,
but because they ask the wrong questions.

This often involves taking too many
things for granted and failing to scrutinize basic assumptions.

Such knowledge is essential to mitigating and negating the adversary’s attempts
at deception since deception relies so heavily on just such ignorance.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This often involves taking too many
things for granted and failing to scrutinize basic assumptions. Such knowledge is essential to mitigating and negating the adversary’s attempts
at deception since deception relies so heavily on just such ignorance. The hope is
that the self-assessment process will make analysts and decision-makers more
alert to information and situations that appear to be too good to be true as well as
making them less likely to casually dismiss information that conflicts with their
5.3
Searching for Common Themes
169

--- PAGE BREAK ---expectations or beliefs.

As Handel points out [78], “Under certain circumstances,
the more perfectly an intelligence puzzle fits together, the greater the danger of a
possible deception ploy.

This is particularly true when information—the solution to
an important and complex intelligence puzzle—is received in the absence of much
noise and contradictory evidence, and when the resulting conclusions conform
neatly to one’s hopes and expectations.”
The second prong of the self-assessment theme stresses the need to know which
of your own strategies and methods of intelligence collection, analysis, and decision-
making have been compromised.

The importance of this vulnerability cannot be
stressed enough since deception is in one sense a battle for control of information
channels.

Deception practitioners and researchers urge both the deceiver and target
to try to control as many channels as possible.

The deceiver seeks to compromise
channels that the target considers to be credible and reliable without the target’s
knowledge.

In a similar manner, the target seeks to develop channels unknown to
the deceiver.

The knowledge that the existence of a secret channel has been compro-
mised or that an adversary has discovered a channel considered to be particularly
valuable by the target is absolutely critical to the detection and discovery dimensions
of counterdeception.

Since knowing thyself is likely to only produce a 50–50 chance of success
according to the venerable Sun Tzu, if you want to be victorious in the next 100 bat-
tles, you need to know your enemy as well.

The threat assessment and situation
assessment themes focus on the various factors that influence an adversary’s deci-
sion to use deception.Since knowing thyself is likely to only produce a 50–50 chance of success
according to the venerable Sun Tzu, if you want to be victorious in the next 100 bat-
tles, you need to know your enemy as well.

The threat assessment and situation
assessment themes focus on the various factors that influence an adversary’s deci-
sion to use deception.

In a counterdeception context, the factors suggested by Daniel
and Herbig provide an excellent starting point for any threat assessment and should
be supplemented with information about the adversary’s capabilities and experience
with running deception operations For example, is deception part of the adversary’s
doctrine?

Does he typically rely on specific styles of deception?

Have previous
attempts at deception resulted in success or failure?

The situation assessment theme
recognizes that the use of deception is likely to be highly situation dependent.

Nor-
mal situations will most likely only call for normal deception measures (i.e., denial
in the form of security measures).

For example, sophisticated deception operations
are not normally associated with conventional weapons development programs
such as routine improvements to armored vehicles.

On the other hand, other situa-
tions (high stakes or asymmetric differences in power or capability between the
adversary and the target) may make it more likely that an adversary will employ
more sophisticated deception measures.

One needs only to watch the evening news
to see any number of stories (nuclear proliferation for instance) that are examples of
potential high-stakes situations where deception is likely to play a role.

These two
assessment processes fit naturally under the awareness dimension of our framework
since the resulting knowledge helps to prime analysts to recognize and register both
the obvious and subtle cues (e.g., the MOM warning signs in the CIA tradecraft
note) that help them to detect deception operations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One needs only to watch the evening news
to see any number of stories (nuclear proliferation for instance) that are examples of
potential high-stakes situations where deception is likely to play a role. These two
assessment processes fit naturally under the awareness dimension of our framework
since the resulting knowledge helps to prime analysts to recognize and register both
the obvious and subtle cues (e.g., the MOM warning signs in the CIA tradecraft
note) that help them to detect deception operations. Our next two themes, collection methods and analytic methods, form the meth-
odological foundation for both detecting and exposing deception and discovering
and penetrating the real story behind the deception. Collection methods drive what
the target observes and subsequently perceives. From the days of R. V. Jones to the
present, the number-one prescription for countering deception has been to try to
170
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---control as many channels (sources) of information as possible with the corollary to
this rule being that one should avoid relying on a single source of information wher-
ever possible.

This is especially true when the stakes are high.

Since human sources
and technical collection systems provide the data and information needed to both
detect and penetrate a deception, it is also highly advisable to exploit channels that
are unknown to the adversary, either by using new methods unknown to him or
known methods that have been compromised without his knowledge (e.g., the
Allies’ ability to exploit the German Enigma code).

Human history includes thousands of years of trying to understand the events
and phenomena we observe in the world around us.

As a result, philosophers and
scientists have developed methods of thinking (from the Socratic method of natural
philosophy to the scientific method of the scientific revolution) as well as innumera-
ble specific techniques (logic, mathematics, algorithms, and other tools) that have
transformed our world.

It is no surprise therefore that analytic methods should be a
major theme that emerges from the counterdeception literature.

Counterdeception
relies on intelligence analysis and intelligence analysis relies first and foremost on
the capabilities of human analysts.

They in turn rely on analytic methods and tech-
niques to help them make sense of the data and information pouring in from multi-
ple sources.

Two methods stand out in the literature when it comes to
counterdeception.

First, incongruity testing is a fundamental method that supports
the detection and exposure function within our framework.Two methods stand out in the literature when it comes to
counterdeception.

First, incongruity testing is a fundamental method that supports
the detection and exposure function within our framework.

Likewise, Heuer [76]
emphasizes the importance of generating and evaluating alternative hypotheses
(essentially an adaptation of the scientific method) “as a tool to aid judgment on
important issues requiring careful weighing of alternative explanations or conclu-
sions.” Here the emphasis is less on detecting deception and more on selecting the
adversary’s actual course of action from other potential COAs where deception is
likely a factor.

The results of incongruity testing and hypotheses evaluation will
more than likely raise further questions.

The answers will require additional infor-
mation to resolve real from false incongruities, eliminate information gaps (missing
evidence), and find information that can disprove hypotheses.

These information
needs can be satisfied by tasking collectors and integrating their inputs with infor-
mation from counterintelligence and counterdeception operations.

Other methods
and analytic techniques support not only the detection and discovery dimensions
but also the processes associated with other themes (e.g., the use of the Bayes’ theo-
rem, game theory, and other modeling and simulation methods to support situation
assessment activities).

Finally, the information uncovered about the adversary’s
deception operations drives the planning and execution of counterdeception opera-
tions aimed at exploiting the adversary’s own plans.

Given the importance of these
themes, we will delve further into the details of counterdeception analytic and
collection methods in Chapter 7.

Although deception occurs in the human mind, we have also seen that there are
organizational processes and biases that can make the deceiver’s job either easier or
harder.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Given the importance of these
themes, we will delve further into the details of counterdeception analytic and
collection methods in Chapter 7. Although deception occurs in the human mind, we have also seen that there are
organizational processes and biases that can make the deceiver’s job either easier or
harder. Factors such as the size of the target’s decision-making groups, their goals
and mindset, resources and resource allocations, the size and numbers of intelli-
gence and military organizations, and the nature of their bureaucratic political pro-
cesses all affect how information is acquired, filtered, shared, and interpreted. For
example, as we saw in Chapter 3, Hitler’s leadership style and the nature of the
5.3
Searching for Common Themes
171

--- PAGE BREAK ---German command structure made the Allies’ job of deception notably easier than it
might have been under other circumstances.

The organizational measures theme
gathers together a set of ideas that counterdeception researchers believe, theoreti-
cally anyway, should make the deceiver’s job harder.

The primary focus of the sub-
jects within this theme is on ways that an organization can overcome organizational
mindsets and remain open to the possibility of what Whaley called the “third way.”
Devil’s advocacy and multiple advocacy are both simply means of putting alterna-
tive interpretations of a situation in front of decision-makers.

None of these inter-
pretations may actually reflect the true situation, but such processes help to ensure
that the situation is at least seen from different perspectives and any questions about
assumptions and evidence are properly raised and addressed.

Jervis probably does
the best job of making this point when he writes [22]:
Of course the correct image will not necessarily emerge from this adversary pro-
cess.

But—and this is important enough—the decision-maker can be given a wider
range of choice in two related ways.

First, because he is exposed to conflicting
interpretations of events and shown how alternative images make the world
appear differently, he will have to exercise explicit judgment to select his explana-
tions and images rather than immediately seeing one view as the only possible one.

Second, debates will help bring out the implicit assumptions discussed above.

An
individual rarely has the ability or the incentive to expose the structure of his
beliefs, and interaction with someone who holds a different position is usually the
best, if not the only, way for those he is advising, and indeed for the person him-
self, to see where his arguments are most vulnerable.

It is unlikely that any partici-
pant will be converted.An
individual rarely has the ability or the incentive to expose the structure of his
beliefs, and interaction with someone who holds a different position is usually the
best, if not the only, way for those he is advising, and indeed for the person him-
self, to see where his arguments are most vulnerable.

It is unlikely that any partici-
pant will be converted.

But those who listen to the arguments are in a good
position to learn what perspectives they are rejecting, what evidence they should
examine more closely, and what assumptions need further thought.

As a result,
fewer important questions will be overlooked because everyone agrees on the
answer.

Our two final themes represent proactive means of counterdeception that play
important roles across both the intelligence and operational dimensions of our
framework.

The potential target of deception does not have to be, and in fact should
not be, a passive participant in the process.

Instead of simply accepting the data and
information (both real and false) received through his information channels, the tar-
get can conduct his own espionage and technical collection operations aimed at
gathering intelligence about the adversary—his plans, capabilities, and real inten-
tions.

Counterespionage and counterintelligence operations focus on denying the
adversary the information he needs to plan and execute his deception operations
and, most importantly, uncovering his double agents in order to negate their value
or even turn them against the deceiver.

In cases where deception is suspected,
counterdeception operations can be used to probe the environment in order to pro-
voke the adversary to some action that will confirm the deception or, better yet,
reveal his true plans.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Counterespionage and counterintelligence operations focus on denying the
adversary the information he needs to plan and execute his deception operations
and, most importantly, uncovering his double agents in order to negate their value
or even turn them against the deceiver. In cases where deception is suspected,
counterdeception operations can be used to probe the environment in order to pro-
voke the adversary to some action that will confirm the deception or, better yet,
reveal his true plans. Likewise, if intelligence confirms the existence of a deception
operation, the target can conduct his own counterdeception operations to deceive
the adversary that his deception working while simultaneously undertaking
operations to exploit the adversary’s plans. 172
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---5.3.2
Counterdeception Themes and the Deception Cycle
In Chapter 2 we proposed that a model of a general deception cycle could be used to
understand the basic workings of deception.

Figure 5.6 shows the impact the nine
counterdeception themes can have on the different steps in the cycle.

At the far
right-hand side of the figure we see that, as always, human reasoning capabilities
play a decisive role in how observations of the environment are transformed into
knowledge and how that knowledge is transformed into decisions and actions.

Human acumen, sagacity, and intuition determine the most likely explanation (the
reconstructed story) that accounts for the observed data as well as what to make of
it and what to do about it.

Also on the right-hand side of Figure 5.7 are three of the
themes that help leverage those human capabilities.

The main impact of the analyti-
cal methodologies theme is on helping analysts to reconstruct the deception story
and, more importantly, recognize that it is a deception.

The self-assessment theme
influences the target’s perceptions of the story.

It enables analysts and decision-
makers to ask questions like: Does the reconstructed story fit a little too well with
expectations?

Finally, the impact of the organizational measures theme is on the tar-
get’s understanding (and timeliness) of the situation as well as on the resulting
decisions and actions that need to be made.

On the left-hand side of Figure 5.7 are the threat and situation assessment
themes—the “know thine enemy” themes.

The impact of these themes is to try to
get one step ahead of a potential adversary by identifying his possible motives for
deception as well as the situations where those motives are likely come into play.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On the left-hand side of Figure 5.7 are the threat and situation assessment
themes—the “know thine enemy” themes. The impact of these themes is to try to
get one step ahead of a potential adversary by identifying his possible motives for
deception as well as the situations where those motives are likely come into play. 5.3
Searching for Common Themes
173
Deception
objective
Actions
required
Required
perceptions
Deception
story
Deception
methods
Execution
Channels,
delays, &
noise
Target’s
observations
Target’s
decisions &
actions
Feedback
Required
observables
Delays, noise, &
filters
Reconstructed
story
Delays, noise, &
filters
Target’s
perceptions
Target’s
understanding
Counterdeception
operations
Counterespionage &
counterintelligence
operations
Situation
assessment
Self assessment
Threat
assessment
Organizational
measures
Analytical
methods
Collection
methods
Deception
objective
Actions
required
Required
perceptions
Deception
story
Deception
methods
Execution
Channels,
delays, &
noise
Target’s
observations
Target’s
decisions &
actions
Feedback
Required
observables
Delays, noise, &
filters
Reconstructed
story
Delays, noise, &
filters
Target’s
perceptions
Target’s
understanding
Counterdeception
operations
Counterespionage &
counterintelligence
operations
Situation
assessment
Self assessment
Threat
assessment
Organizational
measures
Analytical
methods
Collection
methods
Deception
objective
Actions
required
Required
perceptions
Deception
story
Deception
methods
Execution
Channels,
delays, &
noise
Target’s
observations
Target’s
decisions &
actions
Feedback
Required
observables
Delays, noise, &
filters
Reconstructed
story
Delays, noise, &
filters
Target’s
perceptions
Target’s
understanding
Counterdeception
operations
Counterespionage &
counterintelligence
operations
Situation
assessment
Self assessment
Threat
assessment
Organizational
measures
Analytical
methods
Collection
methods
Deception
objective
Actions
required
Required
perceptions
Deception
story
Deception
methods
Execution
Physical
processes
Data
Observation
Organization
Understanding
Application
Information
Knowledge
Channels,
delays, and
noise
Target’s
observations
Target’s
decisions and
actions
Feedback
Required
observables
Reconstructed
story
Delays, noise,
and filters
Target’s
perceptions
Target’s
understanding
Counterdeception
operations
Counterespionage
and counterintelligence
operations
Situation
assessment
Self-assessment
Threat
assessment
Organizational
measures
Analytical
methods
Collection
methods
Delays, noise,
and filters
Human reasoning capabilities
Figure 5.6
Counterdeception themes in the general deception cycle context.essment
Organizational
measures
Analytical
methods
Collection
methods
Delays, noise,
and filters
Human reasoning capabilities
Figure 5.6
Counterdeception themes in the general deception cycle context.

--- PAGE BREAK ---al
measures
Analytical
methods
Collection
methods
Delays, noise,
and filters
Human reasoning capabilities
Figure 5.6
Counterdeception themes in the general deception cycle context.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

These motives drive the adversary’s deception objectives and the subsequent actions
the adversary wants the target to take. In addition, the threat assessment helps to
identify likely deception methods the potential adversary is likely to be capable of
employing to achieve his objectives.
In the middle of Figure 5.6, we see that the impact of counterdeception and
counterespionage/counterintelligence operations falls primarily on the feedback
that the deceiver receives from the target. Depending on the feedback that he
receives (see Figure 2.10), the deceiver must make a choice whether to maintain,
escalate, or stop the deception. By discovering and manipulating those feedback
channels, the target has the potential to force the adversary to show his hand. Dis-
covering those feedback channels is where CE and CI operations come into the pic-
ture. Leaks can either be closed off or used to manipulate the deceiver’s perception
of how the deception operation is proceeding. The same goes for the deceiver’s
human and technical collection sources (spies, bugs, compromised secure communi-
cations systems, and so forth). Counterdeception operations can be used to manipu-
late other channels of information the deceiver relies on such as overhead
reconnaissance or diplomatic assets. CE and CI operations also impact the channels
of information available to the target. As we said before, this involves exposing
those channels that are being used as part of the deception operation but also
involves helping to protect the channels that the deceiver is unaware of.
At first glance, the collection methods theme appears to have considerable
potential for counterdeception. As we have seen, controlling as many channels of
174
Principles of Counterdeception
Detection and exposure
Discovery and penetration
Negate
or mitigate
effects
Awareness
Target’s
observations
The
prepared
mind
The
prepared
organization
Target’s
decisions and
actions
Target’s
perception and
understanding
Principles of counterdeception
• Self-assessment
• Collection
methods
• Threat
assessment
• Situation
assessment
•
•
•
• Collection
methods
• Self-assessment
• CE/CI operations
• Counterdeception
operations
•
•
• Analytic
methods
• Situation
assessment
•
•
Human reasoning capabilities
Organizational measures
Exploit
Know
yourself
Know your
adversary
Know your
channels
Know your
situation
Figure 5.7
Principles of counterdeception within the context of the counterdeception
framework.Organizational measures
Exploit
Know
yourself
Know your
adversary
Know your
channels
Know your
situation
Figure 5.7
Principles of counterdeception within the context of the counterdeception
framework.

--- PAGE BREAK ---information as possible is a key counterdeception maxim.

Not only is this necessary
from an analytical sense, but controlling as many channels as possible may also
restrict range of deception methods available to the deceiver and drive his cost of
deception up by increasing the number of observables that are required to produce a
realistic deception scenario.

A broad range of robust collection methods across all
the INTs increases the likelihood that the target may be able to penetrate the
deceiver’s security measures and discover the existence of the deception operation
(say, through a human asset or a COMINT intercept), the details of the plan (the
deception story), and the deceiver’s objectives themselves.

Nevertheless, it is impor-
tant to recall one more time Heuer’s cautionary words [79]: “The kinds of addi-
tional information one might realistically expect to obtain through enhanced
collection capabilities, however, are unlikely to reduce vulnerability to deception
significantly.

Any systematic counterdeception program must focus primarily on
problems of analysis, only secondarily on collection.”
Before moving on it is important to once again stress that our interpretation of
the counterdeception literature leads us to the conclusion that it represents a holistic
process.

Harris [5] decries “seat-of-the-pants counterdeception efforts” as “uncoor-
dinated, perhaps sporadic efforts to detect and outwit foreign deception operations
and calls for “the coordination of detection and countermeasures programs in a
counterdeception system.” Systems are holistic; their properties cannot be
explained simply by examining the properties of their components.

Nothing in the
counterdeception literature contradicts Harris’s recognition that counterdeception
has this same characteristic.Harris [5] decries “seat-of-the-pants counterdeception efforts” as “uncoor-
dinated, perhaps sporadic efforts to detect and outwit foreign deception operations
and calls for “the coordination of detection and countermeasures programs in a
counterdeception system.” Systems are holistic; their properties cannot be
explained simply by examining the properties of their components.

Nothing in the
counterdeception literature contradicts Harris’s recognition that counterdeception
has this same characteristic.

Although our nine themes do not yet constitute a for-
mal counterdeception system, it should be clear that they can only be effective when
used in a highly coordinated, mutually supportive manner.

With that in mind, let’s
move on and introduce our proposed principles of counterdeception.

5.4
Proposed Principles of Counterdeception
Centuries of conflict have seen strategic and tactical deception [80] transformed
from “an idiosyncratic fad of exceptionally imaginative leaders” to a fairly well
understood component of strategic and tactical doctrine.

Our review of the litera-
ture leads us to conclude that no similar process or doctrine of counterdeception has
as yet evolved.

The adversary’s deception planners, armed with a wide array of
deception methods honed by hundreds of years of practical experience, do not face
a corresponding counterdeception organization armed with a similarly wide range
of practical counterdeception tools.

Instead, we see that the contest between
deceiver and target pits deception methods against basic human reasoning capabili-
ties and the formal and informal processes, procedures, policies, and structures of
the organizational they operate in.

In essence, all that really stands in the way of the
deceiver is what Pasteur called “the prepared mind” and, extending that concept,
the prepared organization.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Instead, we see that the contest between
deceiver and target pits deception methods against basic human reasoning capabili-
ties and the formal and informal processes, procedures, policies, and structures of
the organizational they operate in. In essence, all that really stands in the way of the
deceiver is what Pasteur called “the prepared mind” and, extending that concept,
the prepared organization. The concepts of the prepared mind and the prepared organization correspond
well with the intelligence functions within the counterdeception framework intro-
duced in Section 5.3. Pasteur’s original comments were made to emphasize that
only the prepared mind is receptive to the significance of anomalies or surprising
5.4
Proposed Principles of Counterdeception
175

--- PAGE BREAK ---results when making scientific observations.

The prepared mind and “chance” com-
bine to produce serendipitous scientific discoveries and insights.

In a counter-
deception context, the prepared mind is receptive to both positive and negative cues
(i.e., something is different, surprising, or missing) and is then able to bring to bear a
number of counterdeception methods—collection, analytical, or operational—on
the problems of simultaneously detecting and penetrating the deception.

The pre-
pared organization is able to collect and organize insights and discoveries generated
by individuals and teams and integrate it into the target’s (political leaders and mili-
tary commanders) common perception and understanding of the environment and
situation in a way that negates or mitigates the effects of the intended deception.

It is
the prepared mind and organization, supported by a range of collection methods,
analytical methods and techniques, and operational capabilities that makes the tar-
get less susceptible to deception.

This basic idea is summarized in Figure 5.7, which
shows how four basic counterdeception principles support the prepared mind and
organization to make the target’s perceptions and understanding less susceptible to
the effects of deception.

With that as our context, let’s look at our four proposed
principles.

5.4.1
Know Yourself
Sun Tzu makes it clear that, at a minimum, you must know yourself if you wish to
have any reasonable hope of success in battle.

The same is true in the battle of mir-
rors, masks, lies, and secrets [81] that characterizes the contest between deceiver and
target.

In Chapter 2 we saw that deception is particularly successful when it exploits
the target’s expectations and preconceptions, or paraphrasing Whaley, the best
stratagem is one where the course of action suggested by the deception is more plau-
sible in terms of the target’s prior experience and knowledge then other COAs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The same is true in the battle of mir-
rors, masks, lies, and secrets [81] that characterizes the contest between deceiver and
target. In Chapter 2 we saw that deception is particularly successful when it exploits
the target’s expectations and preconceptions, or paraphrasing Whaley, the best
stratagem is one where the course of action suggested by the deception is more plau-
sible in terms of the target’s prior experience and knowledge then other COAs. Later
in Chapter 3 we saw this phenomenon summed up by the simple phrase seeing what
we expect to see. Such observations are the basis for the self-assessment theme that
emerges from the counterdeception literature and lead us to our first fundamental
principle of counterdeception: know yourself. Putting it another way, if you know
you are going to see what you expect to see, you better know what those
expectations are and how they came about. Although it was made in a different context, U.S. Secretary of Defense Donald
Rumsfeld’s comment about known knowns, known unknowns, and unknown
unknowns [82] represents an important feature of the know yourself principle. Counterdeception requires that you not only evaluate what you know and don’t
know (recall Crowe’s Law), but that you must also consciously consider how that
knowledge came about. Is what you think you know (or believe) based on fact, or is
it really just an assumption or a preconception? Is what you think you know biased
by expectations or ethnocentric biases? And although Rumsfeld was accused of gob-
bledygook [83] in many circles for the “But there are also unknown unknowns—the
ones we don’t know we don’t know” comment [83], the consideration of the
unknown unknowns critically depends on the know yourself principle because this
is where expectations and biases are most likely to blind the target to potential
courses of action available to the deceiver (the third option). 176
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---If Sun Tzu was right, then knowing yourself gives you at least a fighting chance
at detecting deception.

It also helps to bear in mind that Whaley also said [84]: “If
the victim does not suspect the possibility that deception is operating, he will inevi-
tably be gulled.” Knowing yourself plays a critical role in awareness, that sense of
vigilance that triggers some suspicion that something is quite not right or conversely
that things are going just a bit too perfectly.

Such self-awareness and self-reflection
is the first step towards avoiding being “gulled.”
5.4.2
Know Your Adversary
“Know your enemy.” Once again our ancient Chinese stratagemist Sun Tzu points
the way to another fundamental principle of counterdeception.

The second princi-
ple of deception is know your adversary.

We use the term adversary here in order to
make the point that the threat of deception is not limited strictly to military enemies.

The potential for deception exists in any situation—military, diplomatic, or eco-
nomic—where one side can gain competitive advantage through its use.

The know
your adversary principle is the foundation of the two Ms in CIA Tradecraft Note
No.

10—means and motive.

Handel’s deception typology (see Figure 2.5) provides
a good framework for understanding the importance of this principle.

According to
Handel, all deception is directed at manipulating two categories of information:
capabilities and intentions.

Using the military context as an example, an adversary
attempts to:
• Conceal his real capabilities in order to cause the target to underestimate the
deceiver’s real strength.

• Exaggerate his real capabilities in order to appear stronger than he really is.

• Conceal his plans and readiness for some action (e.g., an attack).

• Exaggerate his readiness (e.g., to deter attack).--- PAGE BREAK ---

• Conceal his plans and readiness for some action (e.g., an attack). • Exaggerate his readiness (e.g., to deter attack). From the counterdeception perspective, the know your adversary principle
reminds analysts and decision-makers to consider the means the adversary has at his
disposal (doctrine, training, personnel, experience, and technology) for concealing
or exaggerating his capabilities if it is in his best interests to do so. Likewise, the
principle focuses attention on the adversary’s motives for concealing or exaggerat-
ing his capabilities and/or intent. These motives could range from achieving sur-
prise, bluffing, deterrence, seeking prestige or influence, blackmail, or seeking
concessions from the target. Daniel and Herbig’s second set of factors related to the
likelihood of deception are pertinent here. In addition, motives may change depend-
ing on the situation, so there is also a dynamic component to this principle. A coun-
try that is considerably stronger than a neighbor does not need to resort to
deception in order to threaten or otherwise influence its victim. On the other hand,
that same country when put into another situation involving a considerably stron-
ger nation than itself might resort to deception in order to deter or bluff the stronger
adversary. We have taken Sun Tzu’s “know your enemy” principle and interpreted it in a
broader counterdeception context we label “know your adversary.” Nevertheless,
we have to take care not to fall into a potentially dangerous mindset involving the
5.4
Proposed Principles of Counterdeception
177

--- PAGE BREAK ---use of the words enemy and adversary by remembering that although large sophisti-
cated deception operations are rare, deception itself is common.

Everyone is a poten-
tial deceiver as Handel points out in one of his paradoxes discussed in Chapter 2
[85]: “The more one has a reputation for honesty—the easier it is to lie convinc-
ingly.” Even more concisely: Honest people/states can deceive the best.” This is
why the concept of the prepared mind and the use of a holistic approach to
counterdeception is so important; whether dealing with enemies (in a military
sense), potential enemies, real and potential adversaries, or “honest people/states,”
the prepared mind and organization must be able to draw on a wide and deep pool
of information about the other party.

More importantly, in-depth knowledge of the
adversary makes it possible to begin breaking down ethnocentric biases and come to
see things from the adversary’s perspective.

As Dewar noted, being able to put your-
self into the mind of the adversary may be the counterdeception analyst’s main, per-
haps only, effective weapon.

5.4.3
Know Your Situation
Our third principle, know your situation, focuses on the necessity for continually eval-
uating the environment for the cues indicating deception will have to be a considered
as a major factor when formulating strategies, considering options, making decisions,
or taking action.

Earlier in this chapter we suggested that analysts are confronted by a
continuum of deceptive activity, and most of it, like the normal security activities of an
adversary (denial), can be considered normal and likely to occur no matter what the
situation is.

In addition, as numerous authors have pointed out, the use of large-scale,
sophisticated deception operations is usually rare.Earlier in this chapter we suggested that analysts are confronted by a
continuum of deceptive activity, and most of it, like the normal security activities of an
adversary (denial), can be considered normal and likely to occur no matter what the
situation is.

In addition, as numerous authors have pointed out, the use of large-scale,
sophisticated deception operations is usually rare.

This can be attributed to the fact
that, with the exception of totalitarian regimes that usually have few scruples about
the use of deception, most adversaries are unlikely to go to the effort to plan and exe-
cute extensive deception operations on a regular basis.

As Handel points out [86], “To
begin with, those who frequently make use of stratagem rapidly lose their credibility;
what they may get away with one, two, or three times in succession they cannot hope
to succeed with indefinitely.” In addition, Maxim 6 in Figure 2.7 states [87]: “There
are circumstances where deception assets should be husbanded despite the costs of
maintenance and risk of waste, awaiting a more fruitful use.” This maxim implies that
each situation forces the adversary to perform a cost benefit tradeoff—should high
value deception assets be used to take advantage of an opportunity even though their
use will compromise them and render them valueless, or should they be saved in
expectation of higher gains in some future situation?

The idea that the likelihood of deception is related to situational factors seems
intuitively obvious.

CIA Tradecraft Note 10 makes the distinction between “regular”
and “suspect and sensitive” issues and it would be surprising if the distinction between
the two did not include some sort of situational context aspect.

There are also the
obvious situational factors that we enumerated earlier such as high stakes situations
and those involving asymmetric power relationships between the participants.

Another important situational factor is change.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There are also the
obvious situational factors that we enumerated earlier such as high stakes situations
and those involving asymmetric power relationships between the participants. Another important situational factor is change. Although some situational factors can
be considered to be static (e.g., it is unlikely that the United States will be in the posi-
tion of a second rank state caught between two large power blocs as some countries
were during the Cold War), change is a constant factor in the calculus of international
178
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---relations [88].

Changes in leadership, motives, political goals, military doctrine, or
technological capabilities could all conceivably have an impact on the likelihood of
deception.

An absolutely essential aspect of knowing your situation is to recognize
when such changes affect your assumptions, expectations, preconceptions, and
beliefs in a fundamental way as we saw in Chapter 2, the United States’ failure to rec-
ognize that Japanese naval doctrine had changed helped set the stage for the success of
Japanese deception operations leading to the attack on Pearl Harbor.

Another situational factor that is important to consider is risk.

In any situation,
but especially those involving high stakes, it is important to remember that the
high-risk, high-gain strategy is always an option available to the adversary [89].

Assessing the risks of a situation brings all three of the principles introduced so far
into the picture.

It relies heavily on the know your adversary principle, since esti-
mating risk requires detailed knowledge of the adversary’s culture, the frame of
mind of the leadership, and what the adversary believes he knows about the target
[89].

It also depends on the know yourself principle in order to mitigate the
ethnocentric biases that produce mirror imaging—high-risk options are regarding
as having a low likelihood of occurring because “that’s what we would do in that
situation.” When it comes to risk, knowing your situation means memorizing Han-
del’s second paradox [90]: “The greater the risk, the less likely it seems, and the less
risky it actually becomes.

Thus, the greater the risk, the smaller it becomes.”
There is one final situational factor to mention.

In matters of national security,
the international environment is capable of distorting the perception and under-
standing of a situation.

The signals produced by the international environment
affect the target in two ways.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In matters of national security,
the international environment is capable of distorting the perception and under-
standing of a situation. The signals produced by the international environment
affect the target in two ways. First, events in the international environment, espe-
cially those associated with conflict, occupy the target’s attention and serve as form
of misdirection—focusing the target’s attention away from the situation he faces
with the adversary. In Chapter 2 we gave the example of how events in Europe
tended to divert American attention away from Japanese intentions in the Pacific. On the other hand, a generally quiet and peaceful international environment pro-
duces another form of misdirection by reducing the target’s attention and suspicions
regarding important situational cues. Handel points out that this was the case at the
outbreak of the Yom Kippur War [91]. The knowing your situation principle stresses the importance of human reason-
ing capabilities when confronted with situations that potentially involve deception. Sarbin’s concept of acumen is at its core, requiring the potential target of deception
to be able to switch back and forth between his perspective of the situation as well
as the adversary’s. It also highlights the importance of indirect thinking. Counterdeception analysts must develop the ability to break loose of potentially
blinding mindsets in order to see the situation in a completely different light. Never-
theless, as powerful as these skills are, especially when combined with our first two
principles, there is one more important principle that all three rely on for their
effectiveness. 5.4.4
Know Your Channels
Over 2,000 years after Sun Tzu, another pioneer of deception and counter-
deception, R. V. Jones, reiterated repeatedly the importance of controlling multiple
5.4
Proposed Principles of Counterdeception
179

--- PAGE BREAK ---channels in unmasking deception.

If a playing field or game board exists for decep-
tion and counterdeception, it must surely be the channels of information over which
each party vies for control.

Thus, R.

V.

Jones’s wisdom forms the basis for our last
principle: know your channels.

This principle recognizes that data and information are the raw material from
which knowledge is formed and decisions made.

Our first three principles all rely on
data and information in one way or another.

Data and information about the suc-
cess or failure of his decisions and actions influences the target’s preconceptions,
expectations, and beliefs.

Data and information collected about an adversary con-
tributes to the target’s knowledge of the adversary’s military capabilities, leadership,
politics, organizations, economics, and culture.

Data and information are essential
to the adversary and target’s understanding of situations in which they find them-
selves involved.

All this data and information is obtained from a variety of sources,
human and technical, commonly referred to as channels.

The data and information
flowing from these channels in turn possesses characteristics of its own; it can be rel-
evant or irrelevant, tangible or testimonial, direct or ancillary, solicited or unsolic-
ited, fact or fiction, clear or ambiguous, confirming or contradictory, and most
importantly, credible or noncredible.

Since most of these channels represent second-
hand, third-hand, or even greater sources of information (see the believing what we
are told category of biases in Chapter 3), the likelihood that the data and
information will be distorted increases even when deception is not a factor.

Gilovich reminds us that the old maxim to consider the source is one of the most
important ways of avoiding erroneous beliefs in everyday life but he points out that
this is something that everyone recognizes in theory but is often overlooked in prac-
tice [92].Since most of these channels represent second-
hand, third-hand, or even greater sources of information (see the believing what we
are told category of biases in Chapter 3), the likelihood that the data and
information will be distorted increases even when deception is not a factor.

Gilovich reminds us that the old maxim to consider the source is one of the most
important ways of avoiding erroneous beliefs in everyday life but he points out that
this is something that everyone recognizes in theory but is often overlooked in prac-
tice [92].

Our fourth principle is, essentially, the conscientious application of this
everyday maxim to the channels of information used by intelligence analysts and
political leaders.

If it is only recognized in theory but overlooked in practice, the out-
comes are likely to be much worse than believing what appears in the Weekly World
Review.

5.5
Summary
The purpose of this chapter has been to derive a set of fundamental principles of
counterdeception that can be used as a framework for exploring both technical and
nontechnical approaches to countering deception.

As in Chapter 2, our strategy for
achieving this purpose has been to provide the reader with an overview of the
counterdeception literature as it relates to strategic deception and then identify any
common themes that emerge from that review.

We then examined the impact that
the resulting themes have on the general deception cycle.

The resulting nine themes
were then further consolidated into four fundamental principles that emphasize a
holistic analytical approach to counterdeception relying on the concepts of the pre-
pared mind and the prepared organization.

In the next two chapters we will use
these principles to organize our examination of ways to make human beings and
organizations less susceptible to deception.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The resulting nine themes
were then further consolidated into four fundamental principles that emphasize a
holistic analytical approach to counterdeception relying on the concepts of the pre-
pared mind and the prepared organization. In the next two chapters we will use
these principles to organize our examination of ways to make human beings and
organizations less susceptible to deception. Chapter 6 examines the concepts of the
prepared mind and organization in greater detail and takes a high-level look at non-
technical methods and approaches for mitigating deception’s effects. Chapter 7
180
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---organization in greater detail and takes a high-level look at non-
technical methods and approaches for mitigating deception’s effects. Chapter 7
180
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---

delves even deeper into the subject of counterdeception methodology, examining
technical methods of deception detection and discovery and their implementation.
We will then be in a better position to decide whether or not Barton Whaley’s
optimism regarding the detection of deception is warranted.
Endnotes
[1]
Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, Joint Publication
1-02, 12 April 2001 as Amended Through 9 May 2005, p. 126, http://www.dtic.mil/
doctrine/jel/new_pubs/jp1_02.pdf.
[2]
Rossa, P., “The Denial and Deception Challenge to Intelligence,” in Godson, R., and J.
Wirtz, (eds.), Strategic Denial and Deception: The Twenty-First Century Challenge, New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2002, p. 225.
[3]
In this chapter, we are using the general dictionary definition of the word detection, that is,
to discover something is to determine its existence or presence. Later in Chapter 7, a more
precise, technical definition will be used when discussing technical methods for
counterdeception.
[4]
In this chapter, we are using the general dictionary definition of the word discovery, that is,
discovery requires exploration or investigation in an effort to find out the facts or the truth
about something. Later in Chapter 7, a more precise, technical definition will be used when
discussing technical methods for counterdeception.
[5]
Harris, W. R., On Countering Strategic Deception, R-1230-ARPA, November 1973, p. 33.
[6]
Whaley, B., Stratagem: Deception and Surprise in War, Cambridge, MA: Center for Inter-
national Studies, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1969, p. 146.
[7]
Jones, R. V., Reflections on Intelligence, London, U.K.: Mandarin Paperbacks, 1990,
p. 131.
[8]
Ibid., p. 144.
[9]
Ibid., p. 132.
[10]
Ibid., p. 129.
[11]
Ibid., p. 134.
[12]
Ibid., p. 88.
[13]
Whaley, B., Stratagem: Deception and Surprise in War, Cambridge, MA: Center for Inter-
national Studies, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1969, p. 147.
[14]
Whaley, B., and J. Busby, “Detecting Deception: Practice, Practitioners, and Theory,” in
Godson, R., and J. Wirtz, (eds.), Strategic Denial and Deception: The Twenty-First Century
Challenge, New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2002, p. 189.
[15]
Harris, W. R., On Countering Strategic Deception, R-1230-ARPA, November 1973, p. 40.
[16]
Ibid., p. 42.
[17]
Ritchie, G., “Developing the Incongruity-Resolution Theory,” Proc. of AISB Symposium
on Creative Language: Stories and Humour, Edinburgh, U.K., 1999, pp. 78–85,
http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/ritchie99developing.html.
[18]
Jervis, R., Perception and Misperception in International Politics, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1976, pp. 409–424.
[19]
Ibid., p. 412.
[20]
Ibid., p. 413.
[21]
Ibid., p. 415.
[22]
Ibid., p. 416.
[23]
Ibid., p. 422.
[24]
Ibid., p. 423.
5.5
Summary
181s, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1976, pp. 409–424.
[19]
Ibid., p. 412.
[20]
Ibid., p. 413.
[21]
Ibid., p. 415.
[22]
Ibid., p. 416.
[23]
Ibid., p. 422.
[24]
Ibid., p. 423.
5.5
Summary
181

--- PAGE BREAK ---[25]
Heuer, R.

J., “Strategic Deception and Counterdeception: A Cognitive Process Approach,”
International Studies Quarterly, Vol.

25, No.

2, 1981, p.

318.

[26]
Ibid., p.

320.

[27]
Ben-Zvi, A., “Hindsight and Foresight: A Conceptual Framework for the Analysis of Sur-
prise Attacks,” World Politics, Vol.

28, No.

3, 1976, pp.

381–395.

[28]
Heuer, R.

J., “Strategic Deception and Counterdeception: A Cognitive Process Approach,”
International Studies Quarterly, Vol.

25, No.

2, 1981, p.

322.

[29]
Ibid., p.

323.

[30]
Daniel, D., and K.

Herbig, “Propositions on Military Deception,” in Daniel, D., and K.

Herbig, (eds.), Strategic Military Deception, New York: Pergamon Press, 1981, pp.

12–14.

[31]
Moose, P., “A Systems View of Deception,” in Daniel, D., and K.

Herbig, (eds.), Strategic
Military Deception, New York: Pergamon Press, 1981, pp.

136–150.

[32]
Narrativepsych.com describes narrative psychology as “a viewpoint or a stance within psy-
chology which is interested in the ‘storied nature of human conduct’ (Sarbin, 1986)—how
human beings deal with experience by constructing stories and listening to the stories of oth-
ers.

Psychologists studying narrative are challenged by the notion that human activity and
experience are filled with ‘meaning’ and that stories, rather than logical arguments or lawful
formulations,
are
the
vehicle
by
which
that
meaning
is
communicated.”
See
http://web.lemoyne.edu/~hevern/nr-basic.html.

[33]
Sarbin, T., “Prolegomenon to a Theory of Counterdeception,” in Daniel, D., and K.

Herbig,
(eds.), Strategic Military Deception, New York: Pergamon Press, 1981, p.

157.

[34]
Ibid., p.

162.

[35]
Ibid., p.

170.

[36]
Ibid., p.

168.

[37]
Dewar, M.

The Art of Deception in Warfare, Devon, U.K.: David & Charles Publishers,
1989, pp.

194–203.

[38]
Ibid., p.

194.

[39]
Ibid., p.

200.

[40]
Ibid., p.

195.

[41]
Ibid., p.

198.

[42]
Ibid., pp.

195–196.

[43]
Ibid., p.

202.

[44]
Handel, M., War, Strategy, and Intelligence, London, U.K.: Frank Cass & Co., Ltd., 1989,
p.--- PAGE BREAK ---

202. [44]
Handel, M., War, Strategy, and Intelligence, London, U.K.: Frank Cass & Co., Ltd., 1989,
p. 396. [45]
Holt provides an excellent example from World War II where a double agent provided high
quality, high importance information too late to be of use. While describing GARBO’s role
in the TORCH deception operation that protected the Allied landings in North Africa, Holt
provides this anecdote: “Under date of October 29, GARBO reported that a convoy had
sailed from the Clyde (this was true), and that ‘an operation of great importance is imminent
and I think I fulfill my duty by advising you of this danger.’ Under date of November 1, he
wrote that he had learned at the Ministry of Information that the Allies were about to land
in French North Africa. Alas, through some unaccountable mishap in the post office these
vital messages were delayed and only reached the Germans on November 7, just before the
landings. Though the information was now useless, the Abwehr was overwhelmed by the
skill of their star agent. ‘Your last reports are all magnificent,’ GARBO was told on Novem-
ber 26 ‘but we are sorry they arrived late.’” Holt, T., The Deceivers: Allied Military Decep-
tion in the Second World War, New York: Scribner, 2004, p. 271. [46]
Handel, M., War, Strategy, and Intelligence, London, U.K.: Frank Cass & Co., Ltd., 1989,
p. 397. [47]
Ibid., p. 341. [48]
Ibid., p. 333. [49]
Ibid., p. 250. 182
Principles of Counterdeception

--- PAGE BREAK ---[50]
“CIA Opens Door on the Craft of Analysis,” Center for the Study of Intelligence Newslet-
ter, Winter–Spring 1997, No.

7, http://www.cia.gov/csi/bulletin/csi7.htm#toc9.

[51]
“Note 10 Tradecraft and Counterintelligence,” 1995, http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/
awcgate/cia/tradecraft_notes/note_10.htm.

[52]
Johnson, P., et al., “Detecting Deception: Adversarial Problem Solving in a Low Base-Rate
World,” Cognitive Science, Vol.

25, 2001, pp.

355–392.

[53]
Reyhl, D., “Peer Review Guide—Materiality,” 2001, http://www.reyhl.com/peer_review/
materiality.html#definition.

[54]
Godson, R., and J.

Wirtz, (eds.), Strategic Denial and Deception: The Twenty-First Century
Challenge, New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2002, Chs.

3 and 7.

[55]
Whaley, B., and J.

Busby, “Detecting Deception: Practice, Practitioners, and Theory,” in
Godson, R., and J.

Wirtz, (eds.), Strategic Denial and Deception: The Twenty-First Century
Challenge, New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2002, p.

182.

[56]
Whaley, B., Stratagem: Deception and Surprise in War, Cambridge, MA: Center for Inter-
national Studies, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1969, pp.

210–212.

[57]
Bell, J.

B., and B.

Whaley, Cheating and Deception, New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Pub-
lishers, 1991, pp.

328–331.

[58]
Whaley, B., and J.

Busby, “Detecting Deception: Practice, Practitioners, and Theory,” in
Godson, R., and J.

Wirtz, (eds.), Strategic Denial and Deception: The Twenty-First Century
Challenge, New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2002, p.

197.

[59]
Ibid., p.

192.

[60]
Ibid., p.

191.

[61]
Ibid., p.

200.

[62]
Edwards,
M.,
“J.

C.

Masterman,”
1998,
http://www.twbooks.co.uk/crimescene/
jcmastermanme.html.

[63]
Myers, D.

G., Intuition: Its Powers and Peril, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2002,
p.

1.

[64]
Whaley, B., and J.

Busby, “Detecting Deception: Practice, Practitioners, and Theory,” in
Godson, R., and J.--- PAGE BREAK ---

[64]
Whaley, B., and J. Busby, “Detecting Deception: Practice, Practitioners, and Theory,” in
Godson, R., and J. Wirtz, (eds.), Strategic Denial and Deception: The Twenty-First Century
Challenge, New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2002, p. 209. [65]
Ibid., pp. 213–214. [66]
Ibid., p. 217. [67]
Rossa, P., “The Denial and Deception Challenge to Intelligence,” in Godson, R., and J. Wirtz, (eds.), Strategic Denial and Deception: The Twenty-First Century Challenge, New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2002, pp. 223–228. [68]
Ibid., p. 224. [69]
See Jim Bruce’s chapter, “The Impact on Foreign Denial and Deception” in Strategic Denial
and Deception: The Twenty-First Century Challenge for a more detailed treatment of the
impact of unauthorized disclosures on U.S. intelligence capabilities as it elated to deception. [70]
Rossa, P., “The Denial and Deception Challenge to Intelligence,” in Godson, R., and J. Wirtz, (eds.), Strategic Denial and Deception: The Twenty-First Century Challenge, New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2002, p. 227. [71]
Gerwehr, S., and R. Glenn, Unweaving the Web: Deception and Adaptation in Future
Urban Operations, Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2002, p. xiv. [72]
Stech, F., and C. Elsässer, “Midway Revisited: Detecting Deception by Analysis of Compet-
ing Hypothesis,” 2004, p. 3, http://www.mitre.org/work/tech_papers/tech_papers_04/
stech_deception/, to appear in Military Operations Research in early 2007. [73]
Heuer, R. J., “Chapter 8, Analysis of Competing Hypotheses,” Psychology of Intelligence,
1999, http://www.cia.gov/csi/books/19104/art11.html. [74]
Heuer, R. J., “Strategic Deception and Counterdeception: A Cognitive Process Approach,”
International Studies Quarterly, Vol. 25, No. 2, 1981, p. 321. 5.5
Summary
183

--- PAGE BREAK ---11.html. [74]
Heuer, R. J., “Strategic Deception and Counterdeception: A Cognitive Process Approach,”
International Studies Quarterly, Vol. 25, No. 2, 1981, p. 321. 5.5
Summary
183

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[75]
Whaley, B., and J. Busby, “Detecting Deception: Practice, Practitioners, and Theory,” in
Godson, R., and J. Wirtz, (eds.), Strategic Denial and Deception: The Twenty-First Century
Challenge, New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2002, p. 187.
[76]
Sun Tzu, The Art of War, trans. S. B. Griffith, New York: Oxford University Press, 1963, p.
84.
[77]
Jervis, R., Perception and Misperception in International Politics, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1976, pp. 410–411.
[78]
Handel, M. I., War, Strategy, and Intelligence, London, U.K.: Frank Cass & Co., Ltd.,
1989, p. 341.
[79]
Heuer, R. J., “Strategic Deception and Counterdeception: A Cognitive Process Approach,”
International Studies Quarterly, Vol. 25, No. 2, 1981, p. 318.
[80]
Whaley, B., Stratagem: Deception and Surprise in War, Cambridge, MA: Center for Inter-
national Studies, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1969. p. 4.
[81]
Sarbin, T., “Prolegomenon to a Theory of Counterdeception,” in Daniel, D., and K. Herbig
(eds.), Strategic Military Deception, New York: Pergamon Press, 1981, p. 163.
[82]
United States Department of Defense News Transcript, February 12, 2002, 11:31 a.m. EST,
http://www.defenselink.mil/transcripts/2002/t02122002_t212sdv2.html.
[83]
Plain English Campaign, “The Foot in Mouth Award,” 2005, http://www.plainenglish.co.
uk/footinmouth.html.
[84]
Whaley, B., Stratagem: Deception and Surprise in War, Cambridge, MA: Center for Inter-
national Studies, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1969, p. 142.
[85]
Handel, M. I., War, Strategy, and Intelligence, London: Frank Cass & Co., Ltd., 1989, p.
335.
[86]
Ibid., p.334.
[87]
Everest Consulting Associates and Mathtech, Inc., Deception Maxims: Fact and Folklore,
Princeton, NJ, 1980, pp. 26–27.
[88]
Jervis, R., Perception and Misperception in International Politics, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1976, p. 19.
[89]
Handel, M. I., War, Strategy, and Intelligence, London, U.K.: Frank Cass & Co. Ltd., 1989,
p. 243.
[90]
Handel, M., Perception, Deception, and Surprise: The Case of the Yom Kippur War. Jerusa-
lem: The Hebrew University, 1976, p. 16.
[91]
Ibid., pp. 16–17.
[92]
Gilovich, T., How We Know What Isn’t So: The Fallibility of Human Reason in Everyday
Life, New York: The Free Press, 1991, p. 109.
184
Principles of Counterdeception