The Hght Against


Lending money at intefmt has been condemned by
men such as Plato^ Aristotle^ Plutarch, Seneca and
Cicen}^ early fathers of the Christian church; the
majority of popes and councils up to 1830 ; likewise
modern authors such as Goethe and Wagnen

JtJKJ IJNA

T he figlil against usury goe.s back to the eai^liest
known beginnings ot dvilbatdon. From the days of
Sumer to the present, decent people have stniggled
against this tool of the forces of darkness. Charging
interest was condemned by the ancient Greek
philosophers Money was to them something dead;
something dead l)e allowed to grow. Aristotle

wrote in his work Politics {Book One, part X): “The
most hattd sort, and with the greatest reason, is usury, which
makes a gain out of money itself, and not from the natural
object of it, For money was intended to be used in exchange, but
not t o increase at interest. . . Wherefore of ah modes of getting
wealth this is the most imnatural.”

Up until the end of the Middle Ages it was forbidden for
Christians to diarge interest. To charge interest on a loan was
Lantamouni to murder and robbery. Later, those who charged
interest were treated as heretics,

Martin Luther stated plainly: “All usurers are thieve.s and
belong in the gallows.'^ Everyone who lent money at an interest
rate of 5 to 6 pei'cent was considered to be a usurer. During the
Middle Ages only Jews were allowed to lend money with inter¬
est. In Deuteronomy a Jew is forbidden to charge interest from
liis brother. But the goy Cnon-Jew* was not his brother. And to
Jewish exti'emisT.s plunder was not unfamiliar.

In ancient Babylonia the Legal interest rate was 30 percent
on money and 50 percent on gram. In Assyria there was no
upper limit for interest rate. The farmers were often so deep m
debt that they starved to death along with their Eamilies. This


Martin Luther fleftj, the

fburuiine father of tfw
Lutheran Protestant
Church, and others of
his era condemned
usury, Fiery s>reacher
Jakob Strauss conduct¬
ed a oiolent campaign
against usury and
tithes ^ Thomas
Muetitzen on unruly
genius, combined his
own ingenious liturgi¬
cal reforms with a pro¬
gram of holy imr.


led to ruthless exploitation of the soil.

In the city of Umk in Sumer there lived two brotliers who
lent money with interest. Wlien a borrower no longer could
repay his loan, he lost his house and had to start working for
free for the brothers. The slave could be lent also to other
employers. This is a classical example of economic slavery.

Almost 3,700 years ago the ruler of Babylon, Hammurabi
(184^-1605 B.C.), who was descended from the jXmorite dynasty,
forbade Uirough his legal acts icemtaining 93 paragraphs) the
t aking of interest on intereat, which meant that the bomiwer
had to give in addition to the assets he had borrowed the same
amount in goods or money Anyone who broke the rule w-as
severely punished, though very few abided by it. Tite 282
statutes of Hammurabi, written in Akkadian, were foimd in
1901-02 at excavations at Susa in ancient Elam (now Iran).

The tribune Tiberius Gracchus of the Roman Empire tried
in 133 B.C. to reduce the power of the moneychangers through
stricter laws against usury and to limit the legal land ownership
U> iugeri (about 600 acres) per family. He w'as murdered the
same

tn 48 B,C. Julius Caesar deprived the moneychangers of the
right to coin money and had it done liimsell'. With a larger
money supply he was able Uh erect many public buildings.
Common people adored Caesai' for his contribution to making
money more available. After the murder of Caesar there was an
end to the ai>undanc4e of money. Tlie money supply w’^as reduced
by 90 percent. Taxes rose sky-high. As a result most people lost
their land and tlieir homes. The slander of Caesai’ goes on even
today.

The Freemasons wanted to acquire as niocb wealth as pos-


■Cl


8


sr.PT i;mbf,r/october 2004


sihlti in order to their demonifi during tJie 19th and 20th
ceoturies.

The Irish economist Margrit Kennedy has pointed out that
a i percent loan is doubled in 70 years. A 3 percent loan with
accumulated interest doubles in only 24 years. A 6 percent loan
doubles in 12 years, and at L2 percent the amount is doubled in
just SLS yeai*s.

If anyone had lent one cejit in A.D. 1 and charged a 4 per-
cent interest^ in 1750 he could have bouglu gold weigiiing as
much as the whole Earth. (At. 5 percent interest it would have
been possible as early as the year 1403. J In 1990 he would have
been able to buy 12,246 such "‘nuggets.*'

These extieme examples sliow how' madly interest damages
each country's economy

AAer the so-called French Revolution tlie use of paper
money was widespread.

The gold traders began practicing economic fraud to
become even more powerful. They lent secretly part of the gold
that had been deposited with them and kept tlie interest they
made on such illegal loan. The gold traders then issued more
receipts (bank notes ) of gold deposits than they had gold^ then
lent these notes and charged interest on them Far more money
was lenl than what the creditor had cover for. Soon these
money crooks lent as much as up to 10 times^ more than they
had gold deposited.

This breach of trust has become common in all areas in the
world of the Freemasons. The American banks have the right to
lend 10 times more money thiin they actually have. This means
that their interest acmally is dose to 80 percent and not 8 per¬
cent. which is oflfidally daimed. The Masonic bankens create
money out of nothing and force us to pay interest thereon.

The Prieure de Sion initiated, with the aid of the money¬
changers (above all the Portuguese Rabbi Menasseh ben Ismel,
who bved in tlie Netherlands, and Antonio Fernandez Moses
Carvajal), the insun-ection of 1642, led by Oliver CTOmwell,
which in turn led to the first republic (commonwealth) in
England in 1649. In the year 1643 a large group of ridi Jew's
came to England. They met with the Portuguese ambas-sador in
London, Antonio de Souza, a Maranno, where further moves
were dismissed. All their actions were axirdinated b}'^ Carvajal.

Having depo.sed and executed Clmrles 1 in 1649, naming
himself as dictator in 1653, Cromwell became bloodthirsty and
hostile to cultural development* letting the moneychangers
strengthen their financial ptwer. Unde]- the puritanical rule of
the Lord Protector Cromwell, music and other cuJlairal activities
w^ere practically banned. Even colorful garments were forbid¬
den*

In November of 1688 funder the sign of the scoi-piori) the
Cathobc king of England James IT (Stuart.) was overthrown
through a well-organized inva.sion financed by the moneyed
Jews of Amst.erdam and led by the Frieur^ de Sion and the
Orange Order. The king was exiled to France and in Februaiy
of 1689 William of OrangH:>. the prince of Nassau, was put upon
the English throne by means of a coup d'Hat. which became
known as the Glorious Revolution. Even official historians
admit that the people did not participate in this coup.

England at that time w^as in poor condition after more tiian
50 years of war with France and the Netherlands* and tlie new
king, William III (of Oi'aiige), asked several pow^erful bankers


for help. They provided the English state with a loan of L25 mil¬
lion pounds but only deUvered 750,000 pounds. The terms of lire
loan were as follows: the names of ti\e lenders were not to be
revealed, and these were guaranteed the right to found the
Bank of England, whose directors wei^e ensured to establish a
gold reserve so as tf) be able to issue loans to a value of 10
poimds for each pound deposited gold in the bank vault. They
also were allowed to consolidate the national debt and secure
payment lor annuity and interest through dii'ect Laxation of the
people.

The privately owned Bank of England was established in
1694 with absolute control over Ute currency (the right to issue
bank notes!. The lending of money on usury was able to contin¬
ue at an even largei' scale. Thus the English people suffered a
huge national debt. Taxes had to be raised and prices doubled
Tb the Masonic bankers it was necessary to have a monopoly on
money issuing. That way they were able to make enormous
profits and also control political processes,

The Bank of England was allowed to lend money to an
amoinit 10 times the security the lender put up. With 5 percent
interest it only tciok twf^ years for the bank to earn back an
amount equal to the original security.

B y the year 1698 the national debt had risen from one
and a quarter million poimds to 16 million. In 1815 it
was 885 million pounds and in 1945 it had grown to
22.5 billion pounds* By 1995 the national debt had risen
to moT>& than 300 bdbon pounds, equal to 45 percent of GNR
Not even the Macmillan Committee, which was appointed in
1929, managed to find out who governed the Bank of England.
Only one name has leaked out—that of Rothschild, Ah great
wars have been started and financed by the economic conglom¬
erate emanating from one single banking family—the
Rotlisclnlds,

In the Netherlands, secret societies bad been al>le to found
a centra] bank as early as 1609. About 40 oJ' the world s most
important central banks were estabUsbed in a similar way as
that of the Bank of England. In tliat way Uie Masonic bankers
ruled the long-temi development in the world with loan interest
as a method, the central banks as middlemen, the politicians as
dummies and the people as ignorant wage slaves. The Free¬
mason-controlled banks thus can govern political Life by acting
without being seen. The English people strengthened tlie power
of these invisible Freemasons thi^ough paying taxes durmg
three centuries. Central banks wei'e supposed to keep the econ¬
omy stable.

in reabty it works quite differently,

Benjamin Franklin wrote of the British colonies in North
Amenca in the 1750s: 'Nowhere on Earth does one find a hap¬
pier and more well-being people.'* He explained that this was
due to that “we in the colonies make our own currency,” called
"‘colonial scrip," He further explained: “By issuing our own cur-
reiu^^ we can control its buying power* and we are not oV^liged to
pay intere*st to atiyone."

In these British colonies in New England, there was a
wealth contrasting sharply to the poverty and misery in
England. There was enough money, and it was definitely inter¬
est free,

Wlien the Masonic bankers in England heard Franklin’s


THE bAKNEb REVIEW


9


speech to the British Par La meat, they made sure that Par¬
liament forbade the colonies to use their own fhiaricial system
and instead demanded they use intereal money m gold and sil¬
ver Only an insufficient amount of this money was to be avail¬
able. The money supply was reduced in half, and the colomes
were forced to boiTOW money from the Bank of England. The
result was steep interest and price increases. Within a year the
streets were full of unemployed people.

In American schoolbooks the reason given for the outbreak
of the Revolutionary War was the tea tax. but according to
Franklin ""the colonies would gladly have borne the little tax’" [of
2 percent] on tea and other matters had it not been that
Englaitd took away from the colonies their money which creat¬
ed unemployment mid dissatisfaction.” The msult of the influ-
of the English banks on die British Parliament was hor¬
rendous poverty in America- When this situation had been cre¬
ated, it was easy to get people leady for war. which the Free¬
masons did with satisfaction. They wanted a safe base for dieir
future global activities.

Among the men who drew up the
Constitution of 1787, there were those
who thought one should protect oneself
against the financial drain of the interna¬
tional bankers. Therefore Article I, Sec. 8
of the Constitution reads: "Congress shall
have power . , . to coin money regulate
the value thereof. .."

Alexander Hamilton, a Freemason
and secretary of finance in the govem-
meni of (^orge Washington, and also die
agent of the international financiers,
ordered the establishment of a privately
owned union bank and die introduction
of interest mcjjiey His argument was simple: '^A limited nation¬
al debt would he a blessing to a nation/’ He considered it dan¬
gerous for the government to issue its own cuiToncy.

Thus the United States got its first central bank in 1791. It
was privately owned but had a contract running for only 2Q
years. It was not renewed when it expired. Andrew Jackson
referred to the fact that the ConstiUition had given Congress
the right to issue currency in sufficient quantity but not trans¬
fer this right to others.

The historian Richaiti Boesen disclosed that Ihe Freemason
Nathan Rotirschild (1777-1836), who in 1806 had fom^ded his
bank in London atid who partly financed the NapoleoniL' wars
through the Bank of England, subsequentiy issued an ultima-
tum—either the contiracl be renewed or tlvere would be war.
Jackson called tiie Masonic bankers a bunch of thieves and
promised to exterminate them, Rothseltild gave his own orders:
“Teach these insolent Americans a lesson. Force them back to a
colonial status.”

The British govemoient began to limit ihe Amencan sea
trade and checked the American expansion m Canada.
President -James Madison in 1812 had no other choice but to let
Congi'ess dedai'e war on England. The intention of the leader of
the Freemasons, Rothschild, was to lay waste the country to
such an extent that the Americans would be forced to seek
financial aid. Gmat Britmn, however, failed to regain the lost
colonies, and the United States failed to occupy Canada. The


war was actually fought in 1814.

Many hvea w'ere lost, but Bothscliild did not triumph this
time. 'Fhe renewed central bank contract was again suspended
in 1836 during Andrew Jackson^s presidency (1829-18371
despite the fact that he was grand master of Tennessee. ITie
central bank was abohshed.

Even so European bankers and their American agents man¬
aged to exercise an extensive control of the American monetaiy
system. Gustavus Myens admits in his book History of th€ GmU
American Fortiuies (1910): “Under the surface the Rothschilds
had for a long period of time a direct influence by dictating the
American financial laws. The legal records show that they were
the ones in control of the old Bank of the United Slates.’’

In American histoiy Ixioks ther^ is nothing about the role of
the hanks in the first mid second American wars of independ¬
ence (that is 1775-83 and 1812-1814J. Ndtlier is there anything
about tl^e debt-free ""greenbacks” that Abraham Lincoln issued.
Their existence is only verified by a few encyclopedias.

Tb finance the American Civil War, which broke out on April
12,1861, President Abraham Lincoln was
forced to utilize tiie right of the Congi'ess
to issue its own cmrency. Between the
years 1862 to 1864^ 450 milliun intorest-
free "greenbacks” were printed. LincoLu
promised at his re-election in 1864 to
begin fighting the bank.s as soon as the
war was over. Lord Goschen, the repre¬
sentative of the financial world, wrote in
Vie Lon^lon Times: ""If this fmanciaJ poli¬
cy l>ecomes permanent, the govei'nment
can without expenses acquire necessaiy
monetary provision. It can pay its debt
and repay its loans without debt. It will
have enough money to ti'iide (on the open market). It is going to
be more healthy than any other (before) in history. If we do not
overthrow this govenmient, it will overl.hrow us.”

The North during the Civil War was financed by the
Rothschilds through their American agent August Belmont
(actually Schoenberg) and the South by the Erlanger brothers
who were related to the Rothschild family

Tlie Civil War ended on April 9, 1865, and international
Freemasonry got busy to remove President LincohL

The assassination of Lincoln was cai'ried out by John Wilkes
Bootli (Botha), a Freemason of the 33rd degree, on April 15,
1865 in Washington, D.C., only six days after the end of the Ciril
Wai- Izola Forrester, Bfioth’s granddaughter, stated in her book.
This One Mad Act (1937), that Bootli belonged to tlie lodge
Knights of tlie Gcdden Circle and also Giuseppe Mazxini’s “rev-
oliitionaiy” movement Young Americm Izola Forrester I’evealed
in detail tlmt the Freemasons were involved in tlie assassina¬
tion of the president. Booth was soon eliminated.

The above-mentioned Masonic lodge Kniglits of the Golden
Circle was mixed up in the plot. This name hadliegun to be seen
in the press, and so the Freemason leader Albert Pike in 1866
decided to rename it the Ku Klux Klan; *^kykIoH^ in Greek mean¬
ing "circle,”

It was officially founded as a new organization in 1866 in
Pulaski, Ihnneasee. In 1882 it was banned The present group
with the same name w:as founded in 1915 by William Joseph


Freemmoii iWathan RotJischifd,
xuho parfly finmiced tfie
Napokonk thraugh ihe
Ba n k of England, issu ed a7i
ultimatum — -eithe?' the
emUrmi f?e mmmd or
there wtmld l>e wan


10


SEPTRMBER/OCTOBER 2d0 4


Simmons and thus has not grown out of the Masonic lodge that
existed in the 1860s and 1870s.

After the demise of Lincoln, things were ^‘nonnaUzed." Tile
amount of money in circulation, which in 1866 amounted to $1,9
billion or $50.46 percapitUf had by 1876 been reduced to $606
million or $14,60 per person.

As a result there were 56,446 bankruptcies in 10 yeai^ and
a loss of $2 billion. In 1887 the Masonic bankers reduced the
money amount further to $6.67 per head. Ihe Irish writer
Mai'grit Kennedy stated in the book Interest a?id Inflation Free
Mofiey that tlie interest rate always goes up when tliere is a
shortage of money. This in turn leads to bankruptcies and wors¬
ens the unemployment rate.

In American schoolbooks it is claimed that it was all for the
good that the Democratic candidate for pre^sident in 1896, Wil¬
liam Jennings Biyam was not elected, since he was against the
gold footing and the “sound money’’ of the banks (that is money
that creates debt! Eiy^an explained in his ‘'Cross of Gold'’ speech
at the Democratic National Convention, in Chicago on July 9.
1896: ‘'When we have restored the money of the Constitution, all
other necessary reforms will be- possible, and that until that is
done there is no reform that can be accomplished/’

Bryan was not elected, and 17 years later, in 1913, Congress
passed a bill (introduced by the Masonic
President Woodrow Wilson), that pur¬
ported to I'epeal the right of tlie Congi^ess
to iSsSue currency and transferred this
right to a “federal reserve’’ funding sys¬
tem.

Congressman Cliarlea A. Lindbergh,
father of the famous ariator, bad the fol¬
lowing to say about this: “Wlien the pres¬
ident signs it, the invisible government of
the money brokers has become legalized.

‘The woi^st legal crime of the century is a
fact. The day of reckoning is only a few
years removed/'

Tlie man who played a very important role in providing the
United States again with a central bank was Paul Waihurg. He
was a GeiTnan iramigrantt amving in America together with his
brother Felbc Both brothers became paitners in the banking
house KuJm, Loeb & Co, led by the Dluminatus Jacob Schiff,
who also belonged to B'nai B’ritlr Tlie Warburgs were support¬
ed by Nelson Mdnch (later to become grandfather to Nelson and
David Rockefeller), kn<jwn as ihe handyman in tlie Senate of
John Pierpoint Morgan. ITie family of (Samuel Moses) Del
Branco in 1559 moved from Italy to Germany taldng the name
Warburg. In 1798 the family founded the bank of M.M. Warburg
& Co.

The 1907 financial panic had been caused by Masonic
banker J,P. Morgan, historian Fredrick Lewis Allen concluded
in 1949. Tins was used as pretense to show that there was a
need tor a central banking system.

Frank Vanderlip, who worked for Rockefeller, admitted in
his memoirs: “1 do not believe I exaggerate in saring that our
secret excursion to Jekyl Island w^as the actual beginning of tlial
which eventually became the Federal Reserve System."

During the aforementioned Jekyl Island meeting at the end
of 1910 Paul Warburg had emphasized that the term "central


bank’’ should be avoided under all circumstances. It was decid¬
ed to present the project as a Regional Reserve System.

It was made sure tliat Morgan’s candidate, the Fieeinason
TTiomas Woodinw Wilson, was elected president. His campaign
was financed by Jacob Schiflf, Bernard Baruch, Henry
Morgenthau, New; Ibri 'Hpies pubUsher Adolph Ochs and other
powerful Jewish financiers and Freemasons.

The high-ranking Freemason Edward Maud el House, by
many historians considered the “actual’’ president of the United
States during Wilson’s administi'ation, proposed in his novel
Philip Dru: Administrafor (1912), which was published anony¬
mously, a transition to a progressive income tax and a central
bank These requirements were known from the Illuminati five-
point program. House was in favor of forming a world govern¬
ment and adopting the kind of socialism Marx dreamed of. To
accomplish this he was willing to use political fraud.

’Fire Federal Reserve bill was presented the night of
December 22. 1913, when most of the members of the congres¬
sional committee were asleep. ^Fhat same day the bill hastily
was pushed through the House of Representatives and the
Senate^ President Wdson signed the Federal Reserve Act and
control over money supply was transferred from Congress to
private Masonic bankers. Four times earher the American peo¬
ple had managed to get rid of a cend'al
bank, l)ut not the fifth time.

The Federal Reserve Act was Imiled
as the victoiy of democracy over the
money trusts, wliich was hardly the case.
Paul Warburg immediately began work¬
ing at the Federal Reserve for a salary
sulistantially less than that he received as
a banker. Neither the president, members
of Congress nor the secretary of treasury
have any authority over the Federal
Reserve.

The Federal Reserve System is actu¬
ally a cartel of 13 large private bonks, of which the Bank of New
York is tlie most important.

President Woodrow Wilson allowed the national debt to
grow from $1 billion to $455 billioiL Interest became the third
largest post of the federal budget.

The United States liorrowed up to $4 trillion from various
private banks in 1992. At the same time the deficit was $285 bil¬
lion. In 1991 another 2 million people were registered as poor in
the United States. The nation^ debt was slightly less than $1
trillion in 1980; in 1996 it watJ $5 trillion. The 32.9 million
Americans who in the year- 2002 lived in poverty were 1.3 mil¬
lion more than those of 2000 (31.6 million).

The economist Mdtan Friedman is conrinced that the eco¬
nomic collapse of 1929 took place because the Federal Reser^^e
System refused to buy government bonds, which would have
given the banks more cash, and thus it. caused the monetary
crash, which in turn led to the deep economic crisis.

In the 1810s the Freemasons had been brought into Europe
in order to prepare their sodaiiStic revolutions. Particiilaidy bad
was the situation on Guernsey in 1815, one of the Cliannel
Lslands. Less than half the size of Jersey it enjoys a mild and
humid climate and fertile soil. People had no money to buy
things; production stopped and workei^ went idle. Bankruptcy'


'"When, xm have restored the
money of the Constitution, all
other necessmy refonm will l>e
possible, and that until that
is done there is no reform tluit
can be accomplished. ”


THE BAKNES REViBW


II


Paul Warburg, left, born in Germany in 1868, cam^ m Ihe United Staten for the purpose of"reformit\g'‘ the jinandaf In 18BB, he mar¬
ried a daughter of Mr. Loeh. dueob H. Schtff (venier) married a ilaughter of Mr. Loeh The name of'Se.n. Nelsrm Aldrich''(righlj um, many

years ago, a synonym for the Money Pou^n Aldrich u^s a leader on tariff and fhmncial matters. He was desirous of the prosperity of the coun¬
try, but that ""prosperity” was written in banking balances. These were three of the top tepresentadves of ihe organized usury of their era.


wuis near, sinj^e Lax6i> to England and interest to f-he creditors
could not be piiid* and no new loans were granted. Tlie situation
was desperate. People were beginning to leave the island and
emigrate to Australia.

In 1815 Guernsey needed a new mai’ket hall. There was no
money. Then somebody proposed that the island should avail
itself of its andent prerogative and issue its own interest-free
money. At first the proposal was turned down, but as they
urgently needed 5,0()D pounds and only had 1,000 pounds in
hand, the Bailiff Daniel de Lisle Brock in 1816 decided te issue
4^000 potuids in one-p<jund inteest-free Guernsey state notes.
This was in addition to the cun'ent supply of English pounds,
which two main banks were circulating on the island ah'eady:

Work was begun on the market hall, everything being paid
for with this new money. Wlien the hall was finished, customers
arrived, and business was better Uian expected. By 1822 tiie
market hall was paid for, The 4,000 one-pound notes were
destroyed. The first project with the new money was so success¬
ful tliat it was soon followed by others. Next a new road was
needed: there was gravel, stone and plenty- of labor—but no
money to pay for it. In all, the states issued 65,000 pounds’
worth of notes, which paid for the i’ebuilding of the market, A
new school was built, then several more, the whole suii'ound-
ings of the mai'ket hall were renewed, and several other public
buildings were constructed, as well as widening of the steeete. A
new harbor w-as built along with, the best new roads in Europe
and sewers. The sum was paid for with taxation, and the notes
were again destroyed. All these projects provided employment
and economic stimulation.

In 1827 de IJsie Brock was able to speak of “the improve¬
ments which are the admiration of visitors and which contribute
so much to the joy, the health and well-heing of the inhabitants.”
Things had certahily improved since 1815. It is significant that


the great depression never troubled Guernsey. There was no
unemployment, and the income tax was 10 pence on the pound.

Thii^ got even better. The import of expensive English
flour was reduced. The money supply never exceeded 60.000
pounds. Unemployment was practically nonexistent. Guernsey
became a prosperous island community But the Freemasons
disliked this paradise, for fear that the idea should spread te
other parts of Europe. In that case they would no longer be able
to continue their destructive projects.

I n 1830 the banks launched a counterattack and l>egan to
flood the island with their own notes. The bankers
Finkelstein & Go, of London were the first to open an office
on the inland. There they started tlieir propaganda for "bet¬
ter money,*" “real money.” People l>eheved this hogwash, wliich
resulted in money shortage and loan applications in the banks.
De Lisle Brock fought like a lion to save the island’s sound econ¬
omy and high standard of fiving—but to no avail. The intrigues
and undermining work of the Fi^masons steered iJie island
eednomy over to the banks and their exploitation.

The Guernsey example, of 1816 to 18^17 speaks for itself We
can do without Masonic economy and do much better. But to try
to do away witli interest is considered the worst possible crime
against humanity.

By 1837,55,000 pounds had been put into circulation by the
government for the primaiy pm-pose of local projects such as the
sea walls* the roads, a new marketplace, a church and a college.
These 55,000 pounds more than doubled the money^ supply but
there was no inflation.

In 1914, while the British restricted their own money sup¬
ply, Guernsey issued more^another 140,000 pounds over the
next four years. By 1958, over 500,000 pounds of intemst-free
money was in circulation on Guernsey, and stiU no inflation.


12


SKPTKMBER/OCTOBER 2 0 0 4


By L990, there was a total of 6,5 million pounds in circula¬
tion, issued interest Iree. There was no public debt as in the rest
of Britain, which was still paying for its war debts. And yet on
Guernsey, prosperity was very mudi evident everyw^^here.

It was nothing new. In 1793, Liverptjol suffered from
extreme cash flow problems, and solved this by creating out of
nothing by an act of Parliament some 300^tX)0 pounds of non¬
repayable money, which was used for public works with great
benefit to the city and its people, This issue of money by the
UverpcnM Corporation alleviated the immediate debt crisis.

On June 30, 1934^ the London magazine JVea; Brltam pub¬
lished a statemeiLt by the Freemason and former Piime
Minister David Lloyd George: ‘‘Great Britain is a slave under
the mtemational financial powers,”

The Masonic bankers during the last 25 years have lent
money to the governments of the industrial nations, which find
it harder and harder to repay their enormous debt. The private
sector has become exactly that much richer. This monetary
pcmer has enough money to stop any intransigent politicians.
Popularly elected politicians no longer have any means of con¬
ducting the policies they wish. They cannot take back their
power until the debts ai^e paid. For every
dollar borrowed, the politicians relin¬
quish more power. Tlie developing coun¬
tries are in much worse situation. They
are not even able to pay interest on their
loaiis.

During 1982-1990 the banks of the
industrial nations received $L345 trillion
in interest and annuity' from these poor
countries.

The Argentine-German economist
Silvio Geseh (18624930) wished to intro¬
duce “flee money/' Margril Kennedy relates in her book Interest
and In/lfiiion Ff'ee Mo/icy (1988) how adherents to Geselfs the-
Qiy of a free economy in the 1930s made several attempts with
interest-froe currency in various countries, including Germany^
Switzerland, Spain and the United States. Particularly success¬
ful was the model used in the small town of Woergl in the Tirol
m Austria* In 1932 the ideas described in Gesell's book Die nat-
uerlicke Wirtsckaftsordnung (The Natural Econoiniv Order^
1916) were introduced.

In August 1932 the town couticil of Woergl issued their own
bank notes, called work certificates, to a value of 32,006 schil¬
lings. Backed by an equivalent amount of ordinary schillings in
the bajik, the town put 12,600 work ceitificates into eirculation,
'fhe fee on the mse of the money was I percent per' month or 12
peicent per year. Tliis fee had to be paid by the person who had
the banknote at the end of the month, in the foim of a stamp
worth 1 pei-cent of the note glued to its back.

The town paid for wages and building materials with this
money. A ski-siope was biiilt: streete were renewed as well as
the canal system. They built bridges^ unproved roads and pub¬
lic services^ and paid salaries and for materiais with this money,
which was accepted by the butcher, the shoemaker, the baker,
by everyone.

The smaD fee made everyone put this money into circulation
before using one’s "real” money. Within a year 32,000 work cer¬
tificates had been in circulation 463 times and thus had made


possible the exchange of goods and services to value of’
14,816,000 schillings. In comparison to the siuggiah national
currency it cu'Culated eight times as fast. Unemployment was
reduced by 25 percent within a year. Wlien, however. 130 com¬
munities in Austria began te be intei'e.sted in adopting thus
model the Austrian National Bank on September 1, 1933, pro¬
hibited the printing of any local currency.

Unemployment returned, prosperity disappeai^ed, and the
situation was ‘‘nornuilized,’’ that is, Freemasonized.

Economic Slavery

Interest charges are always included in today^s prices, which
make.s all goods and services very expensive and leaves very lit¬
tle money in the waDet. The economic historian John King has
pointed out that because of interest, businesses must constant'
ly raise their prices* This is camouflaged as inflation. He recom¬
mended abolishing interest as soon as possible, so as to avoid
economic catastrophe. Everyone must now help pay interest. It
is included in all prices—about 77 |>ercent of rental rates, for
instance. Taxe.a and other fees and imposts add up. Tlius we
have become slaves of the bankers. All goods would be only half
as expensive v^dthout interest payments.

According to the Swedish hiatorian
Heiman LindqvisL the Freemasons de¬
cided in the 181 Qs that wages should be
fixed at the poverty level. Such an atti¬
tude shows an enormous contempt for
ordinaiy people. Between the years 1860
and 1910 almost a million Swedes left for
America in connection with several years
of famine, poveity and difficulties in pro¬
viding for themselves*

D uring the Middle Ages conditions were much better
than the Masonic myths claim. It has been calculat¬
ed that a Saxony bncklayei; in addition to free food,
made, in today's currency, at least 26,000 mai'ks a
month. Craftsmen normally received various benefits in addi¬
tion to their wages* Despite the high wages, working hours were
short, normally eight hours a day, and at work five and a half
days a week. Mining journeymen in Saxony only worked six
hours a day. Not until 1479 did they put in an extra hour. Often
the joumeymea enjoyed a free Monday, called “blue Monday,”
usually without wage reduction. This was terminated in
Sweden with the 1669 guild order

So as not to be confused with noblemen, craftsmen in
Freiburg, in Saxony, were advised not to wear gold jewehy ajid
velvet and satin clothes, even tJiough they could well afford all
this. The fact that the economy and cultural file flourished was
due to the braeteate coins, which were Uie basis of a system with
continuous withdrawal of coins, since they often broke.
Withdrawal fxxaiired thrice yearly and also served as taxation.
Using old coins was not permitted No one wanted to hajig on te
“bad” money, so as not to make a loss, since by exchange of 12
told) coins one received only nine (new) ones, The economy pros¬
pered because the effect of interest-generating money w-as not
present. There was to be no interest charged. For the frail, the
old and the sick there were sick houses, and the rich usually
provided housing, clothing and free meals for the poor Wealth


Tfie cuiTmt interest system
makes it prissilde far those that
already haxfe money to get mm
richer; xohile those in need find
it maremm^y hatd to
make ends meet


THE BARNES KEVlliW


13


waft relatively evenly distiibuted at all levels of society.

Ail this disappeared when the Masonic bankers cook control
of the economy, From then on, no one could afford a decent life.
Til enable people Lo stand this misery, the be tliat things were
much worse Ijefore is propagated, which is certainly not true.

Tlie current interest system makes it possible for those that
already have money Lo get even richer, while those in need find
it increasingly hard to make ends meet. From 196S to 1982 the
national income of West Geraiany increased by 300 percent,
while tile interest on the national debt mcreaaod by 1,160 per¬
cent. In 1982 that biterest amounted to 29 bilboii DM. Wlien
interest is abolished, inflation vanishes, l^ennedy stressed in
her book tltat the income tax must also be abolished. The gov¬
ernment will have to be satisfied with a very low VAT, otherwise
the gray economy will grow. As of now interest rates go up when
there is not enough money available.

The European ConimuniLy during the years 1982-88 lost up
to 735,000 jobs due to the debt crisis, while the United States
lost 1.8 million jobs during the same period.

^Fhe Swedish national debt was IA trillion crowns in the fall
of 1997. which makes Sweden more debt-ridden than either
Brmsil or Argentina. Interest on the national debt was 111 bil-
bon kronor yearly which is about 40 bilbon more than the cost
of old-age benefits. Every Swede owed various banks 158,558
crowns each in 1997. Half of Swedish national income goes to
pay interest. Twenty-five percent of the export income went to
suppoil of the national debt in 1990. The head of the central
bank. Bengt Dennis, said: “In the circles where 1 move, it is
expected that Sweden keeps a high interest rate."'

In the beginning of the 1990s the bankers Salomon
Brothers, which had provided the Swedish government with
huge loans, demanded that the Swedish ci'own be devalued. The
government complied.

Argentina w^ent bankrupt in the spring of 2002, ha\dng a


FROM THE T E R BOOK CLUB

SPARTAN WOMEN

By SaRMI a. PtJMEROY
I "nlike the women of Athens, who were
expected to be neidicr lieard nor seen,

SpATcin women w^cre integral pans of tlieir
^ocietv, engaging in physiol and mental
aoiviw xim nvalcd any male in Greece.

Ihc first in-dcpiJi biTok ever published
iboui the w>:imcn of Spariu, Spartart
Ls a welt-laici-our midy, readable
and exETcnidy nil cresting. Boob about
Sparra almost alvvavs deal with poweriiil
nien and glorious battles, bvir tlic role <jf SpEVta s women 1 $ rardy men-
tiemed, lit faa* Sp,imn women represented tiic rmjant)' of hem to
estates and cunmillcd Llic majonty of pniperty 'Inward the end uf the m
of-Spaixan dominance—their sons aitd husbands cnsla^'ed or killed in bat-
tl^-the women of Sparta connniied their once great culmrc. #.^37, soft
cover, 198 pgs,, S20 minm 10% frr TBR,subscribers. Add SSril; .S3 per
knik inside the U S,; S6 per bt>ok outside the LIS., Call TER toil free at
1-877^773^9077 to chaj ge CO Visa or MasterCard or use the coupon on
page 80 CO respond bv mail.


SPARTAN

WOMEN

A

iAflA>4 S POMERDV


mitional debt of $132 bUlioo. Two Jewish banks (Banco de
Patridos and Banco de Mayaj collapsed in 1998 due to the own¬
ers’ cnminal activities. This was a final blow to the national
economy

The Italian Qatiooal debt in the summer of 2001 was astn>-
fiomicaUy 2,391,663,000.000.000 lire ($145,831,500,000), inugh-
ly equivalent to 105 percent of the GNP.

Tlie sultanate of Brunei in nortbem Borneo has free schools
and free medical care. There is no lax and no VAT but the stan¬
dard of living is veiy" high. Interest rates are very low. The coun¬
try has enormous amounts of oil and gas, which is exported and
has given them large incomes. The sultan. Muda Hassanal
Bolkiah. is one of the richest men in the world. His assets are
roughly estimated at $20 billion.

Norway also has oil and gas, but Uie politicians do not wish
to abolish the income tax and other chaj^es. Prices are horribly
high: medical care means long lines.

O n May 1, 1998, exactly 222 years after the founding
of the order of the Illuminati (222 being a third ol'
666, which in turn is a third of 1998), the European
Central Bank was established, actually a cartel of
private banks. All of the people shall be in debt through taxa-
tion. The Masonic bankers ai‘e thus trying to realize the Knights
Tern plains" ancient idea of creating a Eui'opean super state by
means of the banking system.

The Danish “no"’ to the “euro*' at a referendum in September
2000 and the Swedish ""no” m September 2003 showed, howev¬
er, Uiat not everything goes as planned. One does not liave to be
a prophet to see that the euro doe.s not stabilize the economy,
though one must not say it out aloud. Bernard Connolly who
was head of the department of currency policy at the European
Commission in Brussels, in 1996 published a hook. T^ie Rotten
Heart of Europe, claiming tliat fixed exchange rates and tiie
monerary^ union (EMU) would lead to instability and growing
unemploymient. He felt the result would be horrifying. Connolly
was summarily fired.

At a visit to Sweden in August 2003, Connolly stressed that
the introduction of the euro would lead to economic disaster and
to the fall of the European democracies. He warned that the
euro is used as a pretext for forming an economic, political and
military super state.

The problems have become worse in southern Europe.
Portugal for instance is already at the brink of a political break¬
down. and riots in the streets are not far away. This will then
spread to the rest of Europe. He compared the situation to the
economic collapse in Argentina, but the EMtl countries are
worse off. Ai'gentiaa was able to cut its connection Lo the dollar,
but EMU countries cannot abandon Ihe ouro.

One meter was one meter in 1910 Just as now. A liter is a
liter but a Swedish kinna of 2004 is no longer worth the same
as in 1910. Its value has sharply declined. Is that not strange?

Swedish and U.S. official statistics state that in the ye.ar
2000, roughly 140 percent of the average working man's income
went m necessities such as food, living, dofchmgj education med¬
ical care, as compai-ed to 75 percent in tlie early 19708. Today it
is barely enough for both parents to work to malte ends meet.

In the 1970s the total value of tlie world trade of industnai
goods was 50 percent, the rest was in stocks and sliai'es. In the


\4


3 fiPTEMBER/OCTO BER 2 00 4


■James Rimtscnnj} Rtym^mw


(mo VON bismahck AuxANOim n


THE ROTHSCHILDS’ PUIH TO COHOUER AMERICA FOR THE BANKERS


Cotinl Cherep-Spirldovllch, a tsarist general who baUkd the Bohheuik^ in the Russmn, Revoluthn. puhOshed a book in 192t> mitled
Th<5 &cret World Qovenmmt which shows how the Rothschilds'plan for world tyrunny dominates modem history. HeOtt&tari inter-
view with German Ciiancethr Otto von Bivman'k in 1876. in which Bismarck explained that the Rothschilds, who already controlled
Europe, were afraid, in the middle of the I9th rxtntury^ thai the United States would become ind^mdeni of them if it remained one
natiotL The platt, iherefoi'e, was to divide the United States betwem Etigland (conltY>Ued by Lionel liothschild) aTidFrcnice fcontrolkd
by Janies Rothschild). France was to lake Qver the South while British Canada annexed the defeated Noi th. As a preparatofy move,
in 1863, France and Spain inifaded Mexico with 30,000 troops. Britain, Fmnct 0id other European powers were ready to snuff out
the youn^ republic hat were deterred by Rimia, the only Eurojxian nnthn not in the Rpthschilds^ tkralL Tsar Alexander U mni his
fleets to New York and San Fmncisco and declared that an aUatk on the United States was an attack on Russia. Meanwhile the U.S.
Congress, stimulated by Lincoln, created '‘grecfiback” dollars to finance the war and escape indebtedness to the foreigfc flmneiers.
‘They [the Rothschilds] nnderslood at ome tfiat the United States would escape tfmr grip ” Bismarck said, The death of Lincoln was
resolved upon. Nothing [was}easier than, to find n fanatic to strike.^ Chertp*Spiridovitch concludes: "^According to Bismarck the awful
Civil War in America was fomented by a Jewish conspimey, and Abraham Lincoln .., was killed by the snme Hidiien Hand that kiUed
sLx Romanov tsars,. 10 kings and scores of ministers only to mare easily bleed their nathns f


yetiT' 2001 Lht^ icdalion was 1 percent goods and 99 percent with
securities. Speculation dominates.

The current monetary system encourages fraud and exten¬
sion of the gray economy and has led to the fact that those who
constantly are in need of money lose moiie and mure to Uiose
who have far more tjitui they need. More and more money is col¬
lected in the hands of certain individuals, who happen to be
Masonic bankers. If intei^est is abolished, everyone benefits
from Llie new system* not only the 80 percent considered poor

xAlfred Herrliausen» member of the board of Deutsche Bank,
has pointed outi "‘Tljose responsible for the current monetaiy
system, know veo' well that it cannot last, but they do not know
any alternative or do not want to know ol'any.”

To Liie Freemasons it is important to keep us in economic
slavery'^ tliey would Imve done everything to abolish

inleresl. Tlirough taxes and duty the government owns most of
tlie result of the economic activities of the people. What m*e tlien


TJie Freemasons" beautiful phrases of humanism really worth?
The Masonic leaders' foremost goal has been to Conceal as best
as they can the current economic slavery, One must ask oneself
if they have been successful. *>

BlBLTOGRAPin':

‘BjjTtniers lexikoir" f Bcmnicir'^ Encyclopaedia. Stockholm. I9S5. 252.
Dtagntmn (Gennan magazineFebruary' 1906,

Damef John. Scarlet and (he Bemt. Voi III. Tyler, U.S.A.

Gnihiak, Olive & Jaa, The Guentssy Exjierimeia, Oimil Pablicat-iooiv, 196D
Jaikaran. Dr, Jacques S„ The Ihbt Virus: .4 Compelling Sointkn tir the
WbridV Debt Froblerns. 1992,

Kennedy Margril. Interefii and Inflatim free Moitey. Goeieborg 1993* 137^59.

Juju Lina an mtemationaUy renowned writer Hm chief ape-^
daily is political economy, with a specific concentration on the con¬
nection between finance and politick regimes. He presently lives in
Sweden.


THh, BARNES REVIEW


IS
