\4 physicist examines the Kennedy assassination film* 
m 
Luis W.

Alvarez 
i Lawrence Bersetty Laboratory.

University of California.

Berkeley.

California 94720 
(Received 26 January 1976) 
The motion picture film of the Kennedy assassination taken by Abraham Zapruder was one 
of the most important exhibits examined by the Warren Commission.

The author uses the 
tools of the physicist to draw some conclusions that escaped the notice of the Commission 
and its expert Fill photointerpreters.

Among the subjects treated arc (I) the timing of the 
gun shots, (2) a theoretical and experimental investigation of the "backward snap" of the 
President's head immediately after he was killed—yielding the surprising result that it was 
consistent with a shot fired from the rear, (3) the speed at which the camera was running, 
and (4) a previously undetected deceleration of the President’s automobile just before the 
final shot.

The emphasis throughout is not on the assassination but rather on the application 
of elementary physics principles to the solution of practical problems.

EDITOR'S NOTE 
We publish this article by l.nis Alvarez far its unique 
pedagogic usef ulness.

Il brings la hear tm a matter of public 
concern powerful and simple physical arguments that are 
within the reach ofintnuluelory physics students It shows 
a physicist at work employing qualitative arguments, es- 
timates, measurements, and calculations appropriate to 
the problem and to the accuracy of data available.

As always, we welcome readers ’ responses to this article 
and will select some for publication according to their 
appropriateness and the space available.

We are interested 
in comments on procedures which Professor Alvarez uses 
to reach his conclusions and on the pedagogic uses it) which 
the article ran he put.

We do not feel that this Journal is 
an appropriate Jorum for a discussion of alternative 
theories of the assassination.

I.We do not feel that this Journal is 
an appropriate Jorum for a discussion of alternative 
theories of the assassination.

I.

INTRODUCTION 
In the eleven years since the Warren Commission pub- 
lished its 26-volume report1 on the assassination of Presi- 
dent Kennedy, a controversy has continued over the validity 
of .the Commission s findings.

Dozens of btxiks and countless 
articles have been written to show,.for example, that Lee 
Harvey Oswald had nothing to do with the event, or that he 
was part of a conspiracy with the CIA or other parties in 
planning the assassination.

Some of the books, such as Mark 
l ane's Rush to Judgement,2 were best sellers.

In December 
1966 Iz squire published an article1 listing 35 different 
theories that had been advanced by as many authors, each 
suggesting a variation on the Warren Commission's official 
scenario of the assassination.

And since then, many more 
theories have appeared.

In the light of such a long history of unsettled contro- 
versy, the reader might well wonder why yet another author 
would feel moved to write on the subject.

The reasons arc 
quite simple; in the first place, I continue to read, and to 
hear on radio and television that, “The laws of physics re- 
quire that the President must have been shot from the front, 
whereas the Warren Commission places his assassin, Lee 
Harvey Oswald, behind him." 
Such statements involve the backward snap of the Pres- 
ident's head, immediately after the shot that killed him.

I 
will show, both theoretically and experimentally, that such 
statements are simply incorrect; the laws of physics arc 
more in accord with the conclusions of the Warren Com- 
mission than they arc with the theories of the critics.

My second reason for writing this report is to show how 
an experienced physicist attacks a new problem.

Textbooks 
tend to indicate that problem solving in physics is a 
straightforward matter; one proceeds step by step from the 
input data to the final answer.My second reason for writing this report is to show how 
an experienced physicist attacks a new problem.

Textbooks 
tend to indicate that problem solving in physics is a 
straightforward matter; one proceeds step by step from the 
input data to the final answer.

But in real life, as I will show, 
a physicist makes many mistakes, and backs up to correct 
them, one by one.

(To those who feel the personalized style 
of this report is an uncorrccted error, I apologize; the earliest 
version was intended only for a few friends, where the liberal 
use of personal pronouns wouldn't cause offense.

When the 
report was finally finished, the task of squeezing all the first 
person singular pronouns out of the text seemed loo for- 
midable, so the author hopes the reader will accept his 
apology.) 
After a decade of exposure to the various theories of the 
assassination,.!

have at least one advantage over the earlier 
writers.

I've watched each new writer in turn criticize the 
earlier ones for speaking authoritatively in areas in which 
they weren't experts.

I will, therefore, speak with authority 
only in areas in which a judge would most probably accept 
me as an “expert witness.” For this reason, the reader will 
be spared any thoughts of mine on conspiracies, medical 
reports, the CIA, or ballistics.

I haven't counted the number 
of times I have agreed with, or disagreed with the Com- 
mission’s findings; I've done both in several different in- 
stances.

One of the aspects of physics that makes it appealing to 
those of us who practice il as a profession is that calculations 
and the results of experiments can be repeated at will.

So 
all of the interesting observations I’ve made on the Zapruder 
assassination movie film can be repeated by anyone suffi- 
ciently interested in such matters.One of the aspects of physics that makes it appealing to 
those of us who practice il as a profession is that calculations 
and the results of experiments can be repeated at will. So 
all of the interesting observations I’ve made on the Zapruder 
assassination movie film can be repeated by anyone suffi- 
ciently interested in such matters. (And all of them have 
been duplicated at least once by others.) Most of the con- 
clusions I reach will seem reasonable to physicists, but in 
one case I will simply give my “best guess," and not try to 
do any more persuading. This report will cover my analysis of several events ap- 
pearing in the assassination film, some theoretical calcu- 
lations relating to the “head shot," and some firing range 
experiments that validated the theoretical conclusions based 
on the laws of physics as I have taught them for the past 40 
years. My observations, analyses and conclusions also relate 
to the timing of the shots, the speed at which the camera was 
813 American Journal of Physics Vol. 44. No. 9, September 1976 
( opy right •* 1976 Amcrlcnn Association of Physics Teachers 
813

--- PAGE BREAK ---JFK 
• fctllM 
Te»os 
Schoolbook 
Depository 
Budding 
Mr.

Zopruder's 
DEALEY PLAZA, DALLAS, TEXAS 
|-jg | |)c;ilcy IMU/JI, Dallas.Texas.

22 November 1963.

Prcsnlem Ken- 
nedy's mute is shown down M;iin Street :iml 11 on si on Street, turnini!

onto 
P.lm Street, in front of the Book Depositary Building, where I ec I lurvey 
Oswald was employed Mr.

/apruder photographed the President’s car 
throughout its passage along I Im Street, until it disappeared under an 
overpass Physical evidence will be presented for three shots, at /apruder 
frames 177.215.

and 31 .V 
running—boih mailers of some dispute, and to a sharp, 
deceleration of the President's car just before the President 
was ktllcti.-J.u Hte best of my khtmlcdue.

Iliis strange be^ 
havior on the part of the President\s driver has gone unno- 
ticed by everyone else; I suggest a reason for ii.

In pointing out some conclusions that seem persuasive 
to me as a physicist, I do not wish to give the impression that 
I think that a physicist’s way of arriving at "the truth” is the 
best way or the only way.

It works well in the world of 
physics and so long as I confine my attention to the physical 
evidence in the Kennedy assassination, I feel that my con- 
clusions can be of help in elucidating what took place in 
Dcalcy Plaza, Dallas, on 22 November l%3 (see Fig.

I).

II.

THE FILM, THE COMMISSION, AND THE 
CRITIC'S 
A remarkable moving picture record of President John 
F.

Kennedy's last living moments was taken by Abraham 
Zapruder in Dallas on 22 November 1063.

The /apruder 
film was viewed several times by the Warren Commission, 
and extensive testimony was presented to the Commission 
by FBI photoanalysis who had made detailed studies of the 
film, frame by frame.

Nevertheless, a good many substan- 
tive observations were missed by the photoanalysts, and 
some of the information they gave to the Commission was 
incorrect.The /apruder 
film was viewed several times by the Warren Commission, 
and extensive testimony was presented to the Commission 
by FBI photoanalysis who had made detailed studies of the 
film, frame by frame.

Nevertheless, a good many substan- 
tive observations were missed by the photoanalysts, and 
some of the information they gave to the Commission was 
incorrect.

With the publication of the 26-volumc series containing 
the evidence presented to the Warren Commission,1 to- 
gether with a transcript of the hearings,;!

group of “Warren 
Commission Critics” came into being.

These critics, or 
assassination buffs as they are sometimes called, have gone 
over the voluminous ’‘exhibits” with fine-toothed combs, 
and have found many errors and contradictions.

The as- 
sassination buffs attribute most of the errors to more than 
the sloppiness of a rapid publishing effort; they feci that the 
Warren Commission didn’t do a thorough enough job in 
investigating many leads, and some of them take the posi- 
tion that the Commission actually ignored or suppressed 
evidence that Oswald was part of a conspiracy.

I was quite unaware of the strong criticism of the Warren 
Com mission's actions when I first drew some conclusions 
Irom a study of the /apruder film.

A simplified and not too 
convincing report on my analysis ol the timing of the shots 
was presented in a four-hour CBS documentary television 
program.

“The Warren Report.

25 2X June l(Jf>7, the text 
of which is reproduced in Stephen White’s book on that 
documentary 4 It is difficult to explain a rather technical 
matter to a lay audience, and in a short space of lime.

I hope 
that the lifting of such limits in this report will permit me 
to explain the methods I used and the conclusions I drew.

III.

HOW MANY SHOTS WERE FIRED, AND 
WHEN?

Publication of the Warren Commission Report and its 
supporting documentation initiated an intense controversy 
involving the timing of the shots.HOW MANY SHOTS WERE FIRED, AND 
WHEN?

Publication of the Warren Commission Report and its 
supporting documentation initiated an intense controversy 
involving the timing of the shots.

Witnesses testified that 
as few as two and as many as six shots were fired.

The Commission, noting among other bits of evidence, 
the presence of three spent cartridge eases on the sixth floor 
of the Book Depository Building near the abandoned 
Mannlieher Carcano rifle, concluded that three shots had 
been fired by Oswald.

They decided that one of the shots 
missed the car; this missing shot could have been either the 
first or second one fired, but the C ommission favored the 
hypothesis that the second shot was the one that missed.

The 
Commission decided that of these two early shots, the first 
one probably passed through the President’s body before 
wounding Governor Connally of Texas, who was riding on 
a “jumpseat” just ahead of the President, and the third one 
struck and killed the President in frame .113.

Governor 
Connally slated quite positively (in the 25 November 1%6 
issue of Ufi) that he wasn't wounded by the first shot; his 
testimony was based on his recollection that he heard a shot, 
turned around, and was later wounded.

His story agrees 
better with the shot timing to be developed in this section, 
which in turn is not in conflict with the Commission's “al- 
lowed but not favored” conclusions.

My reasons for pre- 
ferring physical evidence to the recollections of even the best 
witnesses are highlighted by noting that the Governor was 
not even aware that he had received bullet wounds in his 
wrist and in his thigh until after he had been admitted to the 
hospital and operated upon.

Several years after I wrote the previous sentence, I read 
a fascinating article in Scientific American by a man who 
qualified as an expert on the reliability of “eyewitness tes- 
timony.” Robert Buckhout wrote5: 
“Eyewitness testimony is unreliable.--- PAGE BREAK ---

My reasons for pre- 
ferring physical evidence to the recollections of even the best 
witnesses are highlighted by noting that the Governor was 
not even aware that he had received bullet wounds in his 
wrist and in his thigh until after he had been admitted to the 
hospital and operated upon. Several years after I wrote the previous sentence, I read 
a fascinating article in Scientific American by a man who 
qualified as an expert on the reliability of “eyewitness tes- 
timony.” Robert Buckhout wrote5: 
“Eyewitness testimony is unreliable. Research and 
courtroom experience provide ample evidence that 
an eyewitness to a crime is being asked to be some- 
thing and do something that a normal human being 
was not created to be or do. Human perception is 
sloppy and uneven, albeit remarkably effective in 
serving our need to create structure out of experi- 
ence. In an investigation or in court, ... [the prose- 
cution and the defense], and usually the witness, too, 
succumb to the fallacy that everything was recorded 
and can be played back later through questioning.” 
The above-mentioned issue of Life arrived on the day 
before Thanksgiving, and because of it I gal very little sleep 
that long holiday weekend. It contained a set of reproduc-

--- PAGE BREAK ----i- 
r>s m color of selected frames from the Zapruder film, 
illtt'iraiing tht controversy between the Commission and 
tin* t iovernor.

With my many years of experience in ana- 
Iwinii bubble chamber film, plus some moonlighting ae- 
ti\ ilies in photographic detective work as a background, I 
M»OII found myself completely engrossed in the Zapruder 
frames.

My first observations and their subsequent “ex- 
planation** turned out, as I showed later, to be quite incor- 
rect But by the time I knew my first conclusions were 
wrong.

I had devoted so many hours to a study or the pic- 
tures that I was subsequently able to see some things that 
I do believe have significance.

M\ attention was drawn to the wa) the flag, at the left 
front lender of the President’s ear, changed its shape Irom 
frame to frame in the Life photographs.

I remembered that 
at Almagordo.

linnet) Fermi had almost instantly measured 
the explosive yield of the first atomic bomb by observing 
how far small pieces of paper which he “dribbled” from his 
•hand, were suddenly moved away from “ground zero" by 
the shock wave, (lie had a precomputed table of numbers 
in his pocket, so he knew the explosive energy of the bomb 
long before any of the official measurements had been an- 
alyzed.) I thought I detected a deformation of the Presi- 
dential flag under the influence of the shock wave generated 
by a nearby bullet, from an elementary calculation in- 
volving the known propert ies of shock waves from bullets, 
and an assumption as to the surface density of the flag, it 
seemed to me reasonable to believe that the motions I de- 
tected were indeed due to the action of shockwaves.

If such 
a conclusion could be confirmed, the vexing questions 
concerning the timing of the shots might be solved.

(My 
knowledge of the strength of shock waves from bullets came 
from an experience I had in World War II, with W.

K.

H.K.

H.

Panofsky, who had built and was testing a “firing error 
indicator." This device was towed behind a plane, in a 
“sleeve," at which gunners fired for practice.

It contained 
two microphones that recorded the shock waves from 
passing bullets.) 
The frames reproduced in UJe showed a total of only 1.3 
see of the critical moments in Dallas, so I had to wait until 
the following Monday to examine the sequence of 160 
frames in the Law School Library's copy of the Warren 
Commission “exhibits."6 When I saw the full set of frames, 
it was clear that the flag was simply flapping in the breeze.

But the thought that effects of the individual bullets might 
show in the film was still very much in my mind.

As I 
scanned the selected color photographs in Life and the full 
set of black and white copies in the exhibits, I noticed a 
striking phenomenon in frame 227 (Fig.

2).

All of the in- 
numerable point like highlights on the irregular shiny sur- 
face of the automobile were stretched out into parallel line 
segments, along the “8 o'clock 2 o'clock" direction.

In the 
plane of the automobile, the parallel streaks appeared to be 
about 10 in.

long.

To appreciate the significance of the streaks, one must 
remember that each frame of moving picture film is not an 
instantaneous snapshot, but a time exposure that lasts for 
about one-thirtieth of a second.

For a point of light on the 
car to be spread out into a streak on the film, the optical axis 
of the camera must have an angular velocity relative to the 
line joining the camera and that point of light IT most of the 
frames had shown streaking, one would simply have con- 
cluded that Mr.

Zapruder was a “sloppy tracker" who 
couldn’t follow the motion of the President's car as it moved 
l ig.

2.

Ziiprudcr frames 227 (top) and 22X (boliom) Note that the 
highlights on the ear which appear in frame 22K as points, are drawn out 
into streaks (along the X uVltick 2 o’clock direction) in frame 227.

past him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ziiprudcr frames 227 (top) and 22X (boliom) Note that the 
highlights on the ear which appear in frame 22K as points, are drawn out 
into streaks (along the X uVltick 2 o’clock direction) in frame 227. past him. as he “panned" his camera to keep the President 
in his field of view. But the highlights showed as sharp points 
of light in most of the frames. If we “transform" to a rotating coordinate system in 
which the car and the camera axis arc at rest, we can better 
understand the significance of the streaks. In this system, 
a streak means that the camera axis has an angular velocity 
relative to the coordinate axis, and this means lhat a torque 
has been applied to the camera to produce the angular ac- 
celeration that gave rise to that angular velocity. Such a 
torque could be produced by a muscle spasm, or by a passing 
shock wave from a bullet. (I guessed lhat the frightening 
crack of a bullet in Dealcy Plaza would set Zapruder's 
neuromuscular system into a temporary spasm. This phe- 
nomenon was demonstrated in the CBS documentary series, 
as we shall see.) For a long time. I thought that I had been 
the first person to attribute significance to the streaks I’ve 
just mentioned. But apparently Harold Weisberg did it first 
in his book Whitewash.1 
My interest in moving picture camera jitter arose when 
I was photographing animals in Africa in the summer of 
1962. I was bothered by my inability to suppress all visible 
jitter in a long focal length movie camera used without a 
tripod, and I started thinking of ways to build optical 
compensators so lhat hand-held movie shots would not cx- 
N If Am. J. Phys. Vol. 44, No. 9, September 1976 
Uh W. Aharez XI5

--- PAGE BREAK ---hibit the jitter that usually distinguishes amateur movies 
from those made on tripods by professionals.

One night in 
Nairobi.

I invented a solution to the problem.

The Bell and 
Howell Company, which incidentally built Zapruder's 
camera, was supporting my development of working models 
of the movie camera stabilizer at the lime the President was 
shot, and my U.S.

camera stabilizer patents arc owned by 
Bell and I lowed.

In the course of my work in movie camera 
stabilization, I learned that the jitter frequency ol a hand- 
held optical device docs not depend to first order upon the 
weight or the moment of inertia of the device, in spite of 
what a physicist's intuition would suggest, but instead de- 
pends mainly on the time constants of the neuromuscular- 
feedback system.

Most people have a peak in their jitter 
power spectrum at about 3 cyclcs/scc.

As we shall soon see, 
this frequency appeared in Zapruder’s jitter spectrum when 
his neuromuscular system was set into oscillation—pre- 
sumably by the sharp “crack” of the bullets.

Many people who have heard of my observation of 
“streaks” in the Zapruder film have concluded that the 
presence of such streaks is the important phenomenon, and 
that if someone tabulated the frames showing streaking, he 
would be repeating my observations.

Pven though CBS 
presented the data in this highly oversimplified manner, the 
presence of the streaks simply indicates that the angular 
velocity of the optical axis of Mr.

Zapruder’s camera (about 
a nearly vertical direction) did not match the angular ve- 
locity of the President’s car, as it drove down Pirn Street 
(Pig.

I).

Such a mismatch in the two angular velocities 
would cause the image of the car on the H-mm film to move 
relative to the edges of the “filmgatc,” during the roughly 
30-mscc exposure, and this motion would give rise to the 
streaking of the pointlike highlights.I).

Such a mismatch in the two angular velocities 
would cause the image of the car on the H-mm film to move 
relative to the edges of the “filmgatc,” during the roughly 
30-mscc exposure, and this motion would give rise to the 
streaking of the pointlike highlights.

It is obvious that no 
information of any importance can be attached to such 
streaking, because no one can perform “hand tracking” 
accurately enough to avoid all streaking.

My observations involved the measurements of the 
streaking, but I didn’t plot the meaningless streak length 
proportional to the mismatch in angular velocity, ACJ- but 
instead, the angular acceleration, rr, averaged over two 
successive frames.

Under normal conditions, when Au) is 
large enough to give appreciable streaking, the angular 
acceleration—given by the difference in the lengths of the 
streaks in two successive pictures—is too small to be mea- 
sured, since the streak lengths in successive frames arc al- 
most equal.

The plot I made and showed to my friends at 
CBS is reproduced in Pig.

3.

The frame number runs ver- 
tically, as on the film itself, and the angular acceleration of 
the camera axis is plotted horizontally.

Since each measure 
of or involves the subtraction of streak lengths, Aa)„+, and 
Aaj„ on two successive frames, the value of o„+|/2 is plotted 
at a “half integral frame number,” midway between the two 
frames whose subtracted streak lengths are involved.

In 
order to find or, one needs to know the “sign” of each of the 
two AcZs to be subtracted.

In other words, we must find out 
for each streaked frame whether the camera axis was 
moving toward the back or toward the front of the car.

It 
turns out that the sign of Au>„ can be found quite unam- 
biguously, simply by observing where the camera was 
pointing on the n — 1 and the n + 1 frames.In other words, we must find out 
for each streaked frame whether the camera axis was 
moving toward the back or toward the front of the car.

It 
turns out that the sign of Au>„ can be found quite unam- 
biguously, simply by observing where the camera was 
pointing on the n — 1 and the n + 1 frames.

When I was 
assigning a plus or minus sign to each of the AUJ’S by this 
technique, I found that the only place this technique didn’t 
work was for frames 314 and 315.

A closer examination 
showed that the numbering of these two frames had simply 
Fig, 3 Angular acceleration of Mr.

Zapruder’s camera, frame by frame.

The frame numbers run vertically from 170 through .134 The angular 
acceleration for the n 4 '/» frame is plotted us abscissa, in arbitrary units 
t acit such acceleration is determined by subtracting the length of the 
streak in the /rth frame from that in the n + I frame, after assigning an 
algebraic sign to the streak length in each frame.

(Sec text for details ) 
Accelerations plotted to the left are**ck»ckwise looking down.** Shots are 
associated (in the text) with pulse trains starling at about IK2, 221.

and 
313.

been interchanged in the “exhibits,” and when they were I 
properly labeled, the signs of all Acu could be determined 
without ambiguity.

Although I later found that the inter- 
change of these two frames was well known to the assassi- 
nation buffs, the manner in which I delected it convinced 
me that my determination of the signs of the Au>’s, and 
therefore the signs and magnitudes of the <»*s were com- 
pletely objective.

Pigurc 3 is a reproduction of my original graph of angular 
acceleration versus frame number.

Angular accelerations 
plotted to the left correspond to motions of the camera axis 
that arc “clockwise looking down.” (The motion of the car' 
and of bullets from the Book Depository arc also clockwise 
looking down, us seen by Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Pigurc 3 is a reproduction of my original graph of angular 
acceleration versus frame number. Angular accelerations 
plotted to the left correspond to motions of the camera axis 
that arc “clockwise looking down.” (The motion of the car' 
and of bullets from the Book Depository arc also clockwise 
looking down, us seen by Mr. Zapruder.) Thus the torque 
acting on the camera between frames 312 and 313 was • 
“negative,” meaning that it could have been caused by a 
direct interaction of the shock wave from the bullet that hit 
the President in frame 313, with the left hand side of Mr. t 
Zapruder's camera. (This is important because the impact ! of the bullet can be seen in frame 313, and there isn't enough 
time available for the relatively sluggish neuromuscular 
system to have produced the observed torque on the camera 
axis.) ; 
When I saw Fig. 3 for the first time, I fell confident that 
the trains of pulses of angular accelerations were largely the 
results of the excitation of Zapruder's neuromuscular sys- 
tem, by the sounds of bullets in Dcaley Plaza. I had no ex- 
perimental data to show that a camera would undergo such

--- PAGE BREAK ---violent angular accelerations if held by a person who was 
startled by the sound of gunfire.

But such a test was made 
for CBS by a firm well known to physicists Fdgertun, 
(iermeshausen, and Greer and films of the lest were 
shown on the CBS program.

While the audience watched, 
cameras held by two separate cameramen shook quite vi- 
olently in response to gunfire, as Walter Cronkitc was 
saying.8 
“Just as a rough check on [the Alvarez) theory, we 
decided to try it ourselves, using other cameramen 
holding similar cameras, standing on a rifle range, 
filming an automobile while a rifleman fired over 
their heads.

“These two volunteers are aiming their cameras at a 
parked limousine Their instructions: ‘I lold the cam- 
eras as steady as possible, and keep filming no mat- 
ter what happens.’ The shots will come between 
them and the car.

The cameramen arc as far from 
the firing platform as Mr Zapruder was from the 
sixth floor of the Book Depository.

(Sound of gunfire 
in background.

| 
“The reaction was obvious.

The film taken b) these 
cameramen showed the effect of the shots, despite 
instructions to hold steady.

Fvcn in steadier hands, 
motion was always noticeable.

This frame shows 
highlight dots around the ear’s windshield.

In reac- 
tion to a shot, the dots changed to crescents.

And in 
the following frame the) became streaks, compara- 
ble to streaks found in some frames from Mr.

Zapru- 
dcr's film.’’ 
In view of these tests, I feel that few persons would now 
dispute i he cause and effect relationship between the shots 
in Dcalcy Plaza and at least some of the trains of streaks in 
Mr.

Zaprudcr’s otherwise well-1 racked movies.

If we accept 
this relationship, wc can use the locations of the trains of 
streaks to shed useful light on the important question of the 
timing of the shots.

No conclusions of the Warren Report 
have been so disputed as those concerning the timing of the 
shots, and the damage done by each bullet.If we accept 
this relationship, wc can use the locations of the trains of 
streaks to shed useful light on the important question of the 
timing of the shots.

No conclusions of the Warren Report 
have been so disputed as those concerning the timing of the 
shots, and the damage done by each bullet.

Most observers 
remembered that three shots were fired, but the recollec- 
tions embraced a range from two to six.

Three spent car- 
tridge cases lay on the floor by Oswald's Mannlichcr- 
Carcano rifle abandoned near the sixth floor window of the 
Book Depository, overlooking Dcalcy Plaza.

According to 
the Warren Commission Report, p.

110, 
.

.

the nearly whole bullet discovered at Parkland 
Hospital |to which the President was taken directly 
from Dcalcy Pla/a) and the two larger fragments 
found in the Presidential automobile, which were 
identified as coming from the assassination rifle, 
came from at least two separate bullets and possibly 
from three." 
One of the “boundary conditions" on the liming of the 
shots (assuming there were three- one from each ejected 
cartridge) was the FBI’s finding that a skilled marksman 
could not space his shots more closely than 2.3 sec, or 42 
frames of Mr.

Zaprudcr’s camera, with its measured frame 
rate or 18.3 per second.

(I will discuss the frame rate later 
in this article.) 
No problem was involved in deciding when the third and 
fatal bullet was fired; the gory photograph labeled frame 
3!

3 settled that question quite conclusively.

The fates of the 
first and second bullets were debated at length by the 
Commission, and the following conclusion emerged: a 
bullet, fired in a one-second interval between frames 206 ' 
and 225, wounded the President by passing through his neck, 
and then wounded Governor Connally, who was seated just 
ahead of the President.

This so-called “single bullet theory" 
as we have already learned, was later challenged by Gov- 
ernor and Mrs.

Connally.This so-called “single bullet theory" 
as we have already learned, was later challenged by Gov- 
ernor and Mrs.

Connally.

The Commission decided that the other bullet was never 
recovered, and after giving reasons to suggest that it could 
have been fired either before or after the shot that was 
identified as vsounding the two men, the Commission fa- 
vored the suggestion that the unrecovered bullet was fired 
after the one that wounded them.

If we now look at f ig.

3 in the light of this background 
material, we sec I ha l the obvious shot in frame 313 is ac- 
companied immediately by an angular acceleration of the 
camera, in the proper sense of rotation to have been caused 
directly by shock-wave pressure on the camera body.

The 
human nervous system cannot transmit signals fast enough 
for the angular acceleration between frames 312 and 313 
to have been caused by Mr.

Zaprudcr’s muscles reacting 
to impulses from a brain that had been startled by the shot 
lhat killed the President.

The expected neuromuscular re- 
action occurs about one-quarter to one-third of a second 
later, as shown by the large accelerations near 318.

(I’ll 
adopt five frames as Mr.

Z.apruder’s experimentally de- 
termined reaction time, for reasons to be discussed later.) 
Another large acceleration peak occurs about two-thirds 
of a second after this group, so wc observe three out of a 
possible four pulses spaced very nearly the canonical one- 
third of a second apart.

For those readers who arc surprised 
that the neuromuscular response time is so long, let me re- 
call a common “parlor trick”: .4 bets B that if A drops a 
vertically held dollar bill without any warning, B cannot 
slop its fall by pinching his fingers together, if his fingers 
are poised, ready to clamp together, at the bottom edge of 
the bill.Z.apruder’s experimentally de- 
termined reaction time, for reasons to be discussed later.) 
Another large acceleration peak occurs about two-thirds 
of a second after this group, so wc observe three out of a 
possible four pulses spaced very nearly the canonical one- 
third of a second apart.

For those readers who arc surprised 
that the neuromuscular response time is so long, let me re- 
call a common “parlor trick”: .4 bets B that if A drops a 
vertically held dollar bill without any warning, B cannot 
slop its fall by pinching his fingers together, if his fingers 
are poised, ready to clamp together, at the bottom edge of 
the bill.

The fact lhat the bill can almost never be slopped 
(unless A gives a precursor signal with his fingers) indicates 
that a nervous system “on hair trigger” takes more than 
one-sixth of a second (3.1 frames) to respond to an optical 
stimulus.

If we look between frames 206 and 225, the onc-sccond 
interval in which the Commission suggested the “wounding 
shot” was fired, wc see the start of a one-second-long train 
of pulses, spaced very nearly one-third of a second apart.

We further note that the initial pulse of the scries, at 221.5, 
is not in the proper direction to have been caused by a direct 
interaction of the shock wave with the camera: the camera 
turns toward, rather than away from the shock wave.

The 
shock wave from a bullet fired from the Book Depository, 
toward the car in its position at the time of frame 221 would 
have been considerably weaker at Mr.

Zaprudcr’s station 
than the shock wave in frame 313, so the lack of a direct 
physical interaction at the time of this earlier shot is not 
surprising.

I therefore conclude that the accelerations at 
220.5 and 221.5 were caused by Mr.

Zaprudcr’s neuro- 
muscular response to an earlier stimulation.

If wc use Mr.

Zaprudcr’s thereby observed oscillation period of about five 
frames (which is close to the expected value), wc place the 
"wounding shot” at about 215.5.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If wc use Mr. Zaprudcr’s thereby observed oscillation period of about five 
frames (which is close to the expected value), wc place the 
"wounding shot” at about 215.5. I find it most interesting 
K17 
Am. J. I*hys. Vol. 44, No. 9, September 1976 
l.uis W. Alvarez 817

--- PAGE BREAK ---that although the determination of 215.5 as the frame 
number of this shot was derived directly from the appear- 
ance of the streaks, it is exactly halfway between two limits, 
only one second apart, set by the Warren C ommission from 
very different data.

If we convert the Commission's language into the ver- 
nacular of the physicist, their conclusion could be staled: 
“The bullet that wounded the President and Governor 
Connally occurred at frame 215 ± 10." Although I would 
not have expected the conclusions of two such different 
studies to agree so closely, it is true that my estimated frame 
number for one of the two disputed shots agrees with the 
Commission's best estimate to within less than one-tenth 
of u second.

The Commission based its findings largely on 
an examination of what the people in the car were doing; 
President Kennedy “seemed to be reacting (in frame 225) 
to his neck wound by raising his hands to his throat.'*9 
I will ignore the two small accelerations between frames 
245 and 280; each is caused by a single frame in which I 
judged that highlights might be smeared slightly more than 
the normal smearing caused by the imperfections of the 
half-tone process.

I will return later to the short sequence 
of significant pulses starling at 290 since they require an 
explanation.

They seemed to me to have less intensity, and 
to last a much shorter time than the three sets of pulses I 
identified as being triggered by bullets.

I eventually found 
what I think is a reasonable explanation, not only for these 
angular accelerations, but also fora pu//ling deceleration 
of the President's car at the same time but that is getting 
a bit ahead of the story.They seemed to me to have less intensity, and 
to last a much shorter time than the three sets of pulses I 
identified as being triggered by bullets.

I eventually found 
what I think is a reasonable explanation, not only for these 
angular accelerations, but also fora pu//ling deceleration 
of the President's car at the same time but that is getting 
a bit ahead of the story.

Because of the quietness of the acceleration graph be- 
tween the pulse trains starting at 221 and 21.1 (except for 
the pulses which I feel have other explanations), and be- 
cause of the obvious train of pulses starting at 182, I favor 
•the view that the Commission's “missing shot" initialed this 
first train of pulses.

My best estimate of the time of this shot 
is therefore 182 minus 5 (for Mr.

Zapruder's calibrated 
time delay), or frame 177.

The Commission noted that about that time, the Presi- 
dent’s ear was partially obscured from the sixth floor win- 
dow, as it passed under a large tree.

In a very thorough 
reenactment session in Dcaley Plaza, photographs were 
taken by the FBI from the window near which the rifle and 
three spent cartridge eases were found.

A limousine was 
moved along Him Street, into positions corresponding to 
known frame numbers, and the Commission report repro- 
duced sample groups of corresponding pictures: (I) from 
Mr.

Zapruder's camera.

(2) from the FBI camera in the 
sixth fkiur window showing the appearance of the limousine 
and a man sitting in the President’s scat, and (3) from an 
FBI camera with a field of view equal to that of Mr.

Za- 
pruder's movie camera, located at the position from which 
he photographed the assassination.

The FBI pictures cor- 
responding to frames 166 and 186 arc reproduced in the 
Commission's report, and both show that the President was 
clearly visible through the branches of the intervening tree 
in both views.Za- 
pruder's movie camera, located at the position from which 
he photographed the assassination.

The FBI pictures cor- 
responding to frames 166 and 186 arc reproduced in the 
Commission's report, and both show that the President was 
clearly visible through the branches of the intervening tree 
in both views.

It appears that the President had been 
unobseured before 186, during which lime the gunman 
would have had a good opportunity to track him, and match 
the angular velocity and angular position of his gun with 
that of the President’s body.

The fact that the President’s 
head might have been partially obscured by branches for 
one-half a second, at frame 177, would not, in my opinion, 
have had any appreciable effect on the gunman’s tracking 
ability, or feeling of confidence that his aim was gtu>d.

Anyone who has ever driven a ear in a heavy rainstorm, with 
a slow windshield wiper will realize that a partial loss of 
visual acuity lor a hall-second would nol seriously affect 
a gunman's ability to perform good tracking, particularly 
when most «if the car was still clearly visible through the 
holes in the trees.

And if we remember that the decision to 
squeeze the trigger must have been made a few tenths of a 
second before the bullet was fired, the effect of the ob- 
scuring tree should have been negligible on the actions of 
the gunman, for a shot fired at frame 177.

I find it strange, on reading the testimony of experts on 
firearms (which I certainly am not), that they all looked at 
the photographs taken through the trees and testified 
whether or not a gunman could have fired at particular 
frame numbers.

They treated the subject as though it was 
static— as though the gunman was presented with a sta- 
tionary target behind a tree.I find it strange, on reading the testimony of experts on 
firearms (which I certainly am not), that they all looked at 
the photographs taken through the trees and testified 
whether or not a gunman could have fired at particular 
frame numbers.

They treated the subject as though it was 
static— as though the gunman was presented with a sta- 
tionary target behind a tree.

They looked at the still pho- 
tographs taken from the window in this static way, and 
decided that the gunman could have fired at certain frame 
numbers (when the President's body showed through a 
hole), but not at other times, when it was eclipsed.

I can 
appreciate how they could have said such things under the 
stress of the investigation, when asked to comment on a set 
of still pictures, but I tun surprised that no one mentioned 
what the real situation was like, with a large moving object 
containing a specific target fixed in its moving frame, that 
had a very nearly constant angular velocity with respect to 
the gunman I don’t believe a gunman would have been 
deterred from firing at frame 177.

and I consider it most 
likely that the shot fired at that lime was the one the 
Commission concluded missed the car and was unrccovcred.

To return to the FBI's (assumed) minimum possible 
firing interval of 2.3 see, we should compare this lime with 
my best estimate of the time interval between what I iden- 
tified as the first two shots.

From frame 177 to frame 216 
is 2.1 3 sec.

To make this conform to the 2.3-scc limit, it is 
only necessary to change the liming of the two shots by one 
and a half frames each; if the first occurred at 175.5 and the 
second at 217.5, the time interval would be 42/18.3 = 2.3 
see.

Such a procedure of altering estimated numbers within 
their known errors is a standard technique in my own 
physics specialty of bubble chamber event analysis.--- PAGE BREAK ---

To make this conform to the 2.3-scc limit, it is 
only necessary to change the liming of the two shots by one 
and a half frames each; if the first occurred at 175.5 and the 
second at 217.5, the time interval would be 42/18.3 = 2.3 
see. Such a procedure of altering estimated numbers within 
their known errors is a standard technique in my own 
physics specialty of bubble chamber event analysis. We have 
complicated computer programs that alter measured angles 
and measured momenta of tracks (within the known errors) 
to match the constraints imposed by the laws of conserva- 
tion of energy and momentum. Just as a bubble chamber 
physicist uses a “fitting routine” to make his events match 
a known constraint, I have shown that I can fit the 2.3-sec 
time interval constraint by two small adjustments in esti- 
mated frame number. Since the two changes of ±1.5 frames 
arc small compared to the extrapolation of five frames each, 
made to arrive at the two unfitted estimates, and since no 
one would really believe that such extrapolations were more 
accurate than 1.5 frames, I believe that the filling procedure 
is justified. I lowcver, if the reader dislikes ihis fitting pro- 
cedure, he can still accept my “unfitted estimates,’’ by 
learning that the CBS tests turned up a “technician w ho had 
one hit and two misses” (at a moving car, in a three-di- 
mensional mockupof the Dcaley Plaza) “in 4.1 sec.’’mThis 
is remarkably like the apparent performance of the 
marksman identified by the Commission as Lee Harvey 
Oswald and reduces the permissible limejnterval to 2.05 
sec, which is within my unfitted estimate of 2.13 see.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Let me now summarize the conclusions of this section.

By an analysis^* "streaks" in the Zapruder film, I identified 
the precise timing of two shots that had been pinpointed by 
other means by the Warren Commission.

So far as I know, 
there is no real controversy concerning the timing of these 
two shots.

I found evidence that convinced me that a third 
shot was fired at about frame 177.

This firing time is al- 
lowed by the findings of the Warren Commission, even 
though they favored the idea that the "third shot” was fired 
between the two that they identified as surely hitting 
President Kennedy.

And finally, this firing sequence is 
consistent with the memories of Governor and Mrs.

Con- 
nolly.

What limitations can be placed on these observations?

If.

as many people have suggested and continue to 
suggest two shots hit the President almost simultaneously 
from opposite directions, at frame 31.1 and very shortly 
thereafter, could I have detected this multiple firing?

The 
answer to that question is "no." To be detected by the 
"streak method," two shots must be spa ceil by about 2 see 
to be resolved as two separate shots, ratherlhan a single shot 
followed by a slower than normal recovery time lor Mr.

Zapruder's neuromuscular system.

But in the next section.

I will be able to shed some light on the question of the "shot 
from the front." 
I was bothered for some time by the weaker set of pulses 
lasting a shorter time, that show in Mg.

3, from frames 290 
through 29H.

They don't look like the ones that seemed 
clearly associated with bullets.

But obviously they required 
an explanation, fll give my best explanation Tor them in the 
final section of this report, but I don’t feel as certain about 
that explanation as I do about the other three cases.

IV.

WIIY 1)11) TUI.

PRESIDENTS IIF.AD 
SNAP BACKWARD AFTER TIIF.

FATAL SHOT?

I must apologize for the tone of the following section, 
which may sound cold blooded and devoid of human feeling.FATAL SHOT?

I must apologize for the tone of the following section, 
which may sound cold blooded and devoid of human feeling.

My long delay in publishing this analysis derives largely 
from my feelings of inadequacy after many attempts to 
soften its impact.

But I am finally convinced that the con- 
clusions I reach in this section arc important, and I have 
therefore done my best to make the text as free from emo- 
tional content as possible.

John Kennedy was one of my 
personal heroes, and I had the pleasure of talking with him 
on two occasions.

His death touched me deeply, and I hope 
the reader will bear that in mind as he studies this sec- 
tion.

Paul I loch, who was then a graduate student at Berkeley, 
tried to interest me in one of the hottest and longest sur- 
viving controversies arising from a study of the Zapruder 
film.

(It was the subject of several radio and television shows 
in April 1975, and testimony concerning it was taken during 
the Congressional Hearings on the CIA, in June 1975.) This 
controversy involves the unexpected behavior of the Presi- 
dent’s head immediately after it received the final and 
mortal shot.

Everyone who studied the behavior of the 
people in the Zapruder film agreed that immediately after 
this shot, the President’s head and body moved suddenly 
backward.

The sixth floor window of the Texas Book De- 
pository Building was behind the car, and the Warren 
Commission concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald shot the 
President from that window.

Why then did the President’s 
head recoil toward, rather than away from the gun as the 
laws ol j.u> .iw> would seem to demand?

The assassination 
buffs argued at length about this action.

I shall mention only 
three persons out of a great many who concluded in writing 
that the President was shot from the front.The assassination 
buffs argued at length about this action.

I shall mention only 
three persons out of a great many who concluded in writing 
that the President was shot from the front.

In his Rush to 
Judgment,2 Mark Lane said, "So long as the Commission 
maintained the bullet came almost directly from the rear, 
it implied that the laws of physics vacated in this instance, 
for the President did not fall forward." Josiah Thompson, 
Professor of Philosophy ill I lavcrford College, wrote a book 
that devoted a good deal of space to this problem.I 11 He 
concluded that immediately after the President was 
wounded in the head from behind, another bullet fired from 
in front of the car hit his head and drove it back, by mo- 
mentum conservation, toward the rear of the car.

District 
Attorney James Garrison of New Orleans made similar 
claims in the highly publicized trial of Clay Shaw, in 1969.

The thrust of all these arguments is that if the President was 
shot from two directions, almost simultaneously, there must 
have been a conspiracy, in contradiction to the Warren 
Commission’s basic conclusion that Oswald acted as an 
independent agent.

Paul I Inch often pressed me for an explanation of the odd 
behavior of the President's head, and although I hadn’t 
observed it myself, I usually suggested that the head had 
probably been held erect by muscles controlled by the brain, 
and that when the controls were suddenly damaged, the 
head fell back.

I was finally convinced that this explanation 
was incorrect after Paul lloch handed me a copy of 
Thompson’s book as I was leaving Berkeley for the Febru- 
ary 1969 meeting of the American Physical Society in St.

I ouis.

On the plane I had time to study the book carefully.

It is beautifully printed, with excellent photographs and 
carefully prepared graphs.

When I studied the graph 
showing the changing position of the President's head rel- 
ative to the moving car’s coordinate system.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is beautifully printed, with excellent photographs and 
carefully prepared graphs. When I studied the graph 
showing the changing position of the President's head rel- 
ative to the moving car’s coordinate system. I was finally 
convinced that the assassination buffs were right; there had 
to be a real explanation of the fact that the President’s head 
did not fall back, but was driven back by some real 
force. And the answer turned out to be simpler than I had ex- 
pected I solved the problem (to my own satisfaction, and 
in a one-dimensional fashion) on the back of an envelope, 
as I sat in solitary splendor in the beautiful suite that the St. Louis hotel management supplied me in my capacity as 
president of the APS. I concluded that the retrograde motion of the President's 
head, in response to the rifle bullet shot, is consistent with 
the law of conservation of momentum, if one pays attention 
to the law of conservation of energy as well, and includes 
the momentum of all the material in the problem. The 
simplest way to see where I differ from most of the critics 
is to note that they treat the problem as though it involved 
only two interacting masses: the bullet and the head. My 
analysis involves three interacting masses, the bullet, the 
jet of brain matter observable in frame 313, and the re- 
maining part of the head. It will turn out that the jet can 
carry forward more momentum than was brought in by the 
bullet, and the head recoils backward, as a rocket recoils 
when its jet fuel is ejected. (Col. W'illiam H. Hanson came 
to the same conclusion, independently.,2) 
If a block of wood is suspended by strings from the ceil- 
ing, it is called a ballistic pendulum, and physicists or 
gunsmiths can calculate the velocity of a bullet shot into it 
to be 
1*1 
>v 
1? 7 r 
\ 
81V Am. J. Phy*. Vol. 44, No. 9, September 1976 
l.uis YV. Alvarez 819

--- PAGE BREAK ---I 
I'H = I'U’M W/MH.

(I) 
where i1 A# is the velocity of the wooden block after it stops 
the bullet, and M\*• and A/# are the masses of the wooden 
block and bullet.

Fquation (I) follows directly from the law 
of conservation of momentum: 
1'UMH a I'H MH - (2) 
In using n ballistic pendulum, we normally forget that 
the collision of bullet and wooden block is very inelastic.

Of 
the incoming kinetic energy of the bullet, only a small 
fraction/appears as kinetic energy of the moving wooden 
block; the remaining fraction (J —J) goes into healing the 
wood.

If MM « A/u% 
KRtt'-ZdCEd.

A/Ill’ll*V- =/X A 1/il'H2/-- O) 
From (3) and (2), 
/« MH/M»«% (4) 
For the case of a 10-g bullet, and a block weighing I Okg, 
it cun be seen that 99.9% of the incoming kinetic energy goes 
into heating the block, and only 0.1% appears as mechanical 
energy.

Ballistic pendulums arc designed so that they con- 
tain the inelastically dissipated energy.

Unfortunately, the 
human head is not able to contain the major fraction of the 
energy carried in by the bullet.

This tragic aspect of the 
assassination is clearly visible in frame 313 of the Zapruder 
film, and is discussed in detail in the reports of the autopsy 
surgeons.

The mechanism of the retrograde recoil turns out to be 
rather simple, if one remembers that 99.9% of the incoming 
energy must be accounted for.

The momentum associated 
with a given amount of kinetic energy varies as the square 
root of the mass of the object carrying that kinetic ener- 
gy: 
p * (2AM')1/3.

(5) 
where p is the momentum, and K is the kinetic energy of the 
object with a mass A/.

Figure 4 shows what happened when my friends and I 
fired bullets at melons thul had been wrapped with Scotch 
glass filament tape, to mock up the tensile strength of the 
cranium.(5) 
where p is the momentum, and K is the kinetic energy of the 
object with a mass A/.

Figure 4 shows what happened when my friends and I 
fired bullets at melons thul had been wrapped with Scotch 
glass filament tape, to mock up the tensile strength of the 
cranium.

Under the influence of the bullet, some of the 
material making up the melon breaks through the rein- 
forcement, and carries momentum in the forward direction 
(Frame 313 of the Zapruder film shows this same phe- 
nomenon.) As we shall now sec, the momentum carried 
forward in this way can be much larger than the momentum 
brought in by the bullet.

For example, if the bullet weighed 
0.1% of the melon weight, and if 10% of the incoming kinetic 
energy was used to propel 10% of the mass of the melon 
forward, then the momentum of the jet expelled forward 
would be (10)*/2 times that of the incoming bullet.

(I will 
use subscripts, h for bullet, j for forward moving jet, and 
m for melon.) 
pj = VMjKjl'n = (2X lOOAy,, X 0.1 Kh}''2 
« (10)•/* (2MhKh)W = (10)!/*/>*.

(6) 
since = 0.1 Kim = \Q0Mh.

K, = 0.1 Kb.

The melon would 
then recoil backward with about twice the velocity it would 
have been expected to go forward, assuming it were made 
of wood.

This is because the melon, acting at first as a bal- 
listic pendulum, acquires a forward velocity equal to r„,\ up 
Fig 4 Rcirorccoil in a lupe-reinforccd melon hit b\ .i high-velocity bullet 
The bullet came from a rifle off the right-hand side of the Irumc*.

The 
forward jet (lo the left) propelled the melon "backwards.** (See text > 
= ph/M,„.

(The notation rw,|HI> means the velocity one 
would expect the melon to have if it contained all the kinetic- 
energy of the bullet, as a ballistic pendulum does.) But in 
the center of mass system of the melon, which is moving 
“forward" with the expected velocity,a jet moves forward 
with momentum equal to (IO)l/2/v—as we have just seen.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 
forward jet (lo the left) propelled the melon "backwards.** (See text > 
= ph/M,„. (The notation rw,|HI> means the velocity one 
would expect the melon to have if it contained all the kinetic- 
energy of the bullet, as a ballistic pendulum does.) But in 
the center of mass system of the melon, which is moving 
“forward" with the expected velocity,a jet moves forward 
with momentum equal to (IO)l/2/v—as we have just seen. It gives the melon an equal and opposite momentum, in the 
moving (CM) system; in that system, p„, = —(10)1 '/>/,. If wc neglect the 10% loss of mass by the melon to the jet. the recoil velocity of the melon (in thc'CM system) is 
» 
J

--- PAGE BREAK ---—(10)1 /2 limes ihc “expected value.” Since velocities add 
vcciorallv.

the final velocity of (he melon (in Ihe laboratory 
system) is 11 — (I0),/2| / ,„| m».

Since the square rcn>i of 10 
is close to 3.16, the observed velocity of the melon is about 
-I m| III*- 
If one wants to know more about the details of the 
transfer mechanism of kinetic energy from the bullet to 
kinetic energy of the fragments thrown forward, he will have 
to ask someone more knowledgeable in the theory of fluid 
mechanics than I am.

My intuitive feeling is that the conical 
shape of the interaction zone is the key to the nonnegligiblc 
efficiency of energy transfer.

(It is clear that an appreciable 
mechanical energy transfer is only possible if the incoming 
energy can avoid “being thermalized.”) The conical region 
is defined by the small entrance hole and the much larger 
exit hole in the melon.

Transmission lines with tapered in- 
ternal conductors arc efficient transformers of electrical 
energy, and a tapered bullwhipcan smoothly transform the 
-energy given to a large mass, by the Hick of the wrist, into 
roughly the same energy of a much smaller mass at the tip 
of the whip.

The “crack” of the whip occurs when the lip 
of the whip goes supersonic.

I believe that in a somewhat 
analogous manner, but of course in the opposite direction, 
ihc kinetic energy of the bullet is given in a “tapered region” 
to a progressively larger mass in the melon, to achieve the 
modestly efficient energy transfer that is demonstrated in 
our experiments.

Now that l*vc given the theory of Ihe “jet recoil mecha- 
nism.*' I’ll describe the experiments that gave rise to Fig- 
4.

When I showed my simple calculations to Paul I loch, he 
said that no one would believe my conclusions (including 
himself) unless we could demonstrate the retrograde recoil 
on a rifle range, using a reasonable facsimile of a human 
head as a target.Now that l*vc given the theory of Ihe “jet recoil mecha- 
nism.*' I’ll describe the experiments that gave rise to Fig- 
4.

When I showed my simple calculations to Paul I loch, he 
said that no one would believe my conclusions (including 
himself) unless we could demonstrate the retrograde recoil 
on a rifle range, using a reasonable facsimile of a human 
head as a target.

I discussed my theory with my longtime 
friend and associate at the Laboratory, Sharon “Buck” 
Buckingham.

Buck is an enthusiastic deer hunter, and he 
offered his services if I would buy the melons into which he 
would fire the shots.

Buck did his first experiments in June 1969 at the San 
Leandro Municipal firing range.

Before he started shooting* 
all the expert marksmen in attendance told him that he was 
wasting his time—one said.

“I’ve been around guns all my 
life, and you must be out of youc mind to believe something 
you hit with a bullet will come back toward you.” Most of 
the targets were melons that Buck had reinforced by 
wrapping with l-in.

Scotch “filament tape,”as mentioned 
earlier.

The results of the first lest shootings were encouraging 
in that most of the reinforced melons were driven by their 
shots toward the gun as I expected, rather than away from 
the gun “as the laws of physics require.” 
Paul Hoch expressed an interest in the results of this test, 
but said that he wouldn’t ask his fellow buffs to believe them 
unless he had photographic evidence to document the case.

Paul enlisted the help of Don Olson, another physics 
graduate student and assassination buff, who had a re- 
motely controlled Super 8 movie camera, and I was present 
as an observer.

We were all impressed to find that Buck's 
early results could be duplicated before the camera.

The 
performances were now more uniform, with six out of seven 
reinforced melons clearly recoiling in a retrograde manner 
toward the gun.We were all impressed to find that Buck's 
early results could be duplicated before the camera.

The 
performances were now more uniform, with six out of seven 
reinforced melons clearly recoiling in a retrograde manner 
toward the gun.

(According to Paul Hoch, the other one 
“just rolled around a bit.”) 
figure 4 is an enlargement of a section of the film 
showing shot number 4.

The frumc rate is 24 per second.

The gun.

a 3Q.Q6 ril]c.

is about 30 m out of sight on the 
right-hand side of the photographs.

Its 150 grain hand- 
loaded soft-nosed1' bullet hit the melon with a velocity of 
about 3000 ft/scc; the 6.5 Mannlichcr-Carcano rifle found 
near the sixth floor window of the Book Depository building 
fired a 160-grain bullet at about 2165 ft/scc.

(I am told that 
at a distance of 265 ft, the measured slant range from the 
Book Depository window to the President in frame 313, the 
bullet would have slowed down to about 1800 ft/scc.) 
To relate these experiments to the melancholy affair in 
Dallas, we can use Thompson's*1 carefully measured ve- 
locity of the backward motion of the President’s head.

I Ic 
finds that it was about 1.6 ft/scc, averaged over eight 
frames In I ig.

4.

the measured retrograde velocity of the 
melon is 4.5 ft/scc.

It is obvious that if the melon had been 
hit by a slower bullet, and had been connected to a large 
mass, simulating a torso, rather than being free of restraint, 
it would also have moved back more slowly.

But in spite of 
what appears to me to be a good semiquantitative match in 
velocities, we must remember that the important question 
at issue here is not the muRnitude of the velocity, but its 
direction!

I believe that our experimental demonstration of retro- 
grade recoil in head-like objects will convince most people 
that the laws of physics do not require a second assassin to 
have been firing at the President from the “grassy knoll,” 
ahead of the car.But in spite of 
what appears to me to be a good semiquantitative match in 
velocities, we must remember that the important question 
at issue here is not the muRnitude of the velocity, but its 
direction!

I believe that our experimental demonstration of retro- 
grade recoil in head-like objects will convince most people 
that the laws of physics do not require a second assassin to 
have been firing at the President from the “grassy knoll,” 
ahead of the car.

It is important to stress the fact that a 
taped melon was our a priori best mockup of a head, and 
it showed retrograde recoil in the first test.

If we had used 
the “P.dison technique” and shot at a large collection of 
objects, and finally found one which gave retrograde recoil, 
then our firing experiments could reasonably be criticized.

But as the tests were actually conducted.

I believe they show 
it is most probable that the shot in frame 313 came from 
behind the car; after all, the jets visible in frame 313 were 
what suggested this mcchanisrft to me.

Many of the assassination buffs wrote to Hoch to say that 
neither my “back of the envelope” numbers nor the exper- 
imental results agreed with Professor Thompson’s measured 
head velocities.

So.

in case any readers of this article may 
be similarly bothered.

I should point out that the three 
numbers I used in my analysis (two mass ratios and an ef- 
ficiency) were each assumed to have the value of I O', where 
i is a positive or negative integer.

In spite of this highly 
quantized nature of the input data, the calculated and ob- 
served velocities differ by only a factor of 3.

The assassi- 
nation buffs who argued with Paul Hoch in a quantitative 
way (neglecting the important sign oft he velocity) usually 
suggested that I was assuming that the mass of the jet (10%) 
was too high.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In spite of this highly 
quantized nature of the input data, the calculated and ob- 
served velocities differ by only a factor of 3. The assassi- 
nation buffs who argued with Paul Hoch in a quantitative 
way (neglecting the important sign oft he velocity) usually 
suggested that I was assuming that the mass of the jet (10%) 
was too high. But they missed the fact that, if cither this 
assumed mass ratio or the assumed efficiency of energy 
transfer were reduced by a combined factor of almost 10, 
the calculated and observed velocities would be equal. In 
addition, frame 313 shows that the event wasn’t one di- 
mensional, as the model was; the two jets visible in frame 
313 have vertical components that would lower the longi- 
tudinal component of momentum, bringing the theory closer 
to the actual event. I don’t want to be that quantitative; the 
theory wasn’t designed to calculate the velocities to high 
accuracies—but to show qualitatively that the head could 
jerk backwards. I will end this section by saying what I think can be 
concluded from our experiments. It is possible to disprove 
K2I Am. J. Phys. Vnl. 44, No. 9, September 1976 
l.ufc W. Aharrz 821

--- PAGE BREAK ---' ■ ■ 
t' - 
\ 
S i ?

* 
I 
a theory, but never lo prove one; no mailer how oflen a 
iheory has given correci predictions in the past, a single 
(repeatable) counterexample invalidates that particular 
iheory.

(Newton's theory of gravitation was disproved in 
this manner.) l or these reasons, I believe that those argu- 
ments for a second assassin that derive from President 
Kennedy's head movements after frame 313 are now clearly 
invalid; a documented counterexample is now available to 
disprove the assertions of many writers concerning the 
consequences of Newton's laws of motion.

I am convinced 
that everything that is known about the motion of the 
President's body in that short time interval is consistent with 
a shot from above and behind, where the sixth fk>or window 
of the Book Depository building was situated.

But by the 
argument given earlier in this paragraph, I obviously can't 
prove that the bullet came from that window.

I)r John K I atlimcr Recent IN published an article14 
entitled “Observations Based on a Review of the Autopsy 
Photographs.

X-rays and Related Materials of the l.atc 
President John P.

Kennedy." |)r.

I .atlimcr was apparently 
the first physician without governmental credentials to be 
given access to this material, which had been restricted for 
more than eight years, at the request of the President's 
family.

Dr.I .atlimcr was apparently 
the first physician without governmental credentials to be 
given access to this material, which had been restricted for 
more than eight years, at the request of the President's 
family.

Dr.

I .at timer's article, published several years after 
the shooting experiments described above, says 
“These observations, made possible by actually 
seeing the autopsy photographs and the clothing, 
(and added to the previous laboratory and autopsy 
findings) have answered some of the questions that 
were in the mind of the author and have revealed no 
incompatibilities with the concept that two high- 
speed bullets hit the President, both fired downward 
and from the rear, as from the sixth floor of the Book 
Depository Building;— There were no signs of bul- 
lets or bullet wounds or bullet fragment tracks 
through the President's body running in any other 
location or direction, such as transversely, or from 
the front, to indicate bullet “hits" from any of these 
directions upon the President's head, body or 
limbs." 
Several critics of the Warren report had predicted that 
when a "nonestablishmeni" expert on bullet wounds, such 
as Dr.

Lattimer (with his “questions") was finally permitted 
lo see the autopsy films, the "head shot from the front" 
would be confirmed.

But Dr.

Lattimer has ruled it out quite 
unequivocally.

Although Dr.

Lattimer is now classified as a urologist, 
his biographical sketch14 shows that he is an expert in the 
relevant fields: 
“In World War II, Dr.

Lattimer was a military 
surgeon in the European Theater of Operations and 
had experience with military missle wounds of all 
types, almost always using X-rays for their localiza- 
tion.

He served as a firearms range officer and also 
did experimental work on the wounding capabilities 
of various missiles on hurqan tissues." 
V.

HOW FAST WAS Till' CAMERA RUNNING?He served as a firearms range officer and also 
did experimental work on the wounding capabilities 
of various missiles on hurqan tissues." 
V.

HOW FAST WAS Till' CAMERA RUNNING?

Everyone who has watched football on TV knows that 
it is easy lo distinguish a slow motion “instant replay" from 
Ihe real thing, even when the play-back rate is not much 
slower than the normal rate.

The clues come largely from 
our memorized knowledge of the oscillation frequency of 
the legs of runners moving at their fastest possible rates, and 
from our memory of the way objects fall in a “one g” gra- 
vitational environment.

But Mr.

Zapruder's camera showed an automobile in 
which the occupants were for the most part silling still, 
together with images of two motorcycle policemen who sat 
immobile on their scats all the while.

The background 
comprised fixed structures, plus a few spectators who ap- 
peared lo be standing still as the camera panned past them 
as it followed the President's car.

So the clues we see in 
“instant replay football" on TV seem to be denied us in the 
Zapruder Him.

If one accepted the FBI’s subsequently measured frame 
rale of 18.3 per second for Mr.

Zapruder's camera, the car 
was moving at a speed of approximately 12 mph.

But an 
FBI report stated that, “The camera was set to take normal 
speed movie film or 24 frames/sec." Had the camera ac- 
tually been operating at that rate, it would have been ex- 
ceedingly difficult -if not impossible—to devise a sequence 
of Mannlicher-Carcano rifle shots that would have been 
within human capability, and therefore the multiple gun- 
men theories—so popular with many of the Warren Com- 
mission critics - could not have been ignored.

(The higher 
the frame rate, the shorter is the time between any pair of 
numbered frames.) The Bell and Howell camera used by 
Mr.

Zapruder had a “normal” button position, and a “slow 
motion" position, and I believe the intent of the FBI report 
was simply to answer the question.(The higher 
the frame rate, the shorter is the time between any pair of 
numbered frames.) The Bell and Howell camera used by 
Mr.

Zapruder had a “normal” button position, and a “slow 
motion" position, and I believe the intent of the FBI report 
was simply to answer the question.

“Did Mr.

Zapruder use 
normal or slow motion speed in taking his pictures?" Since 
the normal speed of 16- or 35-mm sound moving pictures 
is well known to be 24 frames/scc.

I believe that the FBI 
was in turn saying, in effect, “He used normal speed." (I am 
now using my legally acceptable status as a “camera expert" 
lo give an opinion outside the field of physics; I was for 
several years a salaried consultant to the Photoproducts 
Division of the Bell and Howell Company.) Actually the 
“slow motion frame rate” on the Zapruder camera was 
closer to 48 frames/scc.

I tried for some time to find a way lo convince myself that 
the frame rate was 18.3 per second, and not the much higher 
“slow motion rate." But as I looked at the pictures again and 
again, I couldn't find a clue that could distinguish pictures 
of a car moving at 10 mph, together with some people who 
moved slowly, from pictures of a car moving at about 30 
mph, with the same people still moving slowly, but not quite 
so slowly.

I was about to give this problem upas hopeless 
when I noticed the action of a man standing beyond the car, 
as seen by the camera.

He was clapping as the President 
drove by—a gesture that was common in the Kennedy era.

An elementary analysis of the muscle power involved in 
clapping shows that the power required, for a given maxi- 
mum hand spacing, varies as the cube of the clapping fre- 
quency.

The average velocity of the hands varies directly 
with the frequency, so the energy expended per cycle varies 
as the square of the frequency.

Power is the time rate of 
expenditure of energy, so it involves an additional factor 
proportional lo the frequency.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The average velocity of the hands varies directly 
with the frequency, so the energy expended per cycle varies 
as the square of the frequency. Power is the time rate of 
expenditure of energy, so it involves an additional factor 
proportional lo the frequency. It turns out that we can use 
the spectator's apparent clapping frequency, together with 
his observed and very natural maximum hand separation 
of about I ft, in the same way we use a running back's leg 
rate, to decide if we are watching live action, or slow motion 
“instant replay.” 
• / 
•s 
A 
i 
\\ 
.1

--- PAGE BREAK ---The spectator appears to move smoothly across the film 
front the righfhand edge, and about 1 (assumed) see later 
(18 frames) disappears out of view beyond the left-hand 
edge.

Mis apparent motion is of course due to Mr.

Zapru- 
der s punning action to follow the car.

The clapping is shown 
in Frames 278 through 296 (Fig.

5), and even though the 
man's image is blurred because of the panning, it is evident 
that he has executed between 3'A and 4 full clapping cycles.

I will assume that his apparent clapping frequency is 3.7 
cycles/sec, and will ask how much greater this could be — 
due to a higher frame rate and still be within reasonable 
human limits.

The key to this particular analysis is the ex- 
istence of the aforementioned cube law relating clapping 
frequency and muscle power.

IT a person doubles his clap- 
ping frequency, at constant amplitude, he must expend eight 
times as much power.

The “steepness" of the cube law is 
what gives one the ability to distinguish Film speeds by ob- 
servations of clapping behavior, but only if normal clapping 
behavior is not too far from the “power barrier." 
To answer this question.

I clapped in synchronism with 
a metronome set at the assumed rate of 220 beats/min.

I 
found I could clap quite comfortably at this rate of 3.7 per 
second, but I couldn't do so at twice the rale, with the same 
amplitude; to make 7.4 cyelcs/scc, which was an obviously 
unnaturally high rate.

I had to reduce my amplitude con- 
siderably.

I could just make it at 1.5 times 3.7 cyclcs/scc, 
but the effort felt quite unnatural.

I am confident that 
anyone who repeats these experiments, as I have just done 
after a hiatus of several years, will be convinced thut Mr.

Zapruder’s camera was running at very nearly 18 frames/ 
see.I am confident that 
anyone who repeats these experiments, as I have just done 
after a hiatus of several years, will be convinced thut Mr.

Zapruder’s camera was running at very nearly 18 frames/ 
see.

(It was certainly not running at 48 framcs/scc, and I 
believe that 24 framcs/scc can be ruled out, as well.) Al- 
though there is apparently no longer a serious controversy 
relative to frame rates, I wanted to share with my physicist 
readers the pleasure I had in discovering a “cube law clock" 
in the film.

VI.

WHY Dll) Till’.

PRESIDENTS C'AR SLOW 
DOWN ABRUPTLY JUST BEFORE THE FATAL 
SHOT?

The Commission was aided in its interpretation of the 
films by an FBI photoanalyst, Mr.

Lyndal L.

Shaneyfcll.

My first disagreement with his testimony comes on p.

155 
of Vol.

V, where he was running the Zapruder Film for Allen 
W.

Dulles and John J.

McCloy, members of the Commis- 
sion.

After the expert had made a comment relative to 
frame 222, the following conversation took place: 
Mr.

Duties: Jerky motion in Connally in the film.

Mr.

Shaneyfelti There is—it may be merely where he 
stopped turning and started turning this way.

It is 
hard to analyze.

Mr.

Dulles What I wanted to get at—whether it was 
Connally who made the jerky motion or there was 
something in the film that was jerky.

You can't tell.

Mr.

Sheneyfelt: You can’t tell that.

Since Fig.

3 shows some “jerky motion" immediately 
uflcr frame 222, it is a reasonable assumption that this is 
what had caught Mr.

Dulles's attention.

It was too bad that 
Mr.

Dulles answered his own question concerning the pos- 
sibility of distinguishing between the motion of a man in the 
SEPARATION 
OF HANDS 
300 
Tig.

5.

i land clupping m 3‘A cyclcs/scc by a spectator allows Him speed 
to be determined, within important limits.

(See text.) 
car, and a movement of the Film (camera) as a whole Mr.i land clupping m 3‘A cyclcs/scc by a spectator allows Him speed 
to be determined, within important limits.

(See text.) 
car, and a movement of the Film (camera) as a whole Mr.

Dulles was an experienced intelligence agent, and his 
practiced eye caught an important clue, but he loo quickly 
dismissed it as undecipherable, which, of course, we now 
know it wasn’t.

The expert photoanalyst put the lid on the 
matter by his polite endorsement of Mr.

Dulles’s error.

My second disagreement with this same FBI photoana- 
lyst came when he tcstiFicd concerning his inability to pin- 
point the President's car, at frame 313, by examining the 
Zapruder Film.

He had this to say15: 
“Yes, I might slate First that all of the other (reen- 
actment) photographs were reestablished on the 
basis of the Zapruder Film, using reference points in 
the background of the pictures.

**As is apparent here from the photograph of the 
Zapruder frame 313, there arc no reference points.

There is just a grassy plot.

So there is no reference 
point on which we can reestablish the position of the 
ear in the roadway.

“For this reason it was necessary to use the Nix 
film of the head shot and the Muchmore film of the 
head shot to establish this position in the road." 
|These films were shot from amateur movie cameras 
located on the opposite side of the street; one of them 
showed some identifiable background close to Mr.

Zapruder's position, including Mr.

Zapruder him- 
self.

instead of the plain grass that showed at that 
time in the Zapruder film.] 
Mr Shaneyfclt pinpointed the location of the car in 13 
(or perhaps more) frames from 161 to 255, in which inter- 
val, there were architectural background features that were 
easily identifiable in the Zapruder frames.

And as he said, 
the position of the car in frame 313 was determined from 
the two other films.

These data were used in the FBI reen- 
actment studies in Dcalcy Plaza.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And as he said, 
the position of the car in frame 313 was determined from 
the two other films. These data were used in the FBI reen- 
actment studies in Dcalcy Plaza. An open automobile 
similar to the one in which the President rode, was moved 
in turn to the 14 (or more) positions as determined in the 
82.1 Am. J. Ptiys. Vol. 44, No. 9, Stplrmber 1976 
l.uis W. Altarez 823

--- PAGE BREAK ---T 
films.

Ai each position, il was photographed (I) by a still 
camera with the same angular field as Mr.

Zapruder’s 
movie camera, from his original location, and (2) from the 
sixth floor window of the Rook Depository building, through 
the rifle scope of the rifle found at that location immediately 
after the assassination, for each of these 14 selected frames, 
the Exhibits16show photographs (I) and (2), together with 
the original Zapruder frames; in the ease of frame 313, the 
corresponding frames from the Nix and Muchmore films 
arc shown, together with still shots of the stationary car 
from the Nix and Muchmore locations.

In addition to the several pictures corresponding to each 
of the 14 locations, the exhibits also tabulate various mea- 
surements made at the 14 locations.

These include the 
distance of the car from a benchmark on Elm Street 
(“station (*”), the distance between the rear scat of the car 
and the sixth floor window of the Book Depository building, 
and the angle of depression of the rifle sight in that window.

The distances arc given to the nearest tenth of a foot; they 
arc probably accurate to somewhat better than I ft.

As any physicist would do, I plotted the tabulated dis- 
tance of the car (from “station C") against frame number 
for these 14 selected frames.

This graph is shown in Fig.

6, 
and all the points except that for frame 313 lie on a line with 
a slope equal to II .8 mph.

It is clear from the dispersion of 
the (Zapruder) points from a straight line that the final 
poinl (determined from the Nix and Muchmore Aims) docs 
not lie on the extrapolated line.

Two explanations are pos- 
sible; the position of the carat frame 313 was incorrectly 
determined, or the car slowed down somewhere between 
frames 255 and 313.

Neither of these possibilities seemed 
reasonable to me when I first saw Fig.

6, so I set myself the 
task of finding out which explanation was correct.Neither of these possibilities seemed 
reasonable to me when I first saw Fig.

6, so I set myself the 
task of finding out which explanation was correct.

(I did this 
work, and the analysis of the clapping, during the Christmas 
vacation following the publication of the November 26, 
1966 issue of Life.) 
The first relevant observation I made was that contrary 
to what Mr.

Shancyfelt said in his testimony, il was a trivial 
exercise to determine precisely where the car was at each 
of the 79 frames from where his “Zapruder data" stopped 
(at frame 255) to the final published frame, number 344.

What he apparently failed to realize was that the approxi- 
mately ten persons who were standing on the featureless 
background were “reference points" exactly as useful as if 
they were set in concrete.

Their usefulness comes from two 
independent considerations.

There is a linear relationship 
between any horizontal interval on the original film (or on 
the half-tone reproductions in the Exhibits) and the corre- 
sponding angular interval subtended at Mr.

Zapruder’s 
camera.

In other words, every lime the camera panned 
through an angle 6, a fixed object in the field of view moved 
to the left in the picture, a distance of kO.

The value of the 
constant k (the focal length of the camera lens) could be 
determined with the aid of an accurate plan of Dcaley 
Plaza, showing Mr.

Zapruder’s station.

(The camera had 
a zoom lens of variable focal length, which I found had been 
used at very nearly its longest value.) From such a plan, one 
can measure the angles subtended by many architectural 
features, visible in the frames.Zapruder’s station.

(The camera had 
a zoom lens of variable focal length, which I found had been 
used at very nearly its longest value.) From such a plan, one 
can measure the angles subtended by many architectural 
features, visible in the frames.

Those angles, which can be 
measured with a high degree of precision, can be divided 
by the accurately mcasureablc corresponding intervals on 
the film (or on the halftone reproduction) to give the cor- 
responding value of k From then on, we can immediately 
tell through what angle the camera is being panned, frame 
24 O 
220 
—i 1 1 1 1 1 r 
POSITION OF THE CAR 
vs.

FRAME NUMBER 
/ 
8 o I i i i i i i y 
160 180 200 2 20 240 260 280 300 320 
Frome number (16.3 frames/sec) 
Fig.

ft.

Position of ihc President's car as determined by the FHI Note that 
point .113 docs not lie on extrapolated line 
by frame, by simply measuring the displacement of any 
stationary object in the field of view.

That stationary object 
can be a concrete pole, or equally usefully, a person’s foot 
that is temporarily bearing his weight, and is therefore fixed 
to the ground.

Since I didn’t have an accurate enough plan of Dcaley 
Plaza, I couldn’t evaluate k with an absolute uncertainty 
as small as the relative uncertainty with which measure- 
ments could be made on the halftone reproductions.

(The 
FBI could have done that with the theodolite they used in 
the reenactment session.) But that minor lack of absolute 
precision will have no effect on the very accurate mea- 
surements of the relative speed of the car before and after 
the strange and previously unseen deceleration I am about 
to describe.

But before describing that event, I should 
mention that in one sequence, when no spectators are in the 
background, another interesting reference mark is available 
on the plain grass behind the car, in frames 313-334, the 
last ones reproduced in the exhibits.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(The 
FBI could have done that with the theodolite they used in 
the reenactment session.) But that minor lack of absolute 
precision will have no effect on the very accurate mea- 
surements of the relative speed of the car before and after 
the strange and previously unseen deceleration I am about 
to describe. But before describing that event, I should 
mention that in one sequence, when no spectators are in the 
background, another interesting reference mark is available 
on the plain grass behind the car, in frames 313-334, the 
last ones reproduced in the exhibits. This mark is a white 
streak, whose position can be seen to move progressively 
across the film gate, in that sequence of 22 frames. It is clear 
that the white streak is really the image of a small shiny 
object that is reflecting sunlight into the camera lens. In this 
sense, it corresponds directly to one of the highlights on the 
car; il is “streaked” in every frame because the camera axis 
is moving relative to it in all frames. Figure 7 shows the angular position of the car as a 
function of frame number, from frame 260 to the end of the 
sequence—a 4-sec interval of time in which the President 
was fatally wounded. This figure could have been drawn as 
an extension of the Commission-derived Fig. 6, which ends 
at frame 255, but I wanted the scale enlarged because the 
new individual points arc now more precisely known. And 
all of this is in a region where the background 
“• • • is just a grassy plot. So there is no reference 
point on which we can reestablish the position of the 
car in the roadway.”l5|!| 
The extreme smoothness of the curve comSs from the fact

--- PAGE BREAK ---I ip 7 Hi HI i ion ol i he l>rt*Mticnl\ car as determine*] in I hi> paper.

(See 
text ) Mute ihc sudden deceleration «»( the car about t me second before the 
President uas lalallx wounded (in frame .11 .1|.

I rror Hags not shown; the 
75 separate points have errors comparable to the width of the two straight 
killed (in frame 31.1).

The many inconsisicncics in the 
various witnesses’ remembrances of exact limes in this 
critical period made me feel that it was permissible to 
suggest that the siren, from an escorting police vehicle be- 
hind the President’s car.

had come a few seconds before the 
fatal shot.

It would be most probable that an escorting of- 
ficer, having heard one shot, und seeing the President 
wounded by a second shot, would hit the siren button when 
I'm suggesting he did.

If the siren sound became apparent 
lo Mr.

Zaprudcr at frame 2K5, wc would expect him to re- 
spond at frame 290, w'hcre we see the "unexplained and 
relatively weak angular accelerations" starting Wc don't 
know the reaction lime of the driver, but if it was 0.5 sec (9 
frames), then lie would lilt his foot from the accelerator at 
frame 294, as l-ig.

7 shows he did.

f veryonc will recognize 
that such a reaction on the part of the driver would be an 
unavoidable conditioned reflex: we all learn that when wc 
hear a siren suddenly turned on.

just behind our car.

we lift 
our foot from the accelerator pedal.

I haven’t been able to 
think of any other reason why the driver of a car that has 
just stopped one or two high velocity rifle bullets would 
suddenly slow down his rale of travel.

The driver of the car, Agent William R.

Greer, recalls 
that he speeded up the car in this period17: 
1 
) 
linos.

that the smearing due to the camera accelerations (see in 
fig.

3) cancels out; the measurements are made from a 
highlight on the car.

to one of the reference points on the 
(featureless) "grassy plot” that I’ve just discussed.3) cancels out; the measurements are made from a 
highlight on the car.

to one of the reference points on the 
(featureless) "grassy plot” that I’ve just discussed.

Any 
"jiggle” of the camera axis moves both of these reference 
points (on the car and on the ground) by the same distance 
on the film, leaving the distance between the two images on 
the film unchanged.

These distances are plotted against 
frame number in fig.

7, and I estimate that each point has 
a relative uncertainty of about 4 in.

"in real space.” The car 
had an average velocity of about 12 mph or about 12 in./ 
frame interval.

I would normally show all the measured 
points on a curve such as this, but the scatter of the 75 points 
about the "best fit” two line segments is less than the width 
of the lines.

The car was moving almost exactly at 90° to the camera 
axis for these few seconds: one can easily check this by 
noting that the image of the horizontal strip separating the 
front and back compartments of the open car appears as a 
vertical stripe in one of these frames from Mr.

Zaprudcr’s 
downward-looking camera, for this reason wc can translate 
relative positions of a car highlight and the background 
object on a frame-by-frame basis directly into the velocity 
of the car, simply by measuring the slope of the graph in fig.

7.

The heavy car decelerated suddenly for about 0.5 sec (10 
frames), centered at about frame 299, reducing its speed 
from about 12 mph lo about K mph.

Since the car was cer- 
tainly being operated in some low gear ratio, the decelera- 
tion was no doubt caused by the driver reducing his foot 
pressure on the accelerator pedal.

The question is then, 
"Why did the driver suddenly slow down at a lime when a 
more natural reaction would be to speed up and weave to 
left and right, lo avoid being hit again.” I worried about this 
for some time, without finding any satisfactory answer.Since the car was cer- 
tainly being operated in some low gear ratio, the decelera- 
tion was no doubt caused by the driver reducing his foot 
pressure on the accelerator pedal.

The question is then, 
"Why did the driver suddenly slow down at a lime when a 
more natural reaction would be to speed up and weave to 
left and right, lo avoid being hit again.” I worried about this 
for some time, without finding any satisfactory answer.

But 
then I found some testimony concerning a police siren that 
was remembered to have come just after the President was 
Mr.

Arlen Spener: Do you recollect whether you ac- 
celerated before or at the same time or after the 
third shot?

Mr.

Greer: I couldn't really say.

Just as soon as I 
turned my head back from the second shot, right 
away, I accelerated right then.

It was a matter of 
my reflexes to the accelerator.

Mr.

Specter Was it at about that time that you heard 
the third shot?

Mr.

Greer: Yes, sir: just as soon as I turned my 
head.

Mr.

Specter: What is your best estimate of the speed 
of the car at the time of the first, second, or third 
shots?

Mr.

Greer: I would estimate my speed was between 12 
and 15 mph.

Mr.

Specter: At the lime all of the shots occurred?

Mr.

Greer: At the lime the shots occurred.

But since l ig.

7 slums that the car was still moving at 
the slower rate through the last of the published Zaprudcr 
frame number 334 it is apparent that Mr.

Greer’s 
memory doesn’t jibe with the recorded facts.

This is what 
Professor Buckhntil pointed out in his article on the reli- 
ability of eyewitness testimony5; all past events aren’t re- 
corded in a person's memory as on a magnetic tape, to be 
recalled later.

That is why I find the photographic record 
so interesting: it doesn't have the normal human failings.

Certainly, the car eventually speeded up, and this is 
doubtless what Agent Greer recalled.--- PAGE BREAK ---

That is why I find the photographic record 
so interesting: it doesn't have the normal human failings. Certainly, the car eventually speeded up, and this is 
doubtless what Agent Greer recalled. In view of the dis- 
parity of several seconds between what the agent remem- 
bered of this terrible event and what actually happened, the 
reader may come to accept my conclusion that memories 
of the siren were similarly off by a few seconds. That’s all 
it takes to turn the otherwise fantastically absurd dccclcr- 
H25 Am. J. Phys. Vol. 44, No. 9, September 1976 
l.uis W. .third 825

--- PAGE BREAK ---IJT1> • •" : K-, 
tv - 
i alion of the car into a reasonable conditioned reflex on the 
part of the driver to the sound of a siren going off in his ear, 
and to shake up Mr.

Zapruder at the same time.

Dm as I 
said in the introduction, I can’t prove that this is the way it 
happened.

As stated earlier, the streaks in the “grassy plot" were 
doubtless made by a small object reflecting light from the 
sun into the lens of Mr.

Zapruder’s camera.

Figure X shows 
how this streak moved across the film gate in I he camera 
(frames .113 .1.14).

This particular interval of just more than 
I sec coincides exactly with the climax of the events in 
Dcalcy Plaza.

The President has just been fatally shot as 
the streak appears in the background, labeled 313.

In the 
following second, Mr.

Zapruder experiences great difficulty 
in continuing his earlier smooth tracking.

I le sees clearly 
in his view finder what has happened to his President, and 
it is a traumatic experience for him: 
Mr.

y.upnulvr:...

I heard a second shot and then I 
saw his head opened up and the blood and every- 
thing came out and I started - I can hardly talk 
about it.

|The w itness crying.]'* 
But to return to the streaks in Pig.

K, let us first realize 
what that figure would have looked like if the shots had not 
been fired.

Mr.

Zapruder’s tracking ability has been 
checked during the quiet periods of Pig.

3; a given highlight 
on the car, in those periods, stays pointlike, and at a fixed 
location in the film gate.

Under such circumstances, a point 
of light in the background, such as that shown in l ig.

X, 
would move across the film gate on a straight line, at con- 
stant velocity.

But because the camera shutter closes be- 
tween exposures, while the film is being “pulled down," the 
straight line just mentioned would appear as a “dashed line" 
drawn by a draftsman using a straightedge.X, 
would move across the film gate on a straight line, at con- 
stant velocity.

But because the camera shutter closes be- 
tween exposures, while the film is being “pulled down," the 
straight line just mentioned would appear as a “dashed line" 
drawn by a draftsman using a straightedge.

Contrast the evenly spaced dashes on a straight line that 
Zapruder was capable of "drawing." with the dashes of Pig.

X which appear to have been drawn.by a spastic: that might 
even be the correct word to describe Mr.

Zapruder’s con- 
O dition in that ghastly second after frame 313 (Until I re- 
• ah/ed that the labels on frames 3 14 and 315 had been in- 
terchanged in the exhibits, I thought Mr.

Zapruder had lost 
even more control of his muscles than he actually had.) 
Starling at frame 331, we sec the streaks move up to the 
right and then back quite rapidly to the left.

This phe- 
nomenon might be related to the “crescent"-like streaks 
seen in the CBS tests.* In l ig.

.1, I couldn’t plot this two- 
dimensional excursion of the camera axis, but one can see 
from that figure, at frame 332, that something pretty violent 
is happening.

If I d had access to the enlarged color prints 
that Governor Connally is shown viewing in Life, it would 
have been worthwhile plotting tracking curves like Fig.

X, 
for the whole sequence of frames.

My reason for saying this 
is that such a curve complements an acceleration graph, 
such as Fig.

3.

Ideally, the two should yield the same in- 
formation, but in practice, the tracking curve shows more.

This can be seen by comparing Fig.

X with Pig.

3, in the 
vicinity of frame 325.

From Mr.

Zapruder’s measured os- 
cillation time of five frames, I expected to see an accelera- 
tion peak in Fig.

3, near this frame.

But I’ve already pion- 
tioned the fact that ol all the expected ones, a third of a 
second apart, only this peak was missing.

However, a glance 
at Fig.

X shows that there was quite a space in Mr.However, a glance 
at Fig.

X shows that there was quite a space in Mr.

Zapru- 
der’s relatively smooth tracking curves at this point.

This 
cbyu> cAAldfw") 
SPROCK 
HOt E 
3 \y M 
*?f.

3*4 / MO , 
334 
* _ / 
i 
l 1 5"%6SI« 
331*7“ 1 ” i “r i 7< / / 
 > 
3?*J 1 
y/7 3*5 / 11 rr T 
SPROCKET 
HOLE 
s   1 
3?.

3 
319/1 1 
317 315 313 
Fig K "Streak** in the grow The motion or Mr /;i printers camera tixis 
is shown in two dimensions during ilie 1.2-sec period immediately following 
i lie fain I shot (Sec text.) 
example illustrates the fact that tracking curves arc more 
sensitive than the angular acceleration graphs that derive 
from subtracted streak lengths.

I’ll close this section by recalling that the wealth of data 
shown in Fig.

X, encompassing I he climactic second in Dca- 
lcy Plaza, involves a lime period when an FBI photoin- 
terpreler told the members of the Warren Commission that 
from those pictures alone, there was no way to tell where 
the car was.

I hope that this section will demonstrate what 
I’ve long felt that the testimony of a physicist could have 
been of help to the Warren C ommission, as it searched for 
the truth in early 1064.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
As Fvc indicated in the body of this paper.

I’ve had help 
from several friends in the shooting experiments, particu- 
larly "Buck" Buckingham and Don Olson.

Paul I loch was 
lor a long time my most knowledgeable and severest critic.

In the absence of his always friendly but persistent criticism, 
this report of my study of the Zapruder film would have 
been much less convincing that I now hope it is.

His vast 
More of knowledge concerning all aspects of the assassina- 
tion was of great help to me, in my position of having read 
almost nothing of the literature critical of the Warren 
C ommission’s Report.

His help in such matters is clearly 
evident in the text, where I acknowledge the work of others 
who anticipated conclusions that I reached later, but in- 
dependently.--- PAGE BREAK ---

His vast 
More of knowledge concerning all aspects of the assassina- 
tion was of great help to me, in my position of having read 
almost nothing of the literature critical of the Warren 
C ommission’s Report. His help in such matters is clearly 
evident in the text, where I acknowledge the work of others 
who anticipated conclusions that I reached later, but in- 
dependently. Paul made many suggestions for improve- 
ments in a 1970 draft of this report, almost every one of 
which I incorporated. I don’t believe we’ve discussed the 
assassination more than once or twice since then, and I 
haven’t talked to Paul since I started the final rewriting a 
few months ago. He is now writing a book on the assassi- 
nation, and we are agreed that although we each learn from 
the other, when final versions are being written, only one 
person can be responsible. And finally, I would like to ac- 
knowledge a great deal of constructive editorial criticism 
and help from Richard A. Muller. 0 
•This work was done with support from the U.S. Pnergy Research and 
Development Administration Any conclusions or opinions expressed 
in this report represent solely those of the author and not necessarily 
those of the Uwreiiec Berkeley l aboratory nor of the U.S. I nergi 
Research and Development Administration. * 
826 
Am. J. Phys. Vol. 44, No. 9, September |97ft. t •»•- >V.

--- PAGE BREAK ---arily 
those of the Uwreiiec Berkeley l aboratory nor of the U.S. I nergi 
Research and Development Administration. * 
826 
Am. J. Phys. Vol. 44, No. 9, September |97ft. t •»•- >V.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3 * 
’//tarings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of 
President Kennedy (U.S. GPO. Washington. DC'. 1964). 
*’M. I.anc. Push to .lodgement (Molt. Rinehart and Winston, New York 
1966). p. 55. 
'l-.squire, 205 (December 1966). 
4S. White, Shall M> /Vow Believe tlte Warren Report? (Macmillan. New 
York. 1968). 
'R Buckhout. Sci Am. 111,2.1 (December 1974). 
* Reference I. VQ|. XVIII. pp. I 80. f * 
7II Weisberg, Whitewash (Weisberg. I lyuttsvillc. Ml), 1966: reissued 
by Dell. New York. 1966). 
“Reference 4. p. 228. 
vKcfcrencc I. Report, p 98. 
^Reference 4, p 82 
11J. Thompson, Six Seconds in Dallas (Cicis. 1967). 
,JW. II Hanson. The Shutting of John F. Kennedy: One Assassin: Three 
Hits, No Misses (Naylor, San Antonio. 1969). 
nThe fact that the bullets were soft nosed, rather than fully jacketed (as 
the Mannlichcr-Carcano bullets were), was apparently important in 
intensifying the explosive jet effect. Dr. John K. I Jit timer tells me that 
when he repeated our melon experiments with a duplicate of Oswald's 
weapon and jacketed cartridges, the effect was not as vigorous nor as 
dependable, even though it did occur about half the lime When he re- 
peated it on skull models, however, the effect was still morr violent than 
ours, even with the jacketed bullets. 
MDr J. K. I.at timer. Resident and Staff Physician. 34 (May 1972). 
‘'Reference I, Vol. V. p. 159. 
•'■Reference I. Vol. XVIII, pp. 86 313. 
•’Reference I. Vol II. p. 119. 
•"Reference I. Vol. VII. p. 571. 
jfrr. 
827 Am. .1. I*hys. Vol. 44. No. 9, Scplcniher 1976 
1 2F 
iUri 
.1' 
* \ 
w 2 / iiiS.. 'M 
lads W. A barer 827 
rvHET