DearSandy.

10/7/78
I'm very glad your index came today.

There wns rush endinportant FolA work I'd
planned only thoser records,coming by special delivery.didn't cone.SoI used the
time to go over all of your index snd itis quite valuabie.luny thenks。
If you have done no other Sections then you'll not need this rocord.But if you
need a recerc vhat you sent he is C2-109060, Sections 100 through 131.

If end when you
dotherestIllbeanxious togetit.

can be helpful.I made a separate list of then as I read your index。
Poo bnl we could not have been in touch when you were roadinr thase rocords.

Whst
may not have seemed to have significance to you might have trizgered some of tay
recollection of she New Orleans dayo, Kithout reading thc records thericelroc I
suspect that sone of thoue in whouarrison were interestod may hed had CIa links.

I found a few references tome other than those you were kind enough to take the
time to flag.Hhen I canx I'il be going over them.I have separate copiec of soine from
the fabiecations they released afterinvokedFA
Some of the Lab records may be of value in one of my suits。You've glagged a couple。
on how and where Ill keep them.If there is going to be enough to bind then Ill find
some way of starting tiat way.

case and the future role of the critics.It was kind of you to realize thatI am pressed
for timebut Ilve changedtoday'sworking shcedule andwhere youngpeople are Strious
and ask roasonable question I do try to be infornative.While this doos take time I
think it is not an unpzoductiva way of spending time.

What I don't like is silly questions.case and the future role of the critics.It was kind of you to realize thatI am pressed
for timebut Ilve changedtoday'sworking shcedule andwhere youngpeople are Strious
and ask roasonable question I do try to be infornative.While this doos take time I
think it is not an unpzoductiva way of spending time. What I don't like is silly questions. Iwish I had a copy ofa speech I drafted for a meeting at tho NYU law school the
endof Apmil 1975.I never hud a chance to read and cut the draft and Igot sick and
couldn't read the speech.Jim Lesar read it for me.I anticipated what was coming vith
both the committee and the so-called critics and I trmed to inject some reason and
sanity.perhaps also caution,but among those who hungered for a committee-ANY com
nuts and self-seekers begat nuts and irresponsibles. There was no way any comuittee
under Dowming or Gonzalez wculd be responsible.hith that beginning conplicated by the
appointment of a gung ho! prosecutor type.to run it disasster was certain.And it has
type and a proficient coverup artist. There has not been a cezious investigation under
identify tho nuts and belabor them because they vere caeeful to make it appear that
will continue to suffer this。
sOo.or thiscomnittee after the kindofcoumittee itis was clear enough and those
who umderstood. There are so few of the latter I can't make that distinetion。 For
practical purposes all the other critics are in the first group.And I can t speak for
Our remarks should be addressed only at exposing them for what they sot out to do end
did do,not app aring to be grateful for a few inconsequential crumbs. Those who profess
Someareboth
I don't see any good coming fron speaking well of those who have been dishonest
because maybe they were dishonest only about 95% of the time.I'd rather say they
were dishonest than say they were honest because 5.%_of the tine meybe they were. lhil:the comcittees report,the effot of its hearings to coce and those held

--- PAGE BREAK ---me.I'd rather say they
were dishonest than say they were honest because 5.%_of the tine meybe they were. lhil:the comcittees report,the effot of its hearings to coce and those held

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
and the popular and opinion-maker attitudes toall orthis can't be predicted,my
hunch is that arong the rajor media and the official people the committee vili be
acceptedasthecommissionwas.
hhat anyone can do expect point out flaws and continuing to inform himsolf
accurately I cannot now say. I will speak for·myself.
I aa pleased that you do not now euphasize theories about conspiracies 2nd
instead speak of tre effect on the country. this is might and important. It is the
correct and proger way to think anl speak about the subject, although most do not。
I guess I am also saying that as I seek it the role of the critics shculd in the
For myself 1 will try to do as I have been trying and doing.
The amenaing of FOia and the canpaign to create this Frankenstain coincided, as
did Jim tesar's having sone time for the FolA suits.For me these have beer the right
way and will be.There is no substitute for iact and we have sutfered no greater
theories were irrolevant but they attracted attention and for most kep the attention
alive and the money coming in from exciting speechesnthat ripped of the minde of a
way they can escape the responsibility.I doubt any of thom will seo it this way。
I take it Will be their next newsletter and I've expressed my disagreoment to him
in a letter I mailed yesterday or today.I am aware of their financial problons.I
think there present approach will magnify these.While I'm not r9ally familiar with
what they did during the hearings I'm sure it kept them busy and that they did what
We may not have discusced it when you were here with them but last May I said
what I thyught shouid be done for and at the hearings,to them and to Fensterweld.
I also ofiered nyself for this.They did not want it and I remained at home doing
myown thingand leaving itall tothem.We could not have stoppeda dotermined
comnittee but we could have made a vast difference。They could have been expoced
andwith anykind of conpetitivesituetion in theyress we did have achance of some
succeed now.I wouidn't do it in the Kinf hearings in any event because aa lone as
Lane is Hay's lawyer there will be added and serious problems. I will stay aloof.
And by the tine they hoid teir next Jek hearing their report will bo written.
Validating it in the media and popular minds was one of the purposes of the show
theyputon。
and what has happened.All I could do with they is say what I think and this I did。
Ireaily did not hold what I rcgard es a bad AIB past against them.
You refer to a frustratin battle. Don't let it frustrate you. Nothing that is
that we try to inprove any such situation.This is not impossible.what is inpossible
is an absolute and I woild encourage you not to expect it becaure that can be frus-
cq 4ueo4u 4uempue 4oadxe 02 4ou se 4ou s41uoostp ta pue 9urae
itrealiyis。
well. when oyu are near here again piease stop off.
Bestwishes,