The Top Secret Testimony of CIA’s MKULTRA Chief, 50 Years Later

Published: Oct 30, 2025 | Briefing Book # 907 | Edited by Michael Evans

LSD, Assassination Plots, Domestic Spying Highlights of Sidney Gottlieb Depositions
Church Committee Staff Grilled CIA Chemist on Behavior Control Experiments, Death of Army Scientist, “Special Interrogations”
U.S. Military Proposed “Use of LSD on a Fairly Large Scale” in Vietnam
LSD Tests and Operations “Probably Not a High Pay-off Program”

[The first day of Gottlieb’s testimony before the Church Committee staff features questions about the CIA’s support to domestic surveillance operations and a long discussion about the period in the early 1950s when the Agency began to experiment with techniques that they believed could be used to influence human behavior. Getting right down to business, the committee wants to know what Gottlieb can tell them about MHCHAOS, a CIA surveillance program targeting U.S. citizens that was a key focus of the intelligence oversight hearings of the mid-1970s. Regarding whether he was “aware personally either that an American was the target of an overseas audio operation,” Gottlieb says he “had an awareness generically that in connection with the MHCHAOS program there were audio operations that were probably targeted against Americans abroad, since I had a general awareness of what their mission was. But I was never aware specifically that on this day in that country this American.” He said that MHCHAOS “started out as a very sensitive project. There were very few written things I remember seeing about it.” He agrees with the committee’s characterization that, as far as he knew, any TSD support to “audio operations or surreptitious entry operations in the US solely involved foreign targets.” He denies that TSD was involved in the surveillance of former U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark, Democratic presidential candidate George McGovern, actor/activist Jane Fonda, or journalist Jack Anderson. Senate investigators then probe Gottlieb for information about “Project ARTICHOKE,” which started in the early 1950s and which he says involved “a whole series of what I call hypnotics or sleep inducing materials” in an attempt “to catch a person on his way down to the sleep stage, and hope that he would be more open and vulnerable to interrogation.” Key to these ARTICHOKE interrogations, Gottlieb says, was “that it was done in a sort of a medical setting.” Gottlieb differentiates ARTICHOKE interrogations, which he said he never witnessed personally, from so-called “P-1” and “A-2” interrogations, which refer to agency codes for LSD (P-1) and Meratran (A-2), a stimulant that Gottlieb said had an effect that was something like amphetamines. The key difference was that, unlike ARTICHOKE interrogations, P-1 and A-2 interrogations did not mimic a medical setting. “The thrust of one of the aims of our research program was to get a technique that was more covert than the ARTICHOKE technique,” Gottlieb said. Asked whether any of these experiments had occurred “in prisons, mental hospitals or other facilities that might hold either criminals or the criminally insane,” Gottlieb said that hadn’t, but changed his answer the next day, claiming to have not properly understood the question.]

Sidney Gottlieb is photographed while waiting to testify before the Senate health subcommittee, September 21, 1977. (AP)

As chief of operations in the Central Intelligence Agency’s Directorate of Plans (1952-62), deputy director of plans (1962-65), deputy director of central intelligence (1965-66), and director of central intelligence (1966-73), Richard Helms was keenly interested in developing techniques to use biological and chemical materials in covert intelligence operations and, as DCI in 1973, gave the order to destroy the CIA’s MKULTRA files.

Federal narcotics agent George Hunter White was hired by Sidney Gottlieb to run CIA safehouses in New York City and San Francisco where he secretly dosed unwitting subjects with LSD, among other things, and recorded their behavior.

Burt Wides, who worked for Senator Edward Kennedy, was among the Church Committee staffers who questioned Gottlieb. (Miller Center)

CIA staff photo of Sidney Gottlieb, who oversaw Project ARTICHOKE and later the MKULTRA behavior control programs.

Washington, D.C., October 30, 2025 – The CIA experienced “as many failures as successes” in exploring the intelligence applications of LSD and other drugs, according to the October 1975 U.S. Senate testimony of the Agency’s former top chemist, Sidney Gottlieb, the man most closely associated with the notorious MKULTRA behavior control research projects. “[T]he results of everything told us that the money expended, the effort expended, the security risk involved, when you add everything up … it was probably not a high pay-off program.”

The long-secret transcripts of Gottlieb’s testimony to the staff of the United States Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities (“Church Committee”) were published today by the National Security Archive, 50 years after the historic intelligence oversight hearings, along with a selection of declassified CIA memos and other records concerning MKULTRA and related projects that Gottlieb was asked about during his Senate deposition. The Church Committee transcripts are among the highlights of the Digital National Security Archive collection, CIA and the Behavioral Sciences: Mind Control, Drug Experiments and MKULTRA , published in 2024 by ProQuest.“[T]he results of everything told us that the money expended, the effort expended, the security risk involved, when you add everything up … it was probably not a high pay-off program.”

The long-secret transcripts of Gottlieb’s testimony to the staff of the United States Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities (“Church Committee”) were published today by the National Security Archive, 50 years after the historic intelligence oversight hearings, along with a selection of declassified CIA memos and other records concerning MKULTRA and related projects that Gottlieb was asked about during his Senate deposition. The Church Committee transcripts are among the highlights of the Digital National Security Archive collection, CIA and the Behavioral Sciences: Mind Control, Drug Experiments and MKULTRA , published in 2024 by ProQuest. Other documents were found among the recently declassified documents archived in the CIA’s FOIA Reading Room.

Among other things, the recently declassified transcripts from the closed-door hearings held on October 15-18, 1975, shed new light on the bizarre and abusive research projects associated with Gottlieb and the Agency’s Technical Services Staff (TSS), including the administration of mind-altering drugs in situations where, in Gottlieb’s words, “the unwitting and total lack of awareness on the part of somebody who was being interrogated that way might have been the key thing.”

At one point, Senate staffers asked Gottlieb about a document indicating that one interrogee had been secretly given a large dose of LSD that induced a “severe classic paranoid reaction” so extreme that he was declared mentally ill by an equally unwitting psychiatrist and was thus “discredited in the eyes of the group with which he had been working.” Gottlieb said that “it had been recognized that this kind of thing might be a need that P-1 [LSD] might help with, to make somebody behave erratically for the purpose of his colleagues losing faith in his ability to act responsibly.”

Other parts of the hearing focused on Gottlieb’s involvement in CIA assassination plots, especially those targeting Cuban leader Fidel Castro, and its support to the activities of other federal agencies through MHCHAOS, the subject of the earlier Rockefeller Commission report.The Church Committee transcripts are among the highlights of the Digital National Security Archive collection, CIA and the Behavioral Sciences: Mind Control, Drug Experiments and MKULTRA , published in 2024 by ProQuest. Other documents were found among the recently declassified documents archived in the CIA’s FOIA Reading Room.

Other parts of the hearing focused on Gottlieb’s involvement in CIA assassination plots, especially those targeting Cuban leader Fidel Castro, and its support to the activities of other federal agencies through MHCHAOS, the subject of the earlier Rockefeller Commission report. The Committee also asked Gottlieb about his own experiences taking LSD, which he characterized as “disorienting” and “otherworldly.” Gottlieb said that LSD “gave you propioceptions,” which he said meant “perceiving feeling in yourself as opposed to feelings of things outside yourself, like seeing a door as opposed to feeling something inside your own body.”

Details about MKULTRA and related programs first emerged in the mid-1970s alongside revelations about CIA assassination plots and other misdeeds that were exposed in leaks to the media and in official investigations, most notably by the Church and Pike committees and the Rockefeller Commission.Other documents were found among the recently declassified documents archived in the CIA’s FOIA Reading Room.

Details about MKULTRA and related programs first emerged in the mid-1970s alongside revelations about CIA assassination plots and other misdeeds that were exposed in leaks to the media and in official investigations, most notably by the Church and Pike committees and the Rockefeller Commission. In the late-1970s, the CIA’s Victims Task Force reached out to presumed victims of the CIA’s experiments, some of whom later filed lawsuits after learning that the Agency had secretly drugged them or members of their families.

As author Stephen Kinzer wrote in Poisoner in Chief , his 2019 biography of Gottlieb, it was in 1975 that journalists writing about revelations from the Rockefeller Commission “pierced Gottlieb’s shroud of anonymity for the first time” after stories linked him to the death of Army scientist Frank Olson, drug tests on unwitting U.S.The Committee also asked Gottlieb about his own experiences taking LSD, which he characterized as “disorienting” and “otherworldly.” Gottlieb said that LSD “gave you propioceptions,” which he said meant “perceiving feeling in yourself as opposed to feelings of things outside yourself, like seeing a door as opposed to feeling something inside your own body.”

As author Stephen Kinzer wrote in Poisoner in Chief , his 2019 biography of Gottlieb, it was in 1975 that journalists writing about revelations from the Rockefeller Commission “pierced Gottlieb’s shroud of anonymity for the first time” after stories linked him to the death of Army scientist Frank Olson, drug tests on unwitting U.S. citizens, and the destruction of records related to these programs. “Gottlieb was an obvious target” according to Kinzer. His chief bureaucratic ally, Richard Helms, who had been named CIA director in 1966, had been fired two years earlier. MKULTRA “was no longer well regarded.” Perhaps worst of all, “he was tainted by the fact that his Technical Services Division had collaborated with the Watergate burglars.”

But while declassified records and other evidence show that U.S. research into human behavior control and efforts to operationalize these methods extended across multiple U.S.MKULTRA “was no longer well regarded.” Perhaps worst of all, “he was tainted by the fact that his Technical Services Division had collaborated with the Watergate burglars.”

But while declassified records and other evidence show that U.S. research into human behavior control and efforts to operationalize these methods extended across multiple U.S. agencies and involved numerous officials, few, if any, were more central to these programs than Gottlieb, who was involved in nearly every aspect of the program, including research, field tests, and the use of these methods in intelligence operations. The declassified evidence also shows that Gottlieb was a key bureaucratic player who signed off on hundreds of MKULTRA subprojects and who developed clandestine relationships with universities, prisons, hospitals, private laboratories, and private foundations that made it difficult to trace the programs back to the Agency.

The Church Committee faced considerable obstacles in reconstructing the story, especially since Gottlieb and CIA director Richard Helms destroyed most of the original project records in 1973. On top of that, Gottlieb’s attorney Terry Lenzner convinced the Senate to grant Gottlieb immunity in exchange for his testimony. But even with these protections, Gottlieb’s memory was suspiciously fuzzy for a man who had only been retired from the CIA for a couple of years. Gottlieb remembered so little that one wonders whether he might have been subjected to one of the memory-erasing techniques that the Agency tried to develop. But the far simpler explanation is that, even with congressional immunity, Gottlieb was concerned that his testimony on some subjects could expose him to civil lawsuits or worse down the road.

Gottlieb and Lenzner said as much during the deposition.Gottlieb remembered so little that one wonders whether he might have been subjected to one of the memory-erasing techniques that the Agency tried to develop. But the far simpler explanation is that, even with congressional immunity, Gottlieb was concerned that his testimony on some subjects could expose him to civil lawsuits or worse down the road.

Gottlieb and Lenzner said as much during the deposition. During discussion of the Olson case, Lenzner asked “who has access to this transcript” and whether “a private party in a lawsuit” could obtain Gottlieb’s deposition through a subpoena. Committee staffer Elliot Maxwell said that while the rules did not address the issue specifically, he did not think it was possible to obtain executive session testimony in a lawsuit. “The Freedom of Information Act does not affect it?” asked Gottlieb. “It does not apply,” Maxwell replied.

Maxwell was wrong on both counts. The transcripts were first declassified and given to the estate of MKULTRA victim Stanley Glickman in 1995 during the course of a lawsuit against the CIA, Helms and Gottlieb, though it was not made available to the general public.“It does not apply,” Maxwell replied.

Maxwell was wrong on both counts. The transcripts were first declassified and given to the estate of MKULTRA victim Stanley Glickman in 1995 during the course of a lawsuit against the CIA, Helms and Gottlieb, though it was not made available to the general public. The declassified transcripts were finally made public only recently in response to a 2017 FOIA request.

In their questioning of Gottlieb, Church Committee staffers relied heavily on CIA records obtained by the Committee, including two key reports by the CIA inspector general that took a critical look at programs linked to Gottlieb: a 1963 review of MKULTRA and related activities (published in a previous Electronic Briefing Book ) and a 1967 investigation of the Agency’s involvement in assassination plots against foreign leaders (Document 19).

The transcripts of Gottlieb’s testimony before the members of the Church Committee earlier that month, from October 7-9, 1975, have not yet been declassified, but are referenced throughout the Committee’s interim report on “Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders,” published in November 1975.The transcripts were first declassified and given to the estate of MKULTRA victim Stanley Glickman in 1995 during the course of a lawsuit against the CIA, Helms and Gottlieb, though it was not made available to the general public. The declassified transcripts were finally made public only recently in response to a 2017 FOIA request.

The transcripts of Gottlieb’s testimony before the members of the Church Committee earlier that month, from October 7-9, 1975, have not yet been declassified, but are referenced throughout the Committee’s interim report on “Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders,” published in November 1975. Gottlieb appeared at this first series of secret hearings using the pseudonym “Joseph Scheider” and was asked about his role in assassination plots against Cuban leader Fidel Castro and Congo Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba, among other things.

ARTICHOKE and P-1 Interrogations

The conversation on the first day of Gottlieb’s testimony to Senate staff focused on the early years of CIA drug testing, his participation in interrogations where drugs were administered, and his own experiences as both witting and unwitting subject of LSD and other drug tests.

Gottlieb said “the first six months to a year” he was working at the CIA “were confusing indeed about what my job was and what was going on.” He recalled some “ARTICHOKE activity”—which he said referred to “barbiturates administered in the truth serum, quote, unquote, mode in a sort of medical setting,” and mentioned related operations that were “planned for and I think finally carried out in Europe.”

Although he claimed to never have been present at an ARTICHOKE interrogation, Gottlieb said they involved a substance called Nembutal, a powerful barbiturate, along with a “series” of what he called “hypnotics or sleep inducing materials … to catch a person on his way down to the sleep stage, and hope that he would be more open and vulnerable to interrogation.” The use of a “medical setting” was not necessarily done to protect the subject of the interrogation, according to Gottlieb, but was more like an elaborate ruse to make it so “the man was aware in some way of some reason for his being in this medical setting, with physicians around him, getting injections.”

The medical setting, even if artificial, was what differentiated the ARTICHOKE interrogations from those Gottlieb admitted to witnessing himself, mainly during the 1950s.The declassified transcripts were finally made public only recently in response to a 2017 FOIA request.

The medical setting, even if artificial, was what differentiated the ARTICHOKE interrogations from those Gottlieb admitted to witnessing himself, mainly during the 1950s. These are referred to throughout the transcript as P-1 (LSD) and A-2 (Meratran) interrogations and are sometimes called “MKDELTA interrogations.” Gottlieb told the Committee that TSS wanted something “that was more covert than the ARTICHOKE technique”—something that did not require the subject to believe they were under medical care.Gottlieb appeared at this first series of secret hearings using the pseudonym “Joseph Scheider” and was asked about his role in assassination plots against Cuban leader Fidel Castro and Congo Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba, among other things.

The medical setting, even if artificial, was what differentiated the ARTICHOKE interrogations from those Gottlieb admitted to witnessing himself, mainly during the 1950s. These are referred to throughout the transcript as P-1 (LSD) and A-2 (Meratran) interrogations and are sometimes called “MKDELTA interrogations.” Gottlieb told the Committee that TSS wanted something “that was more covert than the ARTICHOKE technique”—something that did not require the subject to believe they were under medical care. “That was the general idea, or to get as close to that kind of capability as we could.”

Investigators also probed Gottlieb for information on how the drugs were tested and the distinction between testing—where they were trying to understand the properties of the substance—and operational use in support of “an approved operation of the Central Intelligence Agency,” which was the focus of MKDELTA.These are referred to throughout the transcript as P-1 (LSD) and A-2 (Meratran) interrogations and are sometimes called “MKDELTA interrogations.” Gottlieb told the Committee that TSS wanted something “that was more covert than the ARTICHOKE technique”—something that did not require the subject to believe they were under medical care. “That was the general idea, or to get as close to that kind of capability as we could.”

Investigators also probed Gottlieb for information on how the drugs were tested and the distinction between testing—where they were trying to understand the properties of the substance—and operational use in support of “an approved operation of the Central Intelligence Agency,” which was the focus of MKDELTA. But Gottlieb said there was also “such a thing as operationally testing … where the two get combined.” On the one hand, “it is being potentially useful to an approved operation of the Agency, and the other is, it is providing what I would call research information in a testing sense.”

The Committee staff also asked Gottlieb about the extent of CIA-sponsored drug testing in prisons and psychiatric facilities in the U.S.“That was the general idea, or to get as close to that kind of capability as we could.”

The Committee staff also asked Gottlieb about the extent of CIA-sponsored drug testing in prisons and psychiatric facilities in the U.S. Asked on the first day of testimony if he recalled “ARTICHOKE operations either in prisons, mental hospitals or other facilities that might hold either criminals or the criminally insane,” Gottlieb replied: “I don’t remember anything like that.” However, the next day, Gottlieb said he did remember that TSS conducted “general research” at hospitals with “psychochemicals,” although he took issue with the word “prison” to describe what he said were treatment facilities run by the Public Health Service for “people with criminal background.”

Gottlieb was similarly evasive in response to questions about whether experiments were done at universities, finally settling on this statement: “[T]here was some of the work involving such testing that went on at hospitals that were affiliated with universities, and might have used university students as a source of volunteers.” Asked again about these kinds of projects on the final day of testimony, Gottlieb admitted that the CIA had “an extensive research program in regard to human experimentation on psychochemicals” under MKULTRA, adding that “a lot of these things were done in hospitals and mental institutions.But Gottlieb said there was also “such a thing as operationally testing … where the two get combined.” On the one hand, “it is being potentially useful to an approved operation of the Agency, and the other is, it is providing what I would call research information in a testing sense.”

Gottlieb was similarly evasive in response to questions about whether experiments were done at universities, finally settling on this statement: “[T]here was some of the work involving such testing that went on at hospitals that were affiliated with universities, and might have used university students as a source of volunteers.” Asked again about these kinds of projects on the final day of testimony, Gottlieb admitted that the CIA had “an extensive research program in regard to human experimentation on psychochemicals” under MKULTRA, adding that “a lot of these things were done in hospitals and mental institutions. And when you say hospitalization, the people were already hospitalized.”

Senate staffers referred Gottlieb to memos from ARTICHOKE Committee meetings in 1953 in which CIA officials discussed the need for a “large numbers of bodies” to “be used for research and experimentation in regard to psychochemicals,” the “problem of the returning POW’s from Korea,” and the interrogation of “particular POW’s at Valley Forge and proposals to interrogate them.” In most cases, Gottlieb failed to remember details about specific meetings and operations.

But Gottlieb did recall working with the Army in certain MKDELTA interrogations.Asked on the first day of testimony if he recalled “ARTICHOKE operations either in prisons, mental hospitals or other facilities that might hold either criminals or the criminally insane,” Gottlieb replied: “I don’t remember anything like that.” However, the next day, Gottlieb said he did remember that TSS conducted “general research” at hospitals with “psychochemicals,” although he took issue with the word “prison” to describe what he said were treatment facilities run by the Public Health Service for “people with criminal background.”

But Gottlieb did recall working with the Army in certain MKDELTA interrogations. While the precise location of the operation is redacted from the transcript, the timeframe coincides with a reported trip by Gottlieb to East Asia in 1953 to assist with prisoner interrogations.And when you say hospitalization, the people were already hospitalized.”

But Gottlieb did recall working with the Army in certain MKDELTA interrogations. While the precise location of the operation is redacted from the transcript, the timeframe coincides with a reported trip by Gottlieb to East Asia in 1953 to assist with prisoner interrogations. He told the Committee he participated in six to 12 interrogations.

To the best of my recollection, I was approached by an individual from the headquarters desk involved that the approval of such a trip and such a series of technically assisted interrogations—and by technically assisted I mean using LSD—consisted of approval by the Branch Chief, the Division Chief, and the DDP… I discussed with [deleted] the nature of the assistance that LSD could provide in this interrogation.While the precise location of the operation is redacted from the transcript, the timeframe coincides with a reported trip by Gottlieb to East Asia in 1953 to assist with prisoner interrogations. He told the Committee he participated in six to 12 interrogations.

To the best of my recollection, I was approached by an individual from the headquarters desk involved that the approval of such a trip and such a series of technically assisted interrogations—and by technically assisted I mean using LSD—consisted of approval by the Branch Chief, the Division Chief, and the DDP… I discussed with [deleted] the nature of the assistance that LSD could provide in this interrogation. And there was [sic] some cables exchanged, I believe, although I can’t remember that in detail now… And I can’t recall the specific arrangement, whether I was looking through it, through a mirror or anything like that, I know that I saw the interrogations.

Committee staffers directed Gottlieb to another memo about a P-1 interrogation indicating that, “The Officer to give the P-1 was familiar with it use, and had worked with the technique in Europe.” While claiming to not remember the specific case, Gottlieb admitted that he himself “fit this description.”

On the third day of testimony, Gottlieb was asked about a little-known program called QKHILLTOP, about which he offers few details, although it has since been learned that it was a program through which the CIA sought to study what they believed were highly advanced brainwashing techniques in use by Communist China.He told the Committee he participated in six to 12 interrogations.

On the third day of testimony, Gottlieb was asked about a little-known program called QKHILLTOP, about which he offers few details, although it has since been learned that it was a program through which the CIA sought to study what they believed were highly advanced brainwashing techniques in use by Communist China. One of the Church Committee staffers described a record they had seen about a HILLTOP interrogation in which an unwitting subject had been given a large dose of LSD in a scheme to have them declared mentally ill by a physician who was also unaware that the drug had been administered.

The cable I referred to indicated that 200 units of P-1 were given to subject number one, and that this precipitated ‘severe classic paranoid reaction’.And there was [sic] some cables exchanged, I believe, although I can’t remember that in detail now… And I can’t recall the specific arrangement, whether I was looking through it, through a mirror or anything like that, I know that I saw the interrogations.

The cable I referred to indicated that 200 units of P-1 were given to subject number one, and that this precipitated ‘severe classic paranoid reaction’. The subject believed that light bulbs were emitting hot and cold rays to produce ‘scientific death’, and told the guard that someone was trying to read his mind and went into a schizophrenic reaction.

“[T]he doctor diagnosed the subject as mentally ill,” according to the document.One of the Church Committee staffers described a record they had seen about a HILLTOP interrogation in which an unwitting subject had been given a large dose of LSD in a scheme to have them declared mentally ill by a physician who was also unaware that the drug had been administered.

“[T]he doctor diagnosed the subject as mentally ill,” according to the document. “And it was apparently done in order to have the subject labeled as mentally ill, which would allow him to be discredited in the eyes of the group with which he had been working.” Gottlieb did not remember that particular case but said “it had been recognized that this kind of thing might be a need that P-1 might help with, to make somebody behave erratically for the purpose of his colleagues losing faith in his ability to act responsibly.”

Senate investigators later asked Gottlieb about a separate MKDELTA interrogation that was reported as a “success” because “it induced a paranoid reaction in the presence of an unwitting psychiatrist” such that it was possible to have the subject “committed to an institution at will, thereby denying to the [deleted] forever a loyal follower.” Gottlieb said that using LSD guaranteed that “you are almost sure to get some peculiar behavior on the part of an individual.The subject believed that light bulbs were emitting hot and cold rays to produce ‘scientific death’, and told the guard that someone was trying to read his mind and went into a schizophrenic reaction.

Senate investigators later asked Gottlieb about a separate MKDELTA interrogation that was reported as a “success” because “it induced a paranoid reaction in the presence of an unwitting psychiatrist” such that it was possible to have the subject “committed to an institution at will, thereby denying to the [deleted] forever a loyal follower.” Gottlieb said that using LSD guaranteed that “you are almost sure to get some peculiar behavior on the part of an individual. And to the extent that that was useful to in Agency operations, it is an effective use of P-1.”

But Gottlieb said that his opinion about the usefulness of LSD had changed with time.

[T]here was a continuum, if I can call it that, at one end of which was, if not an expectation, the possibility of this material being something you administered to somebody who later, when he is asked questions, simply gives answers where he wouldn’t before. That is one end of the spectrum.And to the extent that that was useful to in Agency operations, it is an effective use of P-1.”

[T]here was a continuum, if I can call it that, at one end of which was, if not an expectation, the possibility of this material being something you administered to somebody who later, when he is asked questions, simply gives answers where he wouldn’t before. That is one end of the spectrum. The other end of the spectrum was that the material had no specific effect on interrogation, but what it did was to create a caricature of a person’s normal personality so that a skilled interrogator or psychologist can exploit the weaknesses that are now caricature.

Gottlieb was also asked about drug tests on unwitting “volunteers” in the early 1960s, including U.S. military operations designated DERBY HAT and THIRD CHANCE. While not recalling those specific operations, Gottlieb said that, during the Vietnam War, the military was “considering the use of LSD on a fairly large scale.”

[A]nd by fairly large scale I am talking about in an interrogation sense, interrogating a number of prisoners – and that we were asked to come on that. And I forget what the occasion was, and I forget who was there. But I do remember being there at least once with Mr. [Desmond] FitzGerald when he was DDP [Deputy Director for Plans].

Gottlieb said that the Agency had “as many failures as successes” with LSD. Asked why the Committee did not see evidence of P-1 interrogation cases that had been judged to be failures, Gottlieb suggested that the records of those operations in many cases reflected what the reporting officers wanted their bosses to hear.[Desmond] FitzGerald when he was DDP [Deputy Director for Plans].

Gottlieb said that the Agency had “as many failures as successes” with LSD. Asked why the Committee did not see evidence of P-1 interrogation cases that had been judged to be failures, Gottlieb suggested that the records of those operations in many cases reflected what the reporting officers wanted their bosses to hear. “[The reports of success] have to be seen with a grain of salt – not that people falsified anything, but that they were very close to the situation in their evaluation of how much the national interest was served by information that they got from their interrogation… [T]he results of everything told us that the money expended, the effort expended, the security risk involved, when you add everything up, it probably was not – and I am searching for the right expression here – it was probably not a high pay-off program.”

Drug Experiments at Domestic Safehouses

To further probe the subject of drug tests on unwitting subjects, the Committee peppered Gottlieb with questions about CIA-supplied safehouses in New York City and San Francisco that were staffed by federal narcotics agent George White—an arrangement his boss Richard Helms described as “using the Bureau of Narcotics as a ‘cutout.’” Gottlieb said that “cutout” meant “to remove the CIA by one or two steps from the activity itself.” In a December 1963 memo later cited by Committee staffers on day four of the testimony, Helms had called the project with White “eight years of close collaboration.”

Gottlieb described how they used the safehouses to conduct an array of experiments using drugs, hypnosis and other techniques:

We developed a liaison with the Bureau of Narcotics whereby we would share information on LSD or any other drugs...Asked why the Committee did not see evidence of P-1 interrogation cases that had been judged to be failures, Gottlieb suggested that the records of those operations in many cases reflected what the reporting officers wanted their bosses to hear. “[The reports of success] have to be seen with a grain of salt – not that people falsified anything, but that they were very close to the situation in their evaluation of how much the national interest was served by information that they got from their interrogation… [T]he results of everything told us that the money expended, the effort expended, the security risk involved, when you add everything up, it probably was not – and I am searching for the right expression here – it was probably not a high pay-off program.”

We developed a liaison with the Bureau of Narcotics whereby we would share information on LSD or any other drugs... The mechanism for this was our funding of two safe houses at different times for the Bureau of Narcotics which the Bureau would use for meeting informants and pursuing their own business, and which premises we would occasionally use for our own meetings.

Gottlieb even suggested that he himself had taken LSD at one of the safehouses: “As I remember it, some of the experiments we did on self-administration of drugs took place in one of these apartments.” He later said again that he believed “that some of these meetings where we self-administered LSD early on were held there.”

Gottleib and White had a friendly relationship, according to various accounts, and White’s diary entries, some of which are published in the DNSA collection , record many instances of Gottlieb visiting the safehouses.“[The reports of success] have to be seen with a grain of salt – not that people falsified anything, but that they were very close to the situation in their evaluation of how much the national interest was served by information that they got from their interrogation… [T]he results of everything told us that the money expended, the effort expended, the security risk involved, when you add everything up, it probably was not – and I am searching for the right expression here – it was probably not a high pay-off program.”

Gottleib and White had a friendly relationship, according to various accounts, and White’s diary entries, some of which are published in the DNSA collection , record many instances of Gottlieb visiting the safehouses. Gottlieb told the committee he met with him “three to four times a year.” White “had some prior experience with OSS [Office of Strategic Services, forerunner of the CIA] during World War II in using marijuana-related material in interrogations,” Gottlieb said.The mechanism for this was our funding of two safe houses at different times for the Bureau of Narcotics which the Bureau would use for meeting informants and pursuing their own business, and which premises we would occasionally use for our own meetings.

Gottleib and White had a friendly relationship, according to various accounts, and White’s diary entries, some of which are published in the DNSA collection , record many instances of Gottlieb visiting the safehouses. Gottlieb told the committee he met with him “three to four times a year.” White “had some prior experience with OSS [Office of Strategic Services, forerunner of the CIA] during World War II in using marijuana-related material in interrogations,” Gottlieb said. “And that was during a period when I was looking for this kind of knowledgeable individual specialist in an operational sense.”

Gottlieb said he worked out “an arrangement” with White.

[H]e would get supplies of LSD from us, and use them in circumstances that he felt were of relevancy to his work of dealing with informants and working in the general field of narcotics enforcement, and that we would be made privy, at least in a general way, to the results and effectiveness of these activities, in return for which we would financially support the maintenance of these pads or safe houses which the Bureau of Narcotics, as I remember, badly needed for these operations, but had financial problems as to.

The Committee showed Gottlieb a memo from December 1953 on the status of the Agency’s LSD supply, noting that White had been provided with LSD by the CIA by then at the latest.Gottlieb told the committee he met with him “three to four times a year.” White “had some prior experience with OSS [Office of Strategic Services, forerunner of the CIA] during World War II in using marijuana-related material in interrogations,” Gottlieb said. “And that was during a period when I was looking for this kind of knowledgeable individual specialist in an operational sense.”

The Committee showed Gottlieb a memo from December 1953 on the status of the Agency’s LSD supply, noting that White had been provided with LSD by the CIA by then at the latest. The memo came as the Agency scrambled to account for its LSD research and testing program after Frank Olson’s death in late November.

Other records, including White’s diary entries, show that he had been experimenting with CIA-supplied LSD for nearly a year at that point.“And that was during a period when I was looking for this kind of knowledgeable individual specialist in an operational sense.”

Other records, including White’s diary entries, show that he had been experimenting with CIA-supplied LSD for nearly a year at that point. White first spoke to Gottlieb about the project in May 1952 and while he did not get “final clearance” until the next year, his “experiments” dosing unwitting people with Gottlieb’s LSD were already underway in January 1953 and months before the relationship was formalized in the summer of 1953 .

Gottlieb claimed to not remember much about how White reported back to him on the results of his drug experiments, but said that White “was trying to use this material as close to the manner in which we at that time thought we might find some use of operationally, namely to see whether we could elicit more information from informants and other people he was dealing with.” He later added that White’s experiments “were very useful operationally.The memo came as the Agency scrambled to account for its LSD research and testing program after Frank Olson’s death in late November.

Gottlieb claimed to not remember much about how White reported back to him on the results of his drug experiments, but said that White “was trying to use this material as close to the manner in which we at that time thought we might find some use of operationally, namely to see whether we could elicit more information from informants and other people he was dealing with.” He later added that White’s experiments “were very useful operationally. It was practically the only information we had that was relevant to an operational situation or something near it.” (Gottlieb agreed with the Committee that this was excepting “the interrogations that were being performed overseas by the Agency”—presumably the P-1 and A-2 interrogations that they discussed at length previously.)

Asked again to reflect on the project with White, Gottlieb said: “I don’t think this corner of the ULTRA project was looked upon as a scientific experiment, it was more of an operational, simulated operational test.White first spoke to Gottlieb about the project in May 1952 and while he did not get “final clearance” until the next year, his “experiments” dosing unwitting people with Gottlieb’s LSD were already underway in January 1953 and months before the relationship was formalized in the summer of 1953 .

Asked again to reflect on the project with White, Gottlieb said: “I don’t think this corner of the ULTRA project was looked upon as a scientific experiment, it was more of an operational, simulated operational test. And I don’t think, as I remember it, that we were hoping to get what I would call scientific information from it.”

MKDELTA, Defensive Pharmacology, and the Death of Frank Olson

Having admitted to taking LSD “from six to 12 times,” the Committee asked Gottlieb if he could describe its effect:

I would say that by and large [it was] an effect that I would call disorienting, otherworldly, gave you propioceptions, which means perceiving feeling in yourself as opposed to feelings of things outside yourself, like seeing a door as opposed to feeling something inside your own body.

Gottlieb said that they “did administer the drug to CIA employees ” for “defensive pharmacology purposes” to familiarize them with the feeling of LSD in case it was ever surreptitiously given to them.It was practically the only information we had that was relevant to an operational situation or something near it.” (Gottlieb agreed with the Committee that this was excepting “the interrogations that were being performed overseas by the Agency”—presumably the P-1 and A-2 interrogations that they discussed at length previously.)

Gottlieb said that they “did administer the drug to CIA employees ” for “defensive pharmacology purposes” to familiarize them with the feeling of LSD in case it was ever surreptitiously given to them. Gottlieb remembered it as a program where they approached “people who were going to serve in the Soviet Union or in places that would be exposed” and said that Agency officials were told: “We have this capability of exposing you to this drug … because you might someday be covertly attacked by it.”

Underscoring his point, one Senate staffer then read to Gottlieb a portion of a January 1952 memo from the chief of the CIA Medical Staff, who cited “ample evidence in reports of innumerable interrogations that the Communists are utilizing drugs, physical duress, electric shock, and possibly hypnosis against their enemies.” It was “difficult not to keep from becoming rabid about our apparent laxity,” the memo said.And I don’t think, as I remember it, that we were hoping to get what I would call scientific information from it.”

Underscoring his point, one Senate staffer then read to Gottlieb a portion of a January 1952 memo from the chief of the CIA Medical Staff, who cited “ample evidence in reports of innumerable interrogations that the Communists are utilizing drugs, physical duress, electric shock, and possibly hypnosis against their enemies.” It was “difficult not to keep from becoming rabid about our apparent laxity,” the memo said. “We are forced by this mountain of evidence to assume a more aggressive role in the development of these techniques, but must be cautious to maintain strict inviolable control because of the havoc that could be wrought by such techniques in unscrupulous hands.”

Referring to paragraph 22 of a July 15, 1953, CIA memo, one Senate staffer said it was “the first reference that I have seen to a program under carefully controlled conditions of testing techniques in chemicals on CIA officers.” The paragraph is almost completely redacted in the declassified version of the memo (Document 13), so it’s not clear what they are referring to, but Gottlieb said he did not think these were the same as the self-administered tests taken among TSS staff and others that he had previously mentioned.

The most controversial of these self-administered tests took place in November 1953, when Gottlieb organized a retreat for a group of scientists and other officials from the CIA and their partners at the Army’s Special Operations Division (SOD) at Deep Creep Lake in Western Maryland.Gottlieb remembered it as a program where they approached “people who were going to serve in the Soviet Union or in places that would be exposed” and said that Agency officials were told: “We have this capability of exposing you to this drug … because you might someday be covertly attacked by it.”

The most controversial of these self-administered tests took place in November 1953, when Gottlieb organized a retreat for a group of scientists and other officials from the CIA and their partners at the Army’s Special Operations Division (SOD) at Deep Creep Lake in Western Maryland. The nature of the relationship between the two programs was especially important in light of the revelation that an Army scientist who worked on the project, Frank Olson, died mysteriously just ten days after participating in the Deep Creek Lake experiment.

Gottlieb said that the CIA’s relationship with SOD had “an offensive connotation in the sense of preparing for a contingency either in a hot war or some special operation that was levied on TSD [Technical Services Division, successor to TSS], and also as a defensive study of the potential of U.S.“We are forced by this mountain of evidence to assume a more aggressive role in the development of these techniques, but must be cautious to maintain strict inviolable control because of the havoc that could be wrought by such techniques in unscrupulous hands.”

Gottlieb said that the CIA’s relationship with SOD had “an offensive connotation in the sense of preparing for a contingency either in a hot war or some special operation that was levied on TSD [Technical Services Division, successor to TSS], and also as a defensive study of the potential of U.S. individuals or installations being covertly attacked by BW materials abroad.”

One Senate staffer reminded Gottlieb that he had said in his opening statement “that either sometime during the summer or fall you met with individuals from SOD, and that at the meeting it was discussed whether there should be a covert application of LSD to determine what the effects would be on a meeting of someone adding LSD to a drink or whatever.” Gottlieb strongly implied that Olson attended this meeting and thus would have known that he was among a group of CIA and SOD officials who had agreed at some unspecified time to be given the drug without their knowledge.

While he claimed to not remember details, Gottlieb said that “unwitting administration was talked about as being the only way to determine” what effect it would have in real operations.The nature of the relationship between the two programs was especially important in light of the revelation that an Army scientist who worked on the project, Frank Olson, died mysteriously just ten days after participating in the Deep Creek Lake experiment.

While he claimed to not remember details, Gottlieb said that “unwitting administration was talked about as being the only way to determine” what effect it would have in real operations. “[U]nwitting in this sense obviously meant that they knew they might get it sometime,” he said. Gottlieb said he recalled “a mix of individuals being there. And my recollection, including Mr. Olson, is that they might not have been completely the ones that were at the Western Maryland meeting, but roughly the same mix.” Olson is one of just a few people that he specifically remembers attending the earlier meeting.And my recollection, including Mr. Olson, is that they might not have been completely the ones that were at the Western Maryland meeting, but roughly the same mix.” Olson is one of just a few people that he specifically remembers attending the earlier meeting. “I had the impression,” Gottlieb said, “that we had the agreement of that group at some time in the future to participate in that kind of an experiment.” There was no formal agreement. “There certainly wasn’t anything in writing.”

One Committee staffer wondered why, if the object of the experiment was to determine the effect of LSD on the unwitting, they chose to administer the drug to “a group of people who knew that at some point they would be given LSD, and secondly, a group of people a number of whom had previously taken LSD?” Gottlieb said they hoped they would not remember the agreement and that “their reactions would be innocent ones.” For the ones who had taken LSD before, “there was an ancillary gain, would they recognize it or not.”

Regarding how the LSD was given to the attendees at Deep Creek Lake, Gottlieb remembered that it “was administered in Cointreau, and that Dr. Lashbrook had prepared that earlier, and that it had about 60 gammas [micrograms] per whatever was considered a drink-sized amount of Cointreau.” Asked if he had been given LSD that night, Gottlieb said, “As I remember it, yes.“There certainly wasn’t anything in writing.”

Regarding how the LSD was given to the attendees at Deep Creek Lake, Gottlieb remembered that it “was administered in Cointreau, and that Dr. Lashbrook had prepared that earlier, and that it had about 60 gammas [micrograms] per whatever was considered a drink-sized amount of Cointreau.” Asked if he had been given LSD that night, Gottlieb said, “As I remember it, yes. But my remembrance is hazy on this point.” Asked again whether he had taken LSD that night, Gottlieb said, “My recollection is that I did.” Asked if medical observers were present, Gottlieb said there were not.

Ten years later, in 1963, the CIA’s inspector general, John Earman, led a critical review of the MKULTRA program and related projects, finding, among other things, that “some of the testing of substances under simulated operational conditions was judged to involve excessive risk to the Agency.” The primary sticking point among top officials responsible for continuing the reformulated program under what would be its new designation, MKSEARCH, was whether the Agency should continue “the testing of certain drugs on unwitting U.S.Lashbrook had prepared that earlier, and that it had about 60 gammas [micrograms] per whatever was considered a drink-sized amount of Cointreau.” Asked if he had been given LSD that night, Gottlieb said, “As I remember it, yes. But my remembrance is hazy on this point.” Asked again whether he had taken LSD that night, Gottlieb said, “My recollection is that I did.” Asked if medical observers were present, Gottlieb said there were not.

Ten years later, in 1963, the CIA’s inspector general, John Earman, led a critical review of the MKULTRA program and related projects, finding, among other things, that “some of the testing of substances under simulated operational conditions was judged to involve excessive risk to the Agency.” The primary sticking point among top officials responsible for continuing the reformulated program under what would be its new designation, MKSEARCH, was whether the Agency should continue “the testing of certain drugs on unwitting U.S. citizens.” Could the Agency continue to test substances like LSD on Americans who were unaware that they were being drugged?

The issue ultimately landed on the desk of CIA director John McCone, a Kennedy appointee whose skepticism about the utility of the program had prompted the inspector general’s review. At a November 1963 meeting recorded in a memo by Earman, Gottlieb and another official (whose name is redacted) “argued for the continuation of unwitting testing, using as the principal point that controlled testing cannot be depended upon for accurate results.” Earman and CIA deputy director Marshall Carter disagreed. There was also discussion about the “possibility of unwitting tests on foreign nationals.” The issue was ultimately put before McCone, who, according to Gottlieb and others, never acted on it.At a November 1963 meeting recorded in a memo by Earman, Gottlieb and another official (whose name is redacted) “argued for the continuation of unwitting testing, using as the principal point that controlled testing cannot be depended upon for accurate results.” Earman and CIA deputy director Marshall Carter disagreed. There was also discussion about the “possibility of unwitting tests on foreign nationals.” The issue was ultimately put before McCone, who, according to Gottlieb and others, never acted on it. “A very clear recollection I have is his being needled on the point several times, be reminded that he hadn’t made a decision,” Gottlieb told the Committee.

MHCHAOS

Another top concern of the Church Committee staff was any evidence of CIA involvement with operations inside the United States. As Archive analyst Jeff Richelson wrote in 2001 :

TSD had become an object of concern in this period because of its technical assistance to the efforts of Howard Hunt and G. Gordon Liddy to burgle the office of Daniel Ellsberg’s psychiatrist as well as to dig up derogatory information on Edward Kennedy. As part of an overall examination of the possible CIA activities outside its charter, known as the “Family Jewels,” [CIA director James] Schlesinger asked agency components to prepare relevant reports.

Senate investigators grilled the former TSD head about support that his staff had provided to the FBI, among other federal agencies, for domestic operations. Gottlieb denied any knowledge of surveillance operations targeting the Chilean Embassy, activist Jane Fonda and former U.S.As part of an overall examination of the possible CIA activities outside its charter, known as the “Family Jewels,” [CIA director James] Schlesinger asked agency components to prepare relevant reports.

Senate investigators grilled the former TSD head about support that his staff had provided to the FBI, among other federal agencies, for domestic operations. Gottlieb denied any knowledge of surveillance operations targeting the Chilean Embassy, activist Jane Fonda and former U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark, among others, but admitted that TSD “did have an on-going cooperative effort on the technical side” with the FBI “where we would talk to them about the devices we had, and where they would, as I remember it, buy devices or borrow devices we had when they thought it would help them.” Gottlieb said he could “see lots of places where one of those could have been used on whatever they wanted to” but denied knowing anything about who or what the targets were.

Senate staff member Burt Wides asked Gottlieb about a now-famous memo he prepared in response to Schlesinger’s request for “Family Jewels” information. Did Gottlieb recall “preparing a memorandum to the Deputy Director for Science and Technology in May of 1973 in the course of responding to Director Schlesinger’s request for a summary of possibly questionable activities?”

Gottlieb’s response, “I don’t think I was head of TSD then,” was at least partly right. TSD was abolished in early May 1973, and Gottlieb was set to retire the next month. The document they were asking about, as he surely knew, was essentially his exit memo—a laundry list of secret services TSD had provided in support of the domestic operations of other U.S. agencies.The document they were asking about, as he surely knew, was essentially his exit memo—a laundry list of secret services TSD had provided in support of the domestic operations of other U.S. agencies. (Document 20) Months earlier, Gottlieb and his longtime protector at the Agency, Director of Central Intelligence Richard Helms, had destroyed the vast majority of Agency records on the MKULTRA program just days before Helms himself was fired for refusing to help the Nixon White House concoct a cover story for the Watergate break-in. For whatever reason, Gottlieb’s reply to Wides’ question about the May 8, 1973, memo prompted Church Committee investigators to take the rest of the discussion off the record.

But Gottlieb faced additional questions about the memo a few days later, near the end of his fourth day of testimony. What did Gottlieb make of a separate memo directed to the new DCI, William Colby, indicating that his boss, the deputy director for science and technology, Carl Duckett, was “very uncomfortable with what Sid Gottlieb is reporting” in the May 8 memo “and thinks the Director [of the CIA] will be ill-advised to say he is acquainted with this program”? Gottlieb told the Committee that he didn’t “understand what Duckett says when he says Colby will be ill-advised to say he was acquainted with this program,” adding, “I would only interpret that by saying that Carl Duckett was trying in some way to protect the Director here… I was simply trying to come up with the information that Duckett apparently asked me for.”

The Health Alteration Committee

Church Committee investigators spent considerable time asking Gottlieb about his role in CIA assassination plots, especially those targeting Cuban leader Fidel Castro, which were the subject of a May 23, 1967, report by the CIA’s inspector general (Document 19) that was based, in part, on interviews with Gottlieb and others.What did Gottlieb make of a separate memo directed to the new DCI, William Colby, indicating that his boss, the deputy director for science and technology, Carl Duckett, was “very uncomfortable with what Sid Gottlieb is reporting” in the May 8 memo “and thinks the Director [of the CIA] will be ill-advised to say he is acquainted with this program”? Gottlieb told the Committee that he didn’t “understand what Duckett says when he says Colby will be ill-advised to say he was acquainted with this program,” adding, “I would only interpret that by saying that Carl Duckett was trying in some way to protect the Director here… I was simply trying to come up with the information that Duckett apparently asked me for.”

Church Committee investigators spent considerable time asking Gottlieb about his role in CIA assassination plots, especially those targeting Cuban leader Fidel Castro, which were the subject of a May 23, 1967, report by the CIA’s inspector general (Document 19) that was based, in part, on interviews with Gottlieb and others. Investigators cited the report numerous times in probing Gottlieb for information about his involvement in the so-called Health Alteration Committee and plots involving poison cigars, a wetsuit tainted with botulin toxin, exploding seashells, and a depilatory made from radioactive thallium salts. Of particular interest to the Church Committee was a scheme to release an aerosolized form of LSD inside a radio station when Castro was inside broadcasting.Investigators cited the report numerous times in probing Gottlieb for information about his involvement in the so-called Health Alteration Committee and plots involving poison cigars, a wetsuit tainted with botulin toxin, exploding seashells, and a depilatory made from radioactive thallium salts. Of particular interest to the Church Committee was a scheme to release an aerosolized form of LSD inside a radio station when Castro was inside broadcasting. Regarding poison cigars, Gottlieb claimed to remember little beyond having “a recollection of the events having happened that cigars were prepared” for use against the Cuban leader.

Gottlieb admitted that he talked to Richard Bissell, the CIA official in charge of covert operations, about techniques that, as one Church Committee staffer said, “could either produce death or disorientation of a foreign leader.” Asked again if they had discussed “various technical means of killing a foreign leader,” Gottlieb said, “Yes,” but did not remember the specific topic of cigars nor any other methods or devices coming up in those discussions. He said remembered hearing about plots to poison cigars with botulinum, a deadly toxin, but that he himself “certainly didn’t have that mission.” He agreed with the characterization by one Committee staff member that it was “a scheme calculated to produce the death of whoever smoked these cigars” or even someone who merely “put those cigars in his mouth.” Asked whether he knew that the cigars were being prepared for Castro, Gottlieb said, “I think so.”

Much time is spent on the fourth and final day of Gottlieb’s testimony trying to pinpoint the precise date of handwritten notes taken by CIA covert operations specialist William Harvey, who was at the center of many of the plots against Castro, about a meeting where he claimed to have discussed assassination plots with Gottlieb. [Harvey’s notes are attached to the October 17, 1975, transcript.He said remembered hearing about plots to poison cigars with botulinum, a deadly toxin, but that he himself “certainly didn’t have that mission.” He agreed with the characterization by one Committee staff member that it was “a scheme calculated to produce the death of whoever smoked these cigars” or even someone who merely “put those cigars in his mouth.” Asked whether he knew that the cigars were being prepared for Castro, Gottlieb said, “I think so.”

Much time is spent on the fourth and final day of Gottlieb’s testimony trying to pinpoint the precise date of handwritten notes taken by CIA covert operations specialist William Harvey, who was at the center of many of the plots against Castro, about a meeting where he claimed to have discussed assassination plots with Gottlieb. [Harvey’s notes are attached to the October 17, 1975, transcript. (Document 3)] While Gottlieb was unable to recall anything about the meeting, Committee investigators tell him they believe the meeting took place on January 25, 1961, just five days after the inauguration of President Kennedy, and included cryptic references to “executive action” and what they suggest are references to Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, and Che Guevara (“El Benefactor,” “three wrongs”).

Asked “what can you tell us about the source of authority for discussing assassination capabilities or establishing an assassination capability project,” Gottlieb says, “My impression now … is that Bissell asked [deleted] to create such a capability, or discussed with him creating such a capability,” but that he had no knowledge whether Bissell was acting with our without authority from either the DCI or the President. Asked whether he had discussions with unnamed individuals for the “purpose of developing materials that could be supply [sic] to an operator for an assassination attempt,” Gottlieb said, “I would have to have done that. (Document 3)] While Gottlieb was unable to recall anything about the meeting, Committee investigators tell him they believe the meeting took place on January 25, 1961, just five days after the inauguration of President Kennedy, and included cryptic references to “executive action” and what they suggest are references to Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, and Che Guevara (“El Benefactor,” “three wrongs”).

Asked “what can you tell us about the source of authority for discussing assassination capabilities or establishing an assassination capability project,” Gottlieb says, “My impression now … is that Bissell asked [deleted] to create such a capability, or discussed with him creating such a capability,” but that he had no knowledge whether Bissell was acting with our without authority from either the DCI or the President. Asked whether he had discussions with unnamed individuals for the “purpose of developing materials that could be supply [sic] to an operator for an assassination attempt,” Gottlieb said, “I would have to have done that. I don’t remember specific conversations, but in the course of implementing the Camp Detrick work, we would have to have done that.”

CIA FOIA Reading Room

Committee investigators ask Gottlieb about his participation in the ARTICHOKE Conference of April 16, 1953, in which “all hands agreed that a great deal of work was necessary and it was essential to find an area where large numbers of bodies would be used for research and experimentation.” A participant not identified in the redacted document “stated that in connection with the testing of drugs, he was quite certain a number of psychiatrists all over the United States would be willing to test new drugs, especially drugs that affect the mind,” a proposal that sounds very much like the programs that were developed under MKULTRA. Others at the meeting “said there were foundations, laboratories, etc. that would test new drugs.” All of the meeting participants agreed “that the wider the testing the better chances of success.”

The meeting included a discussion about the proposed use of ARTICHOKE techniques on U.S. prisoners of war returning from Korea, including “a detailed description of the problem to that point and … ARTICHOKE efforts to assist in the interrogation of the returnees.” Participants “agreed that the ‘hard core’ group and those who had been successfully indoctrinated were excellent subjects for ARTICHOKE work,” but the “general opinion” in the room was “that owing to publicity and poor handling, the ARTICHOKE techniques could not probably be brought to bear.”

One participant “suggested, in view of the widespread interest of the ARTICHOKE group and the fact that the ARTICHOKE program of necessity continually moves in operational channels, that an OPS man of senior rank, possibly attached to the office of the DDP should be invited to attend these meeting regularly.”

Gottlieb’s famous memo on TSD support to other federal agencies outside of the CIA has been declassified several times over the years, and the most complete version of the record (published here) is obtained by combining pages from three different declassifications.

The three-page main memo, dated May 8, 1973, was declassified earlier this year as part of the final release of JFK assassination records by the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration (NARA).

The version of that memo declassified by the CIA and included in its online CREST collection is more redacted than that declassified by NARA but includes a highly-redacted version of the attachment (listing the agencies TSD has supported) as well as the attached “buck slip” (essentially, a sticky note) from Carl Duckett indicating that he was “very uncomfortable with what Sid Gottlieb is reporting” in the memo “and thinks the Director [of the CIA] will be ill-advised to say he is acquainted with this program.”

A much less redacted version of the attachment listing the supported agencies was declassified in response to a FOIA request submitted by National Security Archive analyst Jeff Richelson and first published on September 10, 2001, in an Electronic Briefing Book on “Science, Technology and the CIA.”

The attachment to Gottlieb’s memo lists a wide array of support TSD had provided to other agencies in accordance with its charter responsibility to provide “technical assistance to both CIA operations and other activities as may be directed by the Deputy Director for Operations.”

Documents

U.S. Senate, “Report of Proceedings, Hearing held before Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, Testimony of Sidney Gottlieb,” October 15, 1975, Top Secret, 98 pp.
Oct 15, 1975 | Source Digital National Security Archive

U.S. Senate, “Report of Proceedings, Hearing held before Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, Testimony of Sidney Gottlieb,” October 16, 1975, Top Secret, 125 pp.
Oct 16, 1975 | Source Digital National Security Archive
Gottlieb’s second day of testimony to the Church Committee staff picks up where they left off the previous day, with staffers continuing to press him on whether he knew of CIA-sponsored drug tests in U.S. prisons or mental hospitals. Gottlieb eventually admits that experiments were conducted in “institutions” that “had people with criminal background” but who were “not confined as they would be in a prison.” He said he preferred the term “treatment facility,” admitting that it was often a “hospital” but “not a hospital for the criminally insane.” Senate investigators cite a number of CIA documents during the course of their interview with Gottlieb, including evidence in one memo that there was a need for a “large number of bodies” to be “used for research and experimentation” (Document 11) and an ARTICHOKE Committee memo indicating that U.S. prisoners of war had been subjected to CIA interrogation techniques while detained at Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. The questioning then turns to the subject of CIA assassination plots against Fidel Castro and other members of the Cuban leadership that were the subject of a May 1967 report by the CIA’s inspector general. Investigators cite the report numerous times in probing Gottlieb for information about plots involving poison cigars, a wetsuit tainted with botulin toxin, exploding seashells, and a depilatory made from radioactive thallium salts intended to cause Castro’s beard to fall out. Of particular interest to the committee was a scheme to release an aerosolized form of LSD inside a radio station when Castro was inside broadcasting. At the end of day two, Senate staffers begin to question Gottlieb about a series of interrogations that he participated in during 1953 as part of an operation in conjunction with known Army program known as MKDELTA.

U.S. Senate, “Report of Proceedings, Hearing held before Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, Testimony of Sidney Gottlieb,” October 17, 1975, Top Secret, 87 pp.
Oct 17, 1975 | Source Digital National Security Archive
The third day of testimony focuses largely on Gottlieb’s recollections about the Agency’s involvement in so-called “P-1” and “MKDELTA” interrogations and what distinguished these operations from the “ARTICHOKE interrogations” discussed previously. In Gottlieb’s view, the primary distinction was that ARTICHOKE interrogations were conducted in simulated medical settings that provided an artificial rationale to receive injections of LSD and other substances, while P-1 interrogations were for situations where such a setting was not practical. As Gottlieb said, “[A] determination might have been made that the use of the kind of a medical-like setting that Artichoke requires was simply not permissible, it would have frightened somebody, and it would have frightened people, and would have made them – I don’t quite know how to say this – would have made it very difficult to carry off the operation, somebody might have been frightened of that kind of a medical setting, and the unwitting and total lack of awareness on the part of somebody who was being interrogated that way might have been the key thing.” Gottlieb is also asked about a little-known program called QKHILLTOP, which the Church Committee report later defined as “a project to study Chinese Communist brainwashing techniques and to develop interrogation techniques.” Gottlieb remembered it as “a cryptonym that referred to a group of behaviorable, control oriented research activities” that “included a lot of research activities having to do with the behavioral control.” HILLTOP included, “P-1 research, A-2 research… what we have been referring to as narcohypnosis interrogation techniques were also included under it.” The program would later transform into the Human Ecology Fund.

U.S. Senate, “Report of Proceedings, Hearing held before Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, Testimony of Sidney Gottlieb,” October 18, 1975, Top Secret, 195 pp.
Oct 18, 1975 | Source Digital National Security Archive
The final day of Gottlieb’s testimony covers a lot of ground, from his overall perception of the utility of the LSD experiments and operations, to questions about assassination plots, secret drug-testing safehouses run by narcotics agent George White, and the mysterious 1953 death of Army Special Operations Division (SOD) scientist Frank Olson days after his unwitting participation in one of Gottlieb’s LSD experiments. Gottlieb is also asked about portions of the 1963 IG report on MKULTRA, including a section referring to his 1960 memo that most notably concluded that the agency’s experiments with psychochemicals had not produced the breakthroughs that many thought they would, finding in general that the results were too unpredictable. Senate staffers then grill Gottlieb about his involvement in assassination plots. Gottlieb had previously testified about plots against Castro and another against Prime Minister of Congo Patrice Lumumba. Here Senate investigators focus on the appearance of his name in a handwritten memo by CIA official William Harvey and titled “Exec Actions” [Executive Actions], a phrase that Senate investigators took to be a euphemism for assassinations. Other handwritten items in the memo (“El Benefactor,” “three wrongs”) appear to be cryptic references to the top three members of the Cuban leadership. Asked “what can you tell us about the source of authority for discussing assassination capabilities or establishing an assassination capability project,” Gottlieb says, “My impression now … is that Bissell asked [deleted] to create such a capability, or discussed with him creating such a capability,” but that he had no knowledge whether Bissell was acting with our without authority from either the DCI or the President.Other handwritten items in the memo (“El Benefactor,” “three wrongs”) appear to be cryptic references to the top three members of the Cuban leadership. Asked “what can you tell us about the source of authority for discussing assassination capabilities or establishing an assassination capability project,” Gottlieb says, “My impression now … is that Bissell asked [deleted] to create such a capability, or discussed with him creating such a capability,” but that he had no knowledge whether Bissell was acting with our without authority from either the DCI or the President. Asked whether he had discussions with unnamed individuals for the “purpose of developing materials that could be supply [sic] to an operator for an assassination attempt,” Gottlieb said, “I would have to have done that. I don’t remember specific conversations, but in the course of implementing the Camp Detrick work, we would have to have done that.” Gottlieb’s evasive answers eventually lead to a discussion of his group’s relationship with SOD, a part of the Army’s Chemical Corps focused on the offensive and defensive uses of biological and chemical agents that located at Fort Detrick (formerly Camp Detrick) in Maryland. The super-secret unit worked closely with Gottlieb and his staff at TSS. In his deposition, Gottlieb remembered that “the material which they kept on our behalf had both an offensive connotation in the sense of preparing for a contingency either in a hot war or some special operation that was levied on TSD, and also as a defensive study of the potential of U.S.The super-secret unit worked closely with Gottlieb and his staff at TSS. In his deposition, Gottlieb remembered that “the material which they kept on our behalf had both an offensive connotation in the sense of preparing for a contingency either in a hot war or some special operation that was levied on TSD, and also as a defensive study of the potential of U.S. individuals or installations being covertly attacked by BW materials abroad.” Investigators then question Gottlieb about the decision-making process around whether to use drugs during interrogations during the 1950s, citing memos indicating the existence of an “Ad Hoc Committee” that was part of the “approval mechanism for administering P-1 as of July 1958,” although Gottlieb claimed to not remember anything from that time.In his deposition, Gottlieb remembered that “the material which they kept on our behalf had both an offensive connotation in the sense of preparing for a contingency either in a hot war or some special operation that was levied on TSD, and also as a defensive study of the potential of U.S. individuals or installations being covertly attacked by BW materials abroad.” Investigators then question Gottlieb about the decision-making process around whether to use drugs during interrogations during the 1950s, citing memos indicating the existence of an “Ad Hoc Committee” that was part of the “approval mechanism for administering P-1 as of July 1958,” although Gottlieb claimed to not remember anything from that time. He is asked about reports he prepared—including one titled “The Applicability of Special Chemicals and Biologicals to Clandestine Operations” and admits that it was “very likely” that his unit, TSD, was “involved in the consideration of future requests for the operational use of drugs.” Gottlieb believed that the DDP that signed off on requests to use drugs in operations at that time, although such authorization was not required in earlier years. They move on to another case where documents showed that Gottlieb “agreed” that a particular operation “warranted the use of A-2 and possibly P-1,” with Gottlieb agreeing the cable showed “that is exactly what I did.” Asked if TSD, which he ran from 1951-1957, kept logs of the LSD it delivered for use in the field, Gottlieb said he didn’t remember. The conversation moves to how TSD handled the sharing of materials and information with Fort Detrick, with one staffer referring to testimony indicating that TSD would levy “requirements on Fort Detrick for MKNAOMI products and that the levying of the requirements was not necessarily connected with an actual operation, but was done in order that Fort Detrick would never be able to pinpoint an actual operational requirement.” Gottlieb used a discussion about the proposed mass use of LSD in Vietnam to reflect on what he said was the declining belief in its utility for intelligence purposes at the time.individuals or installations being covertly attacked by BW materials abroad.” Investigators then question Gottlieb about the decision-making process around whether to use drugs during interrogations during the 1950s, citing memos indicating the existence of an “Ad Hoc Committee” that was part of the “approval mechanism for administering P-1 as of July 1958,” although Gottlieb claimed to not remember anything from that time. He is asked about reports he prepared—including one titled “The Applicability of Special Chemicals and Biologicals to Clandestine Operations” and admits that it was “very likely” that his unit, TSD, was “involved in the consideration of future requests for the operational use of drugs.” Gottlieb believed that the DDP that signed off on requests to use drugs in operations at that time, although such authorization was not required in earlier years. They move on to another case where documents showed that Gottlieb “agreed” that a particular operation “warranted the use of A-2 and possibly P-1,” with Gottlieb agreeing the cable showed “that is exactly what I did.” Asked if TSD, which he ran from 1951-1957, kept logs of the LSD it delivered for use in the field, Gottlieb said he didn’t remember. The conversation moves to how TSD handled the sharing of materials and information with Fort Detrick, with one staffer referring to testimony indicating that TSD would levy “requirements on Fort Detrick for MKNAOMI products and that the levying of the requirements was not necessarily connected with an actual operation, but was done in order that Fort Detrick would never be able to pinpoint an actual operational requirement.” Gottlieb used a discussion about the proposed mass use of LSD in Vietnam to reflect on what he said was the declining belief in its utility for intelligence purposes at the time. “The results of the P-1 interrogations were uncertain. We had … as many failures as successes. Source Digital National Security Archive “The results of the P-1 interrogations were uncertain. We had … as many failures as successes. And we were very concerned about the military getting into some standardized use of it.” He said they thought “that they wouldn’t be able to discriminate, being such a large organization, and handling possibly a large number of prisoners, that we felt that it just simply wasn’t a good technique to use under those circumstances, that you really had to select each case very carefully, and a lot of individual attention, and we felt this was kind of an indication of some mass use of it that we didn’t think was wise or would work well.” The committee also asked Gottlieb about a project through which the CIA provided drugs and technical equipment to federal narcotics agent George White, who operated secret safehouses in New York and San Francisco where he performed a variety of highly unscientific “experiments” on unwitting people, including individuals connected to narcotics investigations, friends, acquaintances, and others.

Memorandum for Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, “Special Interrogations,” May 15, 1952, Classification Unknown, 27 pp.
May 15, 1952 | Source Digital National Security Archive
In a memo to the DDCI, the CIA’s assistant director for scientific intelligence recommends that the agency “establish an interim field program using special techniques in interrogations” and with greater involvement of the CIA Medical Staff.”

Memorandum for Assistant Director/Scientific Intelligence from Chief, Medical Staff, “Special Interrogations,” May 19, 1952, Classification Unknown, 2 pp. (includes cover memo)
May 19, 1952 | Source CIA FOIA Reading Room
On his first day of testimony before Church Committee staffers, Gottlieb is asked about the “buck slip” attached to this memo and confirms that it is his handwriting. The buck slip says he is “in considerable disagreement” with the conclusions of the May 15, 1952, memo on “Special Interrogations” (Document 5), which recommends above all that the CIA Medical Staff be more involved in secret CIA interrogations using drugs, electroshocks and other dangerous techniques. Gottlieb says that to him it seems “to be a belated attempt to make up for 2 or 3 years [of] confusion and ineffectiveness.” Gottlieb seems skeptical about the implied defensive nature of the proposed interrogation study, “If this is supposed to be covered up as a defensive feasibility study, it’s pretty damn transparent,” adding that, “There is a lot of obvious experimental work that needs to be done” and that the proposed study “doesn’t even begin to get it done.”

Memorandum for ADPC, “OSI Proposal for an Interim Field Program and for Organizational Changes With Respect to Project ARTICHOKE,” May 21, 1952, Classification Unknown, 1 p.
May 21, 1952 | Source CIA FOIA Reading Room
Senate staffers ask Gottlieb about this memo (that he appears to have written) that is in considerable disagreement with plans then underway to reorganize the roles and responsibilities of various CIA components with respect to ARTICHOKE interrogations that rely on the administration of drugs and other “narco-hypnosis” techniques. “TSS is left out of the picture entirely,” the author complains. “In my opinion, the proposal is an effort to cover up the lack of accomplishment in this field by OSI and to block TSS from undertaking any programs,” noting ongoing TSS “research contracts.” Since the Deputy Director for Plans “now has a research organization to support covert operations,” the author says, “I believe that TSS,” a component of the DDP, “should have a primary interest in this field.”

Memorandum for Deputy Director (Plans), “Project ARTICHOKE,” July 14, 1952, Classification Unknown, 2 pp.
Jul 14, 1952 | Source Digital National Security Archive
The committee refers to this memo on the first day of testimony in asking whether CIA mission chiefs were nominally in charge of “special interrogations” that occurred in their areas of responsibility. (Gottlieb says they were.) Attendees at the meeting “understood and confirmed” that, among other things, “the scope of Project Artichoke is research and testing to arrive at means of control, rather than the more limited concept involved in “special interrogations.”

Memorandum, Chief, Technical Branch, SRS, I&S, to Chief, Security Research Staff, I&S, “ARTICHOKE Conference, 22 January 1953,” February 13, 1953, Classification Unknown, 4 pp
Feb 13, 1953 | Source CIA FOIA Reading Room
On the first day of testimony, the committee staffers ask Gottlieb about item 13 in this memo which indicates “that the ARTICHOKE organization had been studying the use of certain facilities in the United States as testing grounds for new ideas, experiments, etc. particularly using criminals and the criminally insane.”

Memorandum, Chief, Technical Branch, “ARTICHOKE Conference, 19 March 1953,” April 13, 1953, 3 pp.
Apr 13, 1953 | Source CIA FOIA Reading Room
Church Committee staff refer to the ARTICHOKE Conference meeting summarized in this memo on the second day of Gottlieb’s testimony, asking him about a section following a discussion of “brainwashing” where he is said to have delivered “a detailed report of TSS efforts” related to LSD, referred to here as “Serunim.” Other material—identified as “botaniacals” obtained from consultants in Latin America—“was now being tested and would be fully exploited,” according to Gottlieb’s report to the conference. The document indicates that someone, presumably Gottlieb, “played a tape recording of the tests on ‘Serunim’ which lasted from 3:20 PM to 4:00 PM and which proved to be a very effective method of presenting in question and answer form the various properties and uses of this new chemical.”

Chief, Technical Branch to Security Research Staff, “ARTICHOKE Conference – 16 April 1953,” May 11, 1953, Classification Unknown, 3 pp.

Chief, Technical Branch to Security Research Staff, “ARTICHOKE Conference, 21 May 1953,” June 8, 1953, Classification Unknown, 4 pp.
Jun 8, 1953 | Source CIA FOIA Reading Room
Although he did not attend the meeting, Committee staffers refer to this memo about the May 21, 1953, ARTICHOKE Conference in asking Gottlieb about references to specific limitations imposed by the Surgeon General on “the interrogation of the returning Korean POWs at Valley Forge,” Pennsylvania.

Chief, Technical Branch to Security Research Staff, “ARTICHOKE Conference, 18 June 1953,” July 15, 1953, Classification Unknown, 6 pp. (includes cover memorandum)
Jul 15, 1953 | Source CIA FOIA Reading Room
Gottlieb’s testimony sheds some light on redacted portions of this declassified CIA summary of an ARTICHOKE Conference held on June 18, 1953. Committee investigators ask Gottlieb about a part of the memo indicating that he “gave a very brief report on some of the activities of the special work carried on by [deleted] in which his division is materially interested, and also commented on the work of the Army Chemical Corps in lines of interest to Artichoke.”

Chief, Technical Branch to Chief, Security Research Staff, “ARTICHOKE Conference, 22 October 1953,” November 16, 1953, Classification Unknown, 3 pp.
Nov 16, 1953 | Source CIA FOIA Reading Room
Church Committee staffers ask Gottlieb about a reference in this memo to “an experimental project using specially screened trainee volunteers” that “would also be given to the ARTICHOKE Conference members at the same time.” The project “would very clearly demonstrate to certain select Agency personnel the effects of chemicals, hypnosis and possibly other elements, etc. upon themselves and their associates” and “under more or less ideal and very safe conditions,” giving them “an opportunity for testing new methods and techniques.” Familiarity with the drugs “would permit our personnel, in the event of their capture by the enemy, to resist or defeat enemy interrogation.”

CIA Office of Scientific Intelligence, Science Intelligence Memorandum, “Potential New Agent for Unconventional Warfare,” August 5, 1954, Secret, 41 pp. (incudes cover memoranda and attached CIA cables)
Aug 5, 1954 | Source CIA FOIA Reading Room
Gottlieb is asked about the finding in this report from the Office of Scientific Intelligence that, “Data, although still very limited, are available which indicate [LSD’s] usefulness for eliciting true and accurate statements from subjects under its influence during interrogation.” Gottlieb claims to not remember the report, adding that he would have “objected to it, based on what we thought we knew at the time, which was that there was no indication that you could get true and accurate statements reliably under the drug.”

Memorandum for Director, Office of Security Through Deputy Director (Plans), “Request for Project alias [Deleted],” November 13, 1957, Classification Unknown, 2 pp.
Nov 13, 1957 | Source Digital National Security Archive
Church Committee investigators referred to this memo in asking Gottlieb whether he knew of cases where P-1 (LSD) had been used on defectors. The memo describes the CIA’s handling of an unnamed Soviet defector who “has been under interrogation by CIA personnel in a safehouse.” The report says that agents were continuing to try using “normal interrogations techniques” on the subject but that “it appears that use of special interrogation techniques will be required in the near future at the CIA safehouse that is guarded by personnel of the Office of Security.” The memo requests that preparations be made to initiate a “special interrogation” on the weekend of November 22-24, 1957.

Memorandum, [P-1 Interrogation], January 20, 1959, Classification Unknown, 1 p.
Jan 20, 1959 | Source CIA FOIA Reading Room
On his fourth and final day of testimony, Committee staff ask Gottlieb about a request to use LSD (“P-1”) in an unidentified interrogation that would require approval from the Office of Security, something Gottlieb said had not been required in previous P-1 interrogations. They then show him about a part of the memo indicating “that the Officer to give the P-1 was familiar with its use and had worked with the technique in Europe” and ask whether he knew people at TSS meeting those criteria. Gottlieb mentions TSS official Henry Bortner before admitting, “I would be another who would fit this description.”

CIA Inspector General John Earman, Memorandum for the Record, “MKULTRA Program,” Classification Unknown, November 29, 1963, 2 pp.
Nov 29, 1963 | Source Digital National Security Archive
Written by CIA inspector general John Earman, this document records a meeting involving several top CIA officials including Gottlieb where the main discussion concerned “the testing of certain drugs on unwitting U.S. citizens.” Gottlieb, the memo states, “gave a brief history of the MKULTRA Program which was not in any way at variance with the IG report of August 1963 on the subject.” Gottlieb and another official (whose name is redacted) “argued for the continuation of unwitting testing, using as the principal point that controlled testing cannot be depended upon for accurate results.” Earman notes that neither he nor CIA deputy director Marshall Carter nor CIA executive director Lyman Kirkpatrick agreed with Gottlieb. The three top CIA officials accepted “the necessity for having a ‘stable of drugs’ on the shelf.” Research was necessary, they believed, “not only for possible operational use but also to give CIA insight on the state of the art in this field” and “to alert us to what the opposition is or might be expected to do in the R&D and employment of drugs.” The only disagreement that there was about the IG report on MKULTRA was “the unwitting testing program,” which had been “held in abeyance” since the IG report had been circulated. The group discussed “the possibility of unwitting tests on foreign nationals,” but senior station chiefs had said such operations were “too dangerous” due to a “lack of controlled facilities.” (Earman finds this odd given that facilities used for unwitting testing in the U.S. “leave much to be desired.”) In the end, the group decide that it “may become necessary” to put the question of whether to continue with “unwitting testing on American citizens” before the CIA director, John McCone.

CIA Inspector General John S. Earman, “Report on Plots to Assassinate Fidel Castro,” May 23, 1967, Secret/Eyes Only, 143 pp. (includes cover memorandum)
May 23, 1967 | Source JFK Assassination Records, 2022 release
CIA inspector general John Earman’s report on CIA efforts to assassinate Castro and other Cuban leaders came up during Gottlieb’s second day of testimony. Earman’s review covers an array of plots to murder, sicken or discredit Castro, including several linked to Gottlieb. One item in the report that was of special interest to the committee was a proposed plot to “contaminate the air of the radio station where Castro broadcast his speeches with an aerosol spray of a chemical that produces reactions to those of lysergic acid (LSD).” Regarding a plot to contaminate Castro’s cigars with chemicals or biological toxins, the Committee read Gottlieb a section of the IG report that said, “Sidney Gottlieb of the TSD claims to remember distinctly a plot involving cigars” and that it was “concerned with killing, not merely with influencing behavior.” Responding to the committee, Gottlieb claimed that he may have been confused when he was interviewed about the cigar plot in 1967 and that it may not have been intended to kill Castro. “[T]he schemes or talks about cigars that somehow might be related to killing Castro – and I don’t remember now whether it was using one substance or another substance or several substances, but just using this vehicle as a means of getting at Castro – were frequently, but not widely talked about.” He later admitted to the committee “that cigars were prepared” for use against Castro and still later said he remembered that “botulinum” was involved. Asked if it was “a scheme calculated to produce the death of whoever smoked these cigars,” Gottlieb said, “Yes.” “Or even put those cigars in his mouth?” “Sure.” Regarding a section of the report about a plot to contaminate Castro’s dive suit with a toxic fungus, Gottlieb had some recollection of it, saying he would call it “an incapacitation effort” rather than an assassination plot: “Because you would be so terribly unsure – to me it would only be an off chance that anybody would die from anything like that.”

Memorandum for Deputy Director for Science & Technology, “TSD Support to Other Agencies,” May 8, 1973, Secret, 8 pp. (includes cover memo and routing sheets)
May 8, 1973 | Source Source A: JFK Assassination Records – 2025 Declassification Source B: CIA FOIA Reading Room Source C: National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 54
