The Capitol Riot: A Chronology

Published: Jan 6, 2022 | Edited by Claire Harvey and Lauren Harper | Updated: Jun 13, 2022

National Security Archive Timeline Pieces Together Events of January 6, 2021
Highlights Ongoing, Unresolved Discrepancies Between Official Testimony, Media Reporting, and Pentagon's Sparse Timeline

[(photo credit Alex Polyakov)]

Washington, D.C., January 6, 2022 - The National Security Archive marks the one-year anniversary of the assault on the United States Capitol on January 6, 2021, with a meticulously researched timeline of the day's events. The chronology, which will serve as an important tool for investigators, researchers, and the public, is divided into three main parts:

Events that took place at the Capitol that we know about thanks to stellar reporting from organizations like ProPublica , The New York Times , the AP , The Washington Post , NPR, Politico, and Newsweek , as well as information provided by a host of both local and federal officials in Congressional testimony;

Activity at the White House, drawn primarily from former President Trump's official statements on Twitter;

The Department of Defense's official timeline that was published on January 8, 2021.

The chronology below, taken together with our three previous sourcebooks, provides a high level of detail about the attempted coup while at the same time underscoring just how much about federal or local government decisions and actions remains unknown to the public. Each entry includes a source, with hyperlink, and a Who's Who of key figures is also provided. The Archive will update the timeline as important new information surfaces.

January 6, 2021, Riot Timeline

Keys to the Timeline

Minute-by-minute reporting of the Capitol attack comes primarily from open sources (much of it video footage and images captured by smartphones) obtained during investigations by major news outlets.

Rioters breached the Capitol Building from both the East and the West side of the building.

Events from the west side of the Capitol are color-coded green;

The east side breach is color-coded blue.

Who's Who (as of January 6, 2021)

Steve Bannon - Former Chief Strategist, White House

William Barr - Attorney General, Department of Justice (February 14, 2019 – December 23, 2020)

Muriel Bowser - Mayor, District of Columbia

Patrick Byrne - Businessman, former CEO of Overstock

Pat Cipollone - Counsel, White House

Jeffrey Clark - Acting Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Division, Department of Justice

Robert J Contee III - Chief, Metropolitan Police Department (MPDC)

Kevin Donahue - City Administrator, District of Columbia

Richard Donoghue - Acting Deputy Attorney General, Department of Justice

Michael Flynn - Former National Security Advisor, Executive Office of the President

Rudy Giuliani - President Trump's Personal Lawyer

Robert Glover - Commander, Special Operations Division, Metropolitan Police Department (MPDC)

Donnell Harvin - Chief, Homeland Security and Intelligence, HSEMA

Paul Irving - House Sergeant at Arms

Ryan McCarthy - Secretary of the Army (SECARMY)

Mark Meadows - Chief of Staff, White House

Molly Michael - President Trump's Executive Assistant

Chris Miller - Acting Secretary of Defense (A/SD)

Mark Milley - Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS)

Peter Navarro - Director, Office of Trade and Manufacturing Policy

Rick Perry - Former Secretary, Department of Energy

Yogananda Pittman - Chief, U.S. Capitol Police (USCP), Sund's successor

Sidney Powell - Attorney, Donald Trump Legal Team

Dr. Christopher Rodriguez - Director, D.C. Homeland Security and Emergency Management Agency (HSEMA)

Jeffrey Rosen - Acting Attorney General, Department of Justice (December 24, 2020 – January 20, 2021)

Michael Stenger - Senate Sergeant at Arms

Steven Sund - Chief, U.S. Capitol Police (USCP)

Virginia "Ginni" Thomas - Attorney, wife of Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas

General William Walker - Commander, D.C. National Guard (DCNG)

Jump to January 5 events Jump to January 6 events Jump to January 7 events
