Deposition of Dr. William Kemp Clark, 6H18, March 21, 
questioning by Mr. Specter. 
Dr. Clark is the Director of Neurosurgery at Parkland 
Hospital. His time sequences show him notified of the President's 
injuries before they happened and put him in the emergency room 
tl minutes before he said in his statement (report page 516) 
the arrival of the President. His handwritten note of $$4 
November 22, 1963 dated 1516 hours, says also the incident began 
4XX4/XXX0 p.m.. Other doctor's statements show Clark was not the 
first at the scene. On 6H20 he identifies four who certainly 
preceded him; there is a possibility of as many as seven. 
The press conference at 2:30 on November 22, 1963 he says 
was arranged by the White House (Kilduff). He described the head 
wound and Perry (6H22) as saying Be "felt that the (neck) missile 
had entered the President's chest." and he says Perry reported the 
wound was "small and clean so it could have been an entrance wound. 
The contradiction perhaps involving perjury between his 
version of Perry's telephone conversation with the Bethesda Naval 
Hospital and that of ferry is summarized under Perry. 
In connection with the Commission's noted unusual treatment 
of Dr. Perry and some of the other doctors this contradiction per- 
haps is a clear indication of why. What is not easy to understand 
however is why if the doctors had been wrong in saying that the 
anterior neck wound was^initially one of entrance they couldn't 
simply say that XX in/light of other evidence they had made a 
mistake and freely admit what the mistake had been. This could 
have been done on behalf of the doctors by other government official 
And why should Dr. Perry have lied if not worse about what Dr. Humes

--- PAGE BREAK ---it what the mistake had been. This could 
have been done on behalf of the doctors by other government official 
And why should Dr. Perry have lied if not worse about what Dr. Humes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 
had told him$ And If Dr. Perry did commit perjury are we to 
Jsmm 
assume that he committed it entirely on his own? Would he, 
the 
for no apparent reason, run the risk of Jail and/ruin of his 
unique 
cafeer, perhaps even a/nlche in the annals of infamy? 
Dr. Clark says that Price and Shires may have been present 
when Perry made his statement. 
Connally was conclous until anesthetized for surgery (page 
24). 
On page 26 Specter asks Clark to identify two statements he 
made—the only ones he made, Clark said. Specter said of one 
"I now show you the second and third sheets, which purport to be 
the summary made by you and ask if that was prepared by you?" 
and of the second Specter said, "And I now show you a 2|-page 
summary which purports to bear your signature, being dated 
November 22, 1963, and I ask you if that, in fact, is your 
signature?" Then Speoter asks "And, was, in fact, this report 
made in your own hand..." All Clark*s responses were affirmative. 
The facts are not as represented. There is a two-page hand- 
written report virtually illegible because of the nature of the 
paper upon which it was written and the introduction, signed, 
dated November 22, 1963, 1615 hours in the report on pages 524 
and 525. There is also a typed document (report 516-8), not in 
C1<U,k,notOMn handW ab°Ut Wh±Ch ther° 18 3ome my8fceiT* I* is, m 
fact, pl^dated. It is signed. The third page is numbered 2 and 
the second page which appears to be the first is numbered 1. The 
first page is not complete and is less than a half page in length 
with the MM word "Statement" written in a neat hand in the upper 
right. The rest or the sheet has been cut oft and the reproduction

--- PAGE BREAK ---omplete and is less than a half page in length 
with the MM word "Statement" written in a neat hand in the upper 
right. The rest or the sheet has been cut oft and the reproduction

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3 
shows only the part of the page with the typing. It seems to be 
in a different typing than the other two pages. It is this part 
which begins with the statement that the President arrived at 
exactly 12:43 p.m.. The second page has a heading. ’’Summary". 
This also is one of the cases the time of 12:43 wasn’t changed 
to 12:38, important if the tenuous Oswald time reconstruction 
isn*t to be destroyed. Elsewhere ( ) it is indicated that 
this cut-off sheet of typing was a letter addressed to the 
Presidents doctor* 
both 
Clark had been earlier interviewed by/the FBI and Se0ret 
Service twice. On^ one oocasion the Secret Service asked if he 
"had a copy of the written report submitted by Dr. Ronald Jones, 
and I told him I did not." 
Copies of all the reports of all the doctors were kept under 
lock and key at the hospital. It seems unlikely that the Secret 
Service was in need of the report. What would seem more likely 
is that the Secret Service didn’t want extra copies of this or 
any other report kicking around. 
Dr. Clark also was rehearsed. 
He was questioned by Specter again four days later, on March 
25, 1964. He was asked whether he ever made statements quoted from 
the translation of an article from the February 20, 1964 issue of 
"L«Express", which in turn quotes the New York Tlmes of November 27, 
1963 as its source. Note that the New York Tlnies is not quoted 
here but the French paper. Specter reads "Dr. Kemp Clark, who 
signed the Kennedy death certificate, declared that a bullet hit 
him right where the knot of his necktie was." The story also

--- PAGE BREAK ---the French paper. Specter reads "Dr. Kemp Clark, who 
signed the Kennedy death certificate, declared that a bullet hit 
him right where the knot of his necktie was." The story also

--- PAGE BREAK ---

h 
chest 
quotes Clark as saying "this bullet penetrated into his and 
did not come out./ The surgeon went on to say that the 
second jtffi&X wound of the President was 'tangiential* and that it 
had been caused by a bullet which hit ‘the right side of his head'". 
The last item quoted should be considered in the light of the 
efforts of some of the doctors to make it seem as though they con- 
sidered that one bullet might have done all the damage, hence 
attempting in this fashion to explain their original implied opinions 
that the wound in the neck was one of entrance. Dr. Clark does not 
denymaking the statement. He admits using a phrase "where the knot 
of his necktie was". He says "I do not recall ever specifically 
stating that this was an entrance wound". Dr. Clark also says 
of Dr. Perry that he "assumed" the "penetration of the missile 
into the chest." The addition to Dr. Clark*s testimony was also 
rehearsed.