Rt. 12, Frederick, *d. 21701 
8/15/78 
Mr. John Auble, Rows 
KSD Ty 
1111 Olive St, 
St, “ouifl, 1.0, 
leer Hr, Auble, 
Jin Polk sucrests I write you for what he does not have, a transcript or a 
Bound tape of what grew into your half-hour Oliver Patterson show. 
As Polk or Pofc Xur will tell you, l*a helping then as such, as I can in their 
current coverage. 
As Tony Marro probably will not tell you, 1 warned hin and Wendell Kawld 
against being used end hurt before this hap^ned, beginning when they went for the 
incomplete Dyers leak, (i an the one who obtained the withheld record and had it 
made available. I had a oaae in court in which it was relevant so I was at the hedd 
of the list when I appealed. Die 1‘oat-Dla patch wa to have had a break but the 
F2X double-crossed on this.) 
Onforttaately Jerry Ray would not heed ne when I told him in April that Oliver 
had to be an active informer. This wan prljr to '“liver's coming here on 4/16/70 as 
well as the night of 5/9, after the Carol Bapper John Ray appearances bafoie 
the assassins com ittee. What X wan net aware of than is Oliver'3 FBI connection 
or that what he was doing was reaching the PHI. 
One of my interoats la in everJ^hing Oliver has said, because I have bean 
exposing the committee from the first and becaueo I have had the FBI in court on 
Alng assassination records since before the committee was formed. What may be 
without news or other interests can be of mush interest to me. 
Another is to obtain as much es is possible for deposit with all ay records 
in a public archive at the diversity of Wiecensin, Stevens Point branch. What is 
merely a sidebar in the overall story can be of much human interest appeal and 
limns what happens or can happen when officials leak. 
So X would appreciate whatever you can supply* Please marie any copyright er 
other rights or limitations for the future. Or just how you would like anything 
credited. 
I*hile I see no likelihood of using ary of it in ry writing, in the future 
others may. Here likely scholars than writers. 
If you can let me have aero than you aired I'd observe any restriction because 
have no intention of making any public use. If you'd “Mire I'll check with you 
before any use. The one that may ba possible is if Oliver disclosed th« gtenre 
of records still withheld from me. I have no feeling against 'liver in his coming to 
my heme because I had assumed he wa: a committee fink. I also ean^t hold him 
responsible for ary committee reporting to the FBI. Matter of fact he did me a favor, 
getting me a cupply of good tapes at much lees than they coat here. 
Sincerely, 
%rold Vaisberg 
P.3* If I can help you in your local coverage, 
my phone is 301/473-8186