Seholarshb
By far tho no.:t videly acclaimed and influential book on the assassination of
lastAugust.
1993
U.S.Hevs andl Worid ileports issue datod uuyust 50/Septomber 6/in vhat it des-
and hisbock
cribed on its cover as a "SiECIaL DoUBLil ISsUE", Cave Posner)thatcover and S6 of its
100 pages。iiore tlan a third of that issue。
The TV nets stood virtulfly in line to get him to appear. Cable, too. CNN's
-three tines beginningAugust 3O.
Urossfire practically shilled for hin and his booll But the coup belonged to ABC-TVis
Augyst 27
vithPosner
20/20. Vith the CIA making it posvible, it amredthe drfected KBG official, Yuri
Hosenko, vho(had for a tinc its Osvald file uro then appeared in public for the first
timein30yavsyearo。
Lost in the excitoment if not in tho modia predisposition to ignore it &Hos-
cnko's authoritative allogation that far from being an assassin, Ose ld could not
hit the side ofbarn:
withahotrun,"
"In linsl he was shooting raobita Hlosenko said "Would you bolieve @t? He
never shot a single rabbit.witirxaxshwtgux And lhere ve see a person shooting with a
Harinq Osvald Porter,zmtxth vidov of thc alleged assassin, cnd thcir daughter June,
not intending the promotion thoy vereused for，alsovere on the nets。
Lenshg
There vero nouopaper stories pnges long andthat all around tho world. As syndicated
it taloo up tlhne p ges. It vas used in this form as far away as outback alstralia, as
aior
it was in the Zos Mngeles Daily ou. (august 29) Alnost all the/papers vont for it big.
yro.72
The Washiugton Post vas an cxception.Hey all reveled in Posner'g "splution" to tlhe
crine and praised lir for tluat groat national service。
With_fou_oxesptionsthe reviewers-all_did that,ter.
Resdy'a rart 2 soction cf it: Setenber 16 issue Cave Posner four pages,vith
heio
his pictu most o: that fronfpogo. He-ss here aal in mont picturostinthn deep-
Mrighl
ght-peoe, lhand to chck,brou furrowed,looking at the lens.

--- PAGE BREAK ---sue Cave Posner four pages,vith
heio
his pictu most o: that fronfpogo. He-ss here aal in mont picturostinthn deep-
Mrighl
ght-peoe, lhand to chck,brou furrowed,looking at the lens.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
Ite Jeck Birica othused bver Pocner's "ro-indexin"g or tha Comnission's 26
y/
volumes. lho givon th.iv offieial%stimated vord cout of 10,000,000 as 1,000,000.
Ho sayo thnt "Posnr
又
also cuployed computor teclmolccy not available to the Comaission."
bFlacling fron th dust-jacket blurbs, Sirica cot the historian, Stephen Aabrose,
to describe Posnor's bool as "just a model of historical scholarship." Sirica's
CThn
aEargemumlero
The novs nacazines and rany othors alco vnt for it big, too .
The coutry,roolly much of the vorld,was just saturated p with the highest of
laPpnt md hiofck.aptenhiswes
praiseoolton accoapanied vitlr oxpressiong of thanles.
Spectacularly
NetuiMPneho+enThtsicle.hlnteuesy,
Although the Suciny ilev York imeg' rovicw vas ever so mauch Monger, Christopher
Lehnann"-llaupt's in the daily lines/is closer to typical.
out its "facts ... overloolked...A having to do with the biography and character of
Lee Harvey Csvala"
Φ Like Sirica and most other reporters and revievers he, is iupressed that Posner"nesindered"
LiatM
f those 26 volunes and"intorvieved nearly 200 prople." To hin the book is "brilliantly
illuminating."
Getting back to that co praiseuorthy "biography" he roports "vhat a profoundly
disturbed childhood Osvald had and uliat an extreme inclination for violence he evinced
as he developod. As Hr.Posner details the evcnts bofore the griine you can almost feel
Osvald doveloping into tho madman who could cormit such an act."
This is no exacgeration. In his book and in his appcarances/Posner refers to
Osvald as a born assassin vho spont his bricf life awaiting his historical moment.
Marren Commission
Posner's source for this is what he says vas thc/testimony of a Hlev York City poe
psychiatrist, Dr. Renatus Hartogs and his report on his ezan.nation of Oswald as an
uaeatnuant
unhappy little boy who bohevet badly.
:ith all of thc ecstacies in virtually all the iedia that had the effect of telling
all ro.dero, l:strners cnd vieuers to rush out and by this sonsational nev book, they little boy who bohevet badly.
:ith all of thc ecstacies in virtually all the iedia that had the effect of telling
all ro.dero, l:strners cnd vieuers to rush out and by this sonsational nev book, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

These are harsll, uplcasant vords. I do not usc them lightly/ They are ap:ropriate
and they aro true.This is vhat tho Randon House dictionary Says they mean:
A shyster id"a lawyer vho uses unprofessicral or questionable'z methods.yfhe
second definition is,"ono who gets along by petty, slbarp practises." In slang it is
八
language, idoas and thouglits of another author, and roprosenting them as ono's ori--
ginal vorl." hc second dofi:ition is,"sonothing apyropriated and presented in this
manner。"
Thc vorb "plugiarizo" is @efined, " to appropriate by plagiarisn." The second
Icaning is, "to appropriate idcas, pasroges, etc.,from (a vorl) by plagia rism." The
third definition io,"to conmit plegiarism。"
It is in their dictionary nvningo that I use these vords.llot as/figures of speech.
mere
Posncr did represent the vork c& lt of others as his ovn work. He did engage in
unprofessional and (questionable methods。The slang sense of shady ad disreputable
fits what ho did vell。

--- PAGE BREAK ---cr did represent the vork c& lt of others as his ovn work. He did engage in
unprofessional and (questionable methods。The slang sense of shady ad disreputable
fits what ho did vell。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

cuuntry
capuntry vas avashvith unpaid pronotions for it。
But nobody cver checlrcd.Posner and lis book out!Hot a single reporter and almost
no reviuucrg。"obody on all tho:o TV shows, Hot a siingle interviuwer。Ho cditor or pro-
ducer seoms to liave had a singlc question about either Posner or his book.
An4 Vtlc plain and sinplo truth is tuat it is the most deliboratl deliberately, bra-
zenly, urinhibitedly dishonest of  all the assassination boks. In this it has some
1
pretty stiff conpetition,too!
There is not a singl: thing in it that is both factual and neW。
This includes those So
odten boasted-of 200 nterviews. Posner used them to cir-
cunvent thc established official zvidwm cvidence that was not congenial to @his con-
his价
ction.Brd yhat is sirnificant in that he cribbed!
=
both a plagiarist and a shyster. 3A
icbe Even bes formula for his fame and fortune, his suacessful exploitation and
hs
coimercialization of thc assassination is not his. le took that from the Hose Select
ofthelate1970s
Comittee on Assassinationa/and usod it as his oun. It is that although the Varren
Commission vas vrong about just about everything it nonethless blundered to the
right conclusion.
Although he is selective in ucing and misusing Commission testimony he also lies
about it and vithout that ho has no book at all...
In so large a book no roporter, reviever or producer can check everything but
what Posner himself said was most irportant in it is an obvious beginning point。In
thie book and in his ap:e.rances he said his new biography of Osvald is the most inportant
single thengThen thero is also vliat he says is the fact of the assassinatione
Randon Hiouse's vicc president and executive editor is Bob Loonis.He shares Posner's
dedication: Ty ob Hooiis, my eriitor who nurtured this project from its inception, and
to Trisha, my wife, my partnei', my life."
ofthebo.lmay31avdco
Loomis told Publishors Weckly'g lobert Dahlenfor its story announcing the books
R2.4
tocommem:ratothe
biograpliy of Loo Harvey tswald..."
3fTrisha, my wife, my partnei', my life."
ofthebo.lmay31avdco
Loomis told Publishors Weckly'g lobert Dahlenfor its story announcing the books
R2.4
tocommem:ratothe
biograpliy of Loo Harvey tswald..."
3f

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3B
Posiier bogins-hisg-biography"dseribing Osuald,when arreated,as smirling with
Satisfaetion overbishi.toric aciievenct
killgnet-hePresident
Pbthen Posner begins his biography doscribing Cswald, when arrested for lilling
1
Dallas policeman J.D.rip.it, as suiriing with satisfaction over his "historio"
4
Ponyo
achievenent, killing tln: Prerident - vith uhich he had not becn charged. Even his
chapter titles cre desiimod to nale Posner's case, that Osvald was a maniacal lkiller,
vith that potential all his life, and 2%a Comaunist (although in his text Posner
refers to hin as an anarchitt) when Oswald had a clear records of hating the United

--- PAGE BREAK ---niacal lkiller,
vith that potential all his life, and 2%a Comaunist (although in his text Posner
refers to hin as an anarchitt) when Oswald had a clear records of hating the United

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ppanerbegins-ints b"piograply" doscribing Osuald as "snirking" vith satisfaction
over his historical achiovenont, lilling, tho Presitent/.lht. was when lho-was arrested.
llo uses cvon chapter titlcs _to mala_his_casc_of_Qsvald,_tho_athological/maniacal
liller_all hi:lifeud ao_a Coin inist_xhanxosxa(although in thc textsfarraixraferd
referring to-him-as u amarchist) vhey;Oswala had-a cloar-rupord-of-hating_the_United
Chastertitles....
States ani tho Russian Cenr uists.ile
"The Bost iloligion is Communisn'"Hunter
1%
TTV TTTA uoUA:M'mPEg SEA poO ST.uWsPUTI STI JO 4mO ST edeI AO.n' m4S4ToSeg Jo
This Foolishness Cone to An hend?!","/'le 上ooks Like a kaniac"".
Tho last vods of lris text aro,"Lee Harvey Osviald, driven by his yon Rurk
1963.To say otherwisc is to absolve a man with blood on his hands,and to mock the
Presi:ent he lilled."
Posner's sole cago for Osvald as this born assassin, aside from over-writing the
whthatihite
Hartogs
S,zousoa uT 0oue4aduT sao4rUi 04Tdog *4una t pe hou or44TT 0 sUn ol uoue pgfAs0
Ce/-21
S Se 9AeS sao4rrH sAeS oU 4UuA 04 pue uTUL 0saaud om4 ue4 rsoT So40Aop ot 6oseo
expertcpinion。
That he paid such scant attentivm to Hartogs is vise。In that vay he avoided
telling his readers that lartogs is onc of those shrinks vho used his women patients
Julie Roy
for free sex. Free, that is, until a fyanhattan jury avgrded one th of those women,
Cl/hg/e Awll /sz/oye Twm yohmN1 Vs2sl 6l 1om, uo soaung n ur 00oosce
Oerrall)
He quot.s lartogs as soying of hiS enanination of this badlittle boy,)"when I
examinod him I found h'm to havo dcfintive thaces g of dangerousness. ooa potential
for explosive,dangerous,assaultive acting out vhich is rather unusual in a@g
child" vith a "vivid fantasy life turmins around onnipotonde,and power."(Page 12)
Also, allegedly, a "pcrsonality pattornlisturbance with sehoid features and & pssive-ag-
中
(ressive tundencies."xiauwmds Pocner ends this sole basis for lhis allegation, enlarged
upon greatl in his public cp:oarance, saying,"although Hartogs thought he was 'quite
clcar'in cnphasizing Osuald's
 ptontial for violence by "fthe diagnosis of passive-s for lhis allegation, enlarged
upon greatl in his public cp:oarance, saying,"although Hartogs thought he was 'quite
clcar'in cnphasizing Osuald's
 ptontial for violence by "fthe diagnosis of passive-

--- PAGE BREAK ---n, enlarged
upon greatl in his public cp:oarance, saying,"although Hartogs thought he was 'quite
clcar'in cnphasizing Osuald's
 ptontial for violence by "fthe diagnosis of passive-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
aggressive,′he di.dl not e.plicitly stato that since^that vould have mandated institution-
alization."xaayxdaumaxxxaysyxhurtoga
"Inst:ad," Pornor wvites,"he recomendod that Osvald be placed on probation so
long as lo .es uidor guidancc, yrv:ferably fron a psychiatrist," which never hapyened.
W-M2/
(page 15)
For all tisvilesnex much/of which does not :pear tlhere, Posner has four
citatione to Iarfogs: Warron Comission tostinony in its Volune  qages 217,220 and
hirnupetoy
atpnitsonlh)+hosipee.het
223, and m to to'Culd rnport he subitelittsvolune 20.Ye does not give the.
(89-90)
trudyet.
page nunborg wlgeh indicatos he mnyfhavo been citing it from tho. tr(nscript of
het.
testimony-rather-than-from hieptamination-ofit。llowever,fron the t.stimony,reading
Posner did not even havc thove 26 volunes. What he fefers to as his "index" of then
may be only hia notes.
6svala's allcged oty@tial for violence interestod the Comission snd its counsel,
on
Vesley liebeler, questionel Hertcgs about it. Tliat isfone page Posner did not cite, page
221。He cites both sidos of thin prgo. All of lartogs' tes imony was of only 10 pages.
Posner has no end note on Hartogs's alleged belier that Oswald should have been
institution alize: for his alleged psychiatric probgins, a fornulation typical of the
skilled shyster in Posner。 Instead ho has a footnote.But it also gives no source。Instead
hc uses that lrngthy footbot: for criticism of S/lvia "engher, author of the brillaint
Accessories. aftor tho Eact, and of me. Posner cites no source bec:ruse contrary to his
shrinks and his perronal nindreading.
Posner lmeu tho truth. Lt is not just that he made thts up. "e made it up lmowing
uhthuticises
Fhat it 4s false from lis-criteismr of Meagher and from his lnovledge of Hartogs!
6
M
actual testiomony.This ia vhat that footnotts quotes of loagher: "there is, then, no %a
basis in ally of tho availablehedical or psychiztric histories z for allegationsthat
从
Uswald vas psychotic, abcrrant or mentally usound in any degree." Posner than says,agher: "there is, then, no %a
basis in ally of tho availablehedical or psychiztric histories z for allegationsthat
从
Uswald vas psychotic, abcrrant or mentally usound in any degree." Posner than says,

--- PAGE BREAK ---en, no %a
basis in ally of tho availablehedical or psychiztric histories z for allegationsthat
从
Uswald vas psychotic, abcrrant or mentally usound in any degree." Posner than says,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
 psychiatrists Mo evaluated Osuald after his failed suicide attempt."
Those tgfi Russian psychiatrists vere so much of the opposite opinion they turned
Osvald loose,vithout any rostraints of ady kind and vitin no requirement that hd get
poychiatric care.
tetmmy
fonn did
Hartogsproves Posner to be a liarJot by accient maling a mistake.
deliberate
Atcauel
hniy
liar who lies his lelio in his, book aaiamxxkrk-that vithout phis lie Pocner vould hul.
mbee,hprfhetPuu.led)
nothave。Ktisonthie page of liartogs'testinony lhe slipped in his sourcing,the one
page of that testinony that is definitive vithout any question at all。Here is how
·not
Liebeler began that question&,
"It would/appear fron this report that you found any
ehetylant!+he
That is thc_pgotostat of Hnutogst ropirt the page references to which Posner did
not -or could not-cite。
Hartogs'response vias a bit evasive:
"If I didn t mention it in the report, I wouldn't recall it now。"
Thio left opon the possibility that he reached that conclusion and had not included
it in l:is raport。So,fiebae Liebeler asked this followup question:
"If you have found it, you vould have mentioned it in the report?"
Hartogs then testified,I would have mentioned it;yes"(page 221)
It is not only that Posner presents hinself as the expert on the Commission's evi-
dence and tlic man who had to index those 26 volunes because he found eagher's, the only
index, inadequate and thus by his oum boasting had to be aware of what Hartogs actually
testified. hicagher, in the very paragraph from which he quotes (on her page 244),
Referring to llartogs' om report，e wrote it
 "...doos not justify the inferonce that he was unbalanced or eranged. Irresponsible
Hstatement/purportedly based on the Youth llouse (fartogs') report vere published and
given grcat prominence in tlie peruod after the assassination. They created an exaggerated
or erronesous inpression, as tho feport aclmnovledges (u A3IS)th llouse (fartogs') report vere published and
given grcat prominence in tlie peruod after the assassination. They created an exaggerated
or erronesous inpression, as tho feport aclmnovledges (u A3IS)

--- PAGE BREAK ---report vere published and
given grcat prominence in tlie peruod after the assassination. They created an exaggerated
or erronesous inpression, as tho feport aclmnovledges (u A3IS)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Posner is thc Comisoion scholar and its indexer,remember,fer he
e says so himself
oten enough. e is, after all, as thc cminont historian Stephen imrose told the un-
b
questioning Heusday ropurtey Jacl Sirica,th& author of that "model of historical
research." So fron lis ow model scholarship and from his claimed indexing and from
lieabher's book, Posnor lmew very vell what the Qeport states where Meagher cited it::
"Contrary to reports tiat aypcared after the assassination, the psychiatriatric ex-
anination áii not inlicato that Lee Osuald vas a potential assassin, potentially danger-
ous, and that'his outlook on life had stronly paranoid overtones' or_that hc.should
be insti tutionalined." ( pego 379)pwphuaus dadlul.]
Posner's lic could not be morq kmoving,more deliberate, more calculated por more
iooRandon IlouseaBet-Lernia,ct
Thele
And Pocner was by his own bcasting familiar with hre three seprate sources that
told him thotruth。
But if he told the truth he had no book。
So! he had his book。
Poner's
With a vohemence in his never-ending clain on TV that his biography of Oswald
is the boolk's most inportant part and his repetition of his lmowing/false interpretation
of what Hartogs'actually tostified to,this is one easily checked matter that should
have called for checiring by aly renpo honest, responsible reporter, reviover or pro-
ducer。
But not a single one did that.They plugged the lying bool instcad, alhost all of them.
Cnethen
Alseeasily checked matter is Posner's also ofteropeated claim that he had to
"re-index" the Commission s volumes.He coould not use lleagher's, the only one,he said。
Dared not is more likely, civen what it rerlects above! But neither Sirica nor the
young army of others vho vithou’ aiy checking at all pufi'ed his book up aslked hismelf
S
thevery obvious questionlHlowlong does it talretorcad andindex 26volumes or about
"rosearch")
10,0o0,000ords? Drd Posncr have the time vhen all hieffort was only about a year?
Nhat is an obvious inpossibility, as each and every roporter and producer and anyindex 26volumes or about
"rosearch")
10,0o0,000ords? Drd Posncr have the time vhen all hieffort was only about a year?
Nhat is an obvious inpossibility, as each and every roporter and producer and any

--- PAGE BREAK ---bout
"rosearch")
10,0o0,000ords? Drd Posncr have the time vhen all hieffort was only about a year?
Nhat is an obvious inpossibility, as each and every roporter and producer and any

--- PAGE BREAK ---

reviever vho Spoko to Posner or rend any of his uncnding bcastings about having had to
nlake hi:alleged index to all those 10,O00,Ou) words.should have lnown.
But cven tlie Tines' cxporionced reviever,Lclmann-Haupt, vho Deboasted Posner's
inpossiblo boast for hiMin urging all to just rush out and buy this greatest of
having indexcd tiosc 10,00o,0oo vords."Certainly fron what I've secn in linumerable
nevs stories,reviews and iV transcript,nobody ever asked Posner this question,did
he reallytido that,or asked to sceall those indezing cards.
According to both Posncr and Loomis the other important part of this book is the
mo Wnew"Znirormation Ponor obtained "from computer and laser enhancements of the
cyewitness Zaprduer film," Ioomis's statomont to Publisher Weokly's lgahlen.
In ono foru oi auothor Posne aluays said this,qdding that those techniques were
not available t the Comnisnion,not yet having; been invcnted.
hae
Thi: alleged "nev" information K two parts, each stolon by Posner。
Tne first he stole from a boy! fe disguisos that in his boole with tricky gat
endnotes.
Because Poane: and his yublisher both sey this is basic in the book that he gave
it less than a page of space in all may seom cursory but it actually is safety that
dictated tluis seoning brevity。
Posner's uhcory- udl i* is a thoory, no matter how often he condemna thoorizing
by others,by cven those vho do not thocrize - is that instoad of the second of the
only
three shotn the  offical acout adnits missing tho linousine,he soys it vas tho first
C
that rmissd. ilou doeqho lmou it? rron "/low Zepruder cnlancomonts." They show " a young
cirl in a red slcirt and vhite top who vas ruuming along thc left side of the'President's
car, doun Bln Stroot, bogan turming to her right. By fane 187, les/than 1.5 seconds
later, the enhancemon: oloarly shows sho had stopped, tuistet 太axkerxrxz
kcomplotely
away from tho neso iotorcado,and veS staring back at the bwmchool Book Depository.
that girl vas tonycar-old Rosoiary Villis.Somo believe xk the grils's reactuon vas
back tovard hin."(page 321）At thio point Posner has his end note 17 for this chapter.t the bwmchool Book Depository.
that girl vas tonycar-old Rosoiary Villis.Somo believe xk the grils's reactuon vas
back tovard hin."(page 321）At thio point Posner has his end note 17 for this chapter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Depository.
that girl vas tonycar-old Rosoiary Villis.Somo believe xk the grils's reactuon vas
back tovard hin."(page 321）At thio point Posner has his end note 17 for this chapter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

His Sou co on this io liis "intorview vith Jin Hoore,"arch 9, 1992."(page 559)
What lorn r sourcos here is tlhc mytholoy fron tiat frned mythologizdr aud assassi-
nation Mut Jim lioore told 'iarhill Vilin called to his daueghter to turn back.
助
sle stopppod ruinr vith th Prosidcnt's car,slie said,'I stopped when I hcard a
:hot'." Kce lere Posner hns cnd noto 1g. It roads, in full,"David Lui,'The Little girl
lust Have feard.' Who Dallas Tincs-BHerala, June 3, 1979, Hs H-5".
a sholoxt, Posner says. nothing omittrd in this dircct (quotation fron a single paragraph,
Me Zapruder filr is tho visual confirmation that provides the timing.A'In that
split second I thought it was a f/recracler.But maybe vithin one tonth of a second I
lmew it vas a guishot。 ..(in original) I think I probably turned to look tyoard the
noise，tovard the Book Depository,*"
19.
nith-Durk, 1979." Besides this being a spurce not iapossible to locate or check, it is
erlimtuy
limitedto(ilis's s:ying that uhen she hcard the shot she turned。
a
relates to thoue "Zapruder enhancemonts" his source for vhich. he has no end note
iving hio sou.ce. In fact lo stole it from David Eui' when pip was a boy, 15 years old,
living in the Los Angoles area.
Lwio
Dallhe
Hist storg vas not in tlo sinco-defunct(imes-Herald alone. It did not originate
helelo,
there. It was syndicated nationally by the Los Angeles_fimeg. lly file hods copies of
this syndicated story frem the June 6, 1979 San "rancisco kr Chronicle, the also-defunct
"Waskington Star of that vuly 5 and a Lcuch longer vorsion from the Baston Qlobe of
4
dult 1。 Luig vas then a froshn an at Bzrown lniver.sity, in Providence, Rhode Island,
not far from Boston. Tlie lobc gave it a big play, about a full-sized newspaper page.
S
ThiAtluuehotniy
Andit tuns out that Pouner bad a gcod reason forhattriely footnoting,for
not giving: any source for liis fabulous "Zapruder engancements。" It was,in fact, thzx
Posner's oun "enhancenont" of vhat lo cribbed from what thio boy soys he sav,with hisforhattriely footnoting,for
not giving: any source for liis fabulous "Zapruder engancements。" It was,in fact, thzx
Posner's oun "enhancenont" of vhat lo cribbed from what thio boy soys he sav,with his

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing,for
not giving: any source for liis fabulous "Zapruder engancements。" It was,in fact, thzx
Posner's oun "enhancenont" of vhat lo cribbed from what thio boy soys he sav,with his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
unaided cye, vhen he madlo one of hi: mnay ezaminations of a rather poor copy of tlhat
film, all of :/lich tlun vore luade frou a poor pffatod copy of it! b
This io hou
Lui's ctory bogins;
sat watching the silent Zapruder
film for what nust have been the
50th time that night. Suddenly,
this time, I saw something that
startled me a young girl,running
tokeep pace with the presidential
limousine,stoppedabruptly and turned
toward theTexas School Book:Depository
 too early in the ilm-—before any shots
were supposed to have been fired.
I turned the fim back to make sure
that what I thought I had seen was not a
roduct of my own fatigue,but there it
was again.
Many assassination investigators have
said that the killing was a conspiracy
not because of the existence of a second
gun,other bullets or witnesses who saw a
secondassassin,butbecause theshots
were fired too close together,too quickly
for that particular gun's mechanism'to
fire twice.
But if the first shot had been fired ear-
:lier than they thought, that would have
left enough timefor one assassin to have
fired all the shots.
I rolled the film again soI could takea
closer look at the girl. She was about 10,
wore a red skirt and a white top,and was
Caucasian.
I knew that there were many possibili-
ties why a 10-year-old might stop run-
ning. maybe her parents called her back,
she might simply have become tired.but
just possibly she stopped running in reac-
tion to a rifle shot.
I believed the theory that the Presi-
dent had been the victimofmore than one
assassin. The most common reason for
concluding thatLeeHarvey Oswaldhad
not been the sole assassin in the plaza
tha: iay was some simpie arithmetic ap-
piied to the Zapruder film.
1 knew from my reading that Oswald's
gun could fire cnly one bullet every 2.3
seconds. The FBI calculated that 18.c
18.3
frames of movie filnn passed thrcugh
Zapruder's Belland Howell camera every
second.If the Zapruder film revealed a
shot striking thecar orits occupants mcre
irequently than once every 42 frames (2.3
seconds multiplied by the camera's 18.3
frames per second) the assassination of
the President must have been a conspira-
cy, since Oswald's gun could not have
fired fast enough to do the job alone..3
seconds multiplied by the camera's 18.3
frames per second) the assassination of
the President must have been a conspira-
cy, since Oswald's gun could not have
fired fast enough to do the job alone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

iate 11-correcbicn,11tLino fron botton:MoulKaaatx Replaveoviths
it。 I publirlod tlat I fhoto_raulie Uhiteuash, which appared the end of wac, 1967,
on page 150.
Zapruder'sinotat roaction wa:tiat t'o shots caunefron bohind him,mekhx
from fart:u lxick: on thnt dranrg fnoll of which the concrete structure on which he
lrto
Was staniucg taleiyg lri: pictuy ver port. Por all their efforst over the monthQ
prior to luir: Juc 22, 1964 tostinony,tho.e Dallas liornin leus photographer Tou
lillard, vhu atlso troi. iirpotaut picturu referred to au "tho federales", never
(Despita tho (avit iaportauce of hi: film in the investication, dospite the Com-
mission's wioa of it thnt yudou noumal procedures roquired him to testify, to identify
lettered iiax lhil.ipi memo vas enouh to toll tlicn thcy did not want to hoar vhat he
Vould say boxauso it is that de:tructive to the preconception of thc lone-nut assassin
with which tle Corm.ssion began its vorlt. (See Post Mortem,Intruduction, Pp. 4r 1ff)
Tie Commis:ion ha plumul to file its Report in June.Zapruder vas not deposed, with
Litethmeytmnfhe
no member of thc Corission presont，urtil July-22。(711569ff)
(On one page, 572, flo teutifier! tlhat the shots came frbn beling him four tines
conly
Und to lnve Woa Couaission Cumsol Vesley liebeler say, "But you didnt form any
m&ATTenoe u1J OuOo PTP_waEgEWa S4O1S oU4 1OT4ooTTp qunA 04 ST ouT4 4U  UOTudo
[Zayrudor's siaplo reply vas thc one vord, "Ho."
M
kis
This lieboler arlced/vith the Phillipa note in hand, the notethe very day of the
assassination in whioh he (quotes Zapruder as saying that tho sots came fron behind him.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---o."
M
kis
This lieboler arlced/vith the Phillipa note in hand, the notethe very day of the
assassination in whioh he (quotes Zapruder as saying that tho sots came fron behind him.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
Lui thon goes: into lio tining: of when Governor
Texas Governor John B. Connally,
another as:assination victim who lived until 1993, vas shot. Z This, too, apears as
Posner's wcrl in MafosnerPosner's book。
So also does tho little boy Luis's conclusion, vithout vhich on at basis alone
Posner and landon louse still. aain have no book:
This being the case,I subtracted the
frame in which President Kennedy was
shot from the frame in which Gov. Con-
nally was hit and found that 28frames at
mostelapsedbetween the twoshots
(238-210=28).This was not enough time
As it luapsens, Auif vas not tho first to roport a shot easlier than the Comnission
and the FBI admit any shot was forod. But he is Posner's source, not any fantastic
enhancement of no given source。
Abrahan Zaprgier himsolf saw it through hgi canora's len lens and I reported
It wqs fpiosled mia-february, 1965.It vas first published that Sugust.
lelf
That Zapruder also hccrd and Yft a bullet passing him from tho Grassy Knoll that
is so infanous to Posner vac lept fron his Cormaission testimony but the Secret Service
reported that in a barely legible note as filed in the Hational Archives, where I found
it. I puhlished that in Whiteuesh II. Ita date of publication is Decomber 2, 1966.
STU uT souTa TmtoaoS 4StTJ iU4 04 Staat 0H So0q 1oq s5 “fn o4 Aq 6rousoa)
andMadelens
book in contriveq criticisn of ne. Me road it.)
So it is clear that the first part of the second most inportant "new" information
assnitea(FaAA)
The rest of tirt second part vas tho work Uf "ailure Analysis that still again,
Ponser goes t groat and carerul trouble to present as his own vorl, 9r as york done
CABAJ
SanpMielo
tor him. Mllat vork wac duae for thc imericanBar assocaations's
Was inteiled to dehonstratet.lawyere houthoy ccullduse modein teclnology thatvas
ukmoun to uost of thcm.But this yeu wili not find in Posner's bo k。lHlot a vord,not
even the most obscure hint ol' it.It is viith studied purpesorilness written as work fonemodein teclnology thatvas
ukmoun to uost of thcm.But this yeu wili not find in Posner's bo k。lHlot a vord,not
even the most obscure hint ol' it.It is viith studied purpesorilness written as work fone

--- PAGE BREAK ---hatvas
ukmoun to uost of thcm.But this yeu wili not find in Posner's bo k。lHlot a vord,not
even the most obscure hint ol' it.It is viith studied purpesorilness written as work fone

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
Failure nalysis is part o a larcer corporate: strueture that has for years
usedthesetecluologies for its experttestinony ir;lavsuit involving najor accidents
ofvariou::inli。
hnougly
Pocner'S(professional dishonosty i:not linitod to proscnting Pailure inalysid"
(n/
vork as his oun, ao fov hin, cirich puts it within hrisYpublisher'd definition of liter-
ary thiovery.lio hid fro: huis r ader and fron all of tho interviews anc TV ap:earances
of which I hav.:r:cordo or laiovledge tiat there vas a a mock trial; tuat the prosecution
vas of Osvald; tlat tho dofcnse side lad only to create "reasonable doubt"about the
cmd
prosecution case er/did not lhavo t: cxculpate Csuald; tivt therefore maka none of those
tedoperle
impressivo techiologios had trbc uscd byt and none were; that there was a jury; and
that what Posner prosonts as tho uqucstioned and unquestionable truth in fact the jury
held vas not that at all。It s.lit Glrost doen tho middle, hanging. gnd thus Osvald was
E
found to b not yuilty  uhereas Posnr's version is that vhat he took fron Failure
analysis' vork vas the uirpeacheble, eysbalished fact and truth.
Cosry
He did lnou thr trjth. But tho trutlhn neant he vould have had no book. So, once again,
agcun/
ynfu
truth yas/tlr fet vietin of Posner's(fame and fortue.
Ve have seen that Heusdey's Jack Suurica wrote that tlhia uork vas for Posner。 liost
of thcee vhn vroto yaout this did that in one vay or aiother. Faned Lohmann-"aupt, too,
altlhough laou: ox.licitly, Srying, "He availabl availped himsolf of new scientific and
computer cnhanccnont o inportant cvidonce,nost portinontly of the filn of the lennedy
motorcede talon by Abrahan Za,rudos."
Hiogt co:pl:toly hosdvinlod vas thy p stigious Philadelphia Inguirer. That paper,
ihich earnod many ulitzer puizog for its outstandiig juusmalism, concluded its Septeriber
"7 editorial，"mhe nagic bullot," vith tlcse vords:
"loaner coirissioned a firm that srocializes in conputer roconstructions for use in
truth about the asoassiuation tlio fact...(in original) are incontrovertible,’ writos
Posner."
Those seolinry truth about the assassination carnot $ get it from either Posneroconstructions for use in
truth about the asoassiuation tlio fact...(in original) are incontrovertible,’ writos
Posner."
Those seolinry truth about the assassination carnot $ get it from either Posner

--- PAGE BREAK ---se in
truth about the asoassiuation tlio fact...(in original) are incontrovertible,’ writos
Posner."
Those seolinry truth about the assassination carnot $ get it from either Posner

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
or frpm tlho"ailuuo Analvsis "rosocution"case in its sales demonstration to the ABA
convention。*t did ot lmv: tb·truthfhl in its denonstration,which vaa to demonstrate
tie possibilit S ol tito ngprloin tehenolo, and it vas not truthful or factual in that
work。 It stated iupossibilites aS actualities, It was ignorant of the ootablished
ufficially entablished fact.It nisroprosented test the Commission's testinony and
the actual,offi:ial-evi.lenco photographs of tlnc crinc scone. It, like Posner, igmored
all the official cvitionco tlat vas or tended to bo eXculpatory, of vhich its "prosecution"
team had to lanov.Aid the clinaiing prouf that it is not thc truth about the assassina-
tion is tlut vhon the other side madle no such uses of that technology at all and content
itself vith moroly dissroving the "prosecution" case, those fine technilogies,/taskyiy
urhr
fivo of thr: 12 jurors afrood vitl:it ang·daid theroby tiatthotthe to Posner was "the
wpmachx :ncontrovortible" truth was not tlhe truth at all。
W yithout any question at all, the ezisting and gfficial evidence, of which
Posner did lmou, ypoved that vhat Fail uro Analysis preppared and presented vas not
7
the truth, and as it and Posner used it, was in fact false.
I go into this in gr.ater detail in the moro than 20O,Ooo-vord manuscript I
ohAetndohustny
i.mesh
but still,I bolievc, overuhelntingly,in about a fourth of that manuscript that as I
vrite this i: bein prepared for publication as Cage'Coen by Richard Gallen/Carroll &
Graf。
To quofe rysolf, Porner has trouble telling the truth even by accident!
and reviows
Of all thic many storieaI lavo beon sont fron tho length and bredth of this country
0
andoBf vhat TV did with Posner and his nistitled beblk book, only tuo reaised any real
question about fosner's dishanesty in presenting Failure 4nalysif's work as for hin.
Aside fronher
cngthy revicti of thic book, thoβan Francisco Chronicle's chief
PatrieraHolt
book reviewer Aurote a xsmrimn :"Botweon the Lines" colun for the September 5 issue。
Without sey tho obvious, that Posner cribbed Pailure nalysis' work in presenting
She
it as dono for hin,trieraHolt
book reviewer Aurote a xsmrimn :"Botweon the Lines" colun for the September 5 issue。
Without sey tho obvious, that Posner cribbed Pailure nalysis' work in presenting
She
it as dono for hin,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ewer Aurote a xsmrimn :"Botweon the Lines" colun for the September 5 issue。
Without sey tho obvious, that Posner cribbed Pailure nalysis' work in presenting
She
it as dono for hin,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
"But t kc tlt: ce:e of Yailure Analysis Associateo, tho rlenlo Park firn that used
computer cuhnncoucnts to) reco.istruct the JrK assassination for a 1992 study。Posner
refers t o tiat :tuly repeatodly but does not explain that Failure Analysis was com-
mock trial f ieo larvey (svald in San F'rancisco last yoar.The trial ended vith a
hung jury.""It qlhiei cxccutive officoy"toger HcCarthy (vho testificd for tho d fenge
at th mocl trial)offer d wiat host Brian Za Banmuller calleda startling con-
clusion'....a coupelling argu.ent that Lee larvey Osvald did not act alone.
According to licCarthy'the tunman gavo up sone awfully good shots t take some auk-
assassins. ..· 'Feu shar-+ sharpshooters, ruch loss Osald, could hit a moying
target taling shots as rapidly as Oscald supposedly did.' He asked HicCarthy, 'Can it
be done? HicCarthy rospondled, Z 'I can't. I'n the best shot I kmou. I can't do that.@
ready to S:y conclus'vely vho killod Prosident Konnedy。'Case Open."
So, cvon tlhe pcopl uho did the study Posner uses as his own say of it the exact
opposito of vhat Posner says。 llo says it proves that Oswald was a lone assassin. The
Failure Aualysis Cief cruecutive office says-zt vas the end product of a conspiracy.
人
theaesksenatron
Pouner says th: shooting attributed to Osuald by Failure Analyais and by Posner was ;
Pert of tho official cvidoucc tlat Posner ignores,and it wa:: cited in my 1965
book tlat ho has,is that tho vry bost siots in the entire country,under better
conditions by far,including still yathor than moving targets and fron half the elevatiion,
aulZo
vith that junly rifle overhauledthea ho.sight that did not vork corrected, all failed
to duplicato tho shooting attributed t: Ysuala yho, As Posner also lmew fron tthat sane
tiat ho vas a"ratler poor"sliot。
Iy -uree?Mdoc 26volunes o thc Comisrions,those.tudied so closely and
Po5nO
and even iricroilg - Ne ddyg !attributed t: Ysuala yho, As Posner also lmew fron tthat sane
tiat ho vas a"ratler poor"sliot。
Iy -uree?Mdoc 26volunes o thc Comisrions,those.tudied so closely and
Po5nO
and even iricroilg - Ne ddyg !

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 4
(Parenthetically,cught vc not considcr tho conscquences of tho misuse of this
10S0
unblanfcqs justico ageinot tho poor and the vcal? fCan a judge or a jury parcoive
it to be vong uhon in lact it io vrong ir thc other side is vithout the very costly
ieansofprovin:it toberong uethsinilar advahcedtechnology?Can therebojustice
for those uho cannot afiord coumsel andcre ropresented by public defenders vhien the
rosecutiou con xosort to tliar; new tochmologies? Do they not endanger juctice?)

--- PAGE BREAK ---therebojustice
for those uho cannot afiord coumsel andcre ropresented by public defenders vhien the
rosecutiou con xosort to tliar; new tochmologies? Do they not endanger juctice?)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
Vashin ton lostportor Jeffrey A.Frank yrote the most pereoptive o? thc
1993
roviews I'vo sccn for tint paper's October S1Boul Horld veekly section.Posner being
pcrfect and aluays accurate, according to Posner, roflects tiuis in his reply printed in
that soction's Doco:ber 12 issue. Thr Post aetually grve hin almost a half of a page.
Posner's othor eriticisns of frons's rovieu are not cortlyof
nention but one in parti-
di
cular ezenpliries tho slkilled slystor in Posner and his deviousness. Indeed, his daring,
bec:use he vas inviting clobboring:
"THe iasinuation that I clained that the FaA pnclanceyenta yere cormis:oned for the
<is/
CRoleit?CFaAA)
boolk false.In the book,the citations to Dr.Piziali's testinony refer to the 1992
ABa mock trial, uhich is a mattor of public record."
to
There io no nrntion_of ho Aba in Pocner's book, none to itu or any other liock
trial, nono to any tost "tostirony" by Piziali.
That there va: t'a': Moek trial vwas "a matter of public record" but that is im-
V thout qiy question at all h) did aid he dosined his vriting to on cach and overy
say hnAt
occasiontho readerito-.boliovetlhet。
Condrontod vit thi truth, faco gt face on one of those Cim "Crossfire" shou
mhet.paaandngespnshernetmale
available tine was usot uy that vey ho added that ilecht had "aistrorted" the truthl !
Posnor rs never adinitted tlie d.sgustingly obvious truth- he stole FAA's vork in
presenting it as done: for lin,os rost readors and nost of thie media understood There
cre other lios, not just this most deficnedly doliberate of thom in Posnor's letter to
the Post, in:hding cven vith rogard to this ong.
Franh's
Thore is not more "insinuation" in ""e dke review and contrary to Posner's letter,
厂
it vas not by F'raMl。liore is what he actually vrote:
Posnor uses couputer-onchancenent material developad by the San fKancisco firn
"ailurc Annlysis Aosociatos. Yet 4ogor licCarthy, the firm's CEo, has Since expressed
outrago ovor what ho calls a Vfunadanenyal iisroprosontation' of tho data - ircluding anby the San fKancisco firn
"ailurc Annlysis Aosociatos. Yet 4ogor licCarthy, the firm's CEo, has Since expressed
outrago ovor what ho calls a Vfunadanenyal iisroprosontation' of tho data - ircluding an

--- PAGE BREAK ---firn
"ailurc Annlysis Aosociatos. Yet 4ogor licCarthy, the firm's CEo, has Since expressed
outrago ovor what ho calls a Vfunadanenyal iisroprosontation' of tho data - ircluding an

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
iaplocation t.at tho vorl uas com.ri.s.oned ti by Po:ner."
Whicl is rrocisoly hat trehia rlilaiolphia Luquirer suid in tho editorial
quoted abovogwtAo memy vlhuu,hfuLiuit,Aeflectlt clacerig
The chiof cxecutivc officer of FAa does nor. than, if politely, refer to Posner
cS a theertlrief。lle says also that vitlrogard te tho fact of the assassination,what
Po ner roforred to as the "incontrove.tible" truth, i'osner's is azXkfyataawtatxx
fvit
"a "fundanontal nisropresatation' of thc data," of FAA'o vork,oftna* aleged
mock trial,evidence."
C
The totality of Posner's and h ot his book's dishonesty is inpossible to exaggerate,
ate
. it is that permeating, delibexly, fully lnouingly on his part dishonest.
 Fosner Was so effective in "inplying" that the worit "uas coumnissioned bffim," as "e
Ca rthy said understatedly that oven U.s.lov and Vorld Report asserted a copyright for.
4中
gosner-on Fha'g work, afin ffact Pormer does in his booky! Posnor's uses of TAa's
A
greaphics areqmoted as cowriglhted by Posner hinsjer on page 88 of thet special Posner UJ
elition!
atletat
kinat
He adnitted this on tvo differont occasion. Un th cbcond
threofricndsofmine
roported it to me.One oi thom had raised the question vith him at a public gathering,
does he rea!ly bolieve thc case ic closed。 All three give consistent accounts of his.
response. Cne oi thom saye vhat io alnost exactly hat the others Says but he tells ne
prorscly
tlat Poener bocan his answer vtlifthese vords, "of course the case os is not closed."
lie also explained that inis purpose vas to direct attention to Osvald. As though for
50 years it lad not been on him*/①
After Posnor appcarod on For: Tv liorning Nevs with my friend and FoJ4 layer jinl
=
Lesar,according t Jim'a lotter to no,Aftcr lithe cnd of the shou he took mo aside and
told me,'lool, I lmov thc case is mor closod.' Hle said, in essence, that the title
vas intrnded to bo provocative." Jin also scid that "After the Fox show I appeared with
Posner on an Irish tall show by tolephone. ..During the course of thie show I noted
that Posner had told mo that he lncu thc case vas not closed。Posner did not dispute
iy statement."w I appeared with
Posner on an Irish tall show by tolephone. ..During the course of thie show I noted
that Posner had told mo that he lncu thc case vas not closed。Posner did not dispute
iy statement."

--- PAGE BREAK ---sner on an Irish tall show by tolephone. ..During the course of thie show I noted
that Posner had told mo that he lncu thc case vas not closed。Posner did not dispute
iy statement."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1′7
There ioanotler asgec:C tlc char:cter of tliis man virtually all the media just
raved abcut --vlat lindoiporsonislo o'her than as h:reflects in hisbookand
anl unsupervised qccess to all - have. "inis includes about a gurter of a million pages
of Wpreviosuly-vithheld official JrT assassinagion recordsythat I obtained by a dozen
Lawhiito
Freedonbf Liuforration ActSome of these suits vere precedental in several ways. One
ied to thc 1974 aiending 6f tho investigatory
yfiles exerytion to open CIA, FBI and
similar gaucg filen to FoIA access. All tloce files are in our basement. Medical and
fuednet
physical linitations Fimit ry iso of the stairs but I took the Posnerg
taere, showed
then hov those filos are arraged and identified.As he wrote,I"allowed" him "full
run" of all。 As he doesn not say, this jncluded usupervised use of out copier, on
which hns vife 1nade, by hor cout, 724 copies, Those he used in hig book appear in
Mret
his notes as thic result of lis work. Fhis is identifiable to ne and nottoothers
bccause hxs this "nodel of hictorical rosearch" romains to a large degree profoundly
ignorant of the suljoct, so iguorant lio lacks any lmovledge at all. of the FBI's filing
detitirlenti
and its file nuiborsKnoving nothing about them but the nuubers on theh,/he citedthem
ho got thein wrong. By the tiiue lhe was finushed he was still iguorant of the nunbers of UM
Lierhat
on
plhis grcat model of hi:torical roscarch was maven indeed!
He Say he"found" my"atttide tovard the sharing of information refreshing"and
said "I thank him for lhi.n generosity in the use of his papers and his time." (page 504)
This/is ho.: he hanlled tho groat(volunc of rocords he got from ny friendJim Lesar
Wuhuikheheads
andthe Asoassination Archives and Research Center,tao,using thoue records also as the
result of his own caoat labor.
Lcme
       s
own characterization of himsolf,as a writer and as a man。huikheheads
andthe Asoassination Archives and Research Center,tao,using thoue records also as the
result of his own caoat labor.
Lcme
       s
own characterization of himsolf,as a writer and as a man。

--- PAGE BREAK ---soassination Archives and Research Center,tao,using thoue records also as the
result of his own caoat labor.
Lcme
       s
own characterization of himsolf,as a writer and as a man。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18
at tho sane point in lis Aclnovledgonontss
risha, at thoir home for sovoral days."
Hou docs a decont nan and a decent umiter ezpross thanks and apjreciatbon to an
xzx an cuifeobled and ill octogenarian who gives him free the result of decades of
productive viorl andl asls notling for it, who "gractou:ly rocoived" hir and his vife
and in addition gav: thoun all tho tinu they wantcd, Now does he express "thanks" for such
"generpso ty"?
By doing all ho can to ruin the old man's roputatioin and trying to destroy the
credibility of lis dunk, naturally..lor Posner at least naturally.
By distortion and misrerosontation of events sarlier in that man's life vhen
they have no rolevance to his wwxx book in any event。
In all that tine he had his "full run" he could have lcqrned the truth if he
tuhy
bad vantod truth for hio bocila invh ich for thr most part 由tuthisan unwelcone stranger
checKee
in any evont.
hel al urth cut arly Ailrc queh.
He aclnovlelges taling ny tiuo for ather r:asons but not for something likc this,
whatheritosabout moondaboutmy !otk?
In his dozcn reforomnces to ne ho doe:have tuo, and only tuo, criticisms of my six
books on tic JFK assassination that ho hav。 One is ontrrely irrelevant, but when he
with
gsall man who imaginas he enlyages hinself by attacling others. He thinls thiat makes
puhl,
CCrTitierraudleueCesho
Hisup
212
then smaller and hin .larger。Te other|is a coHfession of his own ignorance and his
appgent lepondonco upon sources of vell-established umdopondability. le got himsj@f
a
lost in luo city or ileuOrloans and, for all his tarrknga derring-do "personal"
investigation thero ho could not cven get an address on a mai street right。And
T
com uUlet
urhntilolual
location or a strsot d ad iress whoh-it vas corraut, av Ho would have kmownif he had been
there or had at tin) librar used cithor tho city diroctory or the phone bool.
Referring to sou of hi: pnrizod sources m those/so ofton boasted of 200 inteviviews
as mero "nuts" io a lindness to somc of them.r had at tin) librar used cithor tho city diroctory or the phone bool.
Referring to sou of hi: pnrizod sources m those/so ofton boasted of 200 inteviviews
as mero "nuts" io a lindness to somc of them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---used cithor tho city diroctory or the phone bool.
Referring to sou of hi: pnrizod sources m those/so ofton boasted of 200 inteviviews
as mero "nuts" io a lindness to somc of them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
One ou tivcn,llubert Badoau,lbliso'a bool,Xhe The Maderxmxaa Undoruorld of
Lox in 1959. Its subtitle is "/a docunonted cgcomrt of CEGalHzED SEXUAL B DEGEHERACY,
E
(fol lit)Fr n his position on tlaco most ort: one roaches of the  irrational far richt
ho iewaitang about nudin nudicn,cquating it witl Conunism.
eldety
His wisdon, se histicatio  a political understandis such that in sending a fine)
BoiullyMruplemnsit
lady of oio of lleu Orang rafpgt and vealthier faniles a copy of his book tht is so
ugly he Jso uced plain paper for itu drst jaclet, a iool that inlcues all thosefoictures
of nakod moll andl ucnon t king; by tho shoriff face on, ln? also sent her song926 literature
accusing thc lato rospccted conservative Democratfro that stato, Hall boggs, of being
a Communist!
That fino woman gave no thris vgly and ignornt bo:k cndorsed to her and that
literature.Miie, u like Ponnor's, is a good source.
aluhannejgie))
thanks hin for "clarifying" so much for lhin。(page 502) If vhen he was working in the
f:le cabinet in uh.ch + have ny BringJier file lio would have seen the F3I's records
himself and)
because ho feared the: vould be lilled by the surviving conspirators in what Posner
says was not a couspiracy.vhy did Bringuier fear, why did he and his family require
tho FBI's protection? Because he and Usiald had been arreated by the Hew Orleans police
nefregees
when Bringui r and a few of his lilke-minded Kartes broke up an Oswald aiotribution of
repeeet
hn
literature. If tlis vas not enough of what thoFBI files hold about thet prime source Q
Bningnler
fotind
of such fine "clarification" for hin, Xosner would also have f
Fpiad that Bringuier went
totheFBlvith picturosliohadtaenl olme standing noar the cgstons house looling at
 4    1 8     9    1
tlose pictuwros, Bringvuier insisftod. o, thlo Telh Oh fle ,
Understandlinc liov Posnor could not get even an addiress on a main street correct is
uderstandablewhonitis appnrent hevasnot her tihere ninself to readthe numbers
of the builaingscud Ctoplncll&Un ich:atrtrcta.
And this is hiseiky one pretondedly factual critioism of all my six boolks, thestandablewhonitis appnrent hevasnot her tihere ninself to readthe numbers
of the builaingscud Ctoplncll&Un ich:atrtrcta.
And this is hiseiky one pretondedly factual critioism of all my six boolks, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---pnrent hevasnot her tihere ninself to readthe numbers
of the builaingscud Ctoplncll&Un ich:atrtrcta.
And this is hiseiky one pretondedly factual critioism of all my six boolks, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
otlers being misrepresentations contrived to defane mo for ny "openness," mylgenerosity!
and for %graciourly rcceiving " lhin and his wife for several dayse
of intent and cxocution I have li:ited nyself to ovort literary thoa thieverybecause it
ttem
was so eaoy for tlue nodia to] le.rn and report itif not by the simplest of obvmous
chocking, fron those vho didl liave tho lpo.ledge. Instead of tronting Posner and his
4stot 4e Aq 6op ATTreuo4sno suoonpo.td pue sronotaou (gialrodou quoqodvioo se yooq
the simplest choclinc, all fell all. over thoielves in making a hero of lim and in
spreading lhis corrupt and dishonest bool throughout the vorld,to deceive and mislcad
and to confuse oven more pcoplo about tiat most subversuve of crimes in a Bociety like
ours，the assassination of a President.
Is it -and-et it be nore coincides that this has the Sllast of covering the
media for its oum failuros at tho timo of thet tragic grcat subversion and ever since
tlhen, Thc media tlat nover couducted auy rral inquiry of its owm, accepted w.thout
question thn: obviously unacceptable, incredlible officiaa "solution" and then and since
tiehas sought to convince the poplo that vhat canuot be accepted is true and
shouldbeacceptedt
Of all,the lundreds of reporters, reviewers and producers involved insmbaz
almaTMirene.
what was thd glorification of a liar, ä shyster and a literary thief,not-one
thought to do the most elemental of normal checking in the interest of their own i
professional repultations or the reputations of theie wzporturs enmp media employersl ①
When losner and lis publisher said that his account of Osvald as thebornytosbe
Luhat
assassin is so basic, not one thought to check vas Josnor said Hartogs said to see if
he had that corroctly? iat one thought to look Hartogs up in thcir morguesqof clippings?
f1
Not onc remernberod tuatber ascociation "mock trial" also reflected in xukx
their norgues? r sau it on thc cable court channel, wlere Posner lcarned about it?
Mot oie of those vlho Ksote about that "mocl trial" or saw it on the cable court
cheinel though of vriting s story after roading or lourning about Posneras cribbing
of it and passing it off asvo:l he"commissloned"?se vlho Ksote about that "mocl trial" or saw it on the cable court
cheinel though of vriting s story after roading or lourning about Posneras cribbing
of it and passing it off asvo:l he"commissloned"?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
Not one asirl thosc of us vilified by Posnor to conment on what hevrote?
Not on: thought to (consult liea.her's boak on rcading Posner's utterly dishonest,
untrue and unfactual attacl on her and tlirc qulted part or her book then doing that vould
have exposed Posnor as tlhc liar vio so‘totally misrepresetted the sworn "artogs
hetpceiug
testimonyathio first requironent of liis media-crcated trip to fame and wealth?
Not one asled his publisior to sce ey peer reviev, the norm in publishing contro-
versial of suposed nonfiction, which would have disclosed that Randon Muhxw
rousehad none?lot a logitinnteone in any event。
Especially when tlho excepthonaluiuportance of a Presi lential assassination and
its official inveatigations aro consitlered,in the entire coumtry,not a single person
in any of tve major modia thought to do what is noxmal, nake at tho lcast a perfunctory
lctatio/
check before going apc over zhcleqrly most dishonest of all tho many books on the
subject!
Instead tlhoy glorified two fruus, Posper and his lvouingly mlistitled book.
do lcast a perfunctory
lctatio/
check before going apc over zhcleqrly most dishonest of all tho many books on the
subject!
Instead tlhoy glorified two fruus, Posper and his lvouingly mlistitled book.
d

vhich is so fundamental to the ability of our socioty to worl as it is intended to work,
based on an informed clcctyoate, when on so vital a subject as what has tho effect of
Q coup d'otat tho edia So thoroughly abandons its responsibilities?
Particularly vitl all tlie sorious problens our country faces and for some years has
faced, vlat is tli: state of our suexz our nation vhen the indispensible media has·so
totally failed itsolf andthe rest ofus?
Does not its virtually total glorification of Posner and his book tell us?
Pcrhaps a bit de tr?p,but I think not in adding a little percoptive to this self-
ansuering quention is vhat tr: tho bost of my lmowledgo vas greeted witli total silence
Jerenber20,1993
by this sano riajor nodia, a "Coumentary",tho Ycading on a coltuan-in-th/Jey York Obsergr
A
by liicholas vou Hoffnan.That vas shovtly aftor tho 3oth annivorsary of that assassination。
"Kenmedy o.es as tuch to his: lkillor as to hi: father and his father's money," Hoffman
vrote。" Vitvut Loo Harvey O....ld, J.r.K. vould gust be another nondoscript ono--term
President."