Harvard Documents on Sacco-Vanzetti Case
May Fuel Controversy on Fairness Issue
27177
By Stacy Jolna
Instead,the papers throw suspicion
hismind of this case andis ina dis
WashingtonPost StaffWrlters
on the objectivityof theNewEngland
tinctly nervous condition."
CAMBRIDGE,Mass.--Documents
Yankee author of the report,which
In a letter to Gov.Fuller dated
released by Harvard University today.

some Sacco-Vanzetti supporters.have
Sept.9,1927,Lowell advocated amore
on the Sacco-Vanzetti murder case
claimed merely lends “respectability
thorough investigation,but he put a
may fuel controversy over the fair-
toadiscredited trial".and which
furthershadow over thecommission's
nessofa1927commissionreport that
movedone journalist at the time to
credibility by stating such a probe
sealedthefateof the two anarchist
calltheuniversity“Hangman's
would have taken too long.

Italian immigrants.

House."
“Areportexamining theobjectivity
The private papers of former Har-
The commission,headed by Lowell
andreviewing the evidence indetail
vard President Abbott LawrenceLo-
was setup by the governor toreview
would have required a request fora
well, who headed a governor's advi-
the courts'findings and determine if
.reprieve'ofamonthorsixweeks
sory commission that recommended
Sacco andVanzetti hadreceived afair
whilethe committeewas preparing
the execution of Nicola Sacco and
trial.Rejecting defense claims ofprej-
thereport,”Lowell wrote,“and thatis
BartolomeoVanzetti,indicate hemay
udice on thepartof thejudge and the
thevery thing ofwhich there has
have written his-conclusions before
jury foreman,misleading testimony
been toomuch of in thepast.

hearing full testimony from the de-
about ballistics tests and conflicting
Lowellstatedinhislettertothe
fense.

descriptions by eyewitnesses,it con-
governor that after he turned in the
Initial drafts ofthe commissionre-
cluded theyhadreceivedafairtrial.hearing full testimony from the de-
about ballistics tests and conflicting
Lowellstatedinhislettertothe
fense.

descriptions by eyewitnesses,it con-
governor that after he turned in the
Initial drafts ofthe commissionre-
cluded theyhadreceivedafairtrial.

reporthe received manyrequests to
The first draft of the commission
recommend commuatation of Sacco's
port further revealed possible preju-
reportisdated July 20,1927,five days
and Vanzetti's sentences,“but Ipaid
dice byLowell in his attacks on the
before historians say the commission
no attention to them...becauseI
credibilityofadefenseattorneyand
heard defense arguments.

A second
thinkyou were perfectlyright inref
and such generalizations as,“Italians,
draftisdated the same,butiscrossed
using the commutation which.would
have kept the agitation for a pardon
particularly those who get into crimi-
outand thedateJuly27iswritten in.

nal difficulties,commonlycarry
Thatis the date the final report was
open indefinitely.

“Justice has been done,as it should
revolvers..".

issued to then-Massachusetts governor
Alvan T.Fuller.

be,and I admire the courage with
Thedraftsandcorrespondence
Harvard officials said they could
which you have acted."
from April:1927 through 1939 were
partof1,500pages ofLowell'sprivatenotexplain thedatesandwouldoffer
papers that had been donated to Har-
no immediate analysis of the papers.

vard,sealed and locked in the Univer-
InLowell's first draft,later stricken
sity archieves..

from the final report,he writes that
Theelectrocutions.of Sacco and
defense attorney William G.

Thomp
Vanzetti at Boston's Charlestown
son“seemed so obsessed with the idea
State Prison the:night of Aug.from the final report,he writes that
Theelectrocutions.of Sacco and
defense attorney William G. Thomp
Vanzetti at Boston's Charlestown
son“seemed so obsessed with the idea
State Prison the:night of Aug. 23,
ofthe defendants'innocence thathe
1927,spurred worldwide bombings,ri-
had become unable to state the facts
ots and demonstrations over claims
or quoteevidence accurately;that to
the pairhadbeenvictimsofprejudice
him,a suspicion, however improper,
against foreigners and a national,cli-
rapidly turned into a fact."
mate of political intolerance:
Lowell,then 70,served on the com-
Though the Lowell papers'may add
mission with former state probate
to the controversy,they fail to resolve
judge RobertGrant and the thenpres-. historians'uncertainty over whether
identof the Massachusetts Institute
Sacco and Vanzetti actually killed a
of Technology, Samuel Stratton.Lo-
shoe factory paymaster and his guard
well conceded inhis initial draft that
in the old Massachusetts mill town of the trial judge “has become so ob-
Brockton in 1920. sessed with the.constantpresencein