BEM
FIRST NATIONAL MEETING
STATLER HILTON HOTEL
WASHINGTON,D.C.
SEPTEMBER 27,1967
BUSINESS EXECUTIVES
V

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS
BUSINESS EXECUTIVES MOVE FOR VIETNAM PEACE
Text Of Remarks By The Co-Chairmen
And
The Honorable Thruston B.Morton
United States Senator,Kentucky
Rear Admiral Arnold E.True
United States Navy,Retired
His Excellency Tran Van Dinh
Former South Vietnamese Ambassador to the United States
The Honorable Marriner S.Eccles
Former Chairman,Federal Reserve Board
And A Message From
Brigadier General Samuel D. Griffith, II
United States Marine Corps,Retired
Data About The Speakers
First National Meeting
Statler Hilton Hotel
Washington, D.C.
September 27,1967
Address Communications To
BUSINESS EXECJTIVES MOVE FOR VIETNAM PEACE
Henry E. Niles, Co-Chairman
Harold Willens,Co-Chairman
901 N.Howard Street
or
800 W.Pico Boulevard
Baltimore,Maryland 2l201
Los Angeles, California 90015

--- PAGE BREAK ---VES MOVE FOR VIETNAM PEACE
Henry E. Niles, Co-Chairman
Harold Willens,Co-Chairman
901 N.Howard Street
or
800 W.Pico Boulevard
Baltimore,Maryland 2l201
Los Angeles, California 90015

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ORGANIZING CONFERENCEAT
STATLER HILTON HOTEL,WASHINGTON,D.C.
SEPTEMBER 27，1967
HENRY E.NILES,CO_CHAIRMAN
BUSINESS EXECUTIVES MOVE FOR VIETNAM PEACE
Good morning!I am Henry Niles,Co-Chairman from Balti-
more.* Beside me is Harold Willens, Co-Chairman from Los
Angeles. Welcone to the kick-off meeting of BUSINESS EXECUTIvES
MOVE FOR VIETNAM PEACE.
This organization consists exclusively of business execu-
tives opposed to the war in Vietnam.We feel that the risks we
to any possible gain for the South Vietnamese,for the United
States or for the world。
As business executives we must be flexible in meeting
conditionswhich often turnout tobequite different from
what we had expected. When our strategy does not work, we
change it -- or go bankrupt.Our government's strategy in
Vietnam is not working well. We urge that it be changed.
BUSINESS EXECUTIVES MOVE FOR VIETNAM PEACE urges the Pres-
ident to stop the bombing of North Vietnam, de-escalate the war,
negotiate with all parties which are now fighting, bring to an
end American military participation,and effect the earliest
possible return of American troops. We support the Geneva
Agreements of 1954.
BUSINESS EXECUTIVES MOVE FOR VIETNAM PEACE'S obJectiVeS
are:
1.To press for practical steps toward ending American
participation in the Vietnam War.
2. To use the business community's influence in expand-
ing public support for disengagement.
* Affiliations are given for identification only. Mr. Niles
is Chairman of the Board, Baltimore Life Insurance Company,
Baltimore, Maryland. Mr.Willens is President, Factory Equip-
ment and Supply Company, Los Angeles, California.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Niles
is Chairman of the Board, Baltimore Life Insurance Company,
Baltimore, Maryland. Mr.Willens is President, Factory Equip-
ment and Supply Company, Los Angeles, California.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3. To emphasize the war'g adverse effect on our economy.
As soon as those objectives are reached we intend to dis-
band -- and not before.
w.~An Open Letter toPresident Johnson protesting the esca-
lation of the war in Vietnam,signed by 305 business executives
was published in the New York Times on May 28,1967. Since
then, almost four hundred more executives have signed. Three-
quarters of these indicated that they were interested in the
formation of abusiness executives group opposed to the war.
BM is the result.
Weneed vision to see the desired goals of peace and se-
curity and the practical realism to see the obstacles which
must be overcome.It's an age in which distances are over-
come.An airplane leaving India early in the morning reaches
New York before dinner time that night. Or, you can get on a
plane in Hongkong early one morning and reach Los Angeles the
night before you started.
It's an age in which communication is almost instanta-
neous and TV carries pictures of the healthy and wealthy to the
starvingand thedowntrodden.
It's an age in which population is growing faster than food
production.
It's an age in which nuclear weapons are now in position
and ready tobe fired towipe out vastnumbersof humansand
them.
It's also an age in which science gives us the possibil-
ities of overcoming hunger and want and in which the deeper
insight of men of all religions give us the challenge to de-
velop human brotherhood throughout the world, which, in the
long run,may be our only defense.
But today our focus is upon Vietnam.We needachange of
strategy.Our speakers will emphasize that the idea of total
victory isan illusion;that weare notletting our boys down
whenwework to prevent theAdministrationfromsending themto
do the job that Asian boys should do";that most of the South
having an adverse effect upon our economy.
4;that weare notletting our boys down
whenwework to prevent theAdministrationfromsending themto
do the job that Asian boys should do";that most of the South
having an adverse effect upon our economy.
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng our boys down
whenwework to prevent theAdministrationfromsending themto
do the job that Asian boys should do";that most of the South
having an adverse effect upon our economy.
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HAROLDWILIENS,CO-CHAIRMAN
BUSINESS BXECUTIVES MOVE FOR VIETNAM PRACE
It has become fashionable to poke fun at Secretary
McNamara for his involvement with the Edsel fiasco.The fun-
pokers miss the real point。
Once it was clear the highly-paid experts who designed the
Edsel had erred (as all humans can), McNamara and his associates
faced reality, reversed their course, took the financial loss,
then led the company on to better and bigger things.If they
had stubbornly refused to believe they could be wrong, the mis-
take would have been compounded from a loss of money to the
death of a great corporation.
Among the top decision-makers responsible for Vietnan
policy, McNanara is the only man with a business background,
to my knowledge. That probably ezplains his being the only
one with the guss to admit that a policy for which he was
partly responsible, hasn't worked. He did exactly that, when
recently telling the Senate Preparedness Subcommittee that
Hanoi could not be bombed to the negotiating table,even
though that objective was & primary reason justifying the de-
cision to bomb North Vietnam.
I do not imply that men from the business world are bless-
ed with superior wisdom or capability.But they have one thing
going for them which political and military people seem to lack,
and right now it isbadly needed to get us out ofadilemma
which is tearing our nation apart, and which could result in
senseless world conflagration.
What businessmen have going for them, as indicated by
Ford's decision to chuck the Edsel and McNamara's candor re-
garding the foolish drean that we can bomb our vay out of the
Vietnam morass -- is self-honesty. Businessmen cannot afford
the luxury of self-deception,because they are put to the
daily competitive test of the market place, or its equivalent.
If they kid themselves about the wisdom of a decision, objec-
tive reality vill quickly jar them out of tneir self-delusion.
The business man who can't say "I may have been wrong, who
lacks pragmatic flexibility.either fails to make it or gets
dragged out of his office as was (literally) Montgomery Ward's
Sewell Avery.
What does all this have to do with Vietnam? Bverything.
Ibelieve。
5s pragmatic flexibility.either fails to make it or gets
dragged out of his office as was (literally) Montgomery Ward's
Sewell Avery.
What does all this have to do with Vietnam? Bverything.
Ibelieve。
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---ity.either fails to make it or gets
dragged out of his office as was (literally) Montgomery Ward's
Sewell Avery.
What does all this have to do with Vietnam? Bverything.
Ibelieve。
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The stated objective is negotiated settlement.The
policy has been escalation. The bombing of the North began
31 months ago. Here's where we stand today:
1.The Nortn to South troop and material flow (the second
objective of the bombing) has not been significantly curtailed.
2.American casualties now exceed those of the South
Vietnamese and the gap is growing.
3.In the last eight and one-half months our casualties
were greater than those of the past six years com-
bined。
Despite these astonishing facts, political and military
leaders blindly clutch at the hope that more of the same will
somehow achieve the negotiated settlement we want.Business-
mon wouldn't, couldn't do that. Their orientation is such
that when one policy has been tried and hasn't done the job,
another replaces it. In this case, de-oscalation is the ob-
vious alternative.There is much to be said for trying it
without having to guarantee success. Even a reasonable chance
ofsuccess makes more sense than the mindless paralysis of
clinging to that which has clearly failed.
Ag important stockholders in the great American dream,
businessmen owe it to themselves and the nation which gives
them so mmch,to speak forth at this critical cross-road in
our history. They know, and all Americans know, that the
fundamental principles of business decision-making have con-
tributed much to the progress and enrichment of our country.
Why, then, should these same useful principles not be made part
of the policy decisions relating to the costly and dangerous
Vietnam problem
If business executives become actively involvsd and make
their voices heard,they will be engaging in the highest form
of patriotism,as well as admirable self-interest. If,on
the other hand they cop out when their fellow citizens most
need their leadership,American businessmen will have fully
deserved the probably dire consequences of their failure to
act when there was still time to do so.
6cop out when their fellow citizens most
need their leadership,American businessmen will have fully
deserved the probably dire consequences of their failure to
act when there was still time to do so.
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---ellow citizens most
need their leadership,American businessmen will have fully
deserved the probably dire consequences of their failure to
act when there was still time to do so.
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE HONORABLE THRUSTON B.MORTON
UNITED STATES SENATOR FROM KENTUCKY
WASHINGTON,D.C.
The last three years have witnessed a disastrous decline
of the trouble is the bankruptcy of our position in Vietnam.
The ramifications of the tragic decision to commit United
States forces in strength to an Asien ground war are everywhere
evident.A crisis of confidence and credibility threatens to
undermine the nation's hopes for economic and social progress
here at home. Around the world, American principles and pro~
grams are suspect, by friend and foe alike.
The Americanization of the conflict in Vietnam has creat-
eda kind of myopiathat prevents the Administrationfrom ef-
fectively coping with major problems elsewhere.Tne number one
accord with the Soviet Union.
The world's two mightiest powers have no alternative to
developing a set of ground rules that will prevent holocaust,
and permit peeceful progress,however bitterly competitive。
Vietnam stands in the way!
In Europe, a revolution of independence challenges Amer-
ican initiative,but Vietnam stands in the way.In Latin
America a revolution of rising populations and rising expec-
tations threatens the future of our own continent. More imag-
our national interest -- but Vietnam stsnds in the way.
On the domestic front, apyrehension and misunderstending
of our involvement in Southeast Asia are contributing to a
dangerous political polarization.Extremists of the left and
right are poised to destroy our basic social fabric,while men
of reason are reduced to answering "after Vietnam!n
How did ve reach this impasse? And where do we go from
here?
Presiaent Eisenhower warned in his "Farewell Aaaress" of
the dangers of too much power and too much influence in the
hands of a'military-inaustrial complex'.Ibelieve thst
as l96l when,as Vice President,he ventured to Saigon on &
7his "Farewell Aaaress" of
the dangers of too much power and too much influence in the
hands of a'military-inaustrial complex'.Ibelieve thst
as l96l when,as Vice President,he ventured to Saigon on &
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---ss" of
the dangers of too much power and too much influence in the
hands of a'military-inaustrial complex'.Ibelieve thst
as l96l when,as Vice President,he ventured to Saigon on &
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fact-finding mission.I believe he has been mistakenly commit-
ted to a military solution in Vietnam for the past five years --
with only a brief pause during the election campaign of 1964 to
brainwash the American people with 'the war in Vietnam ought to
be fought by Asian boys.!
If the President of the United States has been mistaken,
so have I. In early 1965 when the President began to escalate
the war,I supported the increased American military involve-
ment. I was wrong!
While I believed then that we should not telegraph our
punches, as the President's program of gradual or phased step-
up clearly did,I have grave doubts today that any military
action,then or now,would have decisively influenced the con-
flict.
The basic mistake of the Administration has been its fail-
in Vietnam.And the basic but overwhelming reality in Vietnam
today is that a political victory may well be out of reach.
Iam convinced that further military escalation and an
additionalUnited States militarycommitmentwillnotobtain
our objectives of peace in Vietnam.I am convinced that un-
less we gradually and,if necessary,unilaterally reduce the
scope of our military involvement we may well destroy the very
societywesoughttosave.
The President has said the war 'is worth the price.!
There is absolutely no indication that theVietnamese agree。
They want peace perioa!
We face a clear dilemma.Can we accomplish in Vietnam the
limited objective we want and, at the same time, provide the
Vietnamese with the security they want? The simple brutal truth
is:No!
Therefore,we must decide -- without delay -- on a course
ofpolitical and diplomatic action thatoffers some hope of
settlement。We must make itcrystal clear to the American
people that there is no military solution in Vietnam. We
must put an immediate ceiling on further U.S.military action
and open up every possible avenue toward negotiations.
None of our options will be painless,but who would claim
that present policies have been without pain。
8e ceiling on further U.S.military action
and open up every possible avenue toward negotiations.
None of our options will be painless,but who would claim
that present policies have been without pain。
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---U.S.military action
and open up every possible avenue toward negotiations.
None of our options will be painless,but who would claim
that present policies have been without pain。
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

None of our options will be cheap,but who would claim
that present policies have not been costly.
There have been alternatives offered before that have
been rejected out of hand as too painful and too dear.But in
retrospect,these lost opportunities have looked like bargains
once the chances to take advantage. of them have passed us by.
I believe it would be a national,and indeed an inter-
national,tragedy if the Administration permits any further
suggestions for an end to the war to pass by unexamined and
unexplored.
With absolutely no claims to expertise or originality.I
believe the United States should consider the following:
1.An immediate cessation of all bombing of North Vietnam.
Ido not share,at this time,the concern of many that missions
vention。I do not question the effectiveness of the bombing of
theNorth upon the war in the South.I believe that an indefi-
nite bombing halt just might encourage Hanoi to talk,and I
believe we must give it a try.
2.An end to all search and destroy missions. The price
has not been worth the accomplishments.And the price every-
day goes up.Furthermore,the cost in civilian casualties and
disruptions onlyaddstothegrowing disaffectionoftheViet-
namese population toward their American 'saviors.!
3.A gradual concentration of effort to secure the coast-
ity of the people live..This can and must be accomplished with
a substantial reduction in American troop strength. The 'over-
presense' of our forces has contributed to a mounting tide of
anti-Americanism among the Vietnamese populace.
4.Increased pressure upon the Saigon government to nego-
tiate and to institute widespread reform.The only hope for
any form of representative government or any kind ofcivil
order lies basically with the Vietnamese and their leaders --
the present regime and the NLF. We can encourage reform, but
we cannot impose a military occupation or & colonial govern-
ment。
5.An internal and regional settlement.The thrust to-
ward negotiations, toward a cease-fire, and toward a long
range solution to the conflict that has torn the entire Indo-
9& colonial govern-
ment。
5.An internal and regional settlement.The thrust to-
ward negotiations, toward a cease-fire, and toward a long
range solution to the conflict that has torn the entire Indo-
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---ment。
5.An internal and regional settlement.The thrust to-
ward negotiations, toward a cease-fire, and toward a long
range solution to the conflict that has torn the entire Indo-
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chinese peninsula:asunder for a generation has tobe initiated
locally.A climate for talks:between South Vietnamese and
South Vietnamese, between North and South, between Laos, Cam-
bodia, North and South Vietnam and Thailand, between the free,
neutral and Comrunist nations of Asia, must be developed by
Asians themselves.We must do more to encouragethem.
I devoutly wish that the United Nations had the will snd
the wherewithall to accomplish this task,but such is unfor-
tunately not the case.It is apparent that a return to Geneva
is probably out of the question.Perhaps there is still hope
that a regional or All-Asian peace conference,without outside
involvement,could set the stage for meaningful local initiative
toward peace and progress.
6.The Administration should precisely state to Hanoi and
the world that our unilateral disengagement seeks an appropriate
will takethe first steps dowm thelong andtortuous road to-
ward peace in Vietnam, we pray for an equally pee.ceful response.
Let there be no doubt upon whose shoulders will lie the re-
sponsibility for continued chaos and devastation,should our
efforts fail.
QUESTIONSANDANSWERS
Question: What is the Government'g latest position on having
the Viet Cong in the negotiation?
Senator Morton:I understand from some of my former colleagues
in theDepartment ofState thatwe are willing in anegotiation
to have the Viet Cong there.In fact,a negotiation would be
meaningless without them because you have two wars:the civil
war and the war between the North and South.Our role in a
parties should be the Viet Cong and the South Vietnamese Gov-
ernment in Saigon and the North Vietnamese Government in Hanoi。
Question: From your remarks I feel tnat if the North Vietnam-
ese do not accept some sort of conditions the results are going
to be frightful。 Are you in favor of ceasing the bombing in-
ditions?
Senator Morton: Our involvement is complex. I personally
feel that our western defense perimeter, as outlined by Gen-
eral Eisenhower and the late John Foster Dulles,is an island
chain in the Pacific.That doesn't mean we don't have re-
10plex. I personally
feel that our western defense perimeter, as outlined by Gen-
eral Eisenhower and the late John Foster Dulles,is an island
chain in the Pacific.That doesn't mean we don't have re-
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---eel that our western defense perimeter, as outlined by Gen-
eral Eisenhower and the late John Foster Dulles,is an island
chain in the Pacific.That doesn't mean we don't have re-
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sponsibilities in other parts of the world. Partially with
my urging, and I admitted my mistake, we have gotten so heav-
ily involved we can't send an armada over there and then just
pull out. That won't bring about negotiations.
Question: Do you stand behind General Gavin's theory?
Senator Morton: I think General Gavin and I are in agree-
ment overall but not necessarily in detail. In his position,
the enclaves are mostly along the seacoast. I want to see us
quit this hunt and destroy business and try to secure the
live. This is not necessarily along the seacoast but includes
Saigon and so forth.
Question:Would you comment on what effect the war in Vietnam
is having on our economy in the U.s.?
Senator Morton: You businessmen know & lot more about this
than I do!I don'tthinkit is havingtoo much effecton the
economy. I do think it is preventing us from doing things
that we have to do in certain areas. I don't kmow the actual
tie-in between Detroit and Newark witn Vietnam, but in the
minds of the public there is & psychological association.
We are spending two and one-half billion dollars a month in
Vietnam and we hear that for a billion dollars & year we might
haveprevented such a riot。
No war is popular, but this is an unpopalar war. In the
Korean situation we gave President Truman all kinds of standby
powers and he used many of them. We raised excise and income
taxes; the people in this country felt that war.Here we have
a civil war behind us and a fighting war in front of us. Yet
everyone of you are doing fine, making money, doing just about
as well as you have ever done. No one feels this war unless he
has a loved one there. The families of the half million men
over there of course feel this war.I have talked to many who
have lost loved ones there and it is & harrowing experience.
In the last three months a change has come over this
country; a feeling of frustration about this war.I can only
iation between the troubles we have had in the urban areas and
the price we are paying for this war; and (2) Secretary Fowler
is on Capitol Hill everyday asking for a l0% tax raise.
11war.I can only
iation between the troubles we have had in the urban areas and
the price we are paying for this war; and (2) Secretary Fowler
is on Capitol Hill everyday asking for a l0% tax raise.
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---on between the troubles we have had in the urban areas and
the price we are paying for this war; and (2) Secretary Fowler
is on Capitol Hill everyday asking for a l0% tax raise.
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question:What is the temper of Congress on permitting free
and open debate and especially on reasserting its perogatives
on foreign policy? You see how quickly the Senate establish-
ment took on Senator Case when he criticized tne Presidents
policy in Vietnam.
Senator Morton: There is a lot of free and open debate in
the Senate. Clifford Case spoke out with a motive of patri-
otism and complete sincerity.Idon't tnink the establish-
ment jumping on him should be taken too seriously. You vote
with the majority and you are in the establishment, and the
next day you vote the other way and you are not in the es-
tablishment。
With regard to Congress reasserting its role in the
field of foreign affairs,constitutionally what is it? In
the House of Representatives until lend-lease came along in
the late 1938-39 no one wanted to be on the Foreign Affairs
Committee. How, next to the Appropriations and Ways and
Means Committees it is the most sougnt after committee in
the House. Appropriations implements much of our foreign
policy。
The Senate'g role in foreign affairs has been neg-
ative. We could turn down a treaty or we could refuse to
confirm a Secretary of State or an Ambassador. I suppose
the most historical example is when the Senate turned down
President Wilson's League of Nations treaty.But today be-
cause we are engaged in programs affecting foreign policy that
requires funding,tne role of the Congress is somewhat changed.
Basically, foreign policy is still much up to the President.
Many of us disagree vith the President on the conduct of the
war in Vietnam. When the appropriation bill came up I got
letters saying. nWhy don't you make your opposition manifest
by voting against the 'defense appropriation bill'?w Three
members of tne Senate did vote against that bill but I can't.
We have half a million men in Vietnam.I feel it is not their
fault that they are there.Surely I am not going to vote in
a demagogic way to reduce or restrict the support of those men.
I think this goes for the Congress by and large.In'thig
country you have got to have cooperation between these two
great branches of Government, the Administration and Legis-
lative, to get anywhere. The only way you are going to cut
expenses is when the two team up together and try to do it.
Question:If the Administration continues to ignore us and
go on the same way, what do you envision is likely to happen?
12are going to cut
expenses is when the two team up together and try to do it.
Question:If the Administration continues to ignore us and
go on the same way, what do you envision is likely to happen?
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Senator Morton: I think the Administration is going to re-
spond. If not, the American people will speak out through
theballotbox.
Question:Howard Tucker recently reported that the Viet-
namese, both North and South, are tired of war and want peace
regardless ofwhether they have a Communist or democratic
form of government. If the elections were held at this time,
Ho Cni Minh would win tne election and he is still the nation-
al popular leader of the country.General Eisenhower thought
Ho Chi Minh would have won in an election of 195b.Tucker
said tne Viet Cong controls seventy-five percentof thereal
estate in South Vietnam and also the NLF is composed mainly
of the South Vietnamese rather than the Ncrth.If Tuckerg
statements are true, are we not supporting a minority in
Vietnam and if so,why must we spend more billions there
whenwehave&minorityathome?
Senator Morton: Althougn I don't know exactly, Mr. Tucker's
figures of seventy-five percent,perhaps eighty percent,of
tne area,are reasonably correct.Even though Ho Chi Minh is
a Communist--he is（trained in Moscow),and a dictator--he
to the negotiating table when bombs are bursting within sight
of hundreas of thousands in Hanoi and Haiphong.Do you know
that he is considered the George Washington of his country in
theminds of many South Vietnamese as well as NorthViet-
namese? He fought the Japanese in the occupation. He
fought the French,and here we are in the same position.
The only tning thet is saving us from being considered just
as colonial as the French is that we have twenty percent
Negro troops there。
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---ch,and here we are in the same position.
The only tning thet is saving us from being considered just
as colonial as the French is that we have twenty percent
Negro troops there。
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

REAR ADMIRAL ARNOLD E.TRUE,UNITED STATES NAVY,RETIRED
PROFESSOROFMETEOROLOGY
SAN JOSE STATE COLLEGE
LA HONDA,CALIFORNIA
Like Senator Morton,I am another of those Kentucky hill-
billies. In 1917 they put shoes'on me and sent me to the Naval
Academy. There I took an oath to support and defend the Con-
stitution of the United States against all enemies,foreign and
domestic.I consider that this oath is still binding cnd that
is one of the reasons I am here todey.
I would like to speak very briefly about the eaucation of
the public of the United States about this Vietnam War,-- in
fact,about our foreign policy as a whole,because I think that
the Vietnam War is only one part and there are many Vietnams
in the world.There are going to be some shortly in South Amer-
ica.There will be others in Southeast Asia and various other
parts of the vorld, including Africa.Unless we get a change
in our foreign policy there will be one Vietnam after another.
While our immediate aim is to take care of this war,it is also
important to direct our foreign policy so as to avoid rein-
volvement in a lot of future Vietnams.The public until very
recent months has supported this war because it is the habit of
the citizens of the United States to support their government,
their President, and their Secretary of State under the assump-
tion that they have the facts and they kmow best.
If one examines the situation closely,one finds a tre-
mendous variation between the slogans and the facts,between
wha.t we say and what we do.Alan Payton,writing in the
Saturday Review,said that men can create tremendous noble
slogans and shout them alcud while at the same time doing ig-
noble actions; the more ignoble the actions the louder the
shouts of the noble slogans.This war has been conducted a
great deal on the basis of slogans.A long time ago Thomas
Jerferson said the fate of democra.tic government hangs on the
perilous hope that its citizens can and will think for them-
selves. This group I think is doing so. There are still many
citizenswho need tobe educated and needtobeasked tothink
for thenselves on the basis of facts and not slogans.
One of our first slogans is "commitment." We hear again
anc again that ve have a coamitment in Vietnam.The Consti-
tution prcviGes thet foreign relations shall be conducted by
the Executive department of the Government vith the aavice
snd consent of the Senate.I crn find no record that thet in Vietnam.The Consti-
tution prcviGes thet foreign relations shall be conducted by
the Executive department of the Government vith the aavice
snd consent of the Senate.I crn find no record that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---sti-
tution prcviGes thet foreign relations shall be conducted by
the Executive department of the Government vith the aavice
snd consent of the Senate.I crn find no record that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Senate has ever advised or consented to the Vietnam War or to
our involvement in it.At the same timeIdo finda record
that theSenatehesconsentedand approved our adherence tothe
charter of the United Nations but this Vietnam involvement is &
violation of thatcharter.
Another slogan is our commitment to the "free world," that
we fight to support the free world against the world in slavery.
If you examine sone of the free world that we support,you can
find that one example is Greece,which seems to be occupied now
by a tight military dictatorship.Another example of the free
world is Taiwan.I was in Taiwan fairly recently.Every third
man is in the secret police for one of the tightest dictator-
ships that I have ever seen.I doubt if Mao Tse Tung's dicta-
torship in Red China is eny tighter than the dictatorship of
Chiang Kai Shek in Taiwan. In Thailand we again talk about the
"free world." Thailand is another military dictatorship. So
is Haiti.I could go on and on.Please examine these examples
of the "free world" that ve are supporting.They are perhaps
non-Communist.That is about ss fer as our inquiry into the
freedongoes.
Another slogan is that our national honor" is involved
in Vietnam.In an editorial in the Seturday Evening Post,
Norman Cousins said the President is indeed right when he says
that our national honor is at stake in Vietnan, because things
are being done in Vietnzm that are dishonorable and inconsist-
ent with the neaning of American history.
Another slogan is that this war is necessury to our
fight the Communists there or we will fight them here.This is
a complete mythology.  Can anyone envision Ho Chi Minh bring-
ing his two or three little junlks and torpedoboats to attack
the coest of the United States?Or even China for that matter?
Chine has no navy, nor an effective air force as yet -- this is
not to say vhat she will have in the future.There is certain-
ly no stake of national security. We heer that if Vietnam falls,
according to the domino theory,all of Southeast Asia will fall
and then the Philippines and Indonesia,and then kustralia and
New Zealand.There is cbsolutely no evidence to back up this
assumption.If any Communist nation ever tries to attack Aus-
tralia or New Zealand, they must do it across vater,where the
United Ststes Navy and United StatesAir Force can be complete-
the conceivable future.I can't say whet will happen seventy-
five or even fifty years from now.Perhaps then China will have
a navy that could cross the ocean and, as Tine lagazine says,
15e complete-
the conceivable future.I can't say whet will happen seventy-
five or even fifty years from now.Perhaps then China will have
a navy that could cross the ocean and, as Tine lagazine says,
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---eivable future.I can't say whet will happen seventy-
five or even fifty years from now.Perhaps then China will have
a navy that could cross the ocean and, as Tine lagazine says,
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---

turn the Pacific into a Chinese or Red lake.But this is far
in the future.I sometimes doubt if the future will extend
thatfar.
Another slogan is the urevention of a bigger war.You
don't prevent a bisger war by engaging in a bigger war. The
things we are doing now are leading directly into a bigger war.
We are dropping bombs on the border of China.While a great
many euthorities think there is no chance of Chinese interven-
ticn I am not so sure.A great many authorities thought that
China would not intervene in Korez.Yet China intervened in
Korea. under circumstances far less favorable than exist now for
her intervention in Vietnam.They have 2lready offered --I
believe sincerely -- to send troops to aid North Vietnam. Up
tocate Ho Chi Minhhes turned them down because the Chinese
are traciticnal enemies of the North Vietnemese and Ho Chi Minh
does not want the Chinese any more than he wants us there.But
before we can gain a military victory, before North Vietnan will
fold up, the Chinese will come over. That would be my predic-
tion.They say the reason China won't come is because they are
having internal troubles.Thet is quite true.But as you know
dictators have often found that you can help internal troubles
and you can unite your people by engaging in a. foreign war.
Consequently our giving opportunities for Chinese intervention
night do the very thing that we don't want,nanely to heal all
the internzl troubles in China and unite the Chinese in a holy
war against the United States.If this occurs then our half
million troops in South. Vietnam will be in real trouble.Now
we have more or less a master hand.But suppose thct a million
of the Vietnanese,which are not inconsiderable,there is the
possibility of a tremendous massacre or a Dunkirk.We couldn't
nese army plus their ten million militiamen.So these ere the
chanceswe are taking.
We neglect the fact that Russia's commitments to support
Morth Vietnam are just as strong as our commitments to South
Vietnan, if not stronger. Russia is giving support to an in-
creasing extent. Kosygin has just said that as we escale.te he
vill escalate his support.Sowe 2re led on and on to this
bigcer war we cre trying to prevent.
Another slogan is the containment of China.When you
2 pretty good-sized job.We have China contained to a certain
extent in that we have bases in Korea,Jepan, Okinawa, the
Philippines, and Taiwan. To a great extent China is contained
16f China.When you
2 pretty good-sized job.We have China contained to a certain
extent in that we have bases in Korea,Jepan, Okinawa, the
Philippines, and Taiwan. To a great extent China is contained
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---retty good-sized job.We have China contained to a certain
extent in that we have bases in Korea,Jepan, Okinawa, the
Philippines, and Taiwan. To a great extent China is contained
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as far as her expansion beyond her borders is concerned.The
necessity of this containment might be questioned in that there
is not one single combatant Chinese solaier on foreign soil.
They do have a few labor troops in North Vietnan εssisting in
rebuilding bridges and other things that our bombers destroy.
The United States,on the other hand,is maintaining somewhere
around a million and a half troops on foreign soil.China
might possibly think about containing the United States.I
haven't seen cny evidence of her attempts to do so yet.Once
Another expression that we hear frequently is leave it to
of appeal rather than the President or the Secretary of State
or some other civilian saying, "You bomb this or that briage."
So there is some synpathy for the proposal to leave it to the
generals.But the generals are not supposed to do anythirg
except to fight the wars they are told to fight.If they are
told to win a military victory in Vietnam,you can't blame the
generals for trying to do it and for asking for whatever troops
or supplies or other equipment they need.If the civilian por-
tion of our government,which is supposed to have control over
the military,decides thet war is necessary,that it is in the
nctional interest，then it is not appropriate for us to criti-
cize the generals. However, to leave the decision to the gen-
erals as to whether and how far we fight the war is, in my
opinion,a surrender of the basic principle of our government
that the civilian portion of the government has control over
the military。
In my part of the country my good friend Ed Keating is
running for Congress as & peace candidate. He is being_op-
posed by a young lady whon most of you kmow as Shirley Temple.
Her entire program, as_nearly as' I have heard it, is, "leave
it to the generals"!.Everything!
At this point I would like to quote & public statement
by the American Friends Service Committee,in 1954,thirteenre program, as_nearly as' I have heard it, is, "leave
it to the generals"!.Everything!
At this point I would like to quote & public statement
by the American Friends Service Committee,in 1954,thirteen

foundly disturbed with the pressures for United States rili-
tary involvenent in Indo-Chins.On the basis of long Quaker
experience in international service,we cre _convinced that
nothing but disaster lies down this road.The destructiveness
of modern war can produce nothing but hatred even among those
on whose behalf the fighting is ostensibly uniertaken,and
hatred is no foundation upon which freedom and democracy can
be built.We urge our fellow citizens to remember that the
real victory for freedom in Indo-Chine 2s elsewhere depenis on
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed is no foundation upon which freedom and democracy can
be built.We urge our fellow citizens to remember that the
real victory for freedom in Indo-Chine 2s elsewhere depenis on
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---

winning the hearts and minds of the Indo-Chinese. This requires
that America first understand the legitimate yearnings of the
Asian people for independence and for a better standard of
life.n
These are the fundamental issues in the present raging
Indo-Chinese revolution and they ere not issues that can be met
by military threats.If one objective is to win hearts and
minds,if this is the way to win the war in Indo-China,we lost
ittwoyearsago.
Yesterday's paper ccntained an article which said we had
dropped two hundred and forty thousand leaflets on a village in
Vietnam stating that we were going to bomb this village agein
and again,and therefore the inhabitants of this village should
defect to the Saigon government. This is a marvelous way to win
hearts and minds.But you can possibly understand that while
some of them may defect to the Saigon government,as nobody
likes to be killed,how much loyalty they are going to give to
the Saigon government after they have had/their hearts and
minds won by the dropping of bombs and napalm on the homes
that they have occupied ever since they were born. Sometimes
as I listen to the pronouncements of our governnent I am re-
minded of Cato the Elder in the Roman Senate who ended every
speech with the words delenda est Carthago," which means "we
mustwinthecoldwar.n
I would like to mention the morale of the South Vietnam-
ese Army, the Saigon Arny. All of our military people report
that the NLF and the North Vietnamese troops are the best that
they have ever encountered.They are willing to fight to the
death.Operating with inferior equipmentthey give our people
a very bad time.We also hear that the Saigon Army does not
want to fight and they are called 2ll sorts of uncomplimentary
names.It doesn't take much inductive reasoning to find out
why this is so. The same people are Vietnamese fighting in
NLF and in the North Vietnamese army as_are fighting in the
Saigon army. But the Viet Cong, the NLF, believe that they are
fighting for their country.Whether they are Communist or Com-
munist-led or non-Communist or nationalist or something else,
here is one group that believes in what they are fighting for.
The Saigon Army does not believe in the Saigon government,does
not support the Saigon government and consequently the men de-
sert at the rate of a hundred thousand men per year end they
avoid corbat whenever possible.So we Americans have taken
over the war and are fighting in place of the Saigon Army be-
cause the Saigon Arny does not believe in what it is supposed
to be fighting for,which may appear to them as the perpet-
18ans have taken
over the war and are fighting in place of the Saigon Army be-
cause the Saigon Arny does not believe in what it is supposed
to be fighting for,which may appear to them as the perpet-
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---the war and are fighting in place of the Saigon Army be-
cause the Saigon Arny does not believe in what it is supposed
to be fighting for,which may appear to them as the perpet-
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---

uationofthepowerofajuntaofgeneralswho foughtagainst
the.Vietnam nation under the French. If the South Vietnamese
people believed they were fighting for the freedom of Vietnam,
the South Vietnamese Armywouldbe just as good anarmy asthe
NLF.Since they outnumber the NLF about three to one they would
very shortly establish the Saigon government in complete control
of the entire nation.If they don't believe it,then it looks
as though we are taking on the responsibility of supporting an
unpopular dictatorship for an indefinite period.
There are many solutions end Senator Morton outlined some
of them.If one falls into a deep well he doesn't save face
by staying there. He gets out as gracefully as he can. I
recomnend that in Vietnam we get out as gracefully as we can.
As to what we can do toward a solution,I think this group is
doing it previously. As Norman Cousins says, "It is unpatri-
oticand un-American tobe silentabout theunraveling of the
American fiber in Vietnam.
QUESTIONSANDANSWERS
Question:Wnat does the Admiral think of some intermediate
solution where there would still be an American presence in
Vietnam instead of immediate withdrawal?
Admiral True: Very probably it will be necessary to maintain
some presence in Vietnam.Immediate withdrawal often results
in a great deal of bloodshed,turmoil,and commotion. With-
drawing into enclaves and later withdrawing completely.It
and representatives of the Buddhists and of the liberal
elements of the present Saigon regime.I don’t think it nec-
essarily needs to include General Ky,in spite of his election
landslide.I think that the entire election was & sop to
American opinion in the hope that we would be gullible enough
to swallow it, as & great many people have.
Question: Would the Admiral give his opinion of the feasi-
bility of a Maginot line type of defense of South Vietnan.
Admiral True: The Maginot line didn't work very well in
France nor is it likely to in Vietnam because the people can
wander through tne jungles.Of course it is proposed to
practically remove the jungles. We practically have re-
moved the jungles now by napalming tnem and defoliating the
trees. Still it is easy in the dark to slip across.
19s.Of course it is proposed to
practically remove the jungles. We practically have re-
moved the jungles now by napalming tnem and defoliating the
trees. Still it is easy in the dark to slip across.
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---oposed to
practically remove the jungles. We practically have re-
moved the jungles now by napalming tnem and defoliating the
trees. Still it is easy in the dark to slip across.
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They plan to put in detection apparatus but I think the
alarm bell will be ringing every ten seconds and the people
manning the Maginot line will be darting back and forth and
getting shot at as frequently as they are now. The line
could be made if we want to put enough into it in time, con-
struction, men and money.
Question:Isn't the objective to'involve China in this con-
flict?
Admiral True:I nave feared this and I have no facts and I do
not kmow the answer.It is runored by many people that there
is a contingent of persons in Washington who want to provoke
war with Cnina with the thought that we can kmock out their
nuclear potential now while it is small。It is my belief that
this is the wrong approach and the wrong thing to do.While
undoubtedly by conventional bombing we could delay the de-
velopment of nuclear capacity in China,I do not think we can
destroyit but wewouldincrease the enmity and the deter-
mination of the Cninese eventually to/produce the hydrogen
bombwiththe meangofdeliveryandtogoaheadanduse it as
soonastheygotit。
Question:Isit possible that the report of the incident in
the Tonkin Gulf was a curious report of something thatnever
happened,eince it was a silent attack,cone in total dark-
ness and there was no damage to the United States Navy?
incidentbut the report thatappeared inthe press immediately
aroused my suspicion in that the report we made to the United
Nations stated that in accordance with naval custom the de-
stroyer Maddox fired awarningshot across thebows of the
Vietnamese torpedo boats.: This is not in accordance with
naval custom.Any shot fired at another man of war is &
hostile shot and tneother man of war is entitledunder the
laws of justice,self defense and international law to reply
to that shot. Further, the report made to the United Nations
stated that these torpedo vessels approachea in atteck form&-
tion.All press news that I could assemble and Professor
Bruce Franklin of Stanford University,spent a great deal of
time researching the press on this subject, indicates that the
Vietnamese torpedo boats were astern of our destroyer.This is
not an attack position. The destroyer can make thirty-five
kmots. Tne torpedos they have can make forty-five knots. It
wouldtakeoverthirtyminutesforalaunched torpedotoover-
take the destroyer wnich is free to maneuver.Tne destroyers
were first invented a8 a reply to torpedo boats,not as victims
of torpedo boats and, as an oldtime destroyer skipper, I
20ed torpedotoover-
take the destroyer wnich is free to maneuver.Tne destroyers
were first invented a8 a reply to torpedo boats,not as victims
of torpedo boats and, as an oldtime destroyer skipper, I
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---ke the destroyer wnich is free to maneuver.Tne destroyers
were first invented a8 a reply to torpedo boats,not as victims
of torpedo boats and, as an oldtime destroyer skipper, I
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HNII NVA NVHL AONETTEOXE SIE
FORMER AMBASSADOR FROM SOUTH VIETNAM TO THE UNITED STATES
.DIRECTOR OF THE OVERSEAS VIETNAMESE BUDDHIST ASSOCIATION
FREE LANCE WRITER,WASHINGTON,D.C.
From a commitment of 3,l64 "advisers in 196l,the United
States,in l967,with half a million soldiers,a list of casu-
alties nearing the loo,0o0 mark, is engaged in a full scale, if
undeclared, war in Vietnam. The victory or defeat in this war,
the success or failure of the huge U. S. involvement which af-
fects every Vietnamese from North to South, depends on the an-
swer to this fundamental question:
Is the U. S.military presence accepted by the majority
of the Vietnamese people? Does it serve their national inter-
ests or does it antagonize the Vietnamese society and destroy
its fabric?
By order of importance, prestige and influence, the Viet-
namese society was and is classified in the following order:
SI，NONG，CONG，THUONG,BINH.
First, the Sl,or the community of scholars, intellectu-
als, religious leaders. The government in Hanoi, the Presid-
ium of the National Liberation Front (NLF, usually called Viet
Cong,V.c.) are composed of intellectuals and descendants of
well-knowm Vietnamese scholars,not proletarians。
Second, the NoNG: the peasants and the rural community.
Third, the CoNG or the workers and the industrialists.
Fourth,the THUoNG or the merchants and businessmen.
Fifth.and last, the BiNH or the military. In the history
of Vietnam, old generals faded away as warriors to be remem-
bered only as scholars and administrators。
Let's examine now thetwo most important classes of the
Vietnamese society,the SI and the NONG, the intellectuals and
the peasants,and find out how the war and therefore the U.S.
military presence, affects them. It is worth mentioning here
that all Vietnamese believe, wrongly or rightly, that the U. S.
directs and influences every aspect of Vietnamese life and all
anti-government manifestations automatically turn into anti-
American demonstrations.
21mese believe, wrongly or rightly, that the U. S.
directs and influences every aspect of Vietnamese life and all
anti-government manifestations automatically turn into anti-
American demonstrations.
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---y or rightly, that the U. S.
directs and influences every aspect of Vietnamese life and all
anti-government manifestations automatically turn into anti-
American demonstrations.
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1. The SI: This community, especially since after the
September 3.1967,elections,is openly anti-war and anti-
Anerican.Mr. Richard Gritchfield, of the Washington Even-
ing Star, wrote from Saigon on September 18, 1967: wThe
Vietnamese government and the U. S. officials have been
shocked by what they say is the growing bitterness, indif-
ference and fence-sitting of the Vietnamese." Mr. Ward Just,
of the Washington Post, wrote on January 22, 1967: nThe heavy
weight of the American presence and 'advisory effort',which
has become infact a parallel government reaching down further
into Vietnamese society,is producing a new colonialism dif-
ferent in character but often similar in effect to the French".
A respected and well-kmown Vietnamese journalist, writer, a
Ph.D.in western education, Dr.Ton That Thien told Mr. Richard
Harwood, correspondent of the Washington Post in Saigon:"If
the policies of the U.S.and the government of General Ky had
popular support it would be evident to all. The people of
this country would raise money and pay taxes to support the
war。The young men of the country would do the fighting
against the enemy.The peasants in the countryside would not
help the Vietcong and would supply the intelligence needed to
eliminate them.But we in Vietnam are doing none of those
things. You are paying for the war and this regime, not the
Vietnamese. You are fighting this war with American troops
because the Vietnamese soldiers will not fight.The peasants
are helping the Vietcong and they are not giving you the in-
telligence you want. You are confronted with a society that
opposes the present policies in the only way it can -- with
passive resistance.n (Washington Post, July l6, 1967)
Analyzing the surprising success of lawyer Truong Dinh Dzu,
the first runner up in the recent Presidential elections, the
pro-government Saigon Post mentioned as one of the reasons
for Mr. Dzu's success: nThe undercurrent of chauvinism which
is at the basis of the average Vietnamese man's suspicion of
anything foreign." The paper's editorial continued: "Let it
be kmown here that when the French first were interested in
Vietnam, they were called by our forefathers 'the devils of
the West'. American presence here, however beneficent it
may be for this nation in tne long range,is viewed with sus-
picion and sometimes with resentment.Dzu was the only can-
didate to forget mentioning the necessity of the U. S. pres-
ence at the present juncture of this nation.(Saigon Post,
September 14,1967)
As indicated by the Saigon Post,the suspicion of any-
thing foreign isnot themonopoly ofthe intellectualsbut
it is shared by the average Vietnamese as well. The Viet-
namese are not xenophobic when it comes to the fields of
22Post,the suspicion of any-
thing foreign isnot themonopoly ofthe intellectualsbut
it is shared by the average Vietnamese as well. The Viet-
namese are not xenophobic when it comes to the fields of
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---of any-
thing foreign isnot themonopoly ofthe intellectualsbut
it is shared by the average Vietnamese as well. The Viet-
namese are not xenophobic when it comes to the fields of
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

culture and civilization.But as citizens of a small nation
with a turbulent history of over 2,ooo years, many of tnem spent
in the fighting against foreign invasions -- Chinese, Mongolian,
French, Japanese -- the Vietnamese cannot afford to trust a
foreigner politically and militarily.This is a blunt truth
which is often forgotten.In Asia and in Vietnam, it is na-
tionalism and not communism which motivates man into action.I
am sure if the Soviet Union stationed 500,000 Russian troops in
North Vietnam, my compatriots North of the 17th parallel would
feel the same way,if not stronger,as the Vietnamese feel
about the U.S.military presence in the South.I do not men-
tion here Chinese troops instead, as the answer would be ob-
vious to anyone who has an elementary kmowledge of the history
of Vietnam.The clearsighted and patriotic Americans who warn-
ed this country not to embark in a land war in Asia, not to
send to the Asian jungles the fine and brave American young men
to do the job the Asian boys should do,these Americans not
only have the U. S. interests at neart but they also understand
the realities of Asia and Vietnam as well.
Added to the escalation of the U. S.military commitment,
the two regimes backed by the U.S.and headed by two Catholic
Presidents -- President Ngo Dinh Diem from 1954 to 1963 and
President-elect General Nguyen Van Thieu today -- have sup-
pressed Buddhism, tne majority religion of Vietnam. The May-
June l966 civil war in Hue and Da Nang between the Buddhists
and the military junta killed hundreds and left thousands of
Buddhists in prison. Not long ago, on July l8.19b7,General
Nguyen Van Tnieu declared an unnecessary war against the Bud-
dhists by abolishing the 1964 Buddhist Charter in the most ar-
bitrary manner without the advice and consent of the General
Assembly of the United Buddhist Church, the only qualified
body to effect changes in the Charter.You may be surprised
to know that in "free and democratic South Vietnam, the
majority religion operates under government-approved charter.
2. The NoNG or the commnity of peasants who represent
g0%ofthepopulation.
Tnis commnity suffers the most from the war. Nearly 2
million of them have already become wandering, eimless, hope-
less refugees in strange cities and in stranger settlements。
Tney are taken away from their villages, from their pagodas,
from the tombs of tneir ancestors,from their loyal compan-
ions:the buffaloes,from the familiar trees,from the quiet
rivers,from all that which represent to them life,the cos-
mos,the universe,their past,their present and their future。
Those who remain behind in insecure hamlets are still oppressed,
23rom the quiet
rivers,from all that which represent to them life,the cos-
mos,the universe,their past,their present and their future。
Those who remain behind in insecure hamlets are still oppressed,
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---,from all that which represent to them life,the cos-
mos,the universe,their past,their present and their future。
Those who remain behind in insecure hamlets are still oppressed,
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are still poor and are landless. Despite repeated promises
from successive Saigon governments, land reforrs have never
been carried out.There have been at least four distinct land
plemented.  Just an example: While President Ngo Dinh Diem re-
gime expropriated 457,000 hectares (2.47 acres per hectare) or
over one million acres and while the French government back in
French-owned land,unti1 last year only 248,000 hectares had
been redistributed (AID Report in tne Congressional Record of
March 10,1966). Stated in the simplest terms,the land re-
form problem is the following: The Vietcong tell the peasants
that the land they till is theirs and that they will get more
after victory,whereas the Soutn Vietnamese governments have
been trying to arrange for them to purchase the land from its
owners on easy terms. As the result, the peasants, being
practical,believe that a Soutn Vietnamese governmentg vic-
tory is not to their advantage.It is only natural then that
they do not welcome the government troops in their areas. They
suspect that under the soldiers' cover, the absentee landlord
wili return and seize the land. What they suspect happened
only too often.Even General Ky admitted that "the commnists
were closer to the people's yearnings for social justice and
an independent national life than his own government (James
Reston, The New York Times, September l, 1965). Land reforms,
obviousiy the most important feature in any decent government
in South Vietnam,cannot,however,be carried out in a satis-
factory manner bygovernmentswhose members own lands and are
acquiringmoreandmore。
Except in a few privileged cases,the workers,the busi-
nessmen,the soldiers below the rank of major and captain do
notbenefit much from the present situation mainlybecause of
government officials' ccrruption and inflaticn. The U. S.
commitment is therefore regarded by many Vietnamese as being
geared only to a tiny minority of the population,the less
respected. The U. S. cannot do much if it wants to change the
situation with the present Vietnamese structure unless it takes
over the wholecountrywithone million soldiers andhundreds
of thousands of civilian administrators.
I do not believe that the war, which has its roots in the
politicaland social conditions in SouthVietnamand not in
Peking or Moscow, can be won under the present conditions and
political and social climete unless by victory one means the
total destruction of Vietnam. How can it be won when the in-
crease in the U. S. military commitment provokes an equivalent
increase in anti-war and anti-American feelings,an equivalent
24e means the
total destruction of Vietnam. How can it be won when the in-
crease in the U. S. military commitment provokes an equivalent
increase in anti-war and anti-American feelings,an equivalent
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ascendency in inflation and corruption and a deeper dislocation
of the fabric of tne Vietnamese society? The Americanization
of the military war (General Thieu himself has asked the U. S.
to do more fighting in his Meet tne Press interview on Sept-
ember 10,1967） and the Americanization of the pacification
which gradually leads to the colonization of Vietnam,cannot
help but aggravate an already critical situation. Nor can the
by building a barrier along the 17th parallel。Some_people
think that the surest way to win is.to invade North Vietnam with
one million U.S.troops. But then I am sure,the Chinese will
move intotheconflict.
Itis important to remember that the war started in South
Vietnam and is still very much there. At the present moment,
at best,one can say tnat the war has reached a stalemate and
there is no light at the end of the tunnel. How one can see
long the tunnel is? The tunnel in Vietnam may reach as far as
Pekingand Moscow.
tiate for the end of the war.This,I believe,is the often-
repeated official position of the U.S.
When it comes to negotiations,one basic question poses
itself:Wwho is to negotiate with whom?
I believe negotiations can take place between Hanoi and
Washington if and when the U.S.unconditionally stops the
bombing of North Vietnam.At the present time,I do not think
the U.S. is willing to do so. But even if Hanoi and Washing-
ton come to the conference table,because the problem is in the
South as I said earlier, nothing meaningful could be accomplish-
ed unless negotiations can be arranged among the principal bel-
ligerents in the South. They are the NLF (Vietcong) and the
non-NLF. Who truly represent tne non-NLF population? Certain-be accomplish-
ed unless negotiations can be arranged among the principal bel-
ligerents in the South. They are the NLF (Vietcong) and the
non-NLF. Who truly represent tne non-NLF population? Certain-

imized through an election.Even those who believe（and I ao
"free" and "fair have to admit that the Thieu-Ky ticket rep-
resents only one-third of the non-NIF population.The election
which excludes the most popular candidates, General Duong Van
Minh （Big Minh）and Dr.Au Truong Thanh,former Economic Min-
ister, who a few days ago was brutally narassed by the Saigon
police.An election which bans from tne race candidates from
theBuddhistsandthe labor-unions cannot be considered a
valid one。Ag for the irregularities during the voting,these
25