4 Statement From Philip Agee
Harold Weisberg
Rt8
Frederick,Md 21701
rterly Journal Of The Fifth Estate
JCS-HLNO
Vol.2,Issue 2
Winter 1975 $1.50
CIA
INT
AGENC
Chiefs of Station
Who They Are & What They Do
International Women's Year:
Target for ClA Operations
American Institute for
Free Labor Development
A Research Guidebook

--- PAGE BREAK ---

COUNTERSPY
A Special Issue Focusing On The
CIA

--- PAGE BREAK ---COUNTER-SPY
WINTER1975
Volume2
Contents
Issue2
Published by Fifth EstateSecurity
Education.

Advisory Board(In Formation)
Editorial
Page3
Fred Branfman,Co-Director,In-
TRENDS
Page5
dochinaResourceCenter
UPDATE
Page9
Sylvia Crane,Author,National
Committee Against Repres-
Information on the various projects of the Fifth
siveLegislation.

Estate.

David Dellinger,Institute for
HOWTHECIASPIESONWOMEN
.Page 10
New Communications.

The inside story of how the Overseas Education Fund
Frank Donner,Author,Director,
ACLU Political Surveillance
of the League of Women Voters is being used by the
CIA.

Written by Margaret Van Houten and Tim Butz.

Project.

Dr.Ralph Lewis,Criminal Jus-
EXPOSINGTHECIA
.Page19
tice Research Director,Michi-
A commentary written by ex-ClA employee Philip
gan State University.

Agee.

VictorMarchetti,Author,
Former CIA Official.

CHIEFSOFSTATION:
Barton Osborn,Author,Former
WHO'SWHO&WHATTHEYDO
Page21
CIAAgent.

a o ed uo e jo sisu u
Col.L.Fletcher Prouty (ret.),
clandestine infrastructure.Complete witha listingof
Author, former military liai-
over 100 key ClA personnel overseas.

Complled by
son toCIA.

Marcus Raskin,Co-Director,In-
DougPorter.

situteforPolicyStudies:
Tony Russo,Author,Former
CIALABOROPERATIONSIN
RAND Corp.Official.

LATINAMERICA
.Page30
Kirkpatrick Sale,Author.

An educational guide in three sections: Analysis,
Stanley Sheinbaum,American
Order of Battle for AIFLD, and chronology of ClA
Civil Liberties Union.

labor operations in Latin America.

Rev.

Phillip Wheaton, Ecumeni-
cal Program for Inter-Ameri-
FIFTHESTATEANNUALREPORT
PageS3
can Communication and Ac-
tion.

INLASTISSUE
Page56
Criticisms of the last issue of Counter-Spy are aired
and.explained.

*Organizations listed for identifica-
Subscription Blank
BackCover
tion purposes only.

COUNTERSPY IS PUBLISHED QUARTERLY by Fifth Estate Security Education,a non-profit corporation registered in
Washington DC.--- PAGE BREAK ---

*Organizations listed for identifica-
Subscription Blank
BackCover
tion purposes only. COUNTERSPY IS PUBLISHED QUARTERLY by Fifth Estate Security Education,a non-profit corporation registered in
Washington DC. Address all correspondence to:Post Office Box 647,Ben.Franklin Station,Washington DC 20044.Telephone
(202)785-4891 or 785-8330.Our offices are located at 1346Conn.Ave.NW,Suite 519,Washington DC.Office hours are9 to5
pm daily.Please call before stoppingby,as we havefrequent meetings. government agencies.Write for overseas and bulkrates.Single copies are $1.50 each. COUNTERSPY WELCOMESMANUSCRIPTS on any aspect of security.Please include a stamped,self-return envelope.Signed
articles are a productof the authors only,and donotnecessarily reflect the viewsof all sponsors,advisors,or associatesof the
Fifth Estate.Copyright(c)1975. COUNTERSPY ALSO WELCOMES CRITICISM.Although we do not have a letter to the editorsection,we encourage you to
make your feelings known to us. Through reader input many important changes in the quarterly have,and will continue to be
made. THIS.ISSUE OF COUNTERSPY COST ABOUT $1800 to.produce.Although this is beingwritten prior to seeing thebills,about
$800was spentonprinting,$700ontypesetting,and about$300 onmailing and miscellaneous expenses.Abouthalf thisfigure
will be raised through subscription sales,with therest being donated by the Fifth Estate.Authors are.not paid for articles. Fifth Estate. CounterSpy/Page3

--- PAGE BREAK ---nses.Abouthalf thisfigure
will be raised through subscription sales,with therest being donated by the Fifth Estate.Authors are.not paid for articles. Fifth Estate. CounterSpy/Page3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Editorial
It is with some.regret that we focus this issue ofCounter-Spy on the Central Intelligence Agency.While the
Agencyis certainly
deserving of our scrutiny,we are regretful that the revelations contained in this issue are
coming out.at.a time when themass media have focused their sights on the ClA.
Our experiences.lead us to believe thatalmost every other security service in this country deserves a similar
systems have been the subjectof occasional headlines during the past year.But the abuses of power-like CIA
domestic spying-are abundant throughout the public and priyate sectors of our society.Nothing less than a
apparatusinthis country isrequired,if therights ofcitizens are goingto be protecteg.
mystifyingappendage,isworthy ofexamination
The CAdoes,however,deserve itdayofjudgementbefore theAmericanpeople.Themedia,aswehave
superficial one,and intelligent analysis hasbeeninshort supplyNone of theCtA exposes have told thecitizenry
exactlywhat the ClA does and how they doit.
With this issue.of Counter-Spy we hope to begin toanswer some of these inportant questions.Besides our
continuing series on ClA labor operations,we are presenting a listing of overseas Chiefs of Stations.This is
certainly information that.the American public should have inorder to understand how the ClA works.
Most importantly,we're presenting a major expose of a CiA operation subverting.the women's movement.
While all of therecentrevelations about.the CIA have been about past events,the disclosuresin thisissue focus
onan operation thatishappening now.Althoughwe donotknowwhat theimpact of therevelationswillbe,itis
our sincere hope that those who have been unwittingly affected by these ClA operations will realize the
seriousness.of ourcharges,and act in good faith and with honestconviction.
Bypresentingnformationona currentCIAoperation,webelieve thatwehave takena stepbeyond the
current media orgy of exposing past ClA activities.While understanding the pastis important,it,is more
continue to provide leadership in exposing contemporary abuses of power.
The FifthEstaterealizes that amassive purge is underway within the ClA-aided byrecent disclosuresof
pavedby our national leaders.
For thisreason,andothers,theFifthEstatewill continue to serve asa citizenwatchdogforce ontheCA
and itskin throughout the world.
CounterSpy/Page4ed byrecent disclosuresof
pavedby our national leaders.
For thisreason,andothers,theFifthEstatewill continue to serve asa citizenwatchdogforce ontheCA
and itskin throughout the world.
CounterSpy/Page4

--- PAGE BREAK ---was assassinated by an agent of her
husband’s government.A report in
Asahl Shimbun claims that the
accused assassin could only have
slipped through elaborate security
Trends
precautions with assistance from
high level officials.

The chief of Argentina's police
forces, Alberto Villar,was assassi-
nated on November 1 when an
explosion lifted his 36-foot cabin
cruiser some ten yards off the
surface of the Plata River.

Villar
ASSASSINATIONS
Assassination researcher Harold
right-wing death squads (known as
Weisberg has released a new book
the Anti-Communist Alliances) that
Interest on the part of citizen's
on theJFK assassination,Whitewash
have threatened the:Jives ofa
groups in the mysteries of political
IV,completewith never-before-
number of prominent Argentinians.

assassinations is on the upswing
released documents from the War-
Congressman Hector Sander,who is
once again.A new citizen's group,
renCommission.Amongother
amongthosewho havebeen
known as the Assassination Infor-
mation Bureau (AIB) has taken on
things, the documents indicate that
threatenedby the ACA,has called
the Warren Commission failed to
for a government investigation of
the task of coordinating educa-
fullyexplore reports thatLee
CIAinvolvement inthe death
tional and research efforts.The AIB
Harvey Oswald was either an FBl or
squad.

Cambridge,Massachusetts 02139.

CIA informant.

Pressure has also been mounting
****
for a re-opening of investigations
into the assassination of Robert F.

And speaking of death squads,
Kennedy.

Among those calling for
the concept is now beginning to
Dr.Cyril Wecht, the Coroner of
re-examination of the evidence are:
take hold in the United States.The
Pittsburgh,and oneof the few
Allard K.Lowenstein,former head
Maine Attorney General isreported
independent researchers who has
to be investigating a police“death
squad”in Portland,Me.

According.

toinsidereports,thegroup
involved ex-green berets,and was
planning to assassinate ex-convicts.--- PAGE BREAK ---

According. toinsidereports,thegroup
involved ex-green berets,and was
planning to assassinate ex-convicts. The alleged ringleader of the group
has refused to testify in.the state
inquiry. TECHNOLOGY
When President Ford first an-
of A.D.A.,Paul Schrade,a.western
nounced his"Whip Inflation Now”
been permitted toexamine the
director of theUnited Auto-
 sm
classified medical evidence gathered
workers; Los Angeles Supervisor
such short supply that Cabinet
after the assassination of John F. Baxter Ward;members ofthe
memberswere forcedtoshare
Kennedy,has charged that the.FBI
American Academyof Forensic
them-borrowing' each others but-
covered.up evidence in its investiga-
Sciences;and Godfrey Issac,former
tons before making speeches. tion of that assassination.Writingin
attorney for Sirhan Sirhan. All of
One Federal Agency,however,
Modern Medicine.magazine, Wecht
those calling for the new investiga-
had all the WIN buttons it needed
says that he has uncovered letters
tionarecitingnewballistic
while the shortage was on. That
written by FBl Director J.Edgar
evidence indicating that more than
agency,of course,was the Central
Hoover indicating that two secret
may
havebeen
Intelligence Agency. neutron tests conducted on bullets
one
gunman
involved. and fragments failed to back the
****
Warren Commissions finding that
Lee Harvey Oswald was a lone
An Atlanta based security firm,
assassin. AJapanesenewspaper
has
Security Operating Systems,has
charged that Ryuk Yong Su, wife
announced themarketingofa
ofKorean Dictator Park Chung Hee
mace-like product that,in addition
****

--- PAGE BREAK ---to its incapacitating qualities,markstions made in a suicide note leftby
official spokesperson, Mike Aun,
a suspect with a chemical finger-
Southwestern Bell Executive T.O.

says that Learyis refusing to
print The spray,“X-Pose”,causes
Gravitt.Among the allegations
communicatewithhis friends
temporary blindness and reportedly
made by Gravitt was that South-
(quote).“because he's singing and
leaves a unique blend of chemicals
western Bell was engaging in a
he'safraid for his life."
whichcanlaterbejidentified
massive eavesdropping and record-
According to New Times Maga-
through spectrographic and X-ray
ing campaign against phone users.

zine,Leary was arrested in Afghan-
analysis.

Another executive of South-
istan after leaving the safety of
western Bell, James Ashley,has
Switzerland with  Johanna Har-
confirmed the wiretapping charges
court-Smith;hisself-proclaimed
and filed suit in an attempt to
wife-who is alleged by Attorney
Scotland Yard reports that,
prevent the destruction of wire-
Marvin Cahn and others to be an
thanks to the Polaroid Corporation,
tapping records.

As a result of these
agent provocateur working with
letter bombs have become almost
allegations at least four investigative
federal authorities.In testimony
impossible to detect.The British
agencies-the Texas State Attorney
Cahn revealed that tapes stolen
detectives say that letter bombers
General;a special grand jury;a
from Johanna's possession verified
areusingpowerpacksfrom
groupofTexas Cities;anda special
that Leary was (quote)“trading
Polaroid's SX-70 film cartridges to
legislative committee-are all look-
things"with State of California
create thinner,and harder to
ing into what is being called “the
officials in order to be released
detect, letter bombs.

fromprison.The tapes also
HoustonPolice
ChiefC.M.As a result of these
agent provocateur working with
letter bombs have become almost
allegations at least four investigative
federal authorities.In testimony
impossible to detect.The British
agencies-the Texas State Attorney
Cahn revealed that tapes stolen
detectives say that letter bombers
General;a special grand jury;a
from Johanna's possession verified
areusingpowerpacksfrom
groupofTexas Cities;anda special
that Leary was (quote)“trading
Polaroid's SX-70 film cartridges to
legislative committee-are all look-
things"with State of California
create thinner,and harder to
ing into what is being called “the
officials in order to be released
detect, letter bombs.

fromprison.The tapes also
HoustonPolice
ChiefC.M.

indicated that Johanna used politi-
Lynn,uponinvestigatingthe
charges, discovered that his person-
A Swedish Government report
al phone and that of the Houston
onweapons of the future has
District Attorney were among those
tapped.Additional allegations have
anti-personnel devices on the mar-
been made tying the wiretapping
ket will be something known as a
MASER.According to the report,a
California,AT&T,other.unnamed
MASER is similar to the Laser,
Bell Systems,and the Committee to
except that it sends out microwave
Re-Elect President Nixon (CREEP)
beams instead of light beams.

Two executives of Southwestern
A MASER aimed ata target
Bellhave refusedto.answer
would work in much the same way
questions put before them about
asamicrowave oven,literally
the allegations,and a company
boiling a person from the inside
spokesperson has responded to the
out.indicated that Johanna used politi-
Lynn,uponinvestigatingthe
charges, discovered that his person-
A Swedish Government report
al phone and that of the Houston
onweapons of the future has
District Attorney were among those
tapped.Additional allegations have
anti-personnel devices on the mar-
been made tying the wiretapping
ket will be something known as a
MASER.According to the report,a
California,AT&T,other.unnamed
MASER is similar to the Laser,
Bell Systems,and the Committee to
except that it sends out microwave
Re-Elect President Nixon (CREEP)
beams instead of light beams.

Two executives of Southwestern
A MASER aimed ata target
Bellhave refusedto.answer
would work in much the same way
questions put before them about
asamicrowave oven,literally
the allegations,and a company
boiling a person from the inside
spokesperson has responded to the
out.

charges by saying that the illegal
monitoring was "against company
cal blackmail in attempts to win
policy”.The jnvestigations into the
Leary's freedom and that she has
chargesmadebythe former
been living with paid undercover
Reports in the Long Island
FederalDrugInformer Dennis
newspaper Newsday,indicate that
ing to drag on for months, and
Martino while working on Leary's
the United States government is
includefar-reaching chargesof
freedom.

usinga super-computer  system
corruption.

In his role as drug informant,
known as lliac IV to coordinate
In a related development,South-
Martino has testified that he had
weather modification experiments.

western Bell has proclaimed that its
been paid by the Federal Bureau of
The experiments have been code-
private investigators have the right
Narcotics Enforcement Agency to
named"Project Climate Dynamics'
to enter any home containing a
introduce undercover“narcs"to
by the Pentagon.

telephone-without a search war-
Johanna Leary's friends and ac-
Accordingtothenewspaper
rant-to look for phones illegally
quaintances.It was also revealed
account, the Pentagon has already
hooked up.--- PAGE BREAK ---

western Bell has proclaimed that its
been paid by the Federal Bureau of
The experiments have been code-
private investigators have the right
Narcotics Enforcement Agency to
named"Project Climate Dynamics'
to enter any home containing a
introduce undercover“narcs"to
by the Pentagon. telephone-without a search war-
Johanna Leary's friends and ac-
Accordingtothenewspaper
rant-to look for phones illegally
quaintances.It was also revealed
account, the Pentagon has already
hooked up. Persons who refuse
that Martino worked as an informer
experimented with weather modifi-
entrance to investigators, according
(quote)“For the last two or three
cation to clear away clouds during
tothe company,are subject to
years"..the time that Martino
bombing runs; to create acid rains. having their phone service discon-
was a companion of Johanna and
designed to foul radar reception;to
tinued. Tim's. create rains to slow down troop
In late December,the Berkeley
movements;and tobreakup
Dopes/Dopers
Barb reported that Saxbe and
unfriendly demonstrations. Special U.S. Attorney Guy Good
After nearly five months of
win both asked questions of Leary
speculation andrumoredreports on
during interrogation sessions into
Tapping Ma Bell
December 6,1974 the U.S. Bureau
Leary's knowledge ofweather
of Prisons confirmed reports that
underground and drug activities. The Bell Telephone System has
Dr.Timothy Leary is “singing”.to
The Barb said that the source of its
been under increasing scrutiny in
Federal Prosecutors. The Bureau's
reports was Michael Horowitz (the
recent months, following allega-
CounterSpy/Page 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---researcher.whoruns
Leary's
The history of China's involve-
poppy.

As an indication of its
archives),who reportedly learned
ment with opium dates back to the
the details froma Chicago Tribune
13th century when opium is saidto
lowed its officials six months to
crime reporter.The sources are
have been introduced into Chinaby
accomplish the task under heavy
quotedassaying thatdespite
Arab traders for use asa medicine.

penalties if-they failed to do so.ln
Leary'sreportedwillingnessto
The introduction of opium smoking
October of the same year, the U..

cooperate,neither Saxbe or Good
is thought to have begun in the
Government,having to cope with
win could obtain corroboration of
17thcentury.Thefirstedict
the opium traffic in the Philippines,
Leary'stestimony to support Grand
prohibitingopium smokingwas
raised the question of taking joint
Jury indictments.The Barb said
issued by Emperior Yung Cheng in
measures for its suppression by
that Saxbe and Goodwin decided
1729.Up to that year the amount
interested powers.As a result,a
perhaps onthe basis of their
imported did notexceed15 tons
conference was held at Shanghai on
interviewswithLeary,not tobring
andwas usually brought from India
February 1,1909,to which China,
him as a witness before a Federal
by junks as a return cargo.In1773,
theUnited States,Great Britain,
Grand Jury in Chicago.

the East India Company took the
Austria-Hungary,France,Germany,
In the meantime,Leary is being
opium trade with China under its
Italy,
Japan,TheNetherlands,
held ata secretlocation by the U.S.

charge.In1776,it exported75
Justice Department while corrob
tons to China;in 1780,375 tons.

delegates.charge.In1776,it exported75
Justice Department while corrob
tons to China;in 1780,375 tons.

delegates.

At this meeting it was
orating with government prosecu-
Although importationof opium
resolved that itwas the duty of the
tors.Leary has not been seen by
was forbiddenby Chinese imperial
respective governments to prevent
anyofhisfamily
members,
authorities in1796 andopium
theexportofopiumtoany
associates,or attorneys for at least
smoking
waspunished
severely
countries prohibiting its importa-
five months.A suit,being filed by
(ultimately extending to exile and
tion; that drastic measures should
his daughter,Susan,and PoetAllen
death）,illicit trade in
opium
betaken againsttheuseof
Ginsberg,demandsthathebe
continued to flourish.

morphine,that anti-opium remedies
Until 1839 noreal effort was
should be investigated;and that all
physical and mental well-being can
made by the Chinese to stop the
countries having concessions in
be checked.

trade,but in thatyear the Emperor
China should close the opium densin
Tao-kuang senta commissioner,in
their possession.

The British Gov
DRUGS
Tse-hsu,to suppress the traffic.His
ernment offered to control opium
efforts led toa war with Great
productionin India and to reduce
Thisarticle was prepared by the
Britain known as the Opium War.

the amount exported to China by
DEA Office:of Intelligence, Inter-
Asa result of the settlements in
tenpercenteach
yearsothat
nationalIntelligenceDivision,in
1842and1860,followingthe
shipments would cease after ten
cooperation with.

the U.S.

Depart-
defeats ofChina in the Opium
ment of State.

Wars,the importation of opiumwas
restrictions were tobe made among
legalized and grew substantialy.Depart-
defeats ofChina in the Opium
ment of State.

Wars,the importation of opiumwas
restrictions were tobe made among
legalized and grew substantialy.

China,"
Forexample,5,853tons were
proposals were gratefully received
exported fromIndia to China in
by the Chinese Government and,in
1880 ascomparedto3,200tons in
1910,European travelers reported
1850.While the Imperial Court at
that opium production in Szechuan
Peking endeavored to suppress the
Province,
accounting for about
two-thirds of Chinese production,
Home cultivationofthedrug
remote districts on the frontier.

increased sorapidlythat bythe
OneresultofChinese sup-
20th century opium was produced
pressionof opium production and
in nearly every province of China.

At the beginning of the 20th
opiuminChina rose,
thereby
century,the Chinese population
stimulating illicit production within
was about 400 million.Some 13.5
China and smuggling from without.

The allegation has been made
million Chinese were addicted to
An attemptwas made to treat
opium.The amount of opium used
that the People's Republic of China
in China came to 22,588tons,of
injections.The effectsofthe
（PRC)is actively engaged in the
exportation ofillicit narcotics.This
morphinewereeventuallydis-
in China;the balance wasimported
covered to be much more deleteri-
allegation increased in frequency
from India and Persia(lran).

ous than those of opium smoking.

and intensity during the period of
heavy U.S.involvement in military
The Chinese Government,view-
One dollar'sworth of morphine was
operationsin South Vietnam and
ing the use of opium as one of the
found to be equal in effects to
during.

the periods ofimproving
three dollar's worth of opium,and
U.SandPRCrelations.The
questions whichithad to face,
alarge quantityofmorphine
decided in 1906toput anend toits
manufactured in Europe found its
way.into China.through Japan
in putting this problem in perspec-
tive.--- PAGE BREAK ---

and intensity during the period of
heavy U.S.involvement in military
The Chinese Government,view-
One dollar'sworth of morphine was
operationsin South Vietnam and
ing the use of opium as one of the
found to be equal in effects to
during. the periods ofimproving
three dollar's worth of opium,and
U.SandPRCrelations.The
questions whichithad to face,
alarge quantityofmorphine
decided in 1906toput anend toits
manufactured in Europe found its
way.into China.through Japan
in putting this problem in perspec-
tive. edictohSeptember20,1906,
Despitethesetbacksofthe
forbidding the consumptionof
morphineiexperimentsr andn
History
opium and the cultivation of the
tractable problems with cultivation,

--- PAGE BREAK ---more than enough to account for
all the opium and heroin traded in
somewhat and reduced it gradually,
PRC,however,stated ata session of
the Far East.

even in the face of rapid populationthe Commission on Narcotic Drugs
Recently,the director-general of
growth.In1949,whenthe
that narcotics addiction in China
the Thai National Police,Police
General Prachuap,reported that
land China,it was estimated thatnarcotic.drugs are strictly con-
there issomeevidence that
the Chinese addict population was trolled.

Burmese opium is being illicitly
in the millions.llicit production ofFor manyyears,butparticularly
imported into the PRC along the
opium within China was estimatedsince the summer of 1971, there
Burmese-Yunnan border.Prachuap
at 10,000 tons.Evidence existed
hasbeena spate of magazine and
reported-that early in 1973 the
that smuggling of opium into areas
newspaper articles published in the
PRClauncheda massive drive
of China from the Mid-East and international press alleging that the
against this traffic.

the PRC set up
theillicit Chinese product wasinternational narcotics traffic.Most
border points and imposed severe
being smuggled outof China tostoriesonthissubjectmake
sentences on drug traffickers.

Asian consumers.

Stringent controlsexaggeratedcharges,relying for
Inrecent years, federal.authori-
ties have reported an increase in the
cotics use were adopted at the 2lst pected situationscurrent in the
number of ethnic Chinese illegally
session of the PRC State Adminis-
1940's and 1950's.Manycan be
entering the United States.Many of
trative Council on February 24,
traced to critics of current U.S.

these are merchant seamen“ship
1950.

Basically,the statute pro-
policy on China.

Some stories put
jumpers."
Investigationshave
hibited the privateproduction,
the blame on the Chinese Com-
proved that a small number of these
seamen have carriednarcotics for
opium and other narcotics.The
United States and in Vietnam.

contacts in the United States.Some stories put
jumpers."
Investigationshave
hibited the privateproduction,
the blame on the Chinese Com-
proved that a small number of these
seamen have carriednarcotics for
opium and other narcotics.The
United States and in Vietnam.

contacts in the United States.

The
tight political control exercised by
In the case of Vietnam,weknow
typical Chinese seaman who smug-
the government has probably made
with considerable confidence that
gles heroin bringsone to two
kilograms.He can easily“body
effective in most areas.

U.Stroopswasproducedin
pack"or conceal this amount:The
Control over opium production
refineries in the tri-border area of
proceeds of the sale or payment for
and trade in the southern border
Laos, Burma,and Thailand.The
acting as a courier permit him to
areas,particularly Yunnan Prov-
traffickers:who controlled produc-
fade into the economy.

There is no
ince,hascertainlybeen more tion,processing,and movement
evidence that the PRC is involved in
difficult because of the rough were predominantly overseas Chi-
anyway with the smuggling of
terrainandthevarioustribal
nese residing in Southeast Asia and
heroin by the ship jumpers.

DEA,
elements who inhabit part of the operating for profit motives.

as wellasotherfederal agencies,are
region.

According to one report,
Inthe past two years,U.s.

well aware ofthis illicit activity and
the private cultivation of opium in narcoticsagents have  stepped up
have mounted aggressive programs
southern Yunnan-Province,former-their investigative work in Far East
at all the major entry points in the
lya major opium-producing area,
trafficking centers -mainly Bang-
UnitedStates.

The PRC,ascontacts with
Lopium growth in the province now in cooperation withlocal police,
western nations have resumed,has.well aware ofthis illicit activity and
the private cultivation of opium in narcoticsagents have  stepped up
have mounted aggressive programs
southern Yunnan-Province,former-their investigative work in Far East
at all the major entry points in the
lya major opium-producing area,
trafficking centers -mainly Bang-
UnitedStates.

The PRC,ascontacts with
Lopium growth in the province now in cooperation withlocal police,
western nations have resumed,has.

is supposed to be under the controlhave successfullyimmobilizeda
shown an interest in efforts to
of the government and used for number of major trafficking syndi-
control international trafficking
and has participated as an observer
been scattered reports from Yun-learned a greatdeal about the
in conferences on these matters.

nan Province,less frequent since  structure of the opium trade in the
1967 afterthe“culturalrevolu-Far East.Not one investigation into
PRC may move to more active
tion'washedacrossthisarea,
heroin traffic in the Far Eastin the
participation, including more regu-
indicating that small amounts ofpast two years.led to evidence of
lar reporting toU.S.

agencies.

Movementon its partin this
direction can help diminish the
report in 1963 suggested that local
criminal activity for the usual profit
credibility of unsubstantiated al-
Chinese authorities in Yunnan were
motives.

Where the origin of the
legation.

aware of this activity but as of that
heroin could be traced,it was to
In conclusion,on the basis of
time were unable toeliminate it.

refineries.

owned
bynon-Com-
information available to the U.S.

munist consortiums.

The origin of
Government, there isno evidence
Present Situation
theraw opium can also be traced to
that.the People's Republic of China
the producing area of Southeast
sanctions the illicit export of opium
Since 1949 there has been no
Asiaknown as the Golden Triangle.--- PAGE BREAK ---

munist consortiums. The origin of
Government, there isno evidence
Present Situation
theraw opium can also be traced to
that.the People's Republic of China
the producing area of Southeast
sanctions the illicit export of opium
Since 1949 there has been no
Asiaknown as the Golden Triangle. or opium products or is involved in
official reporting from the PRC to
Wehave reliablereportingon
the illicit trafficking of narcotic
the International Narcotics Control
Board.One result of this is that
production in the Golden Triangle
drugs. there are no official data availablea

Reprinted from Drug Enforcement
on narcotics production,addiction
production of raw opium there is
nterSpv/Page8

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the Golden Triangle
drugs. there are no official data availablea

Reprinted from Drug Enforcement
on narcotics production,addiction
production of raw opium there is
nterSpv/Page8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fifth Estate Update
Speakers Bureau
tour also provided the Fifth Estate
CounterSpy -with the exception
with valuable local media covered
ofVolume 1,Issue 4,-are no
Representatives of the Fifth
in each area visited.
longer available.Copiesof the one
Estate, and others expert on the
available back issue are one dollar
fields of national and domestic
Organizing Manual
each.
security,are available to give
Publication of an organizing
The Fifth Estate would like to
presentations before college,com-
manual,Towards A Fifth Estate,is
encourage readers of CounterSpy to
munity,and labor gatherings.A
now scheduled for early April,
become more actively involved with
slide presentation giving a historical
1975.The manual is designed.to
thequarterly.Manuscriptsand
assist in setting  standards for
criticisms are especially invited.In
domestic police intelligence opera-
organizingcommunity/action/re-
addition,readers can help Counter-
tions,entitled Red Squad,are
search groups, and will contain a
Spy by sending us the names and
available on request,with a Fifth
detaileduresearchmethodology
addresses of bookstores interested
Estate speaker. Fees are negotiable,
guide.Groupsandindividuals
in carrying the publication,urging
but should include traveling ex-
interested inreceiving a copy of the
their friends to subscribe,and
penses.Formore information,
encouraging libraries to-subscribe.
contact Tim Butz c/o the Fifth
Estate a postcard in order toreceive
SinceCounterSpyis not.mass
Estate.
notification of its publication and
marketed,reader support is neces
Fall Tour
cost.Originally, scheduledfor
sary to increase circulation.
Over two dozen cities, coast to
publication in January, Towards A
INTELLIGENCE REPORT
Fifth Estate was postponed due to
coast,hosted presentations and
financial limitations.
Publication of INTELLIGENCE
workshops by the Fifth Estate
CounterSpy Readers Information
REPORT has  been  suspended
during Fall,1974.The tour,which
indefinitely.Internalanalysis-of the
began in San Diego on October22
Many subscriptions.to Counter-
syndicated column by the Fifth
and ended in Ann Arbor December
Spy are expiring with this issue.
9,was designedto heighten interest
Subscriberscopies marked in red
Estate staff ledus to conclude that
it was not effective.in disseminating
in initiating research/action groups
ink indicate that your subscription
information to the public and that
around the United States. Discus-
is.
expiring.Those subscribers
itwas overextending the Fifth
sions about setting up groups took
wishing to renewmay give addition-
Estate. Publication of a newsletter,
place inmost of the citiesvisited by
al gift subscriptions at the reduced
available to the general public,will
the Fifth Estate,and groups are
rate of $4each.
be announced in the near future.
now forming in many areas. The
Untortunately,back issues of
CounterSpy/Page9duced
available to the general public,will
the Fifth Estate,and groups are
rate of $4each.
be announced in the near future.
now forming in many areas. The
Untortunately,back issues of
CounterSpy/Page9

--- PAGE BREAK ---he general public,will
the Fifth Estate,and groups are
rate of $4each.
be announced in the near future.
now forming in many areas. The
Untortunately,back issues of
CounterSpy/Page9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CIATARGET:WOMEN
AGENC
The inside story
of the
ainioG sao
Overseas
Education Fund
bo1
o1200
80
January 11,1975 will be the:inaugural date of
International Women's Year.In ensuing months,
of IWY-that the funding outlooR is“grimat
equality,development and peacewill be goals for
present.She said that only through nongovernmental
enterprising and imaginative women all over the
functions such as the LWVuS will fwY achieve
world.Talk began In the United Nations Commission
fruition..
on the Status of Women and among various volunteer
"We are hoping for achange of traditional
organizations.On December 18,1972,Secretary
General Waldheim proclaimed 1975 to be Interna-
tional Women's Year before the United Nations
lotofattention to theneed to promotenew attitudes
General Assembly.Former PresidentNixon soon
and heightenconsciousness：
Men dieofulcers
after made the same proclamation for the United
while women are never utilized. Women should be
States,and other countries have also followed the
allowedtointeractwithinternational
peace
lead.Up to now a lot of plans and dates have been set
organizations,governmental and nongovernmental."
down - some vague and sketchy, and some more
Exactly a month later,the Overseas Education
definite and potentially useful.Since the launch date
Fund’s Multinational Seminar met with three UN
is now drawing near,here'sa progress report.
Human Rights Officers for a briefing on IWY.Sixteen
On September 16,1974when theLeague's
national board visited the UN,the luncheon speaker
Bolivia,Colombia,CostaRicaEcuadorGuatmala
was Mme Basile Basu of India,who is Officer in
and Peru,plus two from the U.S.got the bigger scoop
Charge,Promotion of Equality of Men and Women
on the lans and goalsfor1975.no
Branch,Centre forSocial Development and
7
Humanitarian Affairs. The subject of her talk was
20
.oonotonso
人MI
a focus of UN effort for the coming year that
onmd
has at this writing some problematical ramifications.
THE NATIONAL VOTER,Vol.XXIV,No.3.League
of Women Voters of the United States, Washington，
buzuD.C.Fal1974
CounterSpy/Page.10coming year that
onmd
has at this writing some problematical ramifications.
THE NATIONAL VOTER,Vol.XXIV,No.3.League
of Women Voters of the United States, Washington，
buzuD.C.Fal1974
CounterSpy/Page.10

--- PAGE BREAK ---CENTRALINTELLIGENCEAGENCY/OVERSEASEDUCATION FUNDOPERATION
“ALLROADSLEADTOLANGLEY
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE
CENTRALINTELLIGENCE AGENCY
LANGLEY,VA
Educational
and Cultural
Bureau of
Affiars Office
Intelligence
and Research
OVERSEAS EDUCATION FUND OFTHE LEAGUE OFWOMENVOTERS
Latin American Program Director
Asian Program Director
Louise Montgomery
None
6Field Representatives
CIA'Contact
bases in Peru,Bolivia,
Karen Smith
CAS/SEOUL
Columbia,Ecuador,
AlexFirfer
Field Representative
Sol Schindler
AID/Panama
and the Dominican
Clyde Hess
Republic
Asia Foundation
(CIA proprietary)
Saigon,Kuala Lampur
In light of the fact that 1975 has been proclaimed
International Women's Year,public attention must be
through clandestine operations.

Two classic opera-
focused on the fact that the Central Intelligence
tions in this genre were the manipulationof the
Agency has begun a process of targeting the women's
international labor and student movements.ln
movement forinfiltration,manipulation,and possible
examining these past operations, it is possible to
sabotage of progressive forces.

The method of
identify the parallels in strategy that are now being
operation for this venture is the standard, almost
targetedagainstwomenweiw
classic, pattern that has been utilized against the
In 1951,the International Organizations Division
student movement and segments of the international
of the ClA began providing fundsto theinternational
labor movement,*
desk of the U.S: National Student Association.The
Through the use of an organization which is
moneywasprovided through anumber ofCfA
seemingly working in the public's interest, the ClA is
conduit foundations,including the Kaplan Fund,the
carrying out a scientifically designed plan to covertly
Independence Foundation, and the Asia Foundation.

collectvaluable information on emerging thirdworld
In addition, the Rockefeller Brothers Foundation,
nations.The method of
identify the parallels in strategy that are now being
operation for this venture is the standard, almost
targetedagainstwomenweiw
classic, pattern that has been utilized against the
In 1951,the International Organizations Division
student movement and segments of the international
of the ClA began providing fundsto theinternational
labor movement,*
desk of the U.S: National Student Association.The
Through the use of an organization which is
moneywasprovided through anumber ofCfA
seemingly working in the public's interest, the ClA is
conduit foundations,including the Kaplan Fund,the
carrying out a scientifically designed plan to covertly
Independence Foundation, and the Asia Foundation.

collectvaluable information on emerging thirdworld
In addition, the Rockefeller Brothers Foundation,
nations.

The Overseas Education Fund of the League
which had previously launderedClAfunds for the
of Women Voters of the United States(OEF) is being
Harvard Jnternational Seminar,** began togive grants
used to collect this intelligence data under the guide
to theUSNSAnternational desk in1951
ofinternational sisterhood.

For itsinvestment,the ClAreceived reports from
While it is perhaps flattering to realize that this
USNSAoverseastravelersandrepresentatives.

operation by the ClA clearly indicates thrat the
USNSA personnek attended international student
women's movement is being taken seriously,it is
meetings,arranged for foreign student leaders to visit
nonetheless a totally immoral and illegal situation in
the U.S,andbuiltanetworkofcontactswith
which unsuspecting women are being used in much
student leaders.

Biological data and other intelligence
the way that they have been used throughout history.--- PAGE BREAK ---

operation by the ClA clearly indicates thrat the
USNSA personnek attended international student
women's movement is being taken seriously,it is
meetings,arranged for foreign student leaders to visit
nonetheless a totally immoral and illegal situation in
the U.S,andbuiltanetworkofcontactswith
which unsuspecting women are being used in much
student leaders. Biological data and other intelligence
the way that they have been used throughout history. information collected by these students was routinely
This is not the time for infighting and accusations
turned over to the ClA
among women's groups;but rather a time for strength
Few members of the NSA knew-thatthe ClA was
and unityof women in the realization that
international sisterhood is a'totally viable concept
See AIFLD articleinthis issue as wllasongoing
that must not be contaminated or co-opted
From its inception under the National Security
Act of 1947,the Central Intelligence Agency has used
KISSENGERMrvinandBnard Kab,itr
CounterSpy/Page 11

--- PAGE BREAK ---5.Interface with private groups,including business
financing.its overseas operations or that NSA staff
was cooperating with the ClA until a former NSA
and student groups must be remedied.

officer revealed the operationin a Rampartsmagazine
6.It will always be desirable to have some CIA
article.

This expose sent shock waves throughout
personnel housed in the embassy compound,if only
NSA and the entire student community.

forlocal commandpost and communications
The exposure of the CiA penetration and
requirements.

manipulation of the USNSA international section,
7.Overseas apparatuses of unofficial cover are also
along with several other revelations concerning DIA
desirable,such as the creation ofprivate organizations
conduit foundations and labor operations forced the
employingnon-U.S.nationals.

Agency to explain and defend its activities and
8.U.S.should make increasinguse ofnon-
policies.

The forum for this explanation was the.

nationals,who with indoctrination and training
Council on Foreign Relations (considered by some
should be encouraged to develop asecond loyalty.

officials to be the“constituency”of the ClA).At a
Bissell went on to say that"As we shift our
meeting of the CFR's discussion group on Intelligence
attention to Latin America,Asia,and Africa, the
andForeign Policy held in NewYork on January 8,
conduct of U.S.nations is likely to be increasingly
1968,ClA consultant Richard Bissell held an“off the
circumscribed.

The primary change recommended
record session with CFR members Allen Dulles
would be to build up a system of unofficial cover;to
（former Director of Central Intelligence),Douglas
see how far we can go with non-U.s.

nationals,
Dillon (current member of.President Ford’s“blue
especially in the field.The CIA might be able to make
ribbonpanel on ClA domestic activities),Joseph
increasing use of non-nationals as ‘career agent
Kraft, Henry:Howe Hansome,Theodore Sorenson,
These suggestions about unofficial cover and career
and14otherCFRmembers.The primary change recommended
record session with CFR members Allen Dulles
would be to build up a system of unofficial cover;to
（former Director of Central Intelligence),Douglas
see how far we can go with non-U.s.

nationals,
Dillon (current member of.President Ford’s“blue
especially in the field.The CIA might be able to make
ribbonpanel on ClA domestic activities),Joseph
increasing use of non-nationals as ‘career agent
Kraft, Henry:Howe Hansome,Theodore Sorenson,
These suggestions about unofficial cover and career
and14otherCFRmembers.

agents illustrateandemphasizetheneedfor
Bissell, former headof the Clandestine Services
continuing
effortstodevelopecovertaction
branch of the CIA, had both the background
capabilities even where there is no immediate need to
experience with and the“unofficial blessing”of the
employthem.

Developing his argument further, Bissell con-
Karen Smith,
tended:“there is no doubt that covertly funded
OEF'sAsian
programs could be undertaken overtly.Often
Field Repre-
sentative and
activities are initiated thru ClA channels because they
aconsultant
can be started more quickly and informally but do
to.the CIA
not inherently need to be secret.An example might
propriaty
Asia Found-
be certain exchange of person programs designed to
ation.

identify potential political leaders and give them
exposure to the U.S.It should benoted however,that
many such innocent programs are more effective if
carried out by private auspices than if officially!

supported by the U.S.government.They do not need
to be covert but if legitimate private entities such 2s
foundations do not initiate them, there may be no
way to get them done except by covert support to
'front'organizations.

Agency.

While his exact words were not recorded,
Bissellscomments onCIAuseofprivate
notes were made and later distributed to members.

organizations are clearly exemplified in its use of
One such member was William Pratt,of the Center
NSA and its projected use ofOEF.--- PAGE BREAK ---

While his exact words were not recorded,
Bissellscomments onCIAuseofprivate
notes were made and later distributed to members. organizations are clearly exemplified in its use of
One such member was William Pratt,of the Center
NSA and its projected use ofOEF. for International Affairs at Harvard University.These
The internationai iabormovement andthe
international student movement became ClA targets
Center was seized by students protesting the invasion
because of the potential power they wielded in
of Cambodia and the.murder of four students atKent
post-World War ll politics:both constituencies were
State. viewed by the ClA asresources and/orbattlegrounds
According to the CFR minutes. Bissell outlined
for the fight against Moscow during the Cold War.As
eight forms of covert action. These were aspects of
the politics of the Cold War changed to containment
CIA operations that he felt were most in need of
ofnaticnal liberation struggles and“brushfire”wars,
change with.regard to the use and abuse of cover.The
and of late to detente, the ClA has continued to
eight points were:
penetrate and manipulate these areas because of their
1.Inordertoavoiddisclosure ofprivate
institutional support, greater compartmenting of
data. operations isnecessary. Since the early 1960's, the women's liberation
2.To be effective, the agency will need to use
movement has increasingly come to the fore,and
private institutions on an expanded scale. with it a new focus for CIA activity.Along with the
3.It will be necessary to operate under deeper
emerging strength and capabilities of women in all
cover,with increased attention to the use of cut-outs. areas of society has come the growth of international
4.Lack of awareness of funding sources on the
sisterhood. As the participation and influence of
part of various groups will prevent the damages of
womennsocietyncreasesepeciallynthepoliial
disclosure. sphere,it is part of a natural process that the CIA
CounterSpy/Page 12ipation and influence of
part of various groups will prevent the damages of
womennsocietyncreasesepeciallynthepoliial
disclosure. sphere,it is part of a natural process that the CIA
CounterSpy/Page 12

--- PAGE BREAK ---begin to collect intelligence on the women's
An outline of the ClA's operations against the
movement.

Members of one women’s,organization
international women's movement has been pieced
with international.contactsfeel justifiably that their
together from conversationswithAnn andother OEF
organization has become the focus of such CIA
emptoyees, and from documents provided by them.

activity.We feel that this is an important revelation
We believe that this isa major operationforAsia and
given the fact that 1975is International Women's
Latin America.

Year.

GovernmentFundingof the OEF
A ClA operation parallel in most respects to the
CIA/USNSA operatjon appears to have been set into
Following the 1967 disclosures of CIA manipula-
action within the Overseas Education Fund of the
tion of the U.S.

National Student Association by
League of Women Voters of the United States
RampartsPresident Lyndon Johnson formeda
(OEF/LWVUS).

committee to study  the question of covert ClA
The Overseas Education Fund is a non-profit,
financing of U.S.groups with international contacts.

non-member,educational affiliate of the League of
The three man committee was headed by Nicholas
Women Voters:It was established in1947by the
Katzenbach, then an Undersecretary of State and
League to aid individuals and organizations around
considered“friendly”to the ClA;assisting him were
theworldwho sought help indevelopingresponsible
Deputy ClA Director Richard Helms and Health
citizenries.OEF seeks to educate others in the
Education and Welfare Secretary John Gardener.

democratic concept aswell as to bring U.S.citizens to
In March,1968,the panel reported to President
therealization of the problems of emerging nations.non-member,educational affiliate of the League of
The three man committee was headed by Nicholas
Women Voters:It was established in1947by the
Katzenbach, then an Undersecretary of State and
League to aid individuals and organizations around
considered“friendly”to the ClA;assisting him were
theworldwho sought help indevelopingresponsible
Deputy ClA Director Richard Helms and Health
citizenries.OEF seeks to educate others in the
Education and Welfare Secretary John Gardener.

democratic concept aswell as to bring U.S.citizens to
In March,1968,the panel reported to President
therealization of the problems of emerging nations.

Johnson and recommended that“No federal agency
"OEF volunteers, consultants,and staff develop
shall provide covert assistance or support,direct or
the programs in response to reasonable requests.The
indirect,to any of thenation’seducational or private
directors of OEF are drawn from leaders of the
voluntary organizations."Subsequently,President
League, business,government,and the academic
Johnson signed an executive order to that effect.

community.Thefund issupported by tax-deductible
While the ClA began to seek exemptions from the
contributionsfromindividualsfoundations,and.S.

order for two of its major propaganda organs,Radio
based corporations, and by contracts with U.s.

Free Europe and Radio Liberty,the restrictions
governmentagencies.Beginningin1957,OEF'smajor
actually meant little to the CIA since the Agency
emphasis has been leadership training for Latin
budget is not subject to any form of public,
American women.

Congressional,or Executive audit,and the standard
The OEF began to work in Indonesid and
operating procedure is to place ClA funds in the
Malaysia during 1970 at the request ofyoluntary
budgets of other agencies such as theDepartments of
groups there.

The OEF exchanged leaders during
Defense,State,HEW,and the Agency for
1970-71withtheKorean Leagueof WomenVoters,
International Development.Congressional,or Executive audit,and the standard
The OEF began to work in Indonesid and
operating procedure is to place ClA funds in the
Malaysia during 1970 at the request ofyoluntary
budgets of other agencies such as theDepartments of
groups there.

The OEF exchanged leaders during
Defense,State,HEW,and the Agency for
1970-71withtheKorean Leagueof WomenVoters,
International Development.

alsoat.thattime aKorean League official toured the
During Fiscal Year 1973-74,over 70 percent of
U.S.under OEF auspices in order to study volunteer
the.total OEFbudget,$340,268.00,came fromState
programs.

To LatinAmerican women who have
Department and AID contracts and grants.The State
demonstrateda commitment to andacapacity for
Department's Office of Educational and Cultural
publicservice,theOEFoffersafourmonthinstitute
Affairs and the Agency for International Develop-
atBostonUniversity.

ment providedfunding through overt contractssigned
"A five week study/travel seminar is also available
withOEFofficials.

to Latin American women leaders brought to theU.S.

The grants and contracts awarded toOEFby these
on State Department International Visitors Grants.

government agencies are for a variety of programs and
Finally,OEFpublishes teaching materials inSpanish
supportactivities,such as the travel of OEF
andEnglish on organizational techniques.*
representatives andofficials,thestagingofworkshops
The first indications that the ClA strategy for
andseminarsin Latin America and Asia,aswellas for
manipulation ofprivate groups,asoutlined by Bissell,
thetravel of selected women to attend joint
was in effect against the women's movement came
OEF-State Department.seminars inside the United
from an OEF employee.Ann Roberts,who is also a
States.The grants and contracts awarded toOEFby these
on State Department International Visitors Grants.

government agencies are for a variety of programs and
Finally,OEFpublishes teaching materials inSpanish
supportactivities,such as the travel of OEF
andEnglish on organizational techniques.*
representatives andofficials,thestagingofworkshops
The first indications that the ClA strategy for
andseminarsin Latin America and Asia,aswellas for
manipulation ofprivate groups,asoutlined by Bissell,
thetravel of selected women to attend joint
was in effect against the women's movement came
OEF-State Department.seminars inside the United
from an OEF employee.Ann Roberts,who is also a
States.

member of the International Committee of the
While these funds and contracts can not be'traced
National Organization for Women,expressed concern
to an exact line number in the CIA.budget,the
that her employer might be assisting the ClA by
funding of such projects must be considered in light
collecting intelligence during a time of increasing
of the Katzenbach recommendation and the secrecy
political repression of women.

Her suspicions were
oftheCIAbudget itself;theKatzenbach
initiallyarousedwhenshereadaninternal
recommendation didnot outlaw government
memorandum regarding money received by OEF
financing of private institutions,only the laundering
from the AsiaFoundation.** Also,during the course
offunds through,private organizations.

of herworkMs.Roberts continually saw OEFreports
"Some Facts About OEF"The Overseas Education
on women leaders in South America and Asia.

The
Fund of the League of Women Voters,Washington,D.C.

final discovery that broughtMsRoberts to theFifth
010
Estate was when she learned that'the bulk of OEF's
The Asia Foundation is a knowh ClA conduit having
budget comes from theStateDepartment and
been established by the Agency in 1956.See also THE
CIA AND THE CULTOF INTELLIGENCE,Marchetti
the Agency for International Development
andMarks,Alfred A.Knopf,New York,1974.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The
Fund of the League of Women Voters,Washington,D.C. final discovery that broughtMsRoberts to theFifth
010
Estate was when she learned that'the bulk of OEF's
The Asia Foundation is a knowh ClA conduit having
budget comes from theStateDepartment and
been established by the Agency in 1956.See also THE
CIA AND THE CULTOF INTELLIGENCE,Marchetti
the Agency for International Development
andMarks,Alfred A.Knopf,New York,1974. CounterSpy/Page 13

--- PAGE BREAK ---Chilean middle
STRUCTURE AND PROGRAM
class women par-
The Overseas Education Fund is composed of a
ticipated in CIA
sponsored dem-
BoardofrustesaBoardofDirectors,twoprogram
onstrations ag-
ainst the Pop-
directors,and six fieldrepresentatives,along with an
ular Unity gov-
office staff of 15 in Washington,D.C.

ernment.This
Membership on the Board of Trustees overlaps
same class of
with membership on the Board of Directors of the
women are the
targets of the
LWV in a number of cases.

In general, the trustees
CIA-OEF oper-
have little to do with the daily operation of OEF,
ation in other
areas of Latin
concerning themselves mostly with the oversight of
America and
fund expenditures and similar matters.

Asia.

TheBoardofDirectorsiscomposedof
twenty-three people, mostly women located on the
east coast.A background check on members of the
Board shows that five individuals have spouses who
are engaged in international business,a position that
would bring them into contact with the Domestic
Contact Service of the CIA.

Other members of the Board have husbands who
are members of the Council on Foreign Relations and
are thus privy to briefings such as one conducted by
formerCIADeputy DirectorBissell forthe
Discussion Group on Intelligence and Foreign Policy
PRIVATEFUNDINGOFOEF
in January of1968.In total, three Board members
The Overseas Education Fund was originally
have family ties to the Council on Foreign Relations.

known as the Carrie Chapman Catt Memorial in
MembersoftheBoard oversee  thedaily
honor of the Wisconsin suffragette.Money from the
functioning of the Fund including the work of the
Carrie Chapman Catt Fellowship, the Percy Maxim
program directors.

The program directors provide
Lee Pioneer Fund,and the Georgianna Mitchell
support for the field representatives,assist with the
Memorial Fund is used to sustain a stock portfolio
raising of funds for their programs, and conduct
which provides OEF with a steady source of income.known as the Carrie Chapman Catt Memorial in
MembersoftheBoard oversee  thedaily
honor of the Wisconsin suffragette.Money from the
functioning of the Fund including the work of the
Carrie Chapman Catt Fellowship, the Percy Maxim
program directors.

The program directors provide
Lee Pioneer Fund,and the Georgianna Mitchell
support for the field representatives,assist with the
Memorial Fund is used to sustain a stock portfolio
raising of funds for their programs, and conduct
which provides OEF with a steady source of income.

In fiscal year 7374,$34,000was gleanedfrom this
foundation personnel.

portfolio.

The remainder of non-government funds
The current director of theLatin American
came from donations from corporations and private
Program is Louise Montgomery.

At this time the Asia
foundations.

Program has no named director.

The programs for
Three major oil companies (Caltex, Exxon, and
Latin America and Asia are parallel in many ways.

Mobil) with holdings in Latin America and/or Asia
The field representatives act as advisors to women's
gave money to OEF in 1973-74.

However, the
groups working in the areas of family planning and
amount of these donations isnot listed in theAnnual
education.

While these areas might appear trivial in
Report.

Donations from other corporations with
the overall scheme of intelligence collection,it is
holdings in these areas include United Brand
important to note that knowledge of growth rates
Foundation and International Telephone and
and educational levels in third world countries are
Telegraph （the transnational conglomoratethat
significant factors in the fofmation of intelligence
attempted to buy the services of the ClA).

area studies and future projections as to the basic
Additional private sector funds are generated
strengths and weaknesses of individual countries.

through foundation grants.--- PAGE BREAK ---

area studies and future projections as to the basic
Additional private sector funds are generated
strengths and weaknesses of individual countries. through foundation grants. As with the listings of
The field workers see their goals as,improving the
corporate donations, the OEF,report does not list the
“efficiency”of yolunteer women's organizations;
individual amounts of the grants.In this area, the
broadening their constituencies; and elevating their
Asia Foundation,the Rockefeller Brother'sFounda-
organizational influence. In order toaccomplish this,
tion,the Lilly Endowment Fund, the W.R. Grace
seminars are held by OEF personnel in both the
Foundation, and the lvy Foundation all made
United States and in the“host countries."In order·to
donations. The Asia Foundation has been previously
qualify for a seminar within the U.S., the women
listed as a ClA conduit; the Rockefeller foundation
selected are carefully screened.It is also interesting
has had a long term interest in Latin Americanaffairs
and important to note that the women chosen are
and as previously stated also gave money to the NSA
those who have potential aspolitical leaders. during the time that the CIA was funding its
The five week“Multinational Seminarheld-in the
operations; the Grace Foundation,whose President is
U.S.usuallybrings together 15 to 20 women to
Peter Grace also funds AIFLD.*
discuss such. topics as “Coordination of Resources for
Foundations donating to OEF in 1973-74with no
Community Action"During the course of the
apparent Agency ties are the Lasbury Foundation,
the Compton Trust,and the Hinerfeld Trust. Aside
from the corporate and foundation grants, private
AIFLD article this issue. donations in the neighborhood of $30,000,made as
OEF Annual Report,Overseas Education Fund ot the
memorials,were given by 190 people in 1973-74.**
League of Women Voters of the United States,Washing
ton,D.C.1974. CounterSpy/Page 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---seminar, the women discuss the conditions of their
appears to be Mrs.

Montgomery's key-contact with
respective countries,'attitudes prevalent with regard
the CIA.Firfer's career can be traced to such
tofamily planningand education,the work structures
controversies as the U.s.invasion of the Dominican
ofwomen's groups,and the bureaucracies that they
Republic,where he and other ClA personnel were
dealwith.

sent within daysof the April 28,1965landingof U.S.

In the last fiscal year,women from over 20
Marines.

countries,including Socialist leaders,were broughtto
After his assignment in the Dominican Republic,
the United States for the OEF seminars and briefings.

Firfer was sent to Vietnam,where hewasa Deputy to
In these ranks were women.in both government
the current CIA Director, William Colby.

Firfer's
service and inthe private sector from such countries
official titlewasDeputy DirectorofCivil Operations
asKorea,Malaysia,Thailand,Bangladesh,the
and Rural Deyelopment Support (CORDS).This was
the pacification effort thatserved as the cover for the
ThirdWorld.

CIA sponsored Phoenix assassination program.In
As a result of the workshops,personal meetings,
testimonybeforetheSenateArmedServices
and Multinational Seminars,OEF representatives and
Committee onJuly20,1973,a formerMarine Corps
staff collect large amounts of biographical data and
pacification officer,David Harrington,described a
personal information on the women that they are in
meeting held in DaNang in March,1969,in which
contact with.It was this extensive data collection
Colby,Firfer, several military pacification officers,
that originally upset Ms.

Roberts.

and local CiA personnel discussed the Phoenix
Wewere advised byMs.Roberts that the
program.According to Harrington,Firfer described
biographical data is routinely sentfrom OEF over to
the Phoenix program as arbitrary and out of control.Roberts.

and local CiA personnel discussed the Phoenix
Wewere advised byMs.Roberts that the
program.According to Harrington,Firfer described
biographical data is routinely sentfrom OEF over to
the Phoenix program as arbitrary and out of control.

the State Department According to former State
DepartmentIntelligence Officer,JohnMarks,
incoming information、of this nature would be
forwarded to the Intelligence and Research Bureau at
State.

Marks further stated that INR would then send
the information to CIA headquarters.in Langley,
Virginia as a matter of routine.

The compilation of data by OEFrepresentativesis
not,in an of itself,necessarily evil:all organizations
and bureaucracies become involved in a.certain
amount of information gathering in order to carry
out their jobs.What is questionable,however,is the
sharing of that information,either through delberate
complicity or negligence,with intelligence agencies
FIRFER,ALEXANDER: Born 4/6/1.

New York
supporting dictatorial and repressive governments in
University,BA,economics,1940.Location and
the Third World.

occupation between graduation and 1942 unknown.

Aside from the fact that the ClAwouldroutinely
1942-47
Office of Price Administration.Initial
receive any information passed onto the Bureau of
contact with U.S.

intelligence through
Intelligence and Research,OEF field representatives
participation in Strategic Bombing Survey
have directrelations with CIA case officers in Korea
ofGermany,1945.

and Panama,as well as relations with suspected CIA
1947-48
North Carolina State College:economics
personnel in several Asian cities,including Saigon and
instructor and private consultant.

Kuala Lampur.

1948-51FederalCommunicationsCommission:
As with ClA labor oriented operations,the largest
economist.

OEF/ClA operation is located in Latin America.OEF
1951-54
Small Defense Plants Administration.--- PAGE BREAK ---

1948-51FederalCommunicationsCommission:
As with ClA labor oriented operations,the largest
economist. OEF/ClA operation is located in Latin America.OEF
1951-54
Small Defense Plants Administration. has a staff of six field representatives in Latin
1954-58
Puerto Rico:Economic Development
America;five Latino women and one North American
Administration. woman. ThesixaresupervisedbyLouise
1958-62
Caracas:U.S.political officer assigned to
Montgomery, the OEF Latin American Program. United Nations. Director based in Washington,D.C. OEF works
1960
Taiwan:temporaryduty，assignment
primarily with middle class women's organizations in
unknown. Bolivia,Ecuador,Peru,and the Dominican Republic. 4/62-5/65'LaPaz,Bolivia:AIDdirector. OEF had a project in Chile until 1971,and is
5/65-1/6
Dominican Republic:AID director,sent
currently consideringits re-establishment. within 1 week of U.S.invasion. Mrs. Montgomery closely supervises the work of
1/6-10/70 Saigon and Danang:Special Assistant to
her field representatives,and frequently travels to
William Colby,Civil Operations and Rural
OEF work sites to consult with-her staff. She also
Development Support, cover for CIA
maintains a close relationship,through,visits and
Phoenix assassination program. correspondence,with a CiA case officer stationed in
10/70-
Panama:AID director,serves as contact
Panama. between CIA and Overseas Education
The ClAcaseofficer,Alexander Firfer,is
Fund field representatives and program
currently the U.S. AlD director for Panama,and
director. CounterSpy/Page 15

--- PAGE BREAK ---OEF's outreach in Latin America is impressive,
Since1961,over400womenleadershave
participated in Multinational Seminars in the United
tt
States,and countless othershave attendedeither the
re
“curso”intensive training sessions.According to one
in
OEF report, over 13,000 Latin American women
leaders are reached through its policy of follow
through with seminar andworkshop alumnae.

SC
Skeptics who might doubt the value of the CIA
relating to middle class women's organizations should
look to the precedent of the 1973 Chilean coup.

SCHINDLER,SOL:Born/21/24.Universityoflowa,
A
After the ClA financed the trucker's strike against the
A
BA1949,MA1951.

Popular Unity government, thus creating a food
th
1943-46U.S.Army,overseas duty,job unknown.

shortage, middle class women were bussed to the
F
1953-66
Rangoon: Director of Burma-American
poorest sections of Santiago to stage their famous
Institute.

“pots and pans” demonstrations.

It has been charged
5/52-7/59 Surbabya:public affairs assistant.

tr
that both the trucker's strike and the pots and pans
7/59-9/62 New Dehli:“book translations officer"
demonstration were financed.with part of the $8
9/62-6/66 Belgrade:book officer.

million used to destabilize the Popular Unity
6/66-12/67Saigon:Director,Vietnamese-American
government.

Association,a ClA proprietary function.

An additional factor in working with middle class
12/67-/70 Washington,D.C..

women is their leadership in the areas of family
6/72-
Seoul:cultural affairs officer.

planning/birth control andeducation.

Educational
Internal documents obtained from sources inside
programs are directly related to the future production
the OEF show that both Louise Montgomery and her
levels of Third World countries:family planning and
predecessor,Joyce Holt,provideFirferwithextensive
birth control are linked to population;areas that are
information concerning OEF work and contacts in
the subject of revolutionary demands in Latin
Latin America.From a sampling of the Firfer-Holt
America.planning/birth control andeducation.

Educational
Internal documents obtained from sources inside
programs are directly related to the future production
the OEF show that both Louise Montgomery and her
levels of Third World countries:family planning and
predecessor,Joyce Holt,provideFirferwithextensive
birth control are linked to population;areas that are
information concerning OEF work and contacts in
the subject of revolutionary demands in Latin
Latin America.From a sampling of the Firfer-Holt
America.

and Firfer-Montgomery correspondence on file at
The mobilization of middle class women, be it in
OEF headquarters,it can be shown that OEF officials
Latin America or in Asia, requires knowledge of
provided Firfer with biographical information on
friends as well as foes;it requires dossiers and
OEF contacts and seminar participants,photographs
personal contacts,updated information on attitudes
ofthese women,background information on a
and political beliefs,andavarietyof similar
woman highly placed in the government of Columbia,
information.

and similar material.

Firfer also receivedreports on internal Panamanian
organizations involved infamilyplanning and
education efforts.

After receiving a report onone
such organization from an OEF field representative,
Firfer and Louise Montgomery signed an AID
"contract” for an in-depth study of that group.

The
study was done by Jean Updike, the only North
American field representative working for OEF in
Latin America.

When OEF officials travel to Latin America,Firfer
is one of the key people they visit.

Shortly after
HESS,CLYDE:Born2/22/23
Louise Montgomery assumed the position of Program
1943-46U.S.Army,jobunknown,overseas duty
Director,in November 1972,she recalled allof her
1946-52Newsand editorialwriter forvarious
field representatives for several weeks of meetings in
papers and stations.

Washington,D.C.

Montgomery wrote to Firfer and
1952-55
Whereabouts unknown.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Washington,D.C. Montgomery wrote to Firfer and
1952-55
Whereabouts unknown. advised him that all of theOEF field representatives
2/55-6/58Baghdad,
IndiaU.s.Information
wouldstop and visit him enroute to theirhome basis
Agency. in Peru, Columbia, and Ecuador. In this fashion,
6/58-8/59
Khartoum:U.S.Information Agency. Firfer is briefed on the ongoing activities of theOEF
8/59-4/62
Intelligence research officer,later Chief
representatives. ofArab Branch,Near East-South
While it would be naive to assume that Firfer is the
Asian-African Division. only CIA agent opeating under U.S.AID cover in
4/62-5/63 NewDehli:"press attache."
Latin America,his is the name that constantly
5/63-8/65Karachi:“information officer. appears in the OEF correspondence.Other U.S. AID
8/65-6/66Washington,D.C. officials named inOEF documents are either
6/66-10/68Saigon:"information officer"
legitimate AID employees or have insufficient
10/68-
Seoul:Chief of “news and curent
background informationlistedintheirAID
events’section,USIA. biographies to make a valid judgement. CounterSpy/Page 16

--- PAGE BREAK ---Such information isroutinely collected as part of
The KCiA was thoroughly aware and extremely
the Multinational Seminars and training sessions.

upset about our meeting in Qwang-ju;a couple of
Each participant in the Multinational Seminar is
agents did come to the meeting and stoodwith their
requiredtocompletea:formthatrequires
earsglued to the door for awhile tohearwhatwas
information concerning avariety of demographic
goingon.

concerns,including active political parties and
'm terribly glad this happened to be the moment
"pressure groups”,labor organizations,and other
Ipassed by.The moral support value of OEF's
social and economicfactors.

interest is incalcuable in addition to which,our
THEASIAN CONNECTIONS
havinggone through thisperiodwith theKLWVwill,
Karen Smith is the OEF'sonly representative in
I'msure,stand usingoodsteadinfuture timeswhen
Asia,a position shehasheld since OEFestablished its
theclimatechanges."
Asian program in 1970.In addition to working for
Inaddition to her meetings with the Korean
the OEF,Ms.

Smith serves as a consultant to the Asia
women,Ms.

Smith had ameeting with two CIA
officers stationed at the U.S.Embassy in Seoul.She
Foundation in Saigon.

Ms.Smith had ameeting with two CIA
officers stationed at the U.S.Embassy in Seoul.She
Foundation in Saigon.

Ms.

Smith makes her home in Indonesia, but
met with Clyde Hess.and Sol Schindler;Hess is a
travels toanumberof other countries including
known ClA case officer operating inthe Newsand
42
ed by security agencies,the political police of SouthVietnam have imprisoned thousands ofwomen
they believed to beinvolved in anti-government activities.While themost widely known of these women
is attorney Ngo Ba Than,women such as those above suffer daily from jail and torture.These photos
were smuggled out of a Vietnamese prison where officials were re-classifying the women as common
Vietnam,Malaysia,Thailand,and Korea.One ofher
Lurrent Affairs Section of the U.S.Information
trips to Korea occurred during last fall's crisis and
Agency,Schindler operates under the coverofa
demonstrations against the dictatorial practices of
Cultural Affairs officer.

Korean President Park Chung Hee.Her report back to
Inher report toOEFheardquarters,Smith
OEF headquarters provided aninteresting look at her
reassured her superiors that Clydewas extremely
work.

warm-and interested in both ourwork ingeneral,
Ms.Smith wrote that:
abouthandlingdetailsfor,our.regular.seminarnext
"There were terrifically important events taking
spring,and being able to help one way or another
place three andfour a day during theperiodI was
with theU.S.Study Tour."
thereandbecauseofthefactthatIwasmanyhours
Other correspondence shows that Ms.

Smith was in
every day withKimChongRye I heard all of them.

contact with lrving Chessler,a CIA case officer who
The major dramatic event taking place during that
until recently was based in Kuala.Lampur.Chessler
period,andwhich was reported in the English
was recently transferred to Dacca,India,and Smiths
newspaperswasanationwidejournalists andreporters
newcontactinJualaLampur.couldnotbe
protest over news censorship.

But that was only one
ascertained.--- PAGE BREAK ---

contact with lrving Chessler,a CIA case officer who
The major dramatic event taking place during that
until recently was based in Kuala.Lampur.Chessler
period,andwhich was reported in the English
was recently transferred to Dacca,India,and Smiths
newspaperswasanationwidejournalists andreporters
newcontactinJualaLampur.couldnotbe
protest over news censorship. But that was only one
ascertained. of many- some known to the public and some
The activities of Karen Smith,hercontact with
known only to thewhisperingnetwork... known CiA case officers and her close association
CounterSpy/Page 17

--- PAGE BREAK ---with a ClA propriety organization clearly indicate
organization.It.is unfortunate that exposure of this
that wittingly or unwittingly,Karen Smith isworking
covert operation will cause divisions within the
for the CIA.

organization （perhaps a latent function of the
operation),however, the extent of the operation as
CONCLUSIONS
well asitsramificationsforotherwomen's
Alumnae of OEF seminars and training sessions
organizations leave us with no alternative.

It is now
cover a wide spectrum of local organizational leaders
the responsibility of the women at OEF to root out
including the mayors of several towns and cabinet
the ClA cooperatives within their midst.

levelassistants.Thescreeningproceduresof
The inherent danger in releasing this story is that it
applicants for OEF programs has brought the
will tend to generate paranoia within organizations
organization into contact with thousands of women
throughout thewomen's movementIt is our
in the developing nations,and therefore itis in no
contention that such paranoia can be diffused by
way coincidental that the OEF and their international
scientific examination of facts.While it is safe to
contacts have been involved in the web of CiA covert
assume that the ClA has other operations targeted
operations.

against the women's movement, to date we have no
Given the fact,it has been difficult to construct
concrete evidence to support that assumption.

this article so as to minimize negative repercussions
Hopefully,those who suspect thata similar
withjnthe women'smovement.However,once
manipulation is takingplace within their organization
presented with the evidence the Fifth Estate had no
will approach theproblem logically;determining the
choice but to actWe feel that we have analyzed the
source of funds for their organization as well as the
situation as objectively as possible.against the women's movement, to date we have no
Given the fact,it has been difficult to construct
concrete evidence to support that assumption.

this article so as to minimize negative repercussions
Hopefully,those who suspect thata similar
withjnthe women'smovement.However,once
manipulation is takingplace within their organization
presented with the evidence the Fifth Estate had no
will approach theproblem logically;determining the
choice but to actWe feel that we have analyzed the
source of funds for their organization as well as the
situation as objectively as possible.

history and fund granting methods of those.sources;
The manipulation of the Overseas Education Fund
andresearching thebackgrounds ofindividuals within
and the League of Women Voters is but another
their organizations that they may be unsure of.

chapter in the ClA's history of covert intelligence
At a time in history when women are stepping into
operations.

This is a textbook example of the
the leadership in traditional and radical politics,
philosophy of CiA penetration of private organiza-
worldwide political repression of certain groups of
tions: In practice, the operation is a carbon copy of
women is also increasing.

As Karen Smith reports to
the CIA/NSA activity in the mid-60's.

the Asia Foundation representative in Saigon or the
The facts arefogicyiuo
CIA case officers in Seoul,Asian women are being
1.ClA funds are buried in the:budgets of other
tortured by the Dictatorships.of NGUYEN Van Thieu
government organizations,including the State
and Park Chung Hee.As Louise Montgomery weighs
Department and Agency for international
the possibility of re-establishing an OEF project in
Development.

CHILE, the Pinochet junta continues to torture and
2.Both the State Department and AID have
murder the women and men who are considered to be
provided cover for ClA operations in the past.

dangerous because of their political beliefs.CHILE, the Pinochet junta continues to torture and
2.Both the State Department and AID have
murder the women and men who are considered to be
provided cover for ClA operations in the past.

dangerous because of their political beliefs.

3.Approximately 70% of the OEF budget comes
Itwould be a tragedy and a grave error for
from AID and State Department grants and
women's-organizations  toforsakeinternational
contracts.c.

contacts because they do not wish to deal with the
4.The balance ofOEF funds comes from
possible manipulation of their organizations.

The
foundations and individual grants,including
international solidarity of women is becominga
grants from foundations.that have a history of
viable political force; there are oppressed women
funnelingCiA funds
throughout the world who need the support of their
5.The OEF Asian representative,Karen Smith,
serves.as a consultant for the ClA's propriety,
CIA/OEF operation will soon be dismantled,other
the Asia Foundation,in addition to filing
attempts to manipulate womenwill meet with a
reports with CiA case officers in Malaysia,
similar fate.

Korea,and Kuala Lampur.

6.The OEF Latin AmericanProgram Director,
BIBLIOGRAPHY
LousieMontgomery,and herpredecessor,
Harrington,David Sheridan,"Statement before the Senate
Joyce Holt,have provided intelligence informa-
Armed Services Committee",July 20,1973.

tion to Alex Firfer.

Firfer is a known CIA
Marchett,Victor and Marks,John,THE CIA AND THE
officerformerly associatedwith the CIA
CULTOF INTELLiGENCE,Alfred A.Knopf,New York,
Phoenix program
1974.

Onthe basisofinterviews uwith OEF staff
members,it is evident that knowledge of this ClA
OEF Annual Report,Overseas Education Fund of the League
operation is limited to a very smallnumber of people
of Women Voters of the United States,Washington,D.C.

within the organization.

It is clear that the women
1974.

involved believe in the stated goals of the projects and
RAMPARTS Magazine,"CIA/NSA",Sol Stern,March,1967.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is clear that the women
1974. involved believe in the stated goals of the projects and
RAMPARTS Magazine,"CIA/NSA",Sol Stern,March,1967. see the OEF asa vehicle for helping to integrate third
world women into the political processes of their
"Some Facts About OEF",The Overseas Education Fund of
particular countries.lt is not our office to sit in
the League of Women Voters,Washington,D.C. judgement of the merits or lack of same of the OEF
THE NATIONAL VOTER",Vol.XXIV,No.3,League of
strategy;but rather to expose the covert operations
Women Voters of the United States,Washington, D.C
being carried on by.the Agency within this women’s
1974. CounterSpy/Page 18

--- PAGE BREAK ---Exposing The CIA
006
Commentary By
Philip Agee
05698587
2.000
During the1960'swhen
workedasaCiA
would have made life impossible for me.

I wondered
operations officer in LatinAmerica,l oftenreflected
if my “friends”on the right and in the “center”
on the exceptional number and variety of operations
would have been able to protect me.

Butno one ever
that.l took over from other officersorinitiated
bothered me because no one knew,really,the scope
myselfAt times,more experienced men observed
of my.work,and of the overall station's operational
that.l was fortunate.to be gaining experience in
programswhereverIwas working.

But times are different now.As each new spateof
operations with governmentministers to communist
revelations:of ClA operations occurs, the pattern
party penetration operations,to surveillance teams,
emerges more clearly.The1967revelations,theClA's
telephone tapping,and trade union operations.

support to the Watergate coverup, the revelations of
“destabilization"operations against theAllende
One of the keys to my capacity to work on many
government, CiA And The Cult Of Intelligence by
operations at once,thereby tocontribute ina
John Marks and Victor Marchetti, my book,and
proportionatelygreater.way to.ClA goals,was the
others yet to appear-all these revelations help to
lack ofany opposition of significance.

In most of
reveal a pattern of ClA support to minority Third
Latin America,indeed in much of the Third World,
Worldregimes that inflict terriblerepression ontheir
the local security forceswerepenetrated and
own people in order to retain power and priviledge.

manipulated by CIA-in some cases they were the
Countries that welcome exploitation of their natural
very creatures of the Agency-in such a manner that
resources and workers by transnational companies.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In most of
reveal a pattern of ClA support to minority Third
Latin America,indeed in much of the Third World,
Worldregimes that inflict terriblerepression ontheir
the local security forceswerepenetrated and
own people in order to retain power and priviledge. manipulated by CIA-in some cases they were the
Countries that welcome exploitation of their natural
very creatures of the Agency-in such a manner that
resources and workers by transnational companies. These minority regimes,in fact,have no other role
or jeopardize the （ClA) station's “unilateral"(i.e.,
than to serve their own interests by serving the
unknown to the local service)operations.Similarly,
interestsofforeign,artcularly,corporatons
while my name appeared from time-to-time in the
No longer can ignorance of ClA's operations and
localleftwingpressasa CIA officer,noone ever
of the purpose and effect of those operationsbe
demonstrated hostility to me, picketed my home,
allowed to delay positive action to defeat them.Now
threatened me if I didn't feave the country，or made
more than ever,concerned Americans, together with
mefeel uncomfortablein some other way.I.was
the ThirdWorld peoples victimized by ClA and the
allowed to achieve all the mischief I could,always
economic and social injustices that CiA enforces,can
with jmpunity,and restrained (sic)only by internal
discover:what ClA isall about. CIA procedures and practicesOfficers experiencedin
What can be done.to defeat this sinister secret
Europeanutiwvewreteit
police force? precautions andprocedures wererequired,were able
One effort could be directed towards elaboratinga
to handle only a fraction of the operations that we
set of indicators.which would be based on known
types of ClA operations that have visible effects-the
Iused to think that if left-wing Ecuadoreans,
construction of a composite model in other words. Such a model might also include non-CIA factors
statements,levelsofmilitaryandeconomicaidevels
CounterSpy/Page 19think that if left-wing Ecuadoreans,
construction of a composite model in other words. Such a model might also include non-CIA factors
statements,levelsofmilitaryandeconomicaidevels
CounterSpy/Page 19

--- PAGE BREAK ---ofcredits from international institutions such as the
expulsions,which will not beuncommon,the people
World Bank,the IMF （International Monetary Fund),
themselves will have to decide what they must do.to
regional development banks,as well as private
rid themselvesof ClA.

financial institutions.

Once the model is constructed,
Some may object that,in the face of such a
a search for appropriate indicators in the country of
campaign,CIA will simply change itscover
interest,e.g.,Portugal,could proceed.

What one
mechanismsand make identification more difficult.

might have at any given moment would be a greater
This will indeed occur,butsomanyClApeople can
or lesser certainty that destabilization programs
beidentified from personal knowledge and past
against a country's left-wing and/or nationalist forces.

covers alreadya part of thepublicrecords,that more
are increasing or decreasing.

But in the absence of
effective cover will be difficult and very slow to
access to documents or to a participating CIA
develop.

Meanwhile,important steps can be.taken to
employee who wants to talk,such an effort must
weaken the Agency and its support of injustice.

remain highly speculative.

In Qctober 19741announced the namesand
Other efforts might well be directed towards
addresses.in MexicoCity of 35official cover
lobbying against ClA and raising public consciousness
（Embassy) CIA people and two non-official cover
in the US against this organization.

But given the
people.

Probably about ten more non-official cover.

overwhelming defeat in October 1974of Senator.

people were working in Mexico City posing as
Abourezk's amendment toprohibit illegal ClA
students, businessmen, tourist,or retired people.overwhelming defeat in October 1974of Senator.

people were working in Mexico City posing as
Abourezk's amendment toprohibit illegal ClA
students, businessmen, tourist,or retired people.

activity,one cannot be sanguine about effective
Within.afew days,both-theChiefofStation,Richard
congressional restraints on the Agency-the Congress,
Sampson,and the Deputy Chief of Station Jonathan
Hauke,were withdrawn from Mexico.Perhaps others
commit all kinds of crimes in the name of the
on the list will be withdrawn soon,or expelled,or
American people.

Someday,perhaps, the Congress
neutralized by the Mexican people.

As a former
may include enough fair-minded people to curtail
operations officer,Ican assure you that such、
CIA and other interventionist agencies, but action
precipitate withdrawals are very disruptive andreduce
should be taken now by those who are concerned.

the effectiveness of the whole station program.Those
The most effective and important systematic
whoremain will have to bewareofaction by the
efforts to combat ClA that can be undertaken right
Mexican people and will have to install greater
now are,I think, the identification,exposure,and
security devices in their operations-thus reducing
neutralization of its people working abroad.Working
their capacities.

through careful analysisof the US government
Similarrevelations(including those in this
employees country by country abroad,the CIA
magazine) are going to follow, but l believe this
people can be identified and exposed through
campaign should be organized in a systematicway by
periodic bulletins disseminatedtosubscribers,
concerned Americans in the U.S,perhaps in the way
particularly individuals and organizations in the
thatcertainof theearlierefforts againstthe Vietnam
foreign country in question.

Photographs and home
War.wereundertaken.Surelyif one opposed
addresses in the foreign capitol or Consular cities
intervention against theVietnamese people,one,
should be included.through careful analysisof the US government
Similarrevelations(including those in this
employees country by country abroad,the CIA
magazine) are going to follow, but l believe this
people can be identified and exposed through
campaign should be organized in a systematicway by
periodic bulletins disseminatedtosubscribers,
concerned Americans in the U.S,perhaps in the way
particularly individuals and organizations in the
thatcertainof theearlierefforts againstthe Vietnam
foreign country in question.

Photographs and home
War.wereundertaken.Surelyif one opposed
addresses in the foreign capitol or Consular cities
intervention against theVietnamese people,one,
should be included.

Having this information, the
would also have to oppose the lower level and usually
peoples victimized by the CiA and the economic
quieter intervention by the CIA.

exploitation that ClA enforces can bring pressure on
This.

campaign could remove the key to CIA
their,so-often compromised governments to expell
effectiveness in destabilizing progressive and revolu-
theClA people.

And,in the absence of such
tionary forces seeking social justice and national
dignity in the Third World.That key is secrecy,and
when it is peled away, there, standing naked and
exposed for all tosee,is the CIA secret policeman,
who only hours before was lurking in the darkness to
bribe a military officer,a student leader,a journalist,
a politician,and a trade unionist.

Take away secrecy
and the ClA officer.become impotent.

We know enough of what CIA does to resolve to
oppose it.What we should do now is to identify and
expose each of the people who instruments and
execute CIA's programs.

People failed to campaign
effectively against the ClA in the past because the
ClA programs and people were unknown.

Now that
impedimentis being removed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

People failed to campaign
effectively against the ClA in the past because the
ClA programs and people were unknown. Now that
impedimentis being removed. Philip Agee worked with the Central Intelligence Agencyfor twelve years as anoperations otficerin Ecuador,Uruguay,and
Mexico.ln1969,heleft theAgency,disgusted withwhathed doneandresolvingto do something aboutit.Hisforthcoming
bookInsideTheCompany:CADiaristheresultof thatresolutiohThebookwhichwillbepulished in theUnited tatein
that deserve to be studied by every American. organization like the Centralnteligence AgncyWhen he leed aboutourplansforthisisueof CountrSpyMrAgee
graciously consented to contribute the following commentary,presenting his view of the problem.This article is thefirst tobe
CounterSpy/Page 20

--- PAGE BREAK ---Chiefs of Station:
Who's Who and What They Do.

In the wake.of revelations about covert operations
abroad,and intelligence operations at home, the
Central Intelligence Agency stands in the middle ofa
storm of controversy.

Members of Congress and
editorial writersare callingfor the abolition ofcovert
operations by.the ClA.A handful of Congressional
Committees.and a Presidential Blue Ribbon Panel
have promised to investigate the situation.And the
Agency itself is purging the leftover cold-warriors in
its midst.When the ardent breezes from Capitol Hill
wane,knowledgeable insiders claim thatgovernment
will have responded to public sentiment with stern
promises that future ClA activities will be strictly
controlled.

ThePresident and theDirector of Central
Intelligence,William Colby,oppose those forces that
would have covert operations abolished.Colby admits
that abolishment would not seriously impair the
national security of the United States.But,they
argue,covert operations give the President a foreign
policy option somewhere between diplomaticpostur-
ing and open intervention.

In fact, covert operations are more than just an
option.

Since Congress left a tiny loophole in the
National Security Actof1947,covert operations and
the clandestine network required to support them,
have been used on a literally daily basis to enforce
foreign policy.In fact, covert operations are more than just an
option.

Since Congress left a tiny loophole in the
National Security Actof1947,covert operations and
the clandestine network required to support them,
have been used on a literally daily basis to enforce
foreign policy.

Covert operations and their support
are big business,utilizing $550million of ClA's $750
million annual budget,and 80 per cent of that
agency's employees.And these figures do notinclude
$50 to $100 million set aside for.use by the CIA
Dugald Stermer/Psychosources
director in emergencies,and thousands of“contract
employees."
clandestine apparati ofAgency employees posing
Colby maintains that the current era of detente
underavarietyof
"covers",
local informers,
has brought a much lower level of covert operations
proprietary organizations,and technical facilities.As
than in pastyears.Other sources,primarily foreign
technological development has made it possible for
newspapers and governmentshowever,ndicate that
almost all intelligence to be collected without using
covert operations are continuing on a level compar-
agents,it is clear that this clandestine infrastructure
able to past eras.

In recent months allegations have
has only one purpose:covert activities.

been made that operations have occurred or are
Most of these covert activities have taken place
occurring in：Vietnam,Thailand,Laos,Cambodia,
within the emergingnations of the Third World.The
Portuglnusf,e,
initial rationale for targeting these countries arose out
ofbelief that the Third World was to be the
Ethiopia and Great Britain.For the present,of
battleground of the Cold War.

In recent years a new
course,all indications of covert activity remain
rationale has developedasThirdWorld countrieshave
exhibited an increasing tendency to exercise their
tion.Asin the past,the CentralIntelligence Agency
sovereignty over raw.materials and overseas invest-
ments integral to the present-economy of the United
in progress.--- PAGE BREAK ---

been made that operations have occurred or are
Most of these covert activities have taken place
occurring in：Vietnam,Thailand,Laos,Cambodia,
within the emergingnations of the Third World.The
Portuglnusf,e,
initial rationale for targeting these countries arose out
ofbelief that the Third World was to be the
Ethiopia and Great Britain.For the present,of
battleground of the Cold War. In recent years a new
course,all indications of covert activity remain
rationale has developedasThirdWorld countrieshave
exhibited an increasing tendency to exercise their
tion.Asin the past,the CentralIntelligence Agency
sovereignty over raw.materials and overseas invest-
ments integral to the present-economy of the United
in progress. States.The ClA presence within socialist countries is
Covert operations do not occur in a void,The
usually much.more oriented towards intelligence
collection and analysis. Regio
CounterSpy/Page 21
b

--- PAGE BREAK ---Present CIA Director Colby and his predicessor Richard Helms.

Both men in practice
are firm beleivers in Covert Actions.

Bufeaucratically speaking, this clandestine net-
technical support facilities that cannot be housed in
LA
work and the covert operations it spawns,operates
Embassies and Consulates.

under the Directorate of Operations -better-known
Those ClA personnel living under diplomatic cover
as Clandestine Services- section of the Central
are relatiyely easy,to spot.Other intelligence services,
Intelligence Agency.Two of the Agency's other three
Directorates,Management and Services,and Science
nationals employed by the Embassy have little or no
andTechnology are largely used by Clandestine
trouble spottingClA personnel.Deadgiveawaysfor
Services.

Management of this clandestine infrastruc-
the casually interested person include exotic locks on
ture begins with ten ClA officers appointed by Colby
office doorsra health insurance plan different from
thatof State Departmentemployees (with readily
operational functions.(This is one of the widely
available premium records),and cryptic references in
trumpeted reforms instituted by Colby.)Moving
the State Department's Biographic Register toperiods
down theline,analytical and managerial functions are
of-time assigned.to one of.the militaryservicesasan
performed by various staffs that are divided along
"analyst".

The fact that other intelligence services and host
personnel within their particular area.

Until the
governments are usually aware of the CIA's presence
recent shift in the internal situation in Ethiopia,for
has never really troubled the Agency.

The United
example,ClA's Africa liaison officer was stationed at
States and the Soviet Union, for-instance,regularly
a secret National Security Agency/ClA base within
swap names of intelligence personnel assigned to each
thatcountry.

other's countries for“area familiarization”purposes.The United
example,ClA's Africa liaison officer was stationed at
States and the Soviet Union, for-instance,regularly
a secret National Security Agency/ClA base within
swap names of intelligence personnel assigned to each
thatcountry.

other's countries for“area familiarization”purposes.

And while the ClA isn't about toopen overseas
within the CiA infrastructure are known as Chiefs of
branch offices,ala Chase Manhattan Bank, there are
Station(CoS）.Usuallylocated within theU.Scertain advantages to letting your presence be'known
Embassy compound, Chiefs af Station are charged
Disgruntled individualshave little trouble locating.the
withmaintaining,creating,and exploiting the
Agency,and Third World security forcesoften look
infrastructure within a given country.

CiA influence
to the CiA for technical assistance.

within political parties,civic associations, student
In some countries,particularly when a potentially
groups,labor unions,media,the military and other
explosive political situation may be brewing,a ClA
governmental agencies can accurately be described as
officer may be installed as Ambassador.

Richard
a web with the Chief of Station at its center.

Helms,former Director of Central Intelligencewas
and other CiA personnel with cover stories,hiding
forced him to leave.his post.And-political parties in
themamong real Foreign Service Officers,and
Venezuela have reacted to the nomination of Harry
providing them with diplomatic immunity.In many
W:Shlaudeman as U.S.

Ambassador by charging.that
countries,CIA personnel are found in the U.S.

he is.a CIA operative being sent in to subdue the
Embassy's"political" section.

increasinglynationalist policiesof thatcountry
InnationswhereU.S.

presence is extensive
U.S.Foreign Policy,both overt and covert
additional managerial personnel known.as Chiefs of
IS
Base (COB) may be located within U.S.

Consulates
team”concept.This “country team’”,nominally
and/or military facilities.--- PAGE BREAK ---

presence is extensive
U.S.Foreign Policy,both overt and covert
additional managerial personnel known.as Chiefs of
IS
Base (COB) may be located within U.S. Consulates
team”concept.This “country team’”,nominally
and/or military facilities. In India,for instance, the
headed by the ambassador,is.composed.of the
CIA maintains four known facilities at New Delhi,
highest ranking foreign service officers within-a given
Bombay,Calcutta and Madras.All these facilities are
country, including the Cos.Its job is to:concretize
under diplomatic guise.In Germany,on the other
the often vague platitudes issued by Washington.The
hand, CiA activity is mixed between military and
ClA'srolein allthis,of course,istheimplementation
diploamtic facilities. In many areas where the CIA
of clandestine aspects of foreign policy,a rolethat
uses military bases for.cover,these bases house large
has been unquestioned until lately. CounterSpy/Page 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---An example of this clandestine policy and
that makes them possible.

The world wide infrastruc-
implementation can be seen with tensions that
ture maintained by the ClA intervenes in the affairs
existed between the U.S.and Cuba during the early
of other nations on a daily basis, not “from time to
1960's.The goal of U.S.foreign policy was to isolate
time as the National Security Council may direct.

Cuba from the rest of the non-communist world.In
Despite the national debate currently in progress,
Latin America, governments were pressured to break
the American public is still being asked to leave
diplomatic relations.

Those governments that op-
evaluation ofthisnation's security forces to
dubiously qualified experts.

The record of such
experiencing internal strife and economic chaos,
experts in overseeing the activities of the Central
directed,of course,by the ClA.

Governments in
Intelligence Agency is clear: power continues to be
Ecuador and Argentina, among others, were over-
abused,nations and peoples are being denied the right
thrown as the result of ClA activities.

of self determination,and the clandestine infrastruc
The range of covert actions available to the CiA is
ture that makes covert action possible continues to
limitless where a strong infrastructure exists,and can
remain unchecked.

Since foreign intelligence services,host countries,
right-wing slogans on walls.

Most actions are approved
and other interested parties have an awareness of the
by staff within the Directorate of Operations, with
CIA's world-wide clandestine presence, the American
only the larger and more expensive ones going to the
people have a right to know as much as those outside
National Security Council or the Forty Committee
the United States do.The time has come for the
for approval.

cloak of secrecy surrounding the activities of the ClA
to be examined and cut down to size,a size that
Two catagories of covert action exist: Psychologic-
reflects the people'sright to know.Most actions are approved
and other interested parties have an awareness of the
by staff within the Directorate of Operations, with
CIA's world-wide clandestine presence, the American
only the larger and more expensive ones going to the
people have a right to know as much as those outside
National Security Council or the Forty Committee
the United States do.The time has come for the
for approval.

cloak of secrecy surrounding the activities of the ClA
to be examined and cut down to size,a size that
Two catagories of covert action exist: Psychologic-
reflects the people'sright to know.

al Warfare and Paramilitary.

Psychological Warfare
Inkeepingwith the belief of the Fifth Estate that
actions,as defined by former ClA agent Philip Agee,
the people have a right to know about the nature of
include “propaganda (also known simply as media),
their security forces,and Philip Agees statement
work in youth and student organizations,work in
elsewhere in this magazine,following is a list of the
labor organizations（trade unions,etc.),work in
ClA's Chiefs of Station and Chiefs of Base from
professional and cultural groups,and in political
around the world.

The list is accurate as of June,
parties."He goes on to define paramilitary actions as
1974,and contains as many personnel working under
"infiltration into denied areas,sabotage,economic
diplomatic cover as we were.able to locate.

Due to
warfare,personal harassment,air and maritime
transfers and other causes,there may be a few
support,weaponry, training and support for small
inaccuracies.

armies."
For purposes of this list, CAS means “Controlled
The Chief of Station is charged with overseeing the
American Source,a name used to route information
use of these techniques and the network of contacts
to intelligence offices.

CAS-Kabul
CAS-Brussels
Brazilia,Brazil
U.S.Embassy
U.S.Embassy
COS Wilfred D.Koplowitz -Born June
Wazir Akbar Khan Mina
27 Blvd.du Regent
24,1925.Has served inParis.armies."
For purposes of this list, CAS means “Controlled
The Chief of Station is charged with overseeing the
American Source,a name used to route information
use of these techniques and the network of contacts
to intelligence offices.

CAS-Kabul
CAS-Brussels
Brazilia,Brazil
U.S.Embassy
U.S.Embassy
COS Wilfred D.Koplowitz -Born June
Wazir Akbar Khan Mina
27 Blvd.du Regent
24,1925.Has served inParis.

Kabul,Afghanistan,
Brussels,Belgium
COS-Samuel H.

Rickard Ill-born,New
COS Michael S.

Thompson- Born,
CAS-Recife
U.S,Consulate General
Jersey,July 10,1924;Graduated from
England,February 20,1928;Joined CIA
1956.

Has served in Rabat,Congo,
Rua Goncalves Maia 163
GeorgetownUniversity in 1950.Has
served in Burma,India and Ethiopia.

Recife,Brazil
Algeria.

COB Thomas J.

Barrett, Jr.

A0
CAS-Algeria
CAS-Rio de Janeiro
EmbassyofSwitzerland
CAS-Antwerp
U.S.Consulate General
U.S.Interests Section
U.S.Consulate General
Avenida Presidente Wilson,147
4Chemin Cheikh Bachir Brahimi
Algiers,Algeria
64-68Frankrijklei
Rio de Janeiro,Brazil
Antwerp,Belgium
COBStephenF.Creane
COS-Edward R.M.Kane -Born, Massa-
一Born
COB Rowland E.

Roberts, Jr.-Born,
Massachusetts,May 31,1926.Graduated
chusetts,December 15,1929.Joined
Pennsylvania,May 8,1928;Joined CIA
from Georgetown University in 1951.

CIA in 1952.Has served in Egypt,Iraq,
1954.Previously stationed in Denmark.

Has served in Indonesia and previous
Libya,Senegal.peaksFrench.

CAS-La Paz
assignments in Brazil.

CAS-Vienna
U.S.Embassy.

CAS-Sao Paulo
U.S.Embassy
Banco Popular del Peru Bldg.

U.S.Consulate General
IX Boltzmanngasse16a-1091
Corner of Calles Mercadoy Colon
Edificio Conjunto Nacional,
Vienna,Austria
La Paz,Bolivia
Rua Padre Joao Manuel,20
COS Charles Trofford Malton, Jr.

COS Frederick W.Latrash-Born New
Sao Paulo,Brazil
Born,Massachusetts,October 22,1927;
York,November 29,1925.Graduated
COB Louis V.Ebert ll Born New
Joined CIA in 1951.

from USC in 1947.

Joined CIAin 1951.--- PAGE BREAK ---

from USC in 1947. Joined CIAin 1951. York,July 2,1927.Graduated from
CAS-Dacca
Has served in India,Jordan,Egypt,
University of Wisconsin in 1952.Has
U.S.Embassy
Venezuela,Panama,and Chile. served in Colombia,Brazil, Honduras,
Adamjee Court Bldg,Montijheel Area
CAS-Brazilia
Mozambique,and Zambia. Dacca,Bangladesh
U.S.Embassy
CAS-Sofia
COSGeorgeT.Walsh
Born,
Massachusetts,uly9,1925.Hasserved
Lote No.3
U.S.Embassy
Avenida das Nocoes
inRawalpindi,Sri Lanka,Egypt. 1Alexander Stamboliski Blvd. CounterSpy/Page 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---Sofia,Bulgaria
COS-Nestor D.

Sanchez - Born New
Mexico July 28, 1927.Graduated from
COS-KennethR.Goodman
Born
COS Robert M.

Sargent -Bom China,
Georgetown University in 1951.

Joined
Arizona,July 15,1936.Joined CiA in
September 9,1936.Graduated from
CIA 1953.Has served In Morocco,
1964.Has been stationed in Venezuela
BowdoinCollege1953.

Previously
Venezuela,Guatemala and Colombia.

and Ecuador.

stationed in the Netherlands.

Speaks
Bulgarian.

CAS-San Jose
CAS-Addis Ababa
U.S.Embassy
U.S.Embassy
CAS-Rangoon
Avenida 3andCalle1
Crown Prince Asfaw Wassen St.

U.S.Embassy
San Jose,Costa Rica
Addis Ababa,Ethiopia
581 Merchant'St
cOS
Comerw.

Gllstrap
Born
COS-Eugene L.

Jeffers -Born May S,
Rangoon,Burma
Alabama, August 6,1926.Graduated
1926.

Joined CIA in 1955.Has served in
COS Clyde R McAvoy- Born New
from the University of Maryland in
Congo and Zambia.

York,March 27,1926.Graduated from
1950.

Joined CIA 1950.Has served.in
Bucknell University 1951.

Joined CIA
CAS-Helsinki
Ecuador,Brazil, Uruguay, EI Salvador,
U.S.Embassy
1953.Has served in Thailand,Laos,and
and Guyana.

Itainen Kaivopuisto
Indonesia.

CAS-Nicosia
Helsinki,Finland
CAS-Bujumbura
U.S.Embassy
COs-William C.Simenson -Born June
U.S.Embassy.

Therissos St.and Dositheos St.

3，
1925:Has served in Iceland and
Chausse Prince Louis Rwagasore,
Nicosia,Cyprus
Sweden.Language: Finnish.

Boite Postale 1720
COS Marlan D.Bowe - Born September
Bujumbura,Burundi
CAS-Paris
17,T934.Language:Greek.

U,S.Embassy
COS John.C.Beam
Born Montana
March251935.Graduated
from
2Avenue Gabriel 75382
MontanaState University 1956.Pre-
U.S.Embassy
Paris Cedex08France
15-12548Praha
COS-Eugen F.

Burgstaller
viously stationed in Morocco.

Prague,Czechoslovakia
CAS-Berlin
CAS-Phnom Penh
U.S.Embassy
COS-Richard A.Kahane
Born New
U.S.Mission
Blvd.Preh
York,August 9,1938.

Graduated from
Clayallee170
Norodom and Samdech
Princeton in 1960.

Has served in the
1000 Berlin
Sutharot Rd.

Congo,Algeria,France, and others.Has served in the
1000 Berlin
Sutharot Rd.

Congo,Algeria,France, and others.

COS-George Weisz
Born Hungary,
Phnom Penh,Khmer Republic (Cam-
Languages:French & German.

August 26,1918.Graduated from New
bodia)
COS John F.

McCarthy
Born
CAS-Cotonou
York University in 1953.Has served in
Washington DC, September 12,1940.

U.S.Embassy
Germany and Vietnam.

Graduated from Washington University
Rue Caporal Anani Bernard
CAS-Accra
in 1967.Served in Vietnam.

Cotonou,Dahomey
U.S.Embassy
COS-Montgomery
LRogers
Born
CAS-Yaounde
Liberia & Rowe Rds.

U.S.Embassy
Aprll 2,1936.Has served in Tanzania.

P.O.Box194.

Rue Nachtigal
Language: Swahill.

Accra, Ghana
Boite Postale 817
CAS-Santo Domingo.

COS-Joel-D.Ticknor -Born New York,
Yaounde,Cameroon
U.S.Embassy
September 27,1939.Graduated from
COS Jeff Corydon I-Born Illinois,
Union College 1960.

Has been stationed
Corner of Calle Cesar Nicholas Pensen y
March14,1929.Graduatedfrom
in Zaire.

Calle Leopoldo Navarro
Northwestern University in 1953.

Jolned
Santo Domingo,Dominican Republic
CAS-Athens
CIA in 1955.Has served in Vietnam and
COS-Thomas
A.

Clayton
Born
U.S.Embassy
Tunisia.

Speaks Arabic.

Washington, February 14,1927.Gradu-
91Vasilissis Sophias Blvd.

CAS-Bangui.

ated from San Jose State 1951.

Joined
Athens,Greece
CIA in 1956.

Has served in Argentina,
COS-Stacy
B.

Hulse,JrBorn
U.S.Embassy
Peru,Venezuela,and Bolivia.Language:
Connecticut,April 25,1920.Graduated
Place de la Republique Centrafricaine
Spanish.

from
Harvardin1941.Hasbeen
Bangui, Central African Republic
COS William L.

Mosebey, Jr.-Born
CAS-Quito
stationed in The Netherlands, Bulgaria
U.S.Embassy
and Italy.

Pennsylvania,March 23,1938.Grad-
uated from Penn State in 1959.

Joined
120 Avenida Patria
CAS-Guatemala
CIA In 1961.

Has been stationed in
Quito,Ecuador
U.S.Embassy
Sudan and Ethiopia.

COS-Paul V.Harwood-Born Massachu-
8Avenida 11-65,Zone1
电6
setts,July 4,1923.Graduated from
Guatemala
CAS-N'Djamena
U.S.Embassy
University of Michigan in 1945.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Has been stationed in
Quito,Ecuador
U.S.Embassy
Sudan and Ethiopia. COS-Paul V.Harwood-Born Massachu-
8Avenida 11-65,Zone1
电6
setts,July 4,1923.Graduated from
Guatemala
CAS-N'Djamena
U.S.Embassy
University of Michigan in 1945. Joined
COS-Edwin M.Terrell - Born Kansas,
CIA in 1948. Has served in Burma,
May 22,1915.Has been stationed in
Rue du Lt.Col. Colonna D'Ornano B.P. Vietnam, France,and Mexico. Cuba,El Salvador,Colombia,Peru，
413
Dominican Republic,and Panama. N'Djamena,Chad
CAS-Guayaquil
COS-Gary M. Miller -Born Wyoming
U.S.Consulate General
CAS-Conakry
5
June 16,1938. Graduated from the
Guayaquil, Ecuador
U.S.Embassy
University.of Californla in 1965. Has
COB-Norman M.Descoteaux
2d Blvd.and 9th Ave.,Boite Postale 603
been stationed in the Ivory Coast. Conakry,Guinea
CAS-Cairo
CAS-Santiago
Peter V.Raudenbush - Born Minnesota,
U.S.Embassy
U.S.Embassy
August13,1935. Graduated from
Cairo,Egypt（United Arab Republic)
Codina Bldg. Harvard in 1957. Joined CIA in 1962. COS-Arthur M.Niner,Jr.-Born DC,
1343Agustinas
September 14,1935.Has been stationed
CAS-Georgetown
U.S.Embassy
Santago,Chile
Lebanon,Iraq,
Yemen,
Yemen
COS Stewart Burton
People's Republic and Egypt. Language:
31 Main St. CAS-Bogota
Arabic. Georgetown,Guyana
U.S.Embassy
COS-Robert H. Riefe
Born Connecti-
CAS-San Salvador
cut,May 15,1922.Graduated from
Edificio Bavaria Carrera 10 No.28-49
U.S.Embassy
Boston University in 1952.Has been
Bogota,Colombia
25 Avenida Norte
stationed in Uruguay and Colombia
San Salvador,Ei Salvador
ahroMrsbo
CounterSpy/Page 24

--- PAGE BREAK ---CAS-Port Au Prince
CAS-Kingston
U.S.Embassy
U.S.Embassy
Harry Truman Blvd.

No.43 Duke St.

Port Au Prince,Haiti
Kingston,Jamaica
COS-Thomas J.Keenan-
COS-JamesD.Montgomery
Born
Born Wiscon-
January1,1928.Joined ClA in 1961.

sin,June 29,1930.Graduated from
Previous service in Algeria.

Marquette in1953.Has servedin
Mexico, Bogota, and Peru.

Language:
CAS-Tegucigalpa
U.S.Embassy
Spanish.

Avenida La Paz
CAS-Amman
Tegucigalpa,Honduras
U.S.Embassy
COS-Glenn O.Brown -
Born Illinois,
Jebel Amman-
December 28,1927.Graduated from the
Amman,Jordan
University of Illinois in1951,Has been
COS-FredericH.Sabin Il-Born
stationed in Surinam and Haiti.

Minnesota,January 20,1934.Graduated
from Williams College in1956.Has
CAS-Budapest
served in Lebanon,lraq,and Egypt.

U.S.Embassy
V.Szabadsag Ter12
CAS-Nairobi
Budapest,Hungary
U.S.Embassy
COS-John W.Whitely-Born December
Cotts House,Wabera St
20
7,1939.Has been stationed in Helsinki.

Nairobi,Kenya
Language:Finnish.

COS-Howard T.Bane-BornVirginia,
August5,1927Graduatedfrom
CAS-New Delhi
Georgetown U.in 1951.Has served in
U.S.Embassy
Thailand,India and Ghana.

Shanti Path,Chanakyapuri 21
New Delhi,India
Cos-william C.Grimsley,Jr
Born
Florida,April20,1927.Graduated from
CAS-Kuwait
U.S.Embassy
Columbia University in-1951.Has been
P.O.BoxNo.77
stationed in Pakistan and Nepal,
Kuwait
CAS-Bombay
COS-Robert C.Ames
Born March 6,
U.S.Consulate Generai
1934.Has served.inYemenand
Lincoln House,78 Bhulabhai Desai Rd:
Lebanon.

Bombay,India
CAS-Beruit
COB-Edward
Gotchef
1.

Born,
U.S.Embassy
September 2,1937.Previous service in
Corniche at Rue Ain Mreisseh
Hungary..

Beruit,Lenanon
.

Seidel,J.

Born`
CAS-Calcutta
cos-John-J
U.S.Consulate General
Maryland, August 21,1925.Graduated
3A Shakespeare Sarani
from Princeton University in1947,Has
Calcutta 16,India
00440
served in Egypt and Pakistan.

COB-E.NorbertGarrett
一Born
The CIA is reportedly backing
CAS-Luxembourg
Missouri,November 25,1938.Born`
CAS-Calcutta
cos-John-J
U.S.Consulate General
Maryland, August 21,1925.Graduated
3A Shakespeare Sarani
from Princeton University in1947,Has
Calcutta 16,India
00440
served in Egypt and Pakistan.

COB-E.NorbertGarrett
一Born
The CIA is reportedly backing
CAS-Luxembourg
Missouri,November 25,1938.

Grad-
rightist anti-corruption forcesns
U.S.Embassy
uated from the University ofKansas in
1960.

Joined CIA in 1962.Has served in
22 Blvd.Emmanuel Servais
Luxembourg.m
Pakistan,Jordan and Egypt.

COS-Felton M.Wyatt-Born May 23,
CAS-Madras
Jakarta,Indonesia
1920
U.S.Consulate General
COS-Clifton.R
Strathern
Born
MountRd.-6
January15,1928.

CAS-KualaLumpur
Madras,India
CAS-Medan
U.S.Embassy
COB-Jack S.Ogini -Born California,
U.S.Consulate
A.l.A.Bldg.

JalanAmpang
October 9,1935.Graduated from the
University ofUtah 1960.Has served in
Djalan 1mamBondjol13
P.O.Box35
Kuala Lumpur,Malaysia
Egypt,and Nepal
Medan,Indonesia
COB-Thomas LNorwood,Jr.Born
COS-Robert,E Brown -Born January
CAS-Tehran
Florida,September 27,1939.Graduated
22,1939.Has served in Singapore and
260Ave.TaktiJamshid
from the University of Florida in.1963
Indonesia.

Tehran,lran
JoinedCIA1964.

CAS-Bamako
COS-George W.Cave-Born New Jersey,
CAS-Surabaya
U.S.Embassy
August6,1929.Graduated
from.

U.S.Consulate
Rue Testard and Rue Mohamed V
Princetonin1956.Has servedin
Lebanon and Rawalpindi.

Djalan Raya Dr.Sutomo33
Bamako,Mali 
Surabaya,Indonesia
3
COS-Raymond F.Denicourt- Born
CAS-Rome
3
COB-Robert H.

Mills-Born November
Massachusetts,
November
30,1925.

U.S.Embassy
ADR
3,1937
Graduated from Providence College in
Via V.Veneto119
1949.HasservedinVietnamand
CAS-Abidjan
Rome,Italy
Ethiopia.

U.S.Embassy
COS-Howard E.

Stone
Born Ohio,
5Rue Jesse Owens
CAS-Valletta
March3,1925.Graduated fromUSCin
1949.Has servedinIran,Jordan,
BoitePostale1712
U.S.Embassy
Abidjan,lvory Coast
2nd fl.Development House,St.Anne St
Pakistan and Vietnam.--- PAGE BREAK ---

U.S.Embassy
COS-Howard E. Stone
Born Ohio,
5Rue Jesse Owens
CAS-Valletta
March3,1925.Graduated fromUSCin
1949.Has servedinIran,Jordan,
BoitePostale1712
U.S.Embassy
Abidjan,lvory Coast
2nd fl.Development House,St.Anne St
Pakistan and Vietnam. COS-Martin J.Bergin,Jr.-BornNew
Floriana,Malta
COS-George
Born
CAS-Jakarta
York,March25,1919.Graduated-from
U.S.Embassy
Columbia University in.1948.Has been
February 25,.1933.Graduated from
stationed-in France,ran,Senegal-and
Occidentalin.1955.Has been stationed
Medan Merdeka Selaton.5
Vietnam. in Turkey and Nepal.