The thrust of my seven bo-jks on the assassi: nations of President ^ohn F. Kennedy and 
Martin Luther King, Jr., is that in those times of great stress and ever since then all 
the basic instisution failed. 
J 
Comes nor Robert Andrews, with the most impecable credentials, to prove this all over 
again ”for~-«e* sublime in his ignorance being entirely unaware of it. 
Andrews' exploitation and commercialize on of the 25th anniversary of the ^ing assassi- 
nation appears in the Outlook section of the Washington Bost on that anniversary day. It 
promotes his coming book, "Death in a Promised Land" (Poscket B00ks), with an amazing 
flaunting of factual ignorance about the most basic of inforation, what records are 
available. In the coipse of his unintended self-portrayal of incometence and unprofessional- 
ism he manages what is not easily accomplishedhe defames the FB^ the same FBI. 
It simply is not true, as Andrews writes that the government has been "reluctant to 
open up their files regarding J.Edgar ^cover's claims that King was surrounded by com- 
3." ^ foh^'sifWr TUJU~ 1)U 
munist agents. 
*44 
inventory of pre- 
I have and have head had for almost two decades a 400-page 
cisely the records Andrews claims are so steadfastly withheld. When I showed that list 
to David (Harrow I told him how he could circumvent the sequestration of some of those 
^ _the late *^ehiia==#igW83r^ 
ogy/pr a federal judge as ever disgraced^the benefit John 
Or*.#1- 
records by as pisspoor an apolog 
Under FOiA the Freedom of ,Information ActfGarrow got and published 
I^wis Smit-  
those^ of th file^in the list 1 showed him - and got a Pulitzer for it. 
Th^is not the most serious of Andrews demonstration of the ggfrissest ignorance 4L 
She major crime of which he writes. 
t] 
“ft 
(■ 
But with the crednetials of which he boasts - at the very outset of his Post artii 
most editors assume he is an expert and do not bother to learn whether such experts 
£now their anal orifices from their apatites apetites)or ( have as much knowledge of 
what they write about as the garlic has connection with the stew over which it is waftea/) 
At the cutset Andrews writes, "ftfy skaptisi skeptisism comes first-hand from Vietnam 
tours as a Gred^ Beret, as a CIA officer working a beat that stretched from the Koreas to 
Burma and as a Senate nggiKgr staffer for intellogence and national security affairsfirst-hand from Vietnam 
tours as a Gred^ Beret, as a CIA officer working a beat that stretched from the Koreas to 
Burma and as a Senate nggiKgr staffer for intellogence and national security affairs

--- PAGE BREAK ---nam 
tours as a Gred^ Beret, as a CIA officer working a beat that stretched from the Koreas to 
Burma and as a Senate nggiKgr staffer for intellogence and national security affairs

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 
All of t-H 3 is quite distant from the ^Slng assassination and anything that relates to 
it. Unless Andrews means to suggest, a3 bis article can be taken to suggest, that the CIA 
conspired with the accused assassin, James Bari Ray. 
V 
The only presumed source Andrews ccites, Philip Melanson, in one of the tras/iest 
of the many (books on the assassinations, does, based on nothing but his own ignorance of 
/ u , , Q— 
iteanliag-fince agefciea and tradecraft, does hold that Ray worked for the CIA, Baloney! 
•1 
Now if in all those world travels of which Andrews boasts he had mentioned Memphis, 
where the federal district court holds singifioant factual information, none of the theory 
that taints virtually all -assassination writing; oJKWashingtoi^ whe^ flJY 
the FBI's public residing room some 60,000 pages of its records on the King assassination) 
there as a consequence of n\y successful FOIA lawsuitof a decade's duration (inc/ouding the 
inventory I shewed Garrow); or come here, where all doing any serious work in the filed 
of assassinations have fldee access to about a third of a million onco~ sofret records , 
he ffiould have written about what is relevant# 
And he would not have mdde a public spectacle of himself by such a, virtuoso 
urrfUmfo fry 'hAMlf HtM 
display of the most basic of subject-matter i^orance^r^sTie placed in the Post# 
By his own noJ~ immodest account Andrews spooked officially throughout much of the 
world# Yet he failed‘^(T learn about basic sources, like Books in Print or the New York 
Times index# (To say he ignored them would be even more of an indictment#) And his 
boasted-of years in the CIA apparently did not teach him to go to his friendly local 
bookstore# If he had he would have known that I am the author of the only strictly 
factual account o^ the King assassination currently available as a quality paperback 
from Carroll & Graf, retitled "Martin Luther King: the Assassination#" 
And thus he might have at least phoned or written me# 
If he had he would not have gone to Memphis to learn what the ^Lles of the federal 
« 
distrbet court there hold# I have that information and make it available to all writing 
—field.(T-t includes the official transcripts of two weeks of evidentiary hearing 
supposedly intended to determine wither or not Ray was entitled to the tripl he has never 
had.lable to all writing 
—field.(T-t includes the official transcripts of two weeks of evidentiary hearing 
supposedly intended to determine wither or not Ray was entitled to the tripl he has never 
had.

--- PAGE BREAK ---—field.(T-t includes the official transcripts of two weeks of evidentiary hearing 
supposedly intended to determine wither or not Ray was entitled to the tripl he has never 
had.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3 
As Ray's investigator I conducted, the investigation, for the habeas corpus proceeding 
that led to the evidentiary hearing. I then conducted the investigation for those two 
week of producing evdience, subject to cross examination,'SiMMV'endod with the judge's 
decision, literally, that Ray's guilt or innocence were not before him. He refused Ray , 
a trial « that basi, alma. “3*^ IM#^™****- 
I prdiduced the witnesses we presen? ed/^hat courtand prepared some of them to 
testify, ^his includes some of those recently on nationwide TV. 
With me having this factual knowledge of the case and all these records all of which 
AhdWJews tells the world- or at least those reached by the Washington Pfcst a^cl to be 
reached by his coming book- are suppressed well irito the next aentury, is it not to wonder 
what kind of spook, investigator, reasearcher or writd/^ndrews is? 
And what it takes to be published on our political assassinations that turned# this 
country and with it ^fetumed the world around? 
But if Andrews had been concern about fact rather than what is now politically 
U 
acceptable and safe, blaming the safely-dead J. Edgar oover for everything he didn't do, 
what could he have writtm of? 
Clear1$ he had no interest in the real work that was done, the costly-heavy, lost- 
lasting, foot-slogging work that did establish what fact there is on the King assassin- 
ation or in that fact. 
If he had he could not have ritten the acceptable nonsense t e Post published, believing 
Mm based on his cedent!ala. 
Andrews is safe, too, in his assumption of Ray's guilt. 
Bsed on this, is article is supposedly on, as its subtitle states, "T^e Unanswered 
Questions About James Earl Ray.” 
Yet it isn't even that, such is the sublimity of Andrews' ignorance. 
Some of what he says is - and this is one of his statenmts that Ray did kill King - 
that', "Out of this," Taylor Branch's incorrect statement that"cruclal files 6n the King a 
fW* Ac rfiUtJ fbi'xtw* b u^trvjr- 
assassination were sealed not to be opened until 2027", 'cam my conviction that James 
T 
Earl Ray did not act alone."ct statement that"cruclal files 6n the King a 
fW* Ac rfiUtJ fbi'xtw* b u^trvjr- 
assassination were sealed not to be opened until 2027", 'cam my conviction that James 
T 
Earl Ray did not act alone."

--- PAGE BREAK ---uclal files 6n the King a 
fW* Ac rfiUtJ fbi'xtw* b u^trvjr- 
assassination were sealed not to be opened until 2027", 'cam my conviction that James 
T 
Earl Ray did not act alone."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 
Here Andrews hself is quote wrong, first in v/hat I’aylor Branch'.rote or in Amrozesz 
Andrews* interpretation of it, and second by saying that the allegedly withheld FBI records 
relating ttt ^oover'sclaim that King was surrounded by cimrlmist agents'* has any relationship 
at all with the rime, most of all that it can i-hna justify the "conviction" that Ray was 
the ssassin." 
Without examination of the FBI records that are available now or can be obtained by 
FOIA action it is not possible to conjee .lore afeout their content with responsibility. 
What is available are the records Harrow obtained and the enormous number of pages used 
th by the official whutewashers misnamed as "He Office of Professsional Responsibility/" 
(OPR). f 
After I filed Civil Action 75-1996 seeking all Department of Just ice records, not 
only those of the FBI, and after in first reaction to that Attorney ueneral ^evy h held the 
the King assassination was a matter of great national and historical importance, requiring 
minimum withholding under FOIA exemption, there was the second officail reaction, the 
creation of a special task force to study and report on the FBI*s abuse of King and his 
fanily and associates and how it investigated the assassination. 
% copies alone of these referris, and I ao not have all that OPR disclosed, along 
with those relating to the assassination and its noft-investigation referred to as an 
investigation, total more than 80,000 pages. 
Andrews not only did not consult them before his phony claim to subjtec-matter expertise- 
he reflects no awareness of their availability -to anyone at all. 
The King assassination file is known within the FBI by its acroynm, "KCRIGN, "xxtxrci&n 
standing for Murder of King. Although the FBI did undertake to keep it secret, and with 
regard to 58 of its 59 field offie of that period, did keep it secret in the records it 
withheld imporperly from me, I did spot in the records of one, the chicago office, that 
FBIHQ had directed all field offices to provide it with an invetory of all the records 
each held relationg to King, the SCLC and his family and associates. These were consolidated 
at FBI Headquarters. 
After months of difficut litigating in whicn official perjury was not uncommon, the 
judge finally ordered the disclosure to mo of that fat sheaf of these inventory reportsated 
at FBI Headquarters. 
After months of difficut litigating in whicn official perjury was not uncommon, the 
judge finally ordered the disclosure to mo of that fat sheaf of these inventory reports

--- PAGE BREAK ---rters. 
After months of difficut litigating in whicn official perjury was not uncommon, the 
judge finally ordered the disclosure to mo of that fat sheaf of these inventory reports

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5 
that were so meaningful toGarrow when I showed them to him. 
There is a record of part ocular value and importance as it relates to Andrews 
claimed basis for being convinced that there is a connection between these files on King 
and thie their reflecting that he was "surrounded by communist agents.” 
% 
William Sullivean was then the ssistant diector in charge of what then was failed 
the Domestic Intelligence Division. When it became more then merely clear to him that the 
FBI1 s enormous inventment in manpower and money proved the exact opposite, that King was 
not in any sense either "surrounded by” or dominated by cimmunists, he made the mmar 
mistake of telling Hoover the turh. truth. 
He should have l&ow that thrre was no truth that could possibly survive confrontation 
with what ^oover wanted to be true no matter much much it wasn’t. 
Hoover clobbered and ridiculed poor v:anting-to=be -truthful Sullivan until Sullivan 
gcovelled before him a in the most abjoct apology for his stupidity - in being absolutely 
right and saying so. 
None of this is secret, except to Andrews and those of his readers who did not know it 
or have forgotten it. It was well publicized fthen those FBI records were disclosed, (if 
necessaary I can locate and cite by FBI identification and if desired quote directly.) 
So, with this well-known public record that there was nothing to the Hoover invention 
of communists "surrounding? King and the availability of many thousands of relevant pages, 
the Career spook Andrews who boasts of his career of spooking, even for the Senate*s 
intellig 3nce oversight committee, invents his basis for his "conviction that the official 
version" of the assassination is "is wrong — that James Earl Hay did not act alone." 
Rather than there being what Andrews attributes to Taykor Branch’s book, a 
government"relcuatance to open up the filed relating to J. Edgar ^ooveris claim that King 
was surrounded by Communists," Most of them are available, either because they have been 
disclosed to ^arrow and others like me or they are available to anyone who seeks them under 
FOIA. Tneexception is the smallest portion of them sequestered by the wronglfu order of that 
FBI rubber-stamp, former federal judge John Lewis smith. Theofficial interpretation of them 
by the FBI’s own top expect, its former assistant director in charge of that work, has beenorder of that 
FBI rubber-stamp, former federal judge John Lewis smith. Theofficial interpretation of them 
by the FBI’s own top expect, its former assistant director in charge of that work, has been

--- PAGE BREAK ---rubber-stamp, former federal judge John Lewis smith. Theofficial interpretation of them 
by the FBI’s own top expect, its former assistant director in charge of that work, has been

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6 
public for about two ecades. 
Before a responsible former spook, and in theory spooks aro responsible when spooking 
on when carrying their spooking careers forward, as Andrews did on the Senate committee, 
can responsibly state that Bay was the assassin he suspects "did not act 1 alone," he 
% 
should have some knowledge ofwhether or not he studies the assassination investigation 
recods that are available# As have others, he could have xamined them here# wr he could, 
43 others have, examined them in the FBI’s public reading robin# 
It is not possible to read the FBIfs alleged proof of Ray's guilt without realizing 
that it had no such proof at all and that despite its persistent refusal to investigate 
the crime itself its^own -and disclosed and available - records exculpate him# 
The3© ere the basic records I spent a decade in court bringing to light. 
In the simplest formulation of what is exculpatory about these MORON records they 
do not place Ray at the eee sece scene of the crime -at anv time! 
The do not prove that the fatal shot was fired from the Rifle Ray boguth bought# 
The FBI did not even test that reifle to determine whether it had been fired after 
the last time it was cleaned, a simple and standard test that is standard operating 
procedure. 
There is more but this should serve to establish that Andrews is hjust ma making up, 
like Hoover, what he wants to be rue without regard for what is true, and like Hoover, he 
has his own purposes# Andrews had an article to sell and he wanted that article to promote 
his coming book# 
There are no FBI "crucial files on the ^ing assassination(that were) sealed"until 
2027." 
The only such files that were "sealed" are those of the House of Representatives 
assassins committee# It never investigated the crime itself, assuming with the safety to 
which Andrews resported that Ray HQS the ssassin, and they were not "sealed" in any event 
and not until 2027. The standing rules of the ^ou^e require that committee files not published 
not be made available until after 50 years following the end of ihs any committee's life# 
^ongress passed a law that ^eorge Bush signed requiring the processing of all suchittee files not published 
not be made available until after 50 years following the end of ihs any committee's life# 
^ongress passed a law that ^eorge Bush signed requiring the processing of all such

--- PAGE BREAK ---ished 
not be made available until after 50 years following the end of ihs any committee's life# 
^ongress passed a law that ^eorge Bush signed requiring the processing of all such

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7 
records. 
Andrews also s writes that "from hi3 prison escape until his arrest. Ray ss±s± 
behaved no re like a trained spy that a failed petty criminal.11 
Unless the bahavior of trained spies has been altered since my days in the World War 
\ 
II forerunner of the CIA, the Office of Strategic Services (OSS) Andrews just made this up 
from the profundity of hms person iggorance of that of the subject-matter ignoramus with 
a PhD, the one soc-alled authority Andrews cites# 
my Hny of years past all th. training manuals I read and all the secret areas I 
t 
visited to be able to draft a top secret report on how the OSS trained its spies, nothing 
i3 more basic than not leaving a trail and not being readily identifiable. 
Almost from the day Ray sc escaped from that Missouri pen the FBI could have nabbed 
Jme James by careful surveillance on his brother Jerry, who was then in Chicago, where 
James went and met with Jerry repeatedly. The FBI could have laid harboring charges on 
Jerry before many weeks had passed but because ierru Jerry is slackjawed, the FBI hoped it 
_ I 
would rop some cookies in fron iof it. didn^t. If it has surveilled Jerry ut wiuld have 
nailed thorn both. But it didn^t. 
0 
Instead it went after the other living brother, John. It happens that John and .immy 
never got along and Jimmy had no idea 'where ^ohn was, or how to get in touch with him, and 
any desire to do that. John is not yet free from, the phony charges, of livings switch car 
for a abnk robber-who was acquitted! - for which John was given 18 years by the judge who 
later become first the FBI's director, and then, until fired by George Bush, the CIA's 
include escapes, 
director, William Webster. John's misconduct,added to his sentence. 
From Chicago James went to Canada. There he left a trail that was easily followed. 
Because the FBI h was hysterical in its failures and failed to do what it usually did it 
did not’ pick this unhidden trail up until William Jradford Huie, who got it itom James' 
then lawyer, Arthur Hanes, published what James told him a a pre-book series in LOOK 
magazine. 
As ny book that would have been available to Andrrws in his local bookstore before 
he put his novel in the guise of a serious factual article on paper would have told him,series in LOOK 
magazine. 
As ny book that would have been available to Andrrws in his local bookstore before 
he put his novel in the guise of a serious factual article on paper would have told him,

--- PAGE BREAK ---azine. 
As ny book that would have been available to Andrrws in his local bookstore before 
he put his novel in the guise of a serious factual article on paper would have told him,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8 
James was being amni pulated by others and he always icnew in advance where he would go and 
how long he would be there* He told others and he put it in writing, as to the Superior 
Film Company in Chicago, xcth which he had paid for an order he had not gotten by the time 
he had to leave Brimingham, Alabala for Mexico* And before going to Brimingham, he l^eft 
% 
instructions with the Canadian tailors so what he had bought could be an was sent to him* 
After for from the kind of life he had led James lived it up in I-lexicao for a couple 
or months, on schedule he moved to Los Angeles* There he had the nose job done that did 
not make any real difference in his appeared* ne had a bit of extra tip remoted* 
The only cover K James ever had was an alias* But tliere is not a single thing he 
did from the time h^escaped until he was captured that is "bahavior" like Ha trained spy*" 
He lived like what he was, a petty crook who had and employed the limited skills of 
a petty cnbok* 
If one of the FBPs own "symbol informants" had not double-crossed it- perhaps himself 
being involved in the assassination -and if he was then there was that FBI connection with 
it - the FBI would have nabbed Hay before he fledt Los Angeles on the langorous trip east 
that ended when he fled the e scene of the King assassination* on returning there shortly 
after tho barricade were placed on the street qhere he had planned to leave his car. 
X y lawsuit included all the relevant FBI Headquarters recors and those of seven 
field offices. One of these was the Los Angels office* V/hat was suppreseed from the 
headquarters records but slipped through the careful screening of the Los Angeles office 
establishes that J*C. Hardin phoned Hay at the St. ^rancis Hi tel, where under the name 
of Eric Starvo Galt he was living. Hardin left a message for Hay to phone him in Atlanata. 
A grmg fed days later Hardin utned up inf person, looking for ^ay• 
And this ^ardin, who doeaiot appear in the Atlanta city directory, was an FBI 
informer, (it hates the word, preferring "informant.") To be a synbol informer requires 
that the informer survive a probationary period, is not identified by name in most 
FBI records, is identified by his "symbol." The symbol consists of the ELI*3 two-letter 
abbreviation for inch office, followed by an arbitrary four-digit number and then by a 
letter or letters indicating the kind of informing he does."C2, forocample, represent aof the ELI*3 two-letter 
abbreviation for inch office, followed by an arbitrary four-digit number and then by a 
letter or letters indicating the kind of informing he does."C2, forocample, represent a

--- PAGE BREAK ---ter 
abbreviation for inch office, followed by an arbitrary four-digit number and then by a 
letter or letters indicating the kind of informing he does."C2, forocample, represent a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9 
criminal informer. "S" indicates "security,” meanig really political informing. 
And so it was that the FBI failed a second time at rhe least and as a result King 
Has safely assassinated and Ray was the alreadyOrfeated patsy it anointed as assassin to 
cover all its failures. 
Pretendinf it i3 hiw own work, having boasted of his personal investigation in 
Canada but actually cribbing from the least authoritative of source, hil 
A1elanosnfs 
"T^e Kurkin Conspiracy,11 Andrews wtites that "a landlady testified that she saw Ray*s 
caller pass something *lije papers* taxhia that Ray pur inside his coat ^pocket. The 
folowing day Ray bogu bought a round-trip ticket to London.n The Andrews asks, ,rWho 
were these people?/ t 
To make his silly concoctions more exciting Melanson wrote of the man who found 
an envelope Ray had carelessly left in a phone booth and returned it to him, the "paperM" 
that were passed, a man who had been identified innth papers merely as "the fat man" 
when the Aunties originally protected his privacy, that he was in mortal terror of 
becoming known. 
The XsxtoL truth is that the FBI disclosed his name to me. That means it was in the 
Fill's public reading room. RobertMcDouldton was the fat man. The landlady was Mrs. Yee 
Ah UU » 
Sun Loo (right)T And they were just ordinary, everyday people. 
^he ohlyi apparent reason for Andrews asking who these people were is that he vent 
for Melanson1 s chdJL dish concoction, that the CIA used McDoudlton as a mean of pssing 
money to £ay - in borad daylight, in the presence of at least one witness? With the 
innocent McDouldton, scared to within an inch of his life by Belanson,s kdschigas, 
ano tber witness? 
My Dulles! What kind of a professions, lifetime spook was Andrews, anyway, to credit 
exx rg this gross violatio n of all spooking tradecraft? 
And what kind of "handler", Melanson Iking for what he thinks is a professional term, 
was handling Ray, anyway, to use a Keystone &ops me:in3 of getting money to Ray? None of 
the many covert traditional means was good enough? "Sbvolve witnesses, in the open and in 
daylight, in public yet, for no need at all?to use a Keystone &ops me:in3 of getting money to Ray? None of 
the many covert traditional means was good enough? "Sbvolve witnesses, in the open and in 
daylight, in public yet, for no need at all?

--- PAGE BREAK ---ops me:in3 of getting money to Ray? None of 
the many covert traditional means was good enough? "Sbvolve witnesses, in the open and in 
daylight, in public yet, for no need at all?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10 
(McDouldton is identified by name ih a Memohis teletype to Headquarters and to the 
FBI's Buffalo office, Buffalo to act as liaison with the Toronto police in an effort to 
traee all the lon^-distance calls made from the public phone where Ray forgot the envelope 
addressed to him and his Ramon N Sneyda alias at this Mrs, Loo's address, where Ray rented 
% 
a room, I gave this m and quite a few or her FBI records to 
AAelanson. He knew what he v/as 
doing when he pretended that the da fat w fat man^s identity was not known. Without 
that pretense he could not have invented the rest of his CIA mythology. In the headquarters 
hURKUT file this record is Serial 4396, The teletype was wired four days after Ray's 
capture,) 
And if the CIA toas "handling" and financing Ray through the innocent McDpuldton, 
involved by leaving an open envelope with money in it for Ray's escape (My Helms! what 
a technique!) how did it come to pass that when Ray got to Portugal, where he flew 
promptly after his plane landed in England, ho was about 3100 shy of passage to what was 
then known as ^hiodesia, a country that had no extradition treaty with the a nited States, 
a country os unexcelled black racism? The CIA gave its minion just enough money for escape 
to get hj.m caught? VInat W jited its assassin caught? 
And with his professional spoolduig Andrews cribs this childish penny-dreadful 
malarky just because a real, authentic PliD made it up? 
There seems to be nothing that after his long career of spooking Andrews does not 
swallow and keep down, except as he reflects it in his writing. 
He asks a series of irrelevant questions and concludes that "Nowhere has Ray addressed 
these questions#! With the questions all fictional, why should he have addressed them, ^ike 
Russell Byers, 
the fie cock and bull story a St. Jouis felon/gave the FB^ in hope of lighter treateent- 
which he got, Byers reported an offer of 350,000 to kill King, Even if true, Ray is not 
in any way connected with it# And with 350,000 would he have lacked a trip to permanent 
freedom for a measley $100? 
Andrews empahasizes, "What did Ray have to gain by killing artin Luther King?" 
(Not counting what he apprently fox-get two paragraphs after writing it, that finctional 
50 gr^nd#)"Nowhere has Ray addressed these qiestions." Even though"he has been interviewedrtin Luther King?" 
(Not counting what he apprently fox-get two paragraphs after writing it, that finctional 
50 gr^nd#)"Nowhere has Ray addressed these qiestions." Even though"he has been interviewed

--- PAGE BREAK ---(Not counting what he apprently fox-get two paragraphs after writing it, that finctional 
50 gr^nd#)"Nowhere has Ray addressed these qiestions." Even though"he has been interviewed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

II 
y assassinatiin scholars/
1 Hay has been interviewed, often enough byt by "assassination 
scholara?" Not one, including the is an auth entic Wscholar" of assassination# e and 
all the others, few of who have cademic credentials, invent, crib and embelish upon and 
seek to exploit the wildest theories all of which are easily refuted by the available 
% 
evisence in which not a sinlg one of Andrews'"scholars" has made any real use of in 
quest of fact# 
Melanson is the only alleged "assass nation scholar" Andrews identifies by name 
but without reference to Melanson1 s book wi?h which Andrews had helped himself# Andrews 
find it provocative thaf'Ray diggedly peristed in didging" answer* to the irrelavant in- 
ventions he could not answwr# And neither Melans on nor Andrews knew enough to knwo know 
the questions were stupid and irrelevant and nobody could answer them/ 
In a syperficial reference to the evidence of which he had kn no knowledge at all 
igborants 
Ander Andrews winds down with what he is so ihgorat of ^hxzhaxiiKzfaKtss^xwhiKaxhBLzrztes 
the supposed ballistic evidence and the FBI13 tests on them -of which he makes no mention 
at all# 
"The fatal bullet broke into three fragments and no baliistocs tests could be run." 
The bullet did not break# *t exploded, as it was designed to do# 
There is no way of knowing how much fragmentation there was# It certainly was not 
established that there were three fragments. A fairly large one was recovered firom king's 
body# It had almost gone netirely through it# It came to eest just h under a shoulder- 
blade on his back# 
Fragments can be examined haebt and are all the time# Weapons can and do leave unique 
fingerprints in the form of the markings on the bullet by the grooves in the barrel that 
givo the bullets twist to make them more stable in flight# These markings are also l£ft on 
fragments# '^hile there may not be adequate markings on all fragments, there ware ample 
and unique markings of the fragment the comoner removed from King's bo£y# 
Rhe FBI knew very well that the so-called "deaths rifle bought by Ray had not been 
used in the drime nd could not have been# 
Consistent with this, b nobod . else having cc access to that remant and the rifle,ew very well that the so-called "deaths rifle bought by Ray had not been 
used in the drime nd could not have been# 
Consistent with this, b nobod . else having cc access to that remant and the rifle,

--- PAGE BREAK ---e so-called "deaths rifle bought by Ray had not been 
used in the drime nd could not have been# 
Consistent with this, b nobod . else having cc access to that remant and the rifle,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12 
FBI Foremans Expert Robert hazier executed an affidavit with which to get Ray extradicated 
in which he swore that the remnant lacked sufficient marks of identification for him to 
make either a positive or negative identified. But he swure to a fieaningless paragrpah 
that, justice being what it is, was cnought o persuade the Britush court, that the number 
of twists on the recovered remnant was cons stent with those of the rifle barrel. 
SAs Fraizer did not attest, by this standrard that remnanet was also consistent wit 
an pp appreciable percentages of all the rifles ever manufactured anywhere in the world. 
As Ray's investigator I asked a respected expert in and teacher of criminalistics, 
Herbert McDonnell, to be out expert witness. When he got to “emphis I took him to the 
office of the clerk o# the Court, Bubba Blackwell. McDonnell took out his micriscope and 
his camera. He examined that remanent with care and then he photographe it also with cure 
The next day he testified that given that remnant of the ft fatal bullet and the 
mfle from which it was allegedly fired, he could test fire the rifle, recover speciameni, 
and state uniquivoc lly thwt the bullet had or had not been fired from that rifle, he had 
fiund marks on the remannt of usch distinction* 
lie was not refuted or rebutted* THis is the sworn, expert testimony of an accredited 
expert. 
About which in what Andrews appraently regards as an appropriate conunemotatiobn of 
the great tragedy and I consider a ghoulish exploitation and commercialization aand a and 
a promotion for his coming book, "no balkLstics tests could be run*" 
With a bit more trah not worthy of mention Andrews concludes,"open all the files on the 
King case..." 
Sure as rain the Andrewses and the Melanson's and the other KX ifnorant exploiters 
and commercializes will not make any use of them when as is inevita le now that happens. 
Tens of thousands of thewe records have been available for many years. I alone have 
more than .80,000 thousand of them that not a single one of those Andrews regards as 
"assassination scholars" lias ever made any real use of them. Andrews is publishable because 
he dones not even know they are available, hence his false statement that all are suppressed. 
Ana all the records should be publicly available.e any real use of them. Andrews is publishable because 
he dones not even know they are available, hence his false statement that all are suppressed. 
Ana all the records should be publicly available.

--- PAGE BREAK ---S 9336 
, 
*• l 
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD -—SENATE 
May SO, 197% 
the agencies operated Illegally.

Tlie prob- 
lem Is that In the quest for law and order, 
enso after enso after case after case has 
been thrown out because the law en- 
forcement and Intelligence communities 
neted Illegally.

80 I do not think we at- 
tain any particular status of accomplish- 
ment In conquering organized crime, or 
any crime whatsoever for that matter, 
with Illegal activities resulting In cases 
belhg thrown out of court.

I would suggest that the record speaks 
for ltseir.

Frankly, Iilever thought the 
record of former Attorney General Ram- 
sey Clark was that good.

But, comparing 
Ids record with that achieved by succeed- 
ing Attorneys General, he looks like Tom 
Dewey In bin prosecutorial heyday.

Mr.

IIRUSKA.

That record Is bad, but 
do we want to make It worse by adopting 
tills amendment which threatens to Uc 
the hands or the FBI and dry up their 
sources of Information?

I say, with that, 
the soup or the broth Is spoiled, and I 
see no use In adding a few dosages of 
poison.

Tlio pending amendment should be 
rejected.

Mr.

KENNEDY.

Mr.

President, I do not 
recognize the amendment, as It lias been 
described by the Senator from Nebraska, 
as tlic amendment we are now consider- 
ing.

I feel there has been a gross misin- 
terpretation of the actual words of tlio 
amendment and Its intention, as well as 
what It would actually achieve and ac- 
complish.

So I think It Is important for 
the record to be extremely clear about 
this.

If wc accept the amendment of the 
Senator from Michigan, we will not open 
up the community to rnplsts, muggers, 
and killers, as the Senator from Nebraska 
has almost suggested by his direct com- 
ments and statements on the amend- 
ment.So I think It Is important for 
the record to be extremely clear about 
this.

If wc accept the amendment of the 
Senator from Michigan, we will not open 
up the community to rnplsts, muggers, 
and killers, as the Senator from Nebraska 
has almost suggested by his direct com- 
ments and statements on the amend- 
ment.

Wliat I am trying to do, as I un- 
derstand the thrust of the amendment, 
is that It be specific about safeguarding 
the legitimate investigations that would 
be conducted by the Federal agencies and 
also the Investigative flics of the FBI.

As a matter of fact, looking back over 
the development of legislation under the 
1966 act and looking at the Senate report 
language from that legislation.

It was 
clearly the Interpretation In the Senate’s 
development of that legislation that the 
“Investigatory nic’’ exemption would bo 
extremely narrowly defined.

It was so 
until recent times—really, until about 
tlio past few months.

It Is to remedy that 
different Interpretation that the amend- 
ment of the Senator from Michigan which 
we are now considering was proposed.

I should like to ask the Senator from 
Michigan a couple of questions.

Doc3 the Senator’s amendment In ef- 
fect override the court decisions In the 
court of npiHMils on the Weisberg against 
United States, Aspln against Department 
of Defense; Dltlow against Brlnegor; and 
National Center against Weinberger?

As I understand It, Uie holdings In 
those particular cases are of the greatest 
concern to the Senator from Michigan.

As I Interpret It, the Impact and efTect 
of his amendment yrould be to override 
those particular decisions.

Is that not 
; correct?

Mr.

IIART.

The Senator from Mich- 
igan Is correct.

That Is Its purpose.

That 
was the purpose of Congress In 19CC, wc 
thought, when we enacted this.

Until 
about 9 or 12 months ago, the courts 
consistently had approached It on a bal- 
ancing basis, which Is exactly what this 
amendment seeks to do.

Mr.Until 
about 9 or 12 months ago, the courts 
consistently had approached It on a bal- 
ancing basis, which Is exactly what this 
amendment seeks to do.

Mr.

President, while several Senators 
are In the Chamber, I should like to ask 
for the yeas and nays on my amendment.

The yeas and nays wero ordered.

Mr.

KENNEDY.

Furthermore..

Mr.

President, the Senate report language 
that refers to exemption 7 In the I960 
report on the Freedom of Information 
Act—and that seventh exemption Is the 
target of the Senator from Michigan’s 
amendment—reads as follows: 
Exemption No.

7 deal* with "Investigatory 
flics compiled for law enforcement purposes." 
These are the flics prepared by Government 
agencies to prosecuto law violators.

Tholr 
disclosure of such flics, except to the ex- 
tent they aro- available by law to a prlvato 
party, could harm the Government’s enso In 
court.

It seems to me that the Interpretation, 
the definition, In that report language 
Is much more restrictive than tlie kind 
of amendment tlie Senator from Mlclii- 
gan at this time Is attempting to achieve.

Of course, that Interpretation In the 
19G6 report was embraced by a unani- 
mous Senate back then.

Mr.

IIART.

I think tlie Senator from 
Massachusetts Is correct.

One could argue 
that the amendment wc are now consid- 
ering, If adopted, would leave tlie Free- 
dom of Informatioh Act less available 
to a concerned citizen that was tlie case 
with the 1966 language Initially.

Again, however, the development in re- 
cent cases requires that we respond in 
soino fashion, even though we may not 
achieve tlie same breadth of opportunity 
for the availability of documents that 
may arguably be said to apply under tlie 
original 1967 act.

Mr.

KENNEDY.

That would certainly 
bo my understanding.KENNEDY.

That would certainly 
bo my understanding.

Furthermore, It 
seems to me flint the amendment Itself 
has considerable sensitivity built in to 
protect agatnsb the invasion of privacy, 
and to protect the Identities of infor- 
mants, and most generally to protect the 
legitimate interests of a law enforcement 
agency to conduct an Investigation Into 
any one of these crimes which have been 
outlined in such wonderful verbiage hero 
this afternoon—treason, espionage, or 
what have you.

So I Just want to express that on these 
points the amendment Is precise and 
clear and Is an extremely positive and 
constructive development to meet legiti- 
mate law enforcement concerns.

These 
are some of tlie reasons why I will sup- 
port the amendment, and I urge my col- 
leagues to’do so.

The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.

DOMKNICI) .

Tlie Senator from Nebraska 
has G minutes remaJuIng.

Mr.

IIRUSKA.

Mr.

President, I should 
like to point out that tlio amendment 
proposed by Uie Senator from Michigan, 
preserves the right of people to a fair 
trial or Impartial adjudication.

It Is 
careful to preserve the identity of an In- 
former.

It Is careful to preserve the Idea; 
of protecting the Investigative techniques^ 
and procedures, and so forth.

But what; 
about the names of those persons that 
are contained in tlie file who are not In-!, 
formers and who are not accused of ' 
crime and who will not be tried?

What 
about the protection of those people • 
whose names will be In there, together # 
with Information having to do with j 
them?

Will they be protected?

It Is a real v 
question, and It would be of great Inter- ,, 
est to people who will be named by in- 
formers somewhere along tlie line of the * 
Investigation and Whose name presume- > 
bly would stay In tlie file.

Mr.It Is a real v 
question, and It would be of great Inter- ,, 
est to people who will be named by in- 
formers somewhere along tlie line of the * 
Investigation and Whose name presume- > 
bly would stay In tlie file.

Mr.

President, by way of summary, I 
would like to say that it would distort V 
the purposes of tlio FBI, imposing on ^ 
them the added burden, In addition to 
investigating coses and getting,evidence, 
of serving as a research source for every 
1 
writer or curious person, or for those 
who may wish to find a basis for suit, 
either against the Government or / 
against someone else who might be men- £ 
tioned in the file.

Second, it would impose upon the FBI 
the tremendous task of reviewing each ^ 
page and each document contained in^" 
many of their investigatory files to make.

an independent Judgment os to whether ; 
or not any part thereof should be re- * 
leased.

Some of these flies are very ex-,: 
tensive, particularly in organized crime • 
cases that ore sometimes under consld- ; 
eratlon for a year, a year and a half, or 
2 years.

Mr.

HART.

Mr.

President, will the' 
Senator yield?

Tlio PRESIDING OFFICER.

All time 
of the Senator has expired.

Mr.

KENNEDY.

I yield the Senator 5^ 
minutes on the bill.

v 
Mr.

HART.

Mr.

President, Ihsk unan-V 
bnous consent that a memorandum let-..

ter, reference to which has been made', 
in the debate and which has been dls- > 
trlbuted to each Senator, be printed in- 
tlie RECORD.

There being no objection, the letter: 
was ordered to be printed In the RECOIID, * 
os follows: 
NBMOXAHBTU LETT Eft 
A question hrui been mixed as to whether'.

my ainondmcmt might btndor the Federal ; 
Bureau of Investigation In the performance * 
of lte Investigatory duties.

Tlie Bureau 
stresses tlie need for confldentlnllty In Its 
Investigations.

I agree completely.

All of us ^ 
recognize *the crucial law enforcement role 
of tlie Bureau’s unparalleled Investigating 
capabilities.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I agree completely. All of us ^ 
recognize *the crucial law enforcement role 
of tlie Bureau’s unparalleled Investigating 
capabilities. • & 
However, my amendment would not hinder 
tlie Bureau's performance in any way. The ^ 
Administrative Law 8cctlon of the American-/ 
Bar Association language, which my amend- *. ment adopts verbatim, was carefully drawn 
to preservo every concelveable reason the Jlft 
Bureau might havo for resisting disclosure « 
of material in an investigative fllo: 
If Informants' anonymity—whether paid 
Informers or citizen volunteers—would bo^ 
threatened, there would be no disclosures; 
If tlio Bureau’s confidential techniques'/ 
and procedures would be threatened, there '* 
would bo no disclosure; „ • 
If disclosure Is an unwarranted invasion 
of privacy, tbore would bo no disclosure £ 
(contrary to the Bureau’s letter, this Is i 
determination courts make all tho time; In- 
Full toxt of Congressional Record of 
which this is part in top drawer of1 
JFK appeals file cabinet*

--- PAGE BREAK ---o the Bureau’s letter, this Is i 
determination courts make all tho time; In- 
Full toxt of Congressional Record of 
which this is part in top drawer of1 
JFK appeals file cabinet*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13 
On all the political assassinations. 
That is why I filed more than a dozen FOIA lawsuit , to rescue then from their 
official graves and from pblivion. 
Some of these lawsuis were precedental. 
% 
Bne of the earliest led to the 1974 amending of the Act’s investigatory files 
exemption, opening G FBI, CIA and slainlr files to FOIA access, 
was the surviving brother of two of the vis tins of our political cssassinations of 
the 1960s, FSenatore Edward Kennedy, who saw to it that what is called 'the legislative 
history” of this amending would be clear. The first lawsyit he cited as requiring any of 
FBI’s 
those 1974 amendment was mine for the results of the scientific testingin the JFK 
assassination.(Congressional Record fof May30, 1974, page S 9336) 
(Rote- to the best of my knowldge this has not been reported anywhere at all outside 
the Congressional record, I know of no print precis or electronic media reporting on it 
our any referrence to it a in any book#) 
So, even though in all I have a about a third of a million once-secret official 
assassination records that are* freely available and always have been, and even though 
thefhauds, pretenders , fictioneers, mythologists and assorted other phonies who are 
regarded by the Andrewses as "assassination scholars" have not, not any one of them, over 
made any real u e of this enormity of ofiicial- dLnfonnation, certaibly all still withheld 
records should be available. 
But it is a further deception, and Abdrews by inference is also guilty of that, to 
pretend that any person or group, any element of the major media , no matter how 
wealthy, is going to invest the time and money for anything like a methodical examination 
of them. 
I know what the time and cost come to. I did it, .'S nobody else did. 
The mass of thes e records alone deiies any real study of them by those who prate 
about them while ignoring thorn entriely. 
It is an additional great tragedy that there is no end of the Andrewses who 
mark commemorations with kies, with what they imagine, with what they efib from those whom while ignoring thorn entriely. 
It is an additional great tragedy that there is no end of the Andrewses who 
mark commemorations with kies, with what they imagine, with what they efib from those who

--- PAGE BREAK ---rn entriely. 
It is an additional great tragedy that there is no end of the Andrewses who 
mark commemorations with kies, with what they imagine, with what they efib from those who

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14 
ho diun t know wh at they were taking about when they spoke and wrote, with xxx± 
what they m the people these records say and mean when they say and mean nothing at 
all like these exploiters and commercializers represent, for, as in Andrews' caae, 
dirty money and the advance promotion of his coming book* 
% 
We suffered tragedies neough with the additional tragd tragedy of the disgraceful 
exploitation and coaunercialiazation of the motley crew who are not "assassination 
scholars" in.any authentic sense. 
As my first words in this rticle state and as my seven factual books on the assassi- 
nations in which there isnot a single theory advanced prove, in those times of great crisis 
and ever since then,*all our basic institutions failed. 
T his includes virtually all of those who wrote about these assassination almost all 
of whom visualized themselves as Perry Uasons and instead enmeshed themselvs and all those 
who read thendn endless theories not one of which i3 proven and almost all of which 
are from the official evidecne so many like Andrews spout off about are proven wrong. 
Andrews is but the most r4cent of this greedy crew. 
Thee There are "unanswered questions" about the Kftg assassination, to many of them, 
but they are not a3 Andrews says, "about James Earl " 
any of 
Nor are/them about what motives the Igeion of ignoramuses like Andrews. 
Other than errant officialdom the real assassins in all the assassination have been 
proected mo3t by the hundreds of Andrev/ses. They have confused 
the still sorrowing people with their ti eories that refuse each other and they ehable the 
intemll 
officials who lied to us to writq/memos many of which * have in which they cite all this 
easily disproven outpouring as proving that al, criticism of the official as sassination 
mythology is wrong and they are right. 
Andrev/s and the Post sure picked a hell of a way of commemorating the assassination 
of a triaLy great American. 
It is the literary equivalent of g houls and grave robbing.