Prologue
Themurder of Martin Luther King in 1968was not the result
of a conspiracy.A Negro-hating,habitual criminal named James
Earl Ray, alone and unaided, killed Reverend King expecting to
make himself a hero. So there was no conspiracy; Ray wasn't
hired, directed, or used.
Now, however, there is a conspiracy in this case .. . a despic-
able conspiracy.Nearly a decade after the murder,an effort is
being made to convince Americans ...and especially young
Americans... that the murder was arranged by agents of the
U.S. government. Aiding this effort are black members of Con-
gress, known as the Black Caucus; the U.S. ambassador to the
United Nations, Reverend Andrew Young; and Coretta King,
widowofReverendKing.
These black leaders were enraged by the revelation that Rev-
erendKingwas so distrusted by John and RobertKennedy that in
1961 theyordered theFederalBureauofInvestigationtotaphis
telephones and install listening devices in his offices and bedrooms.
These black citizens were further enraged by the revelation that
the director of the FBI, John Edgar Hoover, so detested Reverend

--- PAGE BREAK ---all listening devices in his offices and bedrooms.
These black citizens were further enraged by the revelation that
the director of the FBI, John Edgar Hoover, so detested Reverend

--- PAGE BREAK ---

King that he invited him to commit suicide before he accepted
the Nobel Peace Prize and he (Hoover） informed Mrs.King of
ReverendKing's frequent acts of adultery.
These revelations, startlingly cruel,are hard to bear by the
relatives and disciplesof theblackBaptist preacher wholed the
movement for racial change in America.These citizens have
cause tofeel resentful and hurt.But they do not have cause to
charge government complicityin murder.
Let it be agreed that John andRobertKennedy ordered Rev-
erend King “bugged”unmercifully. Let it be agreed that Hoover,
who considered Reverend King a hypocrite,used counter-intelli-
gence methods against him. Let it be agreed that some FBI agents,
alongwith many other Americans,welcomed thenews that Rev-
erend King was dead.The conflicts in America since 1960have
engendered such bitterness.
But it cannot be agreed that Hoover or any other government
agent arranged the murder of Reverend King by or with James
Earl Ray.For this is a lie.There is no evidence that anyagentof
the United States,or of the state of Tennessee,or of the city of
Memphis was involved in the murder; to charge this, when a
offense.
In their effort to strike at the government, these black citizens
and their servants in the media are striking at me,calling me an
ally of the FBI. To maintain that FBI agents committed the
his own reasons, committed it.
In 1968-70,in Look magazine and in a book titled HeSlew the
Dreamer,I explained howReverendKing was murdered by Ray.
With Ray's help and approval, I answered the questions as to
where he got his money,how he obtained a Canadian passport,
and what his motive was.
Then and thereafter my account of the murder was denounced
but never disproved, and in 1976 the U.S. Department of Justice,
underAtty.Gen.Edward H.Levi who had been head of the
University of Chicago Law School,reported that my account is
true.
vias denounced
but never disproved, and in 1976 the U.S. Department of Justice,
underAtty.Gen.Edward H.Levi who had been head of the
University of Chicago Law School,reported that my account is
true.
vi

--- PAGE BREAK ---er disproved, and in 1976 the U.S. Department of Justice,
underAtty.Gen.Edward H.Levi who had been head of the
University of Chicago Law School,reported that my account is
true.
vi

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In 1969,after Ray pleaded guilty of the murder,his attorney
became J.C. Stoner, an anti-Semitic and anti-Negro lawyer long
associated with the Ku Klux Klan. Stoner sued me, charging I
had violated Ray's civil rights when Ipaid Ray and his lawyers
for helping me find the truth in the case. The suit went through
the federal courts to the U.S.Supreme Court.To defend myself
cost me $20,000. The courts ruled that in no way had I violated
Ray's rights in establishing and publishing the truth.
I was a friend of Reverend King, and he was my friend. We
first met in 1956. In May, 1965,less than three years before his
death,he wrote an introduction to my book Three Lives for
major language. The book was published in the United States by
theNewYorkHeraldTribune andwasserialized by theHerald
Tribune,the Chicago Sun-Times,and about forty other news-
papersbelongingto theHeraldTribuneSyndicate.
Here are excerpts from Reverend King's introduction:
....Three Lives for Mississippi reveals without mitigation the
worstinAmericanlifewithnoefforttoobscurerealitiesbecause
it speaksfrom thehonest conscience of man.Itresurrects from
death the meaning of three fine lives.This isa book written to
validate the promise of Canon John Donne,“Death,thou shalt
notdie."
....It is an important book because its author makes himself a
part of the continuing struggle for freedom.WilliamBradford
Huie writes as a reporter but also as an impassioned man. He
writeswithclinicaldetailbutnotwithdetachment.And
above all,he writes ofevil in theSouth as an eighth-generation
Southerner.
....Mr. Huie recognizes that the unholy alliance of violence
and “Southern justice”indicts not only murderers but the larger
society that shelters them.Inboldly proclaiming war upon both
he joins a yet small but growing force in the white Southern com-
munity:thosewhohave decided that social-economicprivilege
does not compensate for a mutilated conscience and a base be-
trayal of their democratic heritage.
....Thisbook ispart of the arsenaldecentAmericans can em-
ploytomakedemocracyforalltrulyabirthrightandnota
distant dream.
viia mutilated conscience and a base be-
trayal of their democratic heritage.
....Thisbook ispart of the arsenaldecentAmericans can em-
ploytomakedemocracyforalltrulyabirthrightandnota
distant dream.
vii

--- PAGE BREAK ---

When Reverend King was murdered, it was as his friend ..
and as the reporter whom he admired ...that I paid Ray and his
lawyers $40,000 on their promise to help me establish the truth.
I carried out my contract with Ray to the letter. And he, at
first, tried to give me what he had promised. Then he began lying,
and I proved to him that he was lying. And despite his lies, I
establishedandpublishedthetruthin1968-70.
Now, because Americans .. . particularly young Americans . .
need the truth to save themselves frombeinghoodwinked,I have
added thisprologue andreissued HeSlew theDreamer.Ihave
alsoadded an epiloguewhich refutes themorerecentliesbeing
toldmostlyfortheprofitof theliars.
WilliamBradfordHuie
Hartselle,Alabama
June17,1977
vii

--- PAGE BREAK ---dreissued HeSlew theDreamer.Ihave
alsoadded an epiloguewhich refutes themorerecentliesbeing
toldmostlyfortheprofitof theliars.
WilliamBradfordHuie
Hartselle,Alabama
June17,1977
vii

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Epilogue
of Americans who have any understanding of a lonely, twisted,
people-hating man named James Earl Ray.
You obtained your understanding by reading a book...some-
thing fewAmericans ever do.Less than3percentof theadults
in this,country read books.Only 18 percent of them read news-
papers or magazines. The great mass of Americans form their
opinionsfromsomething theyhearon televisionorradioorin
conversation with uninformed or misinformed associates.
TheGallupPoll reports that80percentof allAmericansbelieve
Ray must have had help in killing Reverend King. This should
not surprise any informed American.The80percent are those
who are uninformed or misinformed. They ask,and can't answer,
three questions:If Ray didn't have help,where did he get the
money for all that traveling? How did he get a passport? And if he
wasn'tpaid,whatmotivedidhehave?
David Brinkley contributed to the confusion by remarking on
television,“Nobody has ever explained what motive Ray had in
killingKing."
NowthatyouhavereadthisbookyouknowwhatBrinkley
207

--- PAGE BREAK ---d Brinkley contributed to the confusion by remarking on
television,“Nobody has ever explained what motive Ray had in
killingKing."
NowthatyouhavereadthisbookyouknowwhatBrinkley
207

--- PAGE BREAK ---

208
hasn't bothered to learn: that Ray was driven by the most insis-
tent of all motives which drive human beings to commit murder.
The yearning of the nobody to be somebody! The desire of the
two-bit criminal to be recognized by his peers as a bigshot! The
anxiety in the anti-socialoutlaw who tries to find relief by action
which will put his face on the six o'clock news!
You understand Rayhad motives similar to the two lonely,
President Ford. And surely Ray could have repeated the words
ofthelonely,twistedlittlemanwhomurderedPresidentMcKinley
and then explained in broken English, "I wanted to kill a ...a
ruler!"
AWashington columnistmakes her contribution to ignorance
by writing,“Ray made some moves in Canada which were just
howtomake."
Now that you have read this book you know that Ray was an ex-
perienced but unsophisticated criminal.Whenhereached Toronto
after the murder he made a series of blunders which could have
gotten him arrested sooner than he was.He moved in such a
sophisticated manner that he gothimself halted and admonished
by police for jaywalking! Not many escaped convicts or fleeing
murderers would have been that stupid.
He thought he needed a birth certificate to get a passport and
he took risks to get the birth certificate.When it reached him
through the mail,he left it in a telephone booth;he was scared
speechless when a well-intentioned fat man returned it to him.
He thought he needed someone to vouch for him to get the
passport. So he fumbled around trying to arrange two identities
and two residencies so that as Bridgman he could alter his appear-
printed SNEYD on the passport application, he made the D look
like an A, and the passport he received was for SNEYA. This
forced him to risk going to the Canadian Embassy in Lisbon to
haveSNEYAchanged toSNEYD.
two Canadian passports ... one in Ottawa, then a substitute inand the passport he received was for SNEYA. This
forced him to risk going to the Canadian Embassy in Lisbon to
haveSNEYAchanged toSNEYD.
two Canadian passports ... one in Ottawa, then a substitute in

--- PAGE BREAK ---received was for SNEYA. This
forced him to risk going to the Canadian Embassy in Lisbon to
haveSNEYAchanged toSNEYD.
two Canadian passports ... one in Ottawa, then a substitute in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

209
Lisbon ... is cited as a sophisticated move to create confusion.
Itwas theresult ofRay'scarelessness.
Now that you have read this book you know that nothing was
required for him to get a Canadian passport in 1968 except three
prints of aphoto of himself which cost two dollars,another ten
dollars for the passport fee, and enough money for the plane
ticket to London. He had only to go to a travel agency and fill out
a form to be notarized by the agency manager. Then he handed
over the prints of the photo, the passport fee, and the money for
the ticket, and he returned in ten days and picked up the ticket
and thepassport.
No sophistication,no birth certificate,no voucher,no help was
needed beyond that provided by the travel agency in return for
the fee paid to the agency by the airline on which the ticket was
issued.
Now thatyouhave read this bookyou alsoknow whereRay got
his money.He has told you.All his adult life, during the periods
when he was not in prison, he carried a gun and got money by
forgery, theft, armed robbery, and dealing in drugs. He dealt in
drugs and tobacco while he was in prison.When he escaped from
During the year after his prison escape and before he killed
Reverend King, he spent about $9,000. He says he got it by armed
robbery, by smuggling drugs across the Canadian and Mexican
borders, and by smuggling stolen jewelry and coin collections
across the Mexican border.Why should hebe doubted?As an
adult he had never obtained money in any other manner. This is
the way two million Americans now support themselves and their
travels.On the Gulf Coast, near where I live,hundreds of men
and women are now profitably engaged in bringing marijuana into
theUnitedStatesfromMexicoandSouthAmerica.
In his criminal activities Ray, of course,had criminal contacts.
He describes them.But there is noevidence that anyof these con-
tactswanted tobeinvolvedin theprofitlessmurder ofReverend
King. What motivated'Ray to kill Reverend King will motivate
onlyoneman—nottwoormoremen.
So to those Americans who have informed themselves, thereswanted tobeinvolvedin theprofitlessmurder ofReverend
King. What motivated'Ray to kill Reverend King will motivate
onlyoneman—nottwoormoremen.
So to those Americans who have informed themselves, there

--- PAGE BREAK ---in theprofitlessmurder ofReverend
King. What motivated'Ray to kill Reverend King will motivate
onlyoneman—nottwoormoremen.
So to those Americans who have informed themselves, there

--- PAGE BREAK ---

210
are no unanswered questions in this murder case. The questions
continue to be asked only by those who are uninformed or mis-
informed and those who have a political or monetary interest in
promotingdistrustof thegovernment.
Now here is the truthabout why John and RobertKennedy
distrusted Reverend King and ordered him bugged, and why
John Edgar Hoover despised him and both bugged and harassed
him.
(Here I will not fix blame: I only want to establish truth. I
knew all four of these men. John Kennedy first appeared with me
on television when he was a congressman preparing to run for
the Senate.We talked for several hours before and after the
telecast.)
In 1956, during the bus boycott, I spent four days in Mont-
gomery, much of the time ‘with Reverend King. He knew who I
was.He knewI had gone into Tallahatchie County,Mississippi,
andestablished the truth intheEmmett Till murder casewhen
neither the FBI nor the state of Mississippi could establish it. He
alsoknewI had gone into Suwannee County,Florida,saved Ruby
McCollum from execution,and established the truth in that case
when neither theFBI nor the state of Florida could establish it.
Since I was a substantial white citizen of Alabama,Reverend
King welcomed my support. I sat on the rostrum with him at his
church, the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, and he introduced
me to his congregation.I also went with him to other black
churches where rallieswere being held in support of theboycott,
and he introduced me to those congregations. I visited his home
and met Mrs.King.
In all I must have spent six hours in one-on-one conversation
with him. We discussed a strategy for the movement. We antici-
pated moves of his opponents. We considered mistakes he could
not afford to make. I was forty-five years old, a seasoned writer
and lecturer.He was twenty-seven and a beginner.I wanted him
to succeed.I didn't presume to advise him.But since he initiated
the discussion, I went over his problems with him.
First there was the danger of jealousy.I reminded him hownd a beginner.I wanted him
to succeed.I didn't presume to advise him.But since he initiated
the discussion, I went over his problems with him.
First there was the danger of jealousy.I reminded him how

--- PAGE BREAK ---

211
white men had always paid black preachers to keep blacks from
"making trouble."
 u wua punre in suno e sm I uum,
thirties,” I said,“I knew a mine owner who built churches on his
property for his black miners and hired black preachers to pray
each Sunday for the damnation of John L.Lewis, leader of the
UnitedMineWorkers."
I chuckled at that memory, but he didn’t and so I went on.“"The
miracle here in Montgomery is that you, a youthful newcomer,
have been able to get the united support of these older black
preachers. They all have their own domains and their white pa-
trons, and usually they are as jealous of one another as whores.
You can be sure that these white city commissioners expect to
 n go s    n n a 
therebyinducingsome of theseolderblackpreachers to come out
againstyou."
He said he recognized that danger, then he mentioned President
Eisenhower and theFBI andwondered how fiercely they would
oppose the movement.
“Ike won't do much of anything,” I predicted. “"But he is cer-
tainly opposed to you. He opposed integration in the Army, and
he'll die believing that his worst mistake was appointing Earl
Warren to theSupremeCourt."
black people.He'll treat you as a troublemaker.And if you asso-
ciate with Communists or pro-Communists,he'll try to destroy
you."
It was not until our last conversation that I mentioned sex.
Some of the members of theDexter Avenue Baptist Church are
more white than black.They know about illicit sex and they
don't hesitate to discuss it.With several of these people I talked
about their young preacher.
All of them supported him, but near the end of one conversa-
"somethingofarounder."
Another woman arched her brows and remarked,“Remember,
Mr.Huie, not all Southern gentlemen are white!

--- PAGE BREAK ---f them supported him, but near the end of one conversa-
"somethingofarounder."
Another woman arched her brows and remarked,“Remember,
Mr.Huie, not all Southern gentlemen are white!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

212
She was referring to the old jokes about the alacrity with which
"Southern gentlemen" pursue maids, wives, and widows without
regard torace,color,or creed.
I told Reverend King what I had heard, and when he offered no
comment I said, “I'm not insisting that this is any of my business,
but Ill say what we both know is true: if you continue to ...to
forage among the sisterhood ... you'll be vulnerable to your
enemies."
He still didn't comment. But he didn't seem angry, and he
finally turned to me with what I thought was an irrelevant question.
"Don't you do it?"
It was my turn to hesitate, after which I gave a measured
not a reverend.Remember Elmer Gantry and the Christian mis-
sionary in Rain? The reverends in our society who forage among
the sisterhood are regarded by millions of people as hypocrites.
Thedictionary definitionof hypocrite is a falsepretender tovirtue
or piety. If your enemies ever expose you as a false pretender
to piety, millions of Americans who might otherwise support you
will turn against you."
To that he made no reply. For a noticeable interval we sat
there together without speaking. Then he changed the subject and
we continued the conversation.
When John and RobertKennedy assumed thepresidencyin
1961,their first concern was to make sure they held power for
the next eightyears.Like the Carter bunch in 1977,they began
running for re-election the day after inauguration.
In winning their narrow victory they had made a gesture of
friendship toward Reverend King.But this didn't mean they
trusted him.And once they had associated themselves with him,
they moved to make certain he didn't surprise themwith any em-
barrassing conduct during the next four years. So they ordered
the FBI to watch him“like a hawk watching a chicken”and report
liability to them.ved to make certain he didn't surprise themwith any em-
barrassing conduct during the next four years. So they ordered
the FBI to watch him“like a hawk watching a chicken”and report
liability to them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he didn't surprise themwith any em-
barrassing conduct during the next four years. So they ordered
the FBI to watch him“like a hawk watching a chicken”and report
liability to them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

213
As worldly-wise as he thought he was,I don't think Reverend
Kingunderstood theextenttowhichtheKennedyswouldgoto
protect themselves.Certainlyheunderestimated the fury of the
reaction whenJohn Edgar Hoover began listening to him tele-
phoning the wives of other men and arranging rendezvous in
hotels and motels.
Of all the men in America,Hoover was the one least likely to
be tolerant of Reverend King's sexual conduct.In addition to
being anti-Negro,Hoover considered himself to be a devout Chris-
tian.Apparently he was a celibate and he may have been a latent
homosexual.Soablackreverend troublemaker receiving theNobel
Peace Prize while practicing adultery ... this was enough to drive
Hoover up the wall!
Then the question becomes: since Hoover despised Reverend
King to the point where he suggested that he kill himself, why
didn't Hoover have him killed? Especially since having him killed
would have been easy?
There were many weeks when neither reporters nor police were
watching him, and Reverend King had no bodyguard.He was a
man alone, going into and out of his home every day. On any
eveningduring suchperiodsakiller witha shotgun couldhave
waited outside his home, killed him,and escaped without being
apprehended.
In 1967, Reverend King spent several weeks in the Caribbean
unwatched by the press.Hoover knew where he was. Most any-
where in those islands Hoover could have arranged his death with
no fear ofbeing exposed.
Whydidn't Hoover have him killed? The only reasonable
answer is that Hoover was not a murderer.Whatever he was and
whatever illegal actions he may have arranged at presidential di-
rection,none of his detractors has produced evidence, or even
suggested prior to 1977, that Hoover ever arranged the death of
anyone.
To suggest that he arranged the death of Reverend King at a
time when police and press were watching ... and that he em-
ployed an unreliable escaped convict as trigger man .. . this is to
suggest that Hoover was stupid as well as vindictive.everend King at a
time when police and press were watching ... and that he em-
ployed an unreliable escaped convict as trigger man .. . this is to
suggest that Hoover was stupid as well as vindictive.

--- PAGE BREAK ---me when police and press were watching ... and that he em-
ployed an unreliable escaped convict as trigger man .. . this is to
suggest that Hoover was stupid as well as vindictive.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

214
When I think of Martin Luther King,Jr.,now,I think of him
in comparison with Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.
Both were Baptist preachers and sons of Baptist preachers.Both
were pulpit orators.Powell was from Harlem,King from Georgia.
Powell's blood was more white than black, King's blood was all
black. So Powell's oratory was elegant, urbane, and often satiric;
King's oratory was resonant, repetitive, and solemn.
Powell compelled white congressmen to give him more power
than they wanted him to have,and he used the power to try to
out-Herod Herod.When a white committee chairman hireda
secretary who couldn't type,Powell bested him by hiring two
such secretaries.In the end,Powell's excesses allowed the whites
he had bested to turn on him and break him.
The last time I saw Powell, he was sick and broke,but still
wisecracking defiantly,still thumbing his nose at white men even
thoughitcosthimmoneyheneeded tolive.
It was about four years after the death of King, and not long
before Powell's death.Twofilm producers wanted to filmPowell's
life, and they wanted me towrite a biographyfrom which the film
couldbe adapted.Itold them thatwhileI consideredPowell tragic
andsympathetic,Ididn'tbelieveIcouldevermakeafilm audi-
ence believe he was anything but evil. I did,however, agree to
go with them to Powell's apartment in Harlem and to question him
whiletheylistened.
Our dialogue lasted four hours, with me questioning, and Powell
performing,hoping hisperformance would win him fifty thousand
badly-needed dollars for the right toportrayhim.
For three hours he pleased the white money-men.They nodded
their heads often.Then I saw him growing ashamed of himself,
and I guessed what was coming.
"Congressman,” I asked, “after all your years as a preacher
and a politician, just what do you believe now?
"Not a damn thing!" he snapped. "It's all fable and hypocrisy.
I don'tbelievea damn thing!
The mouths of the money-men dropped open.
 u ss jo si A se ne, is I eu no,
pulpit of the Abyssinian Baptist Church, preaching the assurances"It's all fable and hypocrisy.
I don'tbelievea damn thing!
The mouths of the money-men dropped open.
 u ss jo si A se ne, is I eu no,
pulpit of the Abyssinian Baptist Church, preaching the assurances

--- PAGE BREAK ---hypocrisy.
I don'tbelievea damn thing!
The mouths of the money-men dropped open.
 u ss jo si A se ne, is I eu no,
pulpit of the Abyssinian Baptist Church, preaching the assurances

--- PAGE BREAK ---

215
of the Christian religion ... and after all the years in Congress
under the Stars-and-Stripes . . . you don't believe anything?"
"Not a damn thing,” he repeated soberly. “I believe I'm alive
tonight and tomorrow I'll be dead. That's the sum of it."
The fifty thousand dollars for him went flying out the window,
and the money-men were ready to go back to the Sherry-Nether-
land Hotel.Whenwe were in the limousine one of them said to
me, “"Huie, how can you see anything tragic or sympathetic in that
rascal? Hell, he's all evil."
But for the money-men, Powell was not the only casualty in his
conversation with me.After about two hours he hadpaused to sip
wine and,knowing I had written He Slew the Dreamer,he told a
story.
"Old Martin!" he said, beginning to chuckle. “He came down
to the island to see me a littlewhile before hewas killed.He had
this girl with him... ."
Savoring every word, Powell then told us about Reverend
King's lewd and hilarious conduct with the girl, on the beach and
in thehotel.
"You should have seen him! Running down the hotel cor-
ridor .. . stark naked .. . jumping and yelling . . ."
He told us what Reverend King was yelling ... and what he
was yelling was not only obscene but also profane!
There are two other living menwhoheard whatPowell told me.
None of us thought Powell was lying.
AndwhenIlater told that story to ReverendAndrewYoung in
an Atlanta hotel room,Reverend Young didn't tell me Reverend
Powell had been lying about Reverend King.He seemed already
tohaveheard thatstoryandotherslike it.
All of which indicates that perhaps we must reconsider what we
thought was the meaningof the sorrowful speechReverend King
delivered during the evening before his death.Heretofore,we have
interpreted that speech to meanhewasforeseeinghisdeath and
that having already “gone to the mountain,” he was ready to die.
But considering his obscenity and his profanity on Bimini,isn't
it possible he had lost his faith ...that he, too, had concludedth and
that having already “gone to the mountain,” he was ready to die.
But considering his obscenity and his profanity on Bimini,isn't
it possible he had lost his faith ...that he, too, had concluded

--- PAGE BREAK ---

216
 m r n   . e a   
pressingwasadeathwish?
Isn't it possible that as he stood there on the balcony of the
Lorraine Motel, asking a singer to sing “Precious Lord, Take My
Hand and Lead Me Home," he was welcoming what James Earl
Ray was preparing to give him from the dirty bathroom in Bessie
Brewer'sflophouse?