tatiasi


mmmM


SragPi


« The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws'’

permit the experienced forensic pathologist to be reasonably
Sate in his calculations. Regardless of the number or pos.-
tion of the bullet wounds in the body in a given case, the first
step is to determine whether each wound is a wound of -n-

trance or a wound of exit. . «

When a bullet strikes the skin, it first produces a simple
indentation, because the skin is both tough and elastic and the
tissues underneath are not rigid and resistant This s H£ tch 5* '
skin immediately under the nose of the bul et The bullet
which is rotating as well as moving forward, is definitely slowed
up at the point of first contact, but it then more or less bores its
way through the skin and the tissues underneath, and courses on
into the body. The skin is stretched by the bullet at the pomt at
which it passes through; it then returns to its former condition,
so that the size of the wound of entrance appeals to be smaller
than the diameter of the bullet which made it. Usually, tnere is
only a small amount of bleeding from wounds of entrance smce
tissue destruction at this point is not great. These rules apply to
bullet wounds that are the result of the gun being fired at
distances in excess of fifteen to eighteen inches. A different set
of rules applies when the gun is held in direct contact with th
skin or is fired from a distance less than fifteen to eightee

'^Wounds of exit, on the other hand, are usually larger than
the bullet, since the bullet tends to pack tissues in _ fron of it


§f»


\v


:• if


iifPI


.


'Wit


MimMSm


mmmm


&^smm


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

to the Naval Medical Center, I was called to the Center
by my superiors and informed that the President's body
would be brought to our laboratories for an examina-
tion, and I was charged with the responsibility of con-
ducting and supervising this examination; told to also
call upon anyone whom I wished as an assistant in this
matter, that I deemed necessary to be present.

Mr. Specter. Who did assist you, if anyone, in the course
of the autopsy?

Commander Humes. My first assistant was Commander
J. Thornton Boswell, whose position is Chief of Path-
ology at the Naval Medical School, and my other as-
sistant was Lt. Col. Pierre Finck, who is in the Wound
Ballistics Section of the Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology.

In short. Commander Flumes was a “hospital” pathologist.
By any charity of imagination, he could not be considered a
"forensic” pathologist or a “medico-legal” pathologist. The
distinction between the two types of pathology is basic to a
proper evaluation of the Warren Commission Report.

Pathology is the branch of medicine which concerns itself
with the nature of disease, the causes of disease, its process of
development, and its effects on the tissues and organs of the
body. As Commander Humes indicated, the broad field of
pathology breaks itself down into sub-fields and sub-specialties.
One of these is forensic pathology. “Forensic” in this sense
implies anything that has to do with the courtroom or some step
in the administration of justice. The term “medico-legal” has
the same meaning.

The “hospital” pathologist performs his autopsies on cases
where death occurs in a hospital, usually as a result of some
natural disease process. The cause of death is presumed in the
great majority of cases because the patient has been under
medical treatment. The autopsy is performed to confirm the
diagnosis, or for research or other academic purposes.

The “forensic” or “medico-legal” autopsy has an entirely
different setting. The death is usually not attended by a physi-
cian. The exact cause of death is crucial because of the legal
implications. There may or may not be a suggestive or pre-
sumptive lead to guide the autopsy surgeon. If there is a lead,
it is frequently insidious and misleading. The hospital patholo-

22


" The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws”

gist is as much out of his field when he attempts a medico-legal
autopsy as is the chest surgeon who attempts a delicate brain
operation.

This analogy must be given a practical qualification. The
chest surgeon would not attempt a delicate excursion into a
living patient’s brain for fear of killing him. Unfortunately,
hospital pathologists are not fettered by any such fears.

Assistant Commission Counsel Specter did not consider it
either necessary or advisable to attempt to establish Com-
mander Boswell’s expertise in the field of forensic pathology, or
to ascertain whether he had any experience with bullet wounds
in the body. The answer is that he had absolutely none worthy
of mention.

Colonel Finck’s professional qualifications were presented in
an interesting fashion to the Warren Commission.

Mr. Specter. What is your profession, sir?

Colonel Finck. I am a physician.

Mr. Specter. And by whom are you employed?

Colonel Finck. By the United States Army.

Mr. Specter. And what is your rank?

Colonel Finck. I am a Lieutenant Colonel in the Medi-
cal Corps.

Mr. Specter. Where did you obtain your medical degree?

Colonel Finck. At the University of Geneva Medical
School in Switzerland.

Mr. Specter. And in what year did you obtain that
degree?

Colonel Finck. In 1948.

Mr. Specter. What has your experience been in the medi-
cal profession subsequent to obtaining that degree?

Colonel Finck. I had 4 years of training in pathology
after my internship, 2 years, including 2 years of path-
ology at the University Institute of Pathology in Geneva,
Switzerland, and 2 years at the University of Tennessee
Institute of Pathology in Memphis, Tenn.

Mr. Specter. And how long have you been in the United
States Army?

Colonel Finck. Since 1955.

Mr. Specter. And what have your duties consisted of in
the Army?

Colonel Finck. From 1955 to 1958 I performed approx-
23


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

imately two hundred autopsies, many of them pertaining
to trauma including missile wounds, stationed at Frank-
furt, Germany, as pathologist of the United States Army
Hospital in Frankfurt, Germany.

Mr. Specter. Have you had any additional, special train-
ing or experience in missile wounds?

Colonel Finck. For the past 3 years I was Chief of the
Wound Ballistics Pathology branch of the Armed Forces
Institute of Pathology and in that capacity I reviewed
personally all of the cases forwarded to us by the
Armed Forces, and some civilian cases from the United
States and our forces overseas. The number of these
cases amounts to approximately 400 cases. I was called
as a consultant in the field of missile wounds for this
particular case, and also last year in February 1963, the
Surgeon General of the Army sent me to Vietnam for a
wound ballistics mission. I had to testify in a murder
trial, involving a 30/30 rifle in the first week of March
of this year, and I came back yesterday after one week
in Panama where I had to testify. I was sent to Panama
by the Secretary of the Army regarding the fatalities of
the events of 9-10 in January of 1964.

Mr. Specter. Have you been certified by the American
Board of Pathology, Doctor Finck?

Colonel Finck. I was certified in pathology anatomy by
the American Board of Pathology in 1956, and by the
same American Board of Pathology in the field of
forensic pathology in 1961.

Of the two hundred autopsies he performed in Frankfurt,
Germany, Colonel Finck did not give the number that involved
bullet wounds in the body. He used the vague term “many.” As
to the four hundred cases that had come to his attention during
his tenure as Chief of the Wound Ballistics Pathology branch of
the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, he says, “I reviewed
personally.” Colonel Finck’s four hundred “reviewed” cases
clearly are not four hundred cases in which be presided at the
autopsy table and attempted a personal determination as to
whether a bullet wound in the body is a wound of entrance or a
wound of exit. His duties at the Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology were administrative and supervisory. They did not
include the performance of autopsies. He mentioned specifically

24


only two bullet wound cases in which he had personally testified.

These were the three men charged with the responsibility of
evaluating President Kennedy’s gunshot wounds. They were all
officers and gentlemen, and accomplished in their respective
fields of general pathology. Regrettably, their field was not
bullet wounds in the body. This particular autopsy was forced
on them by circumstances over which they had no control.
They dared not refuse it.

As a matter of fact. Colonel Finck’s summons to Bcthesda
was something of an afterthought. He arrived well after the
autopsy had begun and after a fragment of bullet had been
removed from the President’s head. He would not have been
there at all except that General Blumberg, the commanding
officer of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, telephoned
Commander Humes to offer Colonel Finck’s services. Colonel
Finck was relegated to a back-row position.

The natural discomfort of the three autopsy surgeons who
were working in an area in which they were basically unfamiliar
— personally evaluating bullet wounds in the body at the autopsy
table — was intensified by the goldfish-bowl atmosphere that
enveloped their historic operations. The arena was jammed with
FBI and Secret Service agents and various other persons. Com-
mander Humes describes it:

Mr. Specter. Tell us who else in a general way was pres-
ent at the time the autopsy was conducted in addition to
you three doctors, please?

Commander Humes. This, I must preface by saying it
will be somewhat incomplete. My particular interest was
on the examination of the President and not the security
measures of the other people who were present

However, the Surgeon General of the Navy was pres-
ent at one time or another. Admiral Galloway, the Com-
manding Officer of the National Navy Medical Center,
my own Commanding Officer, Captain John Stover of
the Naval Medical School; Dr. John Ebersole, one of
the radiologists assigned to the Naval Hospital, Bcthesda,
who assisted with the X-ray examinations which were
made. These are the chief names, sir, that I can recall.

Mr. Specter. What time did the autopsy start approxi-
mately?

Commander Humes. The President’s body was received
25


“The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws H


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

at 25 minutes before 8, and the autopsy began at ap-
proximately 8 p.m. on that evening. You must include
the fact that certain X-rays and other examinations were
made before the actual beginning of the routine type
autopsy examination.

Mr. Specter. Precisely what X-rays or photographs were
taken before the dissection started?

Commander Humes. Some of these X-rays were taken
before and some during the examination which also
maintains for the photographs, which were made as the
need became apparent to make such.

However, before the postmortem examination was
begun, anterior, posterior and lateral X-rays of the
head, and of the torso were made, and identification
type photographs, I recall having been made of the
full face of the late President. A photograph showing
the massive head wound with the large defect that
was associated with it To my recollection all of these
were made before the proceedings began.

Several others, approximately 15 to 20 in number,
were made in total before we finished the proceedings.

The taking of X-rays was a promising beginning and should
be done in any gunshot or bullet wound case. The wanderings
of bullets inside the human body both before and after death
are often so bizarre that the only practical way to locate them is
through the use of diagnostic X-rays. One case from Dr. Hel-
pern’s vast personal experience is sufficient to illustrate the need
for X-rays. A .38 caliber lead bullet entered a mans right
subclavian vein, a major vein just under the collarbone. It
somehow made its way down through the right auricle, the
right lower chamber of the heart, through the inferior vena
cava, one of the two principal veins that return the blood from
the body to the heart, finally to come to rest in the common
iliac vein down in the region of the right hip. Without X-rays,
the bullet would probably never have been found.

The autopsy on the President’s body continued until 1 1 p.m.,
when it was released to those who would prepare it for burial
and take it to the White House, where it arrived at four o’clock
Saturday morning, November 23.

The weeks following the President’s death flowed into months
as the FBI and Secret Service painstakingly and thoroughly as-

26


“The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws ”

tn n !hl. ed w the eV L dCnCe ’. hem by item - for presentation

« -I Varre ° Commission. The world waited expectantly for
clarification of the bullet wounds.

An aura °f confusion clouded the picture— due primarily
to statements made by some of the doctors at Parkland Me-

T/‘ a t h H n P ‘ ,a . ' n DalIas at a press conference a short time
after the Presidential party left for the return trip to Washing-

0n . T ? ese doctors - w ho had worked skillfully at the impossible
task of restoring life to the dead President, had observed a
wound in the front part of the President’s neck, just below the
Adams apple. Dr. Malcolm Perry described it as approxi-

Z- ra l lllineters < 1/5 of an inch) in diameter. It was ex-
uding blood which partially hid edges which were “neither
ciearcut that is, punched out, nor were they very ragged.” This
wound had been extended by Dr. Perry’s tracheotomy. A tra-
cheotomy is a surgical procedure of forming an opening in the
trachea (windpipe) for the purpose of providing an artificial
breathing vent in cases where the natural opening in the area
of the larynx (voice box) is obstructed.

At no time during the interval that the President’s body was
in Parkland Memorial Hospital did any of the doctors turn it so
that the back portion of the body could be viewed or examined,
l hey, therefore, interpreted the wound in the front part of the
neck as being a wound of entrance.

No legitimate criticism whatsoever can be directed against
the doctors in Dallas. They performed their futile tasks credit-
ably None of them had any great experience with bullet
wounds m the body, and they could not be expected to make a
definitive interpretation of whether the neck wound was a
wound of entrance or a wound of exit
The principal burden of enlightening the Warren Commis-
sion on the President’s wounds fell upon Commander Humes
In the military hierarchy, he was the senior officer charged with
this responsibility, although Colonel Finck had more experi-
ence m the field of bullet wounds than the other two doctors
corn me , and his first-hand autopsy-table case experience was

Commander Humes brought with him several drawings to
assist his presentation. He described these drawings:

Mr. Specter. Dr. Humes, before you identify what that
27


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

represents let me place Commission Exhibition No. 385
on it so it may be identified.

(The drawing was marked Commission Exhibit No.

385 for identification).

Commander Humes. When appraised of the necessity
of our appearance before this Commission, we did not
know whether or not the photographs which we had
made would be available to the Commission. So to as-
sist in making our testimony more understandable to
the Commission members, we decided to have made
drawings, schematic drawings, of the situation as we saw
it, as we recorded it and as we recall it. These drawings
were made under my supervision and that of Dr. Bos-
well by Mr. Rydberg, whose initials are H. A. He is a
hospital corpsman, second class, and a medical illustra-
tor in our command at Naval Medical School.

Mr. Specter. Did you provide him with the basic in-
formation from which these drawings were made7
Commander Humes. Yes, sir.

Mr. Specter. Distances, that sort of thing?

Commander Humes. Yes, sir. We had made certain
physical measurements of the wounds, and of their po-
sition on the body of the late President, and we pro-
vided these and supervised directly Mr. Rydberg in mak-
ing these drawings.

Mr. Specter. Have you checked the drawings subsequent
to their preparation to verify their accuracy?

Commander Humes. Yes, sir.

Mr. Specter. And proportion?

Commander Humes. I must state these drawings are in
part schematic. The artist had but a brief period of
some 2 days to prepare these. He had no photographs
from which to work, and had to work under our de-
scription, verbal description, of what we had observed.
Mr. Specter. Would it be helpful to the artist, in re-
defining the drawings if that should become necessary,
to have available to him the photographs or the X-rays
of the President?

Commander Humes. If it were necessary to have them
absolutely true to the scale. I think it would be virtually
impossible for him to do this without the photographs.

28


"The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws ’ 9

Mr. Specter. And what is the reason for the necessity
for having the photographs?

Commander Humes. I think that it is most difficult to
transmit into physical measurements by the — by word
the — exact situation as it was seen to the naked eye.
The photographs were — there is no problem of scale
there because of the wounds, if they are changed in size
or changed in size and proportion to the structures of
the body and so forth, when we attempt to give a de-
scription of these findings, it is the bony prominences,
I cannot, which we used as points of reference, I can-
not transmit completely to the illustrator where they
were situated.

Most medical illustrations in articles and textbooks that re-
late to anatomy are schematic or diagrammatic in nature. In
medico-legal situations, however, where the ultimate in accu-
racy as to the path of a bullet is the goal, the better procedure is
certainly to work from the photographs themselves rather than
from a schematic medical illustration prepared not from the
photographs which the medical illustrator views, but from a
secondhand, hearsay description that is related to him orally.
The fact of the matter is that in the case of the assassination the
security regulations imposed were so stringent that the real
investigative purpose of taking the photographs and the X-rays
was completely obscured. As to their use. Commander Humes
first testified:

Mr. Specter. Were the photographs made available then,
Dr. Humes, when Exhibit 388 was prepared?

Commander Humes. No, sir.

Mr. Specter. All right.

Commander Humes. The photographs, to go back a mo-
ment, the photographs and the X-rays were exposed in
the morgue of the Naval Medical Center on this night,
and they were not developed, neither the X-rays or the
photographs. They were submitted to the, and here, if
I make a mistake I am not certain, to either the Federal
Bureau of Investigation or to the Secret Service. I am
not sure of these.

Mr. Specter. Did you submit those yourself immedi-
ately after they were taken, Dr. Humes?

29


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

Commander Humes. Again, one of the senior people
present, I believe my own Commanding Officer, Cap-
tain Stover, took care of turning this material over to
these authorities, and receiving a receipt for this infor-
mation, for this material. It was— I supervised the posi-
tioning of the body for various of these examinations
but as far as beyond that, I did not consider that my
responsibility. . . •

The X-rays, however, do make their appearance later on
in Commander Humes’ testimony:

In further evaluating this head wound, I would
refer back to the X-rays which we had previously pre-
pared. These had disclosed to as multiple minute frag-
ments of radio opaque material traversing a line from
the wound in the occiput to just above the right eye,
with a rather sizable fragment visible by X-ray just
above the right eye. These tiny fragments that were
seen dispersed through the substance of the brain in
between were, in fact, just that extremely minute, less
than 1 mm. in size for the most part.

Mr. Specter. Will you proceed now, Dr. Humes, to con-
tinue your description of the head wound.

Commander Humes. Head wound — a careful inspection
of this large defect in the scalp and skull was made
seeking for fragments of missile before any actual de-
tection was begun. The brain was greatly lacerated and
tom, and in this area of the large defect we did not
encounter any of these minute particles.

I might say at this time that the X-ray pictures which
were made would have a tendency to magnify these
minute fragments somewhat in size and we were not too
surprised at not being able to find the tiny fragments
detected in the X-ray.

Mr. Specter. Approximately how many fragments were
observed, Dr. Humes, on the X-ray?

Commander Humes. I would have to refer to them again,
but I would say between 30 or 40 tiny dustlike particle
fragments of radio opaque material, with the exception
of this one I previoasly mentioned which was seen to
be above and very slightly behind the right orbit

30


The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws f*

; h ;-ir n K i0 r d P re u vi0 f ly that x - rays were made of
the enure body of the late President. Of course, and

11131 3S 1 descnbe something to you I
might have done it before or after in the description but
for the sake of understanding, we examined carefully
the bony structures in this vicinity as well as the X-ravs
to see if there was any evidence of fracture or of deoo^
sition of metallic fragments in the depth of this wound
and we saw no such evidence, that is no fracture of the
bones of the shoulder girdle, or of the vertical column
and no metallic fragments were detectable by X-rav ex-
animation. J

The ambiguous status of the X-rays is not entirely cleared
up even in this portion of the transcript: X

Mr Specter. Did you search the body to determine if
there was any bullet inside the body?

Commander Humes. Before the arrival of Colonel Finck
Presidenr a nd^ rayS ° f ^ head ’ " eck and torso of

fe or hoih r- Upper j K>rt,ons of major exlremi-
Vmrvi b th h ' S Upper and Iowcr extremities. At Colonel
inck s suggestion, we then completed the X-ray exam-
ination by X-raying the President’s body i Zo Z
those X-rays are available. ’

^offie^iihr 131 did th ° S r X ' rays disc,ose with aspect
£dy? PrcSen “ ° f 3 missile “ the President’s

Commander Humes. They showed no evidence of a mis-

exaniined 6 f reS,dcnt .’ s body at an y P°int. And these were

by 1116 Wh0 -

exposed but undeveloped ^a^were ^^^^1 m

^uSTw^ — a^-

for burial. e President s body prepared

involving buUet^^ounds^aftlfr C ^ ripetent medl co-legaJ autopsy
s uuuei wounds, after the external examination and

31


■

-V '--rJ'M


.

•i' \ -'. v' L-i- . -<• • *


h : :■ >.

. •


- i -

-i>-


where death delights

• Y\e» track of the bullet. A stainless steel

SlSSfSSi >

through the body, Us P<*» -»> “*

of entrance, and its point and ang e ° WO und track in

The futile, inexpenenced l efforts to probe tn^ described
the body, one end of which was in the necK area,
by Commander Humes.

ws-rs s

“ ”rS the point of entry with yon, 6t.E=r7
Commander Humes. Yes, sir, I did.

Commander Humes was detaihng a paftehc^fumWtng eff^

,o probe with his finger a wound Uack that had^an ^ ^
perforation of no greater than ° n ® q , t p bullet wounds

5er. While it is readily M the wound

can be probed, particular y through the body and strike

here may have a different Finally the direction of

the

moves. If, 3S • P . * j and arm were raised in a

his neck wound while his rig , trac k may have been

SfS “ ST Z bo'nTsmtctu*. Their Let of erpen-

32


“The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws ”

ence, compounded by the pressures of this particular autopsy
situation, prevented them from ever successfully probing the
President’s wound. Their conclusions, therefore, as to the exact
route of the bullet through the body are mathematical projec-
tions based upon measurements of the position of the two
external wounds, one at each end of the track. Because of
the tracheotomy which extended the wound in the front of the
neck, just below the Adam’s apple, the exact location of the
wound made by the bullet had to be estimated or approxi-
mated.

These projections, in turn, were relayed verbally to Hospital
Corpsman Second Class Rydberg so that he could incorporate
them into his schematic drawings. The photographs and X-rays
were never made available to him as he constructed the official
illustrations which served as the demonstrative aids for the
medical testimony. The synthetic character of the drawings is
further exaggerated by the artist’s arrows, complete with arrow-
head and nock, to illustrate the paths of the bullets. They made
it appear that the President was shot by bow and arrow.

We must accept the fact that these rather amateurish illus-
trations were not drawn to scale. Otherwise, the Commission’s
report and conclusions are patently inconsistent and obviously
invalid. The size and shape of the bullet wound in the back of
the President’s neck is presented by the artist in such a way in
Commission Exhibit 388 that it must either be a wound of exit
or, if a wound of entrance, one made by a bullet of considerably
larger caliber than the one fired from the rifle found on the
sixth floor of the Texas vSchool Book Depository Building.

To set the stage for the conclusions he would draw, Com-
mander Humes described four wounds in the President’s body,
two in the head and two in the region of the neck. To avoid con-
fusion in studying his testimony, it is necessary to remember
that each bullet that passes through the body is said to create
two wounds. One is the wound of entry; the other, the wound
of exit. Commander Humes, therefore, in discussing four
wounds was talking about the damage done by two bullets only,
each of which created its own wound of entry and its wound
of exit.

One of the head wounds was located 2.5 centimeters (ap-
proximately 1 inch) to the right and slightly above the large
bony protrusion (external occipital protuberance) which juts
out at the center of the lower part of the back of the skull. It


-'iff


Mr. Specter. Now, Dr. Humes, at one point in your ex-
amination of the President, did you make an effort to
probe the point of entry with your finger?

Commander Humes. Yes, sir; I did.

Mr. Specter. And at about the time that you were trying
to ascertain, as you previously testified, whether there
was any missile in the body of the President, did some-
one from the Secret Service call your attention to the
fact that a bullet had been found on a stretcher at Park-
land Hospital?

Commander Humes. Yes, sir; they did.

Mr. Specter. And in that posture of your examination,
having just learned of the presence of a bullet on a
stretcher, did that call to your mind any tentative ex-
planatory theory of the point of entry or exit of the
bullet which you have described as entering at point
“C” on Exhibit 385?


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

measured 6 by 15 millimeters (1/4 of an inch by 5/8 of an

inch ) . . .

The second head wound was massive, measuring approxi-
mately 13 centimeters (5 inches) in its greatest diameter. It was
difficult to measure accurately because multiple crisscross frac-
tures of the skull radiated from the large defect. It involved the
right and frontal portion of the skull, which had been exploded
oil by the force of the bullet. During the autopsy, Federal
agents brought the surgeons three pieces of bone recovered
from Elm Street in Dallas and from the Presidential automobile.
When put together, these fragments accounted for approxi-
mately three-quarters of the missing portion of the skull.

There was another wound near the base of the back of the
President’s neck, slightly to the right of his spine. It was de-
scribed as being approximately 14 centimeters (5.1/2 inches)
from the tip of the acromion (right shoulder joint) and ap-
proximately 5 1/2 inches below the tip of the right mastoid
process, the bony point immediately behind the ear. This
wound measured 7 by 4 millimeters (approximately 1/4 by 1/7
of an inch). It had clean edges and was sharply delineated.

The fourth wound was the one in the front part of the necK,
just below the Adam’s apple, which Commander Humes de-
scribes:


Some of the difficulties and discomfort experienced by the
autopsy surgeons are explained when it is understood that this
telephone conversation between Commander Humes and Dr.
Perry did not take place until the following morning, at which
time the President’s body was already resting in the White
House. Lacking the medical history of what had transpired in
Parkland Hospital in Dallas, the autopsy surgeons during the
time that they had the President’s body in front of them labored
under the impression that they were working with only three
bullet wounds, the two in the head and the one in the back of
the neck. They attributed the wound in the front of the neck to
the tracheotomy.

This caused them grave concern and anguish. Their inex-
perienced efforts to probe the neck wound were made at a time
when they assumed that the bullet must still be in the Presi-
dent’s body since there was no separate wound of exit.

Commander Humes explains their perplexity:


“The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws”


surgeons when people are in respiratory distress to give
them a free airway.

To ascertain that point I called on the telephone Dr.
Malcolm Perry and discussed with him the situation of
the President’s neck when he first examined him . . .


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

Commander Humes. Yes, sir. We were able to ascertain
with absolute certainty that the bullet had passed by the
apical portion of the right lung, producing the injury
which we mentioned.

I did not at that point have the information from Dr.
Perry about the wound in the anterior neck, and while
that was a possible explanation of the point of exit, we
also had to consider the possibility that the missile in
some rather inexplicable fashion had been stopped in its
path through the President's body and, in fact, then had
fallen from the body onto the stretcher.

Mr. Specter. And what theory did you think possible, at
that juncture, to explain the passing of the bullet back
out of the point of entry; or had you been provided with
the fact that external heart massage had been performed
on the President?

Commander Humes. Yes, sir; we had, and we considered
the possibility that some of the physical maneuvering
performed by the doctors might have in some way
caused this event to take place.

MR. Specter. Now, have you since discounted that possi-
bility, Doctor Humes?

Commander Humes. Yes; in essence we have • . .


The autopsy surgeons were considerably relieved by the re-
ceipt of this information. It permitted them to end their futile
search for the missing bullet which was not in the President’s
body. They now believed that the bullet accidentally found on
a stretcher in Parkland Hospital had been recovered from the
stretcher on which the President’s body had rested. This as-
sumption, in all probability, was correct, even though the final
report tortured the evidence, on Assistant Counsel Specter’s
persuasion, to conclude that the bullet was fortuitously found
on the stretcher which held Governor Connally during his
period in the emergency room at the hospital.

The truth of the matter is that no one will ever know for
sure which stretcher held the bullet. Its discovery, however, did
affect the course of the autopsy. The doctors thankfully aban-
doned their search, “presumed” with the self-assurance of the
“hospital” autopsy atmosphere to which they were accustomed
that they had solved the mysteries of the bullet wounds, and

36


“ The Bod y Seems to Defy Physical Laws »

S£. ed With 3 r ° Utine ’ systematic lamination of the body

,„? ey ., eXP ! nenCed no obvious discomfort in adopting the

wound of entry and a wound of exit. Until the following

Dalh ,n8 t E Whe ,M| COmniander Humes ,eIe P ho "ed Dr. Perry in
Dallas, they still regarded the opening in the front of the^eck
as a surgical wound only.

bu,^£ b ir P ? rSi8tent search of the President’s body for a

after inform^’ ^ ^ * Searc ^ W ^ 1C ^ Wa s abandoned only

after information was relayed from Dallas that a bullet bad

been found in the hospital, sheds considerable light the
initial X-rays. E.ther the surgeons did not have them available"
or for some reason, they doubted their own ability to read and
interpret them. Whatever the reason, they elected to pursue «

I f 2r, atapt t0 Pr ° be f0r ,he rnissin 8 bullet instead
VSS* re,ymg ° n 1,16 X ‘ rays *° ,eU them tha ‘ no bunet

The preliminaries were now established for the task of ex

ffXi ? r! den, ’ S bu " et wounds «o the world, through
he artificial, administrative forum of the Warren Commission-

All C °1!T ander Humes rose t0 the dem ands of the occasion’
Although his experience had been “more in the field of natural

disease than violence,” he succumbed to the intoxicating vapors
and endemic infections of the witness-box. He developed a S
b own case of “witness-chairitis” which magically Ssformed
him into an expert on every phase of the subject of hXt

wounds in the body. Having had the final look, he proceeded to
his biblical right of the final word. proceeded to

How could there be two separate wound tracks or paths made
by a single bullet through the President’s brain? r>im \
Humes had his answer: S bra,D? Comm ander


1R. Specter. Dr. Humes, would you elaborate on the
differences in the paths, especially why the bullet went
“ ?" e direcf ! on , in P art and m Part in the second di-
5ht Ty e ? ennm g With ** fragment r 'ght over the

Commander Humes. Yes, sir.

sk,!n W ch ™ ke a draw ' n « of tbe P° sterior portion of the

2e inn^rThf Tu bevelin S which we observed at
toe inner table of the skull.


WHERE DEATH DEEIGHTS

Our impression is that as this projectile impinged
upon the skull in this fashion, a small portion of it was
dislodged due to the energy expended in that collision,
if you will, and that it went off at an angle and left
the track which is labeled 388, which is labeled on Ex-
hibit 388 from "A”, point “A” to the point where the

fragment was found behind the eye. . ...

Why a fragment takes any particular direction 11
that is something which is difficult of scientific explana-
tion Those of us who have seen missiles strike bones, n
it the skull or a bone in the extremity, have long since
learned that portions of these missiles may go oil in
various directions and the precise physical laws govern
ing them are not clearly understood.

Had dumdum bullets been used? Commander Humes ex-
pounded on this:

Mr. Specter. Do you have an opinion. Dr. Humes, as to
whether there were dumdum bullets used specially on
the wound which struck point “A” on the head, on 388?
Commander Humes. I believe these were not dumdum
bullets, Mr. Specter. A dumdum bullet is a term that
has been used to describe various missiles which have
a common characteristic of fragmenting extensively upon

Mr .Specter. Would you characterize the result and effect
on this bullet as not extensive fragmenting?

Commander Humes. Yes. Had this wound on point
“A” on Exhibit 388 been inflicted by a dumdum bullet,

I would anticipate that it would not have anything near
the regular contour and outline which it had. I also
would anticipate that the skull would have been much
more extensively disrupted, and not have, as was evi-
dent in this case, a defect which quite closely corre-
sponded to the overlying skin defect because that _type
of a missile would fragment on contact and be much
more disruptive at this point.

What was the physical mechanism of the brain injury? Com-
mander Humes continued:


38


"The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws'*

. . . When the brain was turned over and viewed from
its basular or inferior aspect, there was found a longi-
tudinal laceration of the mid-brain through the floor of
the third ventricle, just behind the optic chiasm and
the mammillary bodies.

The laceration partially communicates with an oblique
1.5 cm. tear through the left cerebral peduncle. This is
a portion of the brain which connects the higher centers
of the brain with the spinal cord which is more con-
cerned with reflex actions.

There were irregular superficial lacerations over the
basular or inferior aspect of the left temporal or frontal
lobe. We interpret that these later contusions were
brought about when the disruptive force of the injury
pushed that portion of the brain against the relatively
intact skull.

This has been described as contre-coup injury in that
location.

The fragments recovered were what proportion of the bullet?

Mr. Dulles. Could one say as to what portion of the bul-
let was found in all these fragments, I mean arrive at an
estimate, was it a tenth of the bullet, was it, how much
was it, assuming the type of bullet that we believe was
used in this particular rifle?

Commander Humes. Sir, I have not had an opportunity
to personally examine the type of bullet which is believed
to have been represented by this injury.

However, I would estimate — if I understand you
correctly the total amount that was present in the
President’s skull and brain?

Mr. Dulles. Yes.

Commander Humes. Including the fragments?

Mr. Dulles. Including all the fragments.

Commander Humes. Including all these minute particles,
I would say there was something less than one-tenth of
the total volume of the missile.

Could the diameter of the bullet (its caliber) have been
different from one fired from the rifle found on the sixth floor


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

of the Texas School Book Depository Building? Commander
Humes had an authoritative answer:

MR McCloy. Perhaps this was something that Colonel
Finck could testify to exactly, but, be would be quite
competent. Is there anything to indicate that this was,
might have been a larger than a 6.5 or smaller than

Commander Humes. The size of the defect m the scalp,
caused by a projectile could vary from missile to mis-
sile because of elastic recoil and so forth of the tissues.

However, the size of the defect in the underlying
bone is certainly not likely to get smaller than that of the
missile which perforated it, and in this case, the smallest
diameter of this was approximately 6 to 7 mm., so I
would feel that there would be the absolute upper limit
of the size of this missile, sir.

Mr McCloy. Seven would be the absolute upper umit.

Commander Humes. Yes, sir; and, of course, just a little
tilt could make it a little larger, you see.

Again, on the mechanism of the massive head injury, Com-
mander Humes rises to the occasion:

Mr. Dulles. I have one other question, if I may?

Is the incidence of clean entry as indicated there, and
then great fragmentation on exit, is that a normal conse-
quence of this type of wound?

Commander Humes. Sir, we feel that there are two
potential explanations for this.

One having traversed the skull in entrance m e
occiput as depicted on 388, the missile begins to tumble,
and in that fashion it presents a greater proportion of its
surface to the brain substance and to the skull as it

makes its egress. _

The other and somewhat more difficult to measure,
and perhaps Colonel Finck will be able to testify in
greater detail on this, is that a high velocity missile has
tremendous kinetic energy, and this energy is expanded
against the structures which it strikes, and so that much
of this defect could be of the nature of blast, as this
kinetic energy is dissipated by traversing the skull.

40


“The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws'*

Is that the sense of the question, sir?

Mr. Dulles. Yes.

The trajectory of the bullets? Commander Humes gave a
long, rambling answer to conform to the preestablished theory
of the Commission that all the shots were fired from the window
of the Texas School Book Depository Building. When boiled
down, it was:

Commander Humes. The degree of angle?

Senator Cooper. The angle, yes, the degree of angle of
the missile from the building.

Commander Humes. Yes, sir; there is one difficulty,
and that is the defect of exit was so broad that one has
to rely more on the inclination of the entrance than they

\ do connecting in this instance entrance and exit because
so much of the skull was carried away in this fashion.

Senator Cooper. That was my second question.

My first question was would it be possible physically
to establish the degree of angle of the trajectory of the
bullet?

Commander Humes. Within limited accuracy, sir?

Senator Cooper. Within limited accuracy.

That being true then my second question was whether
the point of entry of the bullet, point A, and the, what
you call the exit —

Commander Humes. Exit.

Senator Cooper. Did you establish them so exactly that
they could be related to the degree of angle of the tra-
jectory of the bullet?

Commander Humes. Yes, sir; to our satisfaction we did
ascertain that fact.

What about holes and defects in the clothing which the
President wore and which Commander Humes only saw for the
first time the preceding day? It was an uncomfortable question,
but he did the best he could to make the holes in the clothing
correspond to the wound in the back of the neck. He thought it
a difficult hurdle, since the holes in the clothing were actually
lower than the neck wound:

Mr. Specter. Now, how if at all, do the holes in the
shirt and coat conform to the wound of entrance which


The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws”

lieve that this action would further accentuate
hon of the coat and the shirt with respect t<
or the President.

Mr. Specter. Now, Dr. Humes, would you t
mission Exhibit No. 395—

Mr. McCloy. Before you go, may I ask a qu,
In your examination of the shirt, I just war
in the record, from your examination of the s
is no defect in the collar of the shirt that coin
the defect in the back of the President’s cc
correct?

Commander Humes. You are correct sir Th
such defect.

The point of fire?

Mr. Dulles. So then the shot would have been f
some point above the head of the person hit?

Commander Humes. Yes, sir.

Commander Humes experienced no difficulty in e
is loins so that he could discuss Governor Connallv’
“ 8r “ t .“■ He expounded on the bullet, its path
the Presidents body, its velocity after it passed thrc
l ullets metal jacket, all in support of the premise tha
nor Connally was struck by the same bullet that passec
the President’s neck. 1

On the question of greatest concern to the Warren
sion, which were the wounds of entrance and which
wounds of exit on die President’s body, Commande,
first quoted a few of the textbook criteria for makin
determination. He then confidently expressed his opinio;


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

you described as point “C” on Commission Exhibit
385?

Commander Humes. We believe that they conform quite
well. When viewing — first of all, the wounds or the
defects in 393 and 394 coincide virtually exactly with
one another.

They give the appearance when viewed separately and
not as part of the clothing of a clothed person as being,
perhaps, somewhat lower on the Exhibits 393 and 394
than we have depicted them in Exhibit No. 385. We
believe there are two reasons for this.

385 is a schematic representation, and the photo-
graphs would be more accurate as to the precise location,
but more particularly the way in which these defects
would conform with such a defect on the torso. It
would depend on the girth of the shoulders and configu-
ration of the base of the neck of the individual, and the
relative position of the shirt and coat to the tissues of the
body at the time of the impact of the missile.

Mr. Specter. As to the muscular status of the President,
what was it?

Commander Humes. The President was extremely well
developed, an extremely well-developed muscular young
man with a very well-developed set of muscles in his
thoraco and shoulder girdle.

Mr. Specter. What efFect would that have on the po-
sitioning of the shirt and the coat with respect to the
position of the neck in and about the seam?

Commander Humes. I believe this would have a tendency
to push the portions of the coat which show the defects
here somewhat higher on the back of the President
than on a man of less muscular development

Mr. Specter. . . . Will you describe. Dr. Humes, the
position of President Kennedy’s right hand in that pic-
ture?

Commander Humes. Yes. This exhibit Commission Ex-
hibit No. 396, allegedly taken just prior to the wound-
ing of the late President shows him with his hand
raised, his elbow bent, apparently in saluting the crowd.
I believe that this action —

Mr. Specter. Which hand was that?

Commander Humes. This was his right hand, sir. I be-


WHERE DEATH DELTGHT3


so complex that it was impossible to accurately pinpoint
the exit of the missile in the head wound.

Mr. Specter. Now as to that last factor, would the
X-rays be of material assistance to you in pinpointing
the specific locale of the exit?

Commander Humes. I do not believe so, sir. The only
path that the X-rays show in any detail are of the
minor fragments which pass from point A to point B.

In other words, the bullet through the head entered at the
back of the head and made its exit somewhere toward the front
and right portion of the skull.

As to the wound through the neck. Commander Humes
continues:

We reached the conclusion that point “C” was a
point of entry.

Mr. Specter. What characteristics of that wound led you
to that conclusion?

Commander Humes. The characteristics here were basi-
cally similar to the characteristics above, lacking one
very valuable clue or piece of evidence rather than clue,
because it is more truly a piece of evidence in the skull.
The skull as I mentioned before had the bone with the
characteristic defect made as a missile traverses bone.

The missile, to the best of our ability to ascertain,
struck no bone protuberances, no body prominences, no
bone as it traversed the President’s body. But it was a
sharply delineated wound. It was quite regular in its
outline. It measured, as I mentioned, 7 by 4 mm.
Its margins were similar in all respects when viewed
with the naked eye to the wound in the skull, which
we feel incontrovertibly was a wound of entrance.

The defect in the fascia, which is that layer of con-
nective tissue over the muscle just beneath the wound,
corresponded virtually exactly to the defect in the skin.

And for these reasons we felt that this was a wound
of entrance.

Mr. Specter. What conclusion, if any, did you reach as
to whether point “D” on 385 was the point of entrance
or exit?


“The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws’ 9

Commander Humes. We concluded that this missile de-
picted in 385 “C” which entered the President’s body
traversed the President’s body and made its exit through
the wound observed by the physicians at Parkland Hos-
pital and later extended as a tracheotomy wound.

Mr. Specter. Does the description “ragged wound” which
is found in the Parkland report shed any light in and
of itself as to whether point “D” is an exit or entry
wound?

Commander Humes. I believe, sir, that that statement
goes on, ragged wound in the trachea. I don’t believe that
refers to the skin and you might say that it is a ragged
wound is more likely to be a wound of exit.

However, the trachea has little cartilaginous rings
which have a tendency, which would be disrupted by
this, and most wounds of the trachea unless very closely
incised would perhaps appear slightly ragged.

But had Dr. Perry called this a “ragged wound”?

Dr. Malcolm Perry had observed it as exuding blood which
partially hid edges which were “neither clean-cut, that is,
punched out, nor were they very ragged.”

Although this wound in the front of the President’s throat, as
it appeared initially, was seen only by the doctors at Parkland
Hospital before they extended it in performing the trache-
otomy, there was absolutely no doubt in Commander Humes*
mind but that it was a wound of exit:

Mr. Dulles. Just one other question.

Am I correct in assuming from what you have said
that the wound is entirely inconsistent with a wound
that might have been administered if the shot were
hred from in front or the side of the President: It had
to be fired from behind the President?

Commander Humes. Scientifically, sir, it is impossible
tor it to have been fired from other than behind. Or to
have exited from other than behind.

Commander Humes’ substantive testi-
f i p n rH° U • I £ resi< ? en . t ’s wounds, Commission member Ger-
Ford voiced his misgivings as to the pictures and X-rays.

45


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

Representative Ford. May I ask what size are the pic-
tures to which you refer?

Commander Humes. We exposed both black and white
and color negatives, Congressman. They were exposed
in the morgue during the examination. They were not
developed. The Kodachrome negatives when developed
would be 405. They were in film carriers or cassettes as
were the black and white. Of course, they could be mag-
nified.

Representative Ford. Have those been examined by
personnel at Bethesda?

Commander Humes. No, sir. We exposed the negatives;
we turned them over. Here I must ask the counsel again
for advice — to the Secret Service.

Mr. Specter. Yes; it was the Secret Service.

Commander Humes. They were turned over to the Secret
Service in their cassettes unexposed, and I have not
seen any of them since. This is the photographs. The
X-rays were developed in our X-ray department on the
spot that evening, because we had to see those right
then as part of our examination, but the photographs
were made for the record and other purposes.

Representative Ford. But they had never been actually
developed for viewing.

Commander Humes. I do not know, sir.

Commander Humes had completely reversed his earlier testi-
mony that “neither the X-rays or the photographs” were de-
veloped the night of the autopsy but were turned over to the
FBI or Secret Service, exposed but not developed.

Assistant Commission Counsel Specter next proceeded to
tidy up the record. He introduced approximately fifteen pages
of longhand notes which Commander Humes had made during
the performance of the autopsy. The transcript continues:

Mr. Specter. Are there any notes which you made at any
time which are not included in this group of notes?

Commander Humes. Yes, sir; there are.

Mr. Specter. And what do those consist of?

Commander Humes. In privacy of my own home, early
in the morning of Sunday, November 24th, I made a
draft of this report which I later revised, and of which

46


“The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws’’

this represents the revision. That draft I personally
burned in the fireplace of my recreation room.

There is no way of knowing at this stage just exactly what
Commander Humes* initial, independent conclusions were.
The transcript, however, does contain this interesting exchange:

Mr. Specter. Now, just one point on the notes them-
selves. Page 14 of your rough draft. Doctor Humes, as
to the point of origin, the notes showed that there was
a revision between your first draft and your final report.

Commander Humes. Yes, sir.

Mr. Specter. Will you first of all read into the record
the final conclusion reflected in your final report.

Commander Humes. I would rather read it from the
final report. The final report reads:

“The projectiles were fired from a point behind and
somewhat above the level of the deceased.”

Mr. Specter. And what did the first draft of that sentence
as shown on page 14 of your rough draft state?

Commander Humes. It read as follows:

“The projectiles were fired from a point behind and
somewhat above a horizontal line to the vertical position
of the body at the moment of impact.”

Mr. Specter. Now would you state the reason for making
that modification between draft and final report, please?

Commander Humes. This examination, as I have indi-
cated, was performed by myself with my two associ-
ates. The notes which we have just admitted as an ex-
hibit are in my own hand and are my opinion, was my
opinion at that time, as to the best way of presenting
the facts which we had gleaned during this period.

Before submitting it to the typist, I went over this
with great care with my two associates. One or the other
of them raised the point that perhaps this sentence
would state more than what was absolutely fact based
upon our observations, pointing out that we did not
know precisely at that time in what position the body
of the President was when the missiles struck, and that
therefore we should be somewhat less specific and some-
what more circumspect than the way we stated it.

47


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

When I considered the suggestion, I agreed that it would
be better to change it as noted, and accordingly, I did so.


All told, Commander Humes’ testimony consumes less than
thirty pages of transcript. Commander Boswell’s contribution is
less than a page. He merely corroborated Commander Humes’
opinion and stated that he had nothing of value to add.

Colonel Finck’s testimony runs for seven pages. His major
contribution was in the form of an illustrated lecture as to how
he could determine wounds of entrance and wounds of exit:


Mr. Specter. Have you had occasion to conduct any ex-
periments on the effect of missile penetration of the
brain reflected in the chart which you have brought with
you here today?

Colonel Finck. No, sir.

Mr. Specter. Of the skull — let me phrase the question
this way: What does the test which is depicted on the
document before you relate to?

Colonel Finck. It is based on my observations, not on
experiments.

Mr. Specter. Would you pass that to me, sir, so that I
may mark that as a Commission Exhibit, and then I
will ask you to identify it, please?

Mr. Chief Justice, may I mark this Commission Ex-
hibit No. 400 a document?

The Chairman. It may be marked.

(The document was marked Commission Exhibit No.
400 for identification.)

Mr. Specter. I will ask Dr. Finck to describe it for us,
please.

Colonel Finck. This is a scheme which I prepared before
the 22nd of November. It is a teaching scheme, but it
does apply to the case in discussion. It will be a help
in understanding how I could identify the entrance and
the exit by examination of bone. “A” represents the
bony portion of the skull. “B” represents the cavity of
the head, the cranial cavity. “C” represents the entrance
and “D” represents the exit The arrows indicate the
missile path.

This scheme is based upon observation of through
and through wounds of bone, and the same differences


Although he does not state it in so many words, it is obvious
that Colonel Finck’s theory concerning the head wound is that
the bullet split into at least two parts when it crashed into the
President’s skull:


Mr. Specter. One more question, Mr. Chief Justice.

On 388, point A to B, what is your view. Doctor
Finck, as to whether or not this is represented by a
straight line going back to the point of origin of the
weapon?

Colonel Finck. The difficulty in interpreting the path
in line A-B of Commission’s Exhibit 388 is that, one,
there is, as stated before, a large wound of exit, and


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

two, there is a secondary path as indicated by the frag-
ments recovered. So we can have an assumption and
stale that the general direction, the general path, the
general angle of this missile was from behind and above,
and that the bullet markedly fragmented, went out of
the President’s head on the right side, but that a por-
tion of this bullet which badly fragmented was recov-
ered within the skull.

Colonel Finck did have sufficient familiarity in the field of
bullet wounds in the body to know the name of the authorita-
tive text on the subject

Representative Ford. How many cases did you investi-
gate to develop this theory shown by Commission Ex-
hibit 400?

Colonel Finck. Among the more than four hundred
cases I have reviewed, several of them — I cannot give
you an exact figure, I do not tabulate them, but many
of them had through-and-through wounds of the skull
as well as of flat bones, as, for instance, the sternum, the
bone we have in front of our chest and this would
apply also to a through-and-through wound of the
sternum. I have had cases like that.

There was a specific case in which I was able to iden-
tify the entrance at the level of the sternum on the same
basis as the criteria I have given for the skull. Whenever
a bullet goes through a flat bone, it will produce that
beveling, that cratering, shelving, and that I have seen
in numerous cases.

Representative Ford. Is this a generally accepted theory
in the medical profession?

Colonel Finck. Yes, sir; it is. Am I allowed to quote a
standard textbook?

The Chairman. You may; yes, sir.

Colonel Finck. The textbook of legal medicine, pa-
thology and toxicology by Gonzalez, Vance, Helpem
and Umberger does not give a scheme like I have
shown to you today, but describes similar criteria.

As you know, one of the authors of the book I men-
tioned is still chief medical examiner of New York City,
with 20,000 medical-examiner cases a year.

50


"The Body Seems to Defy Physical Law s ’ 9

This was the evidence on which the Warren Commission
issued its official, authoritative report as to the medical nature
of the bullet wounds which killed the President.

One continuing theme permeates the entire final work. It is
the demand that the medical evidence be interpreted so as to be
consistent with the already well-established theory that all of
the bullets involved were fired from a single rifle found in the
sixth-floor room of the Texas School Book Depository Build-
ing. This theme is clearly illustrated by an excerpt from the
final Commission summary:


The findings of the doctors who conducted the autopsy
were consistent with the observations of the doctors who
treated the President at Parkland Hospital. Dr. Charles S.
Carrico, the resident surgeon at Parkland, noted a small
wound approximately 1/4 of an inch in diameter (5 to 8
millimeters) in the lower third of the neck below the
Adam’s apple. Dr. Malcolm O. Perry, who performed the
tracheotomy, described the wound as approximately 1/5
of an inch in diameter (5 millimeters) and exuding'blood
which partially hid edges that were ‘neither clean-cut,
that is, punched out, nor were they very ragged.’ Dr!
Carrico testified as follows:


Q. Based on your observations on the neck wound alone
did you have a sufficient basis to form an opinion as
to whether it was an entrance or an exit wound?

A. No, sir; we did not. Not having completely evaluated
all the wounds, traced out the course of the bullets,
this wound would have been compatible with either
entrance or exit wound depending upon the size, the
velocity, and the tissue structure and so forth.


The same response was made by Dr. Perry to a
similar query:


Q. Based on the appearance of the neck wound alone,
could it have been either an entrance or an exit wound?
A. It could have been either.


Then the doctor was asked to take into account the other
known facts, such as the autopsy findings, the approximate

51


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS


distance the bullet tra v eled, and tested muzzle velocity
of the assassination weapon. With these additional factors,
the doctors commented on the wound on the front of the
President’s neck as follows:


Dr. Carrico. With these facts and the fact as I under-
stand it no other bullet was found this would be, this
was, I believe, was an exit wound.

Dr. Perry. A full jacketed bullet without deformation
passing through the skin would leave a similar wound
for an exit and entrance wound and with the facts
which you have made available and with these assump-
tions, I believe that it was an exit wound.”


This was the testimony that satisfied the Commission and
permitted it to conclude that “the findings of the doctors who
conducted the autopsy were consistent with the observations of
the doctors who treated the President at Parkland Hospital.”

“The tragic, tragic thing,” Dr. Helpern explains in sum-
marizing his comments on the medico-legal aspects of President
Kennedy's death, “is that a relatively simple case was horribly
snarled up from the very beginning; and then the errors were
compounded at almost every other step along the way. Here
is a historic event that will be discussed and written about for
the next century, and gnawing doubts will remain in many
minds, no matter what is done or said to dispel them.”

What were these step-by-step errors?

“I’ve already touched on the gravest of them all — the selec-
tion of a ‘hospital’ pathologist to perform a medico-legal
autopsy. This stemmed from the mistaken belief that because a
man can supervise a laboratory or perform a hospital autopsy
to see whether a patient died from emphysema or heart disease,
he is qualified to evaluate gunshot wounds in the body. It’s like
sending a seven-year-old boy who has taken three lessons on
the violin over to the New York Philharmonic and expecting
him to perform a Tchaikovsky symphony. He knows how to
hold the violin and bow, but he has a long way to go before he
can make music.”

Does this observation apply to Lieutenant Colonel Pierre
Finck?

“Colonel Finck’s position throughout the entire proceeding
was extremely uncomfortable. If it had not been for him, the
autopsy would not have been handled as well as it was; but he


“The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws'*

was in the role of the poor bastard Army child foisted into the
Navy family reunion. He was the only one of the three doctors
with any experience with bullet wounds; but you have to re-
member that his experience was limited primarily to ‘reviewing’
files, pictures, and records of finished cases. There’s a world
of difference between standing at the autopsy table and trying
to decide whether a hole in the body is a wound of entrance or
a wound of exit, and in reviewing another man’s work at some
later date in the relaxed, academic atmosphere of a private
office. I know, because I’ve sweated out too many of these
cases during the past thirty-five years. Colonel Finck is ex-
tremely able in the type of administrative work which has been
assigned him over the years.”

Are there any crucial steps that should have been taken
that were omitted that Friday evening in the autopsy room at
the Naval Medical School?

“The major problem in any gunshot case, of course, is to
determine which is the wound of entry, and the wound of
exit. This is basic. All the so-called critics of the Warren
Commission Report would be left dangling in mid-air with
their mouths gaping unless they can suggest or argue that the
hole in the front of the President’s throat was a wound of en-
trance. Deprive them of this opportunity for speculation and
you pull the rug right out from under them. Give it to them,
and they now have it, and they can bring in all kinds of un-
reliable eyewitness reports of shots coming from the bridge
across the underpass, or from behind the screen of trees in
Dealey Plaza, and puffs of blue smoke that remained suspended
in the air with police officers scrambling up the bank to inves-
tigate these illusory puffs of smoke. Smoke from gunshots just
doesn’t behave like that!”

Specifically, how could a positive determination have been
made at the time of the autopsy that the throat wound was a
wound of exit or a wound of entrance?

“In a great many cases, the only safe way to reach a con-
clusive decision is to compare the size and characteristics of
each wound on the end of the wound track. It's easy for text-
book writers and their readers to assert ponjifically that the
wound of exit is always larger than the wound of entrance,
and the wound of exit is ragged whereas the wound of entry is
smooth, so that you have no difficulty in taking a gross, eye-
ball look and saying ‘this is the entry wound’ or ‘that is the exit


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS


wound.’ This isn’t true at all. The difference between the entry
wound and the exit wound is frequently a lot more subtle than
that. Many of the wounds require careful and painstaking study
before you can reach a decision.”

But wasn’t the throat wound gone at the time of the autopsy?
In one place, the Warren Commission Report states: “At that
time they [the autopsy surgeons] did not know that there
had been a bullet hole in the front of the President’s neck when
he arrived at Parkland Hospital because the tracheotomy in-
cision had completely eliminated that evidence.” At another
point the report says: “. . . since the exit wound was obliterated
by the tracheotomy.”

“No, you see, the staff members who wrote that portion of
the report simply did not understand their medical procedures;
and they did not know enough to seek medical guidance.
Here’s what the autopsy protocol says about this throat wound:

\ . . it was extended as a tracheotomy incision and thus its
character is distorted at the time of autopsy.’ The key word
here is extended. That bullet wound was not ‘eliminated’ or
‘obliterated’ at all. What Dr. Perry did was to take his scalpel
and cut a clean slit away from the wound. He didn’t excise it,
or cut away any huge amount of tissue, as the report writer
would have you believe.”

What about the description in the autopsy protocol that “its
character is distorted”?

“Certainly, its character is distorted in the sense that the
original wound was extended in length by Dr. Perry’s scalpel;
but this throat wound could still have been evaluated. Its edges
should have been carefully put back together and restored to
their original relationships as nearly as possible. It should have
then been studied, and finally photographed. By comparing
this throat wound with the wound in the back of the neck,
there should have been no room for doubt as to which wound
was of entry and which of exit. This would automatically es-
tablish the course of the bullet, whether from front to back, or
back to front.”

Why wasn’t this procedure followed?

“I can’t crawl into the minds of the surgeons and answer for
them. I can only offer my own speculative opinion. In the first
place, their lack of experience deprived them of the knowledge
of what should have been done. Secondly, it appears from
every facet of the evidence now available that at the time they

54


“The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws? 9

finished their autopsy and closed the body so that it could be
prepared for burial, they labored under the illusion that the
hole in the back of the neck was both a wound of entrance and
a wound of exit. They thought the throat wound was nothing
more than a surgical wound, so there was no need to pay it
any special attention.”

Are there any other procedures followed by the autopsy
surgeons that have furnished ammunition to the critics of the
Warren Commission Report?

“Unfortunately, there are. The phraseology in the formal
autopsy protocol itself implies or suggests that the doctors still
harbored doubts and uncertainties at the time it was written.
In speaking of the neck wounds, the protocol describes them
as ‘presumably of entry’ and ‘presumably of exit’ It says: ‘As
far as can be ascertained this missile struck no bony struc-
tures in its path through the body.’ Well, that just doesn’t read
like the work of men in confident command of their ship.

“On the other side of the coin, the writers of the Warren
Commission Report went to the opposite extreme when they
tried to force a unanimity of opinion on all the doctors at Park-
land Hospital in support of the autopsy surgeons that the throat
wound had to be a wound of exit. When you put too much
tension on the evidence, by pulling and tugging it, in an effort
to mold it to the shape of a preconceived conclusion, you leave
yourself pretty vulnerable.”

What about Commander Humes burning his original notes
of his draft of the autopsy protocol?

“It’s extremely unfortunate that he did; but I interpret this
only as further evidence of his lack of experience in medico-
legal situations. I can’t believe that there’s anything sinister
about it as some of the critics would have you believe. Com-
mander Humes simply did not appreciate that this was not just
another hospital autopsy, and that every note or memorandum
should be saved for later scrutiny.”

Some of the critics of the Warren Commission Report have
attempted to bolster their attacks by alleging that Commander
Boswell’s drawing (a portion of Commission Exhibit 397)
shows die bullet wound in the back of the neck as being down
about the level of the shoulder blades. Is this significant?

“It’s significant in that it demonstrates the total ignorance of
the critics in the matter of autopsy procedures. We don’t need
to spend any time on trivia like this; but for their information,

55


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

this is simply part of the work sheet. It contains two purely
schematic drawings of the human figure, one front and one
rear, in what is known as the ‘quas i-anatom ic position.* Tne
doctor doing the autopsy uses them as a shorthand way of mak-
ing notes on what he observes during his external examination
of the body. Commander Boswell sketched in a number of ob-
servations including the surgical wounds, the old scar from the
President’s back operation, and the bullet holes. No one ever
pretends that these markings are drawn to scale. To take the
time to do this would defeat the entire purpose of this short-
hand way of making notes. The written material in the autopsy
protocol is what matters.”

Some critics have alleged some sort of duplicity because an
FBI report dated December 9, 1963, and another one dated
January 13, 1964, apparently contain information which is not
consistent with the formal autopsy protocol.

“This is more trivia and underbrush. What difference does it
make what these two FBI reports said? The controlling factor
insofar as the medico-legal phase of the investigation is con-
cerned is the autopsy protocol itself. There was undoubtedly
conversation going on in the autopsy room. The FBI agent
there probably heard the doctors agonizing over their inability
to find the bullet. He observed them trying to probe the neck
wound. He heard their speculations that the hole in the back
of the neck was both a wound of entrance and a wound of exit.
To me, ^1[ these particular FBI reports show is exactly what we
have mentioned before: at the time the autopsy was finished,
the doctors thought they were dealing with only three bullet
holes, two in the head and one in the back of the neck.”

Where did the Warren Commission, as distinguished from
the autopsy surgeons, fail to clarify the medical issues of the
President’s death?

“It failed tragically because it did not have sufficient knowl-
edge in the field of forensic medicine to even appreciate the
need to call in an expert with experience in bullet wounds in
the body. This lack of knowledge is evident in the official re-
port itself. For example, it contains thousands of exhibits in
eleven volumes. They include all sorts of meaningless pictures
of Marina Oswald, Oswald’s mother, Oswald as a young boy.
Jack Ruby’s employees or girl friends in varying states of attire,
and nine X-rays of Governor Connally’s body.

“The X-rays of President Kennedy’s body, however, were

56


"The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws 99

not considered significant enough to the entire investigation to
be filed as exhibits to the report. The same holds true of the
black and white and the color pictures of the bullet wounds.
These were never seen by the Commission members, its staff,
or even the autopsy surgeons before the report was finalized.
The Commission said it would not ‘press' for the X-rays and
photographs because these would merely ‘corroborate’ the find-
ings of the doctors, and that considerations of ‘good taste’ pre-
cluded these from being included.

“Well, you see, there was nothing that offended ‘good taste’
in the nine X-rays of Governor Connally’s body [Commission
Exhibit 691]; so this great curtain of secrecy that was pulled
down on the X-rays and pictures of the President’s body added
more explosive fuel to the fire of doubt There have been in-
timations that these X-rays and pictures had gone the way of
Commander Humes’ notes; and it was only after considerable
public pressure built up that the pictures and X-rays were
turned over to the National Archives by the Kennedy family
in November of 1966; but they are still shrouded by this great
curtain of secrecy. Secrecy is the natural culture medium for
suspicion.”

Why didn’t the examination by the Navy doctors of the X-
rays and pictures in November 1966 still the doubts of the
critics?

“Let’s come back to our analogy of the seven-year-old violin
player. We sit him down in front of an electronic microscope
and ask him what he sees on a slide. He says: ‘I don’t see any-
thing. We then jump to the conclusion that there is nothing
there because an inexperienced eye can’t see anything there.”

What might these X-rays show to an experienced observer
that could have been completely overlooked by the nonexpert
expert?

“Who knows? Probably absolutely nothing. I don’t like to
engage in rank, blind speculation; so I can only explain how
I would approach them. My first interest would be to see
whether there could be another bullet or fragment of bullet in
the body which has not been accounted for.

“Remember that the Warren Commission concluded that
the preponderance of the evidence indicated that three shots
altogether were fired. Only one relatively intact bullet and
the fragments of a second bullet were found. This leaves a miss-
ing third bullet. I definitely do not agree with the Commission’s

57


n

7


¥


\


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

conclusion that only two bullets caused all the wounds suffered
by both President Kennedy and Governor Connally; but we’ll
pass that for the moment.

“Since the X-rays of the President’s body were not filed as
exhibits, we must rely entirely upon the observations of the
Navy doctors that they skillfully eliminated the possibility that
a third bullet, or a fragment of some bullet, did not enter the
body and somehow meander down to come to rest in some
illogical, remote spot. Apparently, the doctors did not feel con-
fident enough to rely on the X-rays during the autopsy when
they went probing, or rather tried to go probing, for the bullet
that was found on the stretcher in Parkland Hospital. They
have now been quoted publicly as saying that they did have
the X-rays available to them that night Bullets do have a
funny habit of showing up in the most astounding places in
the body.

“I would also look for trace flecks of metal that might in-
dicate another head wound. This possibility is extremely re-
mote; but it still exists. Often, quite often, wounds of entrance
in the head are completely overlooked because they are cov-
ered naturally by the hair. The wound may barely bleed at
all. If you don’t take a comb and go over the entire scalp inch
by inch, separating the hair carefully and meticulously, it’s easy
to miss a head wound entirely. There is no evidence that this
type of examination was made.”

Would the X-rays help establish whether the two wounds
in the neck area were wounds of entrance or of exit?

“No, I would not expect them to be of help on this question.
An X-ray film is nothing more than a photographic record
of the different densities of tissues through which the X-ray
beam has passed. It will not record defects in the skin and soft
tissue caused by a bullet passing through.”

What about the black and white and the color photographs?

“These could be of considerable interest and value. A lot
would depend on their quality and how they were exposed.
Hopefully, they could shed considerable light on the neck
wounds. I would, of course, be interested in what the pictures
of the rear neck wound would show; but I would be particularly
interested in seeing whether the pictures of the throat wound
are good enough to permit it to be evaluated and possibly
reconstructed.”


“The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws?’

Where else can the Warren Commission be faulted for what
it did or failed to do?

“Again, it committed a grievous error of omission by failing
to call in someone who knew something about bullet wounds
in the body. This led them into the final trap of buying Assistant
Counsel Arlen Specter’s theory that the same bullet which
passed through the President’s neck was the bullet that also
wounded Governor Connally, shattering his fifth rib, fracturing
a bone in the wrist, and finally going on to slash his thigh.
Now, this bizarre path is perfectly possible. When you are
working with bullet wounds, you must begin with the premise
that anything is possible; but Mr. Specter and the Commis-
sion overlooked two important ingredients.

“In the first place, the original, pristine weight of this bullet
before it was fired was approximately 160-161 grains. The
weight of the bullet recovered on the stretcher in Parkland
Hospital (Commission Exhibit 399) was reported by the Com-
mission at 158.6 grains. This bullet wasn’t distorted in any
way. I cannot accept the premise that this bullet thrashed
around in all that bony tissue and lost only 1.4 to 2.4 grains of
its original weight. I cannot believe either that this bullet is
going to emerge miraculously unscathed, without any deformity,
and with its lands and grooves intact.

“Secondly, Mr. Specter and the Commission have asked too
much from this bullet. You must remember that next to bone,
the skin offers the greatest resistance to a bullet in its course
through the body than any other kind of tissue. The energy
of the bullet is sometimes so spent that it can’t quite get out
through the final layer of skin, and it comes to rest just beneath
the outside layer of skin. If it does get through the skin, it may
not have enough energy to penetrate even an undershirt or a
light cotton blouse. It has exhausted itself, and just more or
less plops to a stop.

“This single bullet theory requires us to believe that this
bullet went through seven layers of skin — tough, elastic, re-
sistant skin. It passed through the back of the President’s neck,
then out through his throat; it entered the Governor’s back
and out through his chest; it next entered the skin on the back
of his wrist; it came through the layer of skin on the inside
of his wrist; and it apparently penetrated the layer of skin on
his left thigh. In addition to these seven layers of tough human

59


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

skin, this bullet passed through other layers of soft tissue; and
then these shattered bones!

“I just can’t believe that this bullet had the force to do what
Mr. Specter and the Commission have demanded of it; and I
don’t think they have really stopped to think out carefully
what they have asked of this bullet for the simple reason that
they still do not understand the resistant nature of human skin
to bullets.”

Do these conclusions shed any light on the order of the shots/
“In my opinion, this beautifully preserved bullet that was
found in the Hospital was the first bullet that was fired. It
passed through the President’s neck, exited from the throat
wound, and was stopped by his clothing, or just plopped out of
his neck into his clothing. I’ve seen this exact thing happen
hundreds of times.”

What about the Commission’s conclusions that this bullet was
found on Governor Connally’s stretcher in Parkland Hospital?

“It’s based on tortured evidence, or inconclusive evidence,
to say the least. No one will ever know for sure which stretcher
this bullet came from. In my opinion, the probabilities are that
it fell out of the President’s clothing while the doctors were
administering to him in the hospital. For the sake of argu-
ment, however, let’s assume that it was found on the Governor’s
stretcher. This still does not rule out the premise that it was
the first bullet that passed through the President’s neck. That
spent bullet could just as easily have taken an erratic jump
out of the President’s clothing and lodged in Governor Con-
nally’s clothing. These things happen with bullets. Sometimes
they get through the final layer of skin and hop limply about
it all arcs of the circle and at all angles to the wound of exit.

Do you agree with Governor Connally that he was struck by
the second bullet?

“Yes, I definitely do. His testimony is most persuasive. I
just can’t buy this theory that this beautifully preserved first
bullet is going to have power enough to pass all the way
through the seven layers of skin of the two men, plus other
soft tissue, plus rib and wrist bone, and end up losing no more
than 2.4 grains of its weight. In my opinion, the second bullet
that wounded Governor Connally is the one that is missing.”

Shouldn’t this bullet have been found during the careful
search of the Presidential limousine?

“Not necessarily. It is not unusual at all for spent bullets

60


"The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws”

that have passed through a human body to become lost. Most
longtime homicide detectives can spin off several tales of cases
of lost bullets. If I had to venture a guess as to what happened
to the bullet that wounded Governor Connally, I would suggest
that it fell out of his pants leg while he was being removed
from the car and placed on the stretcher; or it could have fallen
out at any stage of his hospital experience.”

And the third?

“The third one quite obviously is the one that caused the
President’s massive head wound, and his death. Also, either a
fragment from this bullet, or a pi ece of skn[j caused the crack- (
ing of the windshield and the denMnth^windshield chrome on \
the interior of the limousine, provided these marks on the car 1
were not already present at the time the shooting began.”
Assistant Counsel Arlen Specter’s creation of the theory that
a single bullet passed through the President’s neck and went
on to inflict all of Governor Connally’s wounds has been hailed
by a prominent Commission staff member as the one significant
contribution of the Warren Commission to the solution of the
assassination. It was at odds with the FBI reports of December
9, 1963, and January 13, 1964. The FBI concluded: “. . . three
shots rang out. Two bullets struck President Kennedy, and one
wounded Governor Connally. . .

Mr. Specter thought that he needed the “one bullet” theory
because of the Zapruder movie, and the “one bullet” theory is
perhaps the most amateurish conclusion in the entire Com-
mission Report. Regrettably, it permits the brand of “doubt-
ful to cloud the genuine, bona fide Commission findings. *
Abraham Zapruder is now undoubtedly the most famous ama- m
teur movie photographer in all history. As he stood in Dealey
Plaza aiming his home movie camera in an easterly direction, he
caught and recorded the Presidential motorcade as it proceeded
north on Houston Street, to make its turn west onto Elm Street.

This innocent, famous home movie ended up by leading Mr.
Specter and the Warren Commission into an unfortunate trap.

Even those who have purported to study the work of the
Commission in considered hindsight are still mesmerized by the X
beguiling and misleading power of the Zapruder movie. For #
example, in its November 25, 1966 issue, Life magazine inno-
cently perpetuates the error. Its article reads: “Of all the wit-
nesses to the tragedy, the only unimpeachable one is the 8-mm.
movie camera of Abraham Zapruder, which recorded the assas-

61


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS


records is < bullet that passed through his head,

exploding as a result of the ouuei i F ^ fflm is

| Ewry other item purpOT ^ y ulated up0 ii

evolve unknown quan-
* One of the most common pitfalls in any **

actly what happened to Mr. ’ Commission,

able to sell his erroneous theory President’s death

Some time after the invest, gaUon into Jte President : J

began, the FBI staged a mock enactment _ol : *e ass^ ^

\ which was geared to and scripted b}te . P ^ Qf ^ Texas
’ FBI agent was stationed m Aes^th-fl t0 the

„ School Book Depository Building with a camera B ^ ^

telescopic lens of ^ ^“^“^sination. An effort was
same window minutes alter w hat the assassin

made to synchronize to Z*n*« ^e 8 Wfloor

presumably saw from his point , j its historic

window as the Presidential caravan moved along

10 Ithad previously been determined that the
ran at the speed of 18.3 P^^or fmm ca)cu]ated by
timing of certain events, . ’ ,i en ; c t ed from one frame

allowing 1/18.3 seconds f ° r the 3 dete nnined that this Mann-
to the next. Other tests had g bc .

7 licher-Carcano rifle required a mmimurn ol zo

• Zapruder 81m w H™ • »”“*“• N ““-

62


"The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws”

ber 1 beginning where the motorcycles leading the motorcade
came into view on Houston Street. Combining the FBI reenact-
ment with the Zapruder movie, it was concluded that the
assassin had a clear view of the President from his sixth-floor
window as the limousine moved up Houston Street, and for an
additional one hundred feel as the Presidential car proceeded
west on fclm Street. At a point denoted as Frame 166 on the
Zapruder film the assassin’s view of the President became ob-
structed by the foliage of a large oak tree.f The President’s
back reappeared into view through the telescopic lens on the
rille for a fleehng instant at Frame 186. This momentary view
was permitted by an opening in the leaves of the tree; but they
closed to again obscure the view of the President's back
through the telescopic sight until the car emerged from behind
the tree at Frame 210.

The Commission implies that one of the difficulties in inter-
preting the Zapruder film is that the President’s car begins to
disappear behind a road sign reading “Stemmons Freeway
Right Lane at approximately Frame 193. At Frame 206, the
President s hand is still raised as he disappears behind the street
sign. He reappears in the film at Frame 225. As a matter of fact
it is really not essential to the evidential value of the film

S to 32 Smef dCnt "" * "" ° Ul ° f ^ for ««

,, The , r f 4l are , thosc w ho viewed the Zapruder movie who
thought that the President looked like he was hit through the
neck when he reappeared from behind the street sign at Frame
F 11131 G° ver nor Connally appeared to be hit at

ame 230. Governor Connally believes that he was hit around
prame 154. Life magazine summarizes the subjective factor of

Kr, * Sa u yin8: “ S P ecter sees Connally wincing in
frame 230. Life s i photo interpreters think he looks unharmed,
as does Connally himself.” ’

Still, Mr. Specter labored under the illusion that the Zap-
ru er movie gave him a stopwatch precision measurement of

STM atraSETsSST r

s mxzEi S = s=


63


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

events that took place not in the Presidential limousine hut in
the Texas School Book Depository Building over one hundred
feet hack up Elm Street.

Mr. Specter did not believe that he could solve the problem
of orienting the Zapruder movie to the minimum time required
to fire two shots from the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle without
adopting the “one bullet” theory. The 2.3 seconds required to
fire two shots from the rifle worked out to 42.09 frames of the
Zapruder movie. Even assuming that the President had been
hit in the neck while he was behind the street sign at, say,
Frame 210, it would not be possible for a second shot to be
fired until Frame 252.09.

This presented a difficult impasse, provided the “timetable”
supplied by the Zapruder movie was correct. Mr. Specter as-
sumed that this “timetable” was accurate, and then adopted the
“one bullet” theory to get around its limitations. Otherwise, he
was faced with the awkward admission that two guns were used
instead of one.

His better procedure would have been to carefully analyze his
“timetable” in an effort to understand exactly what he was
working with. By beginning with Frame 313, the only objective
point of reference in the entire film where the picture of the
President’s exploding skull was recorded, it is possible to set up
a reverse timetable by working backward:


Frame

313

230

210

1 186


What does this reverse timetable prove? It proves exactly the
same thing as the forward timetable of the Zapruder film, which

64


Description of Event
President’s skull explodes
Governor Connally’s “reaction”
(earliest estimate)

President possibly hit while
behind street sign
Mgjflgnfaiw reappearance of
m President through leaves
of oak tree

Disappearance of President from
assassin’s view caused by
foliage of oak tree


Elapsed


( Seconds )
Elapsed


Frames


Time


83


4.5


103


5.6


111


6.9


147


8.0


'\\x ij/wf UC ^

V'Wr" t it**

"The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws ”

wtoTffe No,hine P roved because we do not know

Ae L? / u nd G ° Vernor Connally were s, ruck by
r ' ‘* n se cond bullets. There is absolutely nothing in the "I

the p r ‘ S , ! T a ^ uandar y of uncertainty as to when

"’h °° Ver T ^liv"

established that diflerent .

- • *■ ffss *

ZlZZZPSSJg? “* »• c ° nce p t t-

.. Tbe nex ! 8 r ? at error that was committed in attempting to use *

sastss r? a “ ,ime,abi f; was ,he -"-sx s

l ( he Gov craor would have some visible reaction to /<>

sus Led -Snr ,0 K ? e f MC ' ins,ant that the rounds were />
STwf 2 ? c abS0lUtely no,hin 8 in medicine to indicate *
tnnJ h K UmP ,S C0rrect ' As a matter of fact what is

Mca " , *”■>- •

n P ioT St be admitled th at ‘he reaction-time of anv

person to a bullet wound is a purely speculative entity No one

ba * ye ^ conduc ‘ e d a senes of experiments so that a set of rules

8 StS I eaC "°u n ‘ t,me ‘° bul,Ct wounds can be formulated
Studies have been made of certain other types of reunion

tune u, the field of automobile accident reconstruction where
elaborate tests have been given to drivers uX ^ntSfed
conditions. It has been established that between the tinv the

his breker'^h 3 dang< ! rous even ‘ and ‘he time that he applies
his brakes or begins other evasive action, an average reaction

period of two-thirds to three-quarters of a second elapSs lJ

Ther ‘ ndn ; U3lS ' ' h,S reac ‘ ion -‘ime is well over one full^ccond
re is always some “drag" or reaction-time involved between
the stimulus and the reaction to the stimulus. This is true even
though this type of stimulus is something that the £5rT£

sr-sssiffij; *• - •»**■»*

£“m y wit drl ?b r ">*»'»“ * dSj

process, whereas the reaction of the body to a bullet is more
nearly analogous to an autonomic, reflex type of action 11, ere
e, however, hundreds of reported cases in which the person

65


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS


shot apparently does not realize that he has been shot for a
period of several minutes. He may continue to perform a
number of complex, highly coordinated functions for a substan-
tial period of time before collapsing to lose consciousness or to

die. . , .

Furthermore, Governor Connally’s reaction-time to his
wounds may have been more rapid than the President’s reaction-
time to his first neck wound. This is true because the Gover-
nor’s wounds were far more severe than the President’s neck
wound. The Governor may have been hit at Frame 230 of the
Zapruder film. He may have “reacted” immediately, so that his
“reaction” can still be observed by viewers of the movie. This
does not mean at all that the President could not have been
shot through the neck before Frame 166 when his back dis-
appeared behind the leaves of the oak tree, or at Frame 186
when his back reappeared momentarily, and the Presidents
observable physical reactions appeared in the movie only after
Frame 225 when the President emerges from behind the road

^There is absolutely nothing in the “open end” Zapruder
movie "timetable” to rule out the possibility or even the prob-
ability that the President was shot through the neck before
Frame 166. The error in using the Zapruder film was in the
assumption that the President would have to “react” instan-
taneously to the neck wound in such a manner that his reaction
could be observed in the rnovie. The Zapruder film is not really
a “timetable” after all, because it can help establish the “loca-
tion” of only one “station” along the “railroad.” It does not
help us pinpoint the other two important stations, nor does it
tell us when the train got there. We can use the Zapruder
“timetable” to conclude that the train got to one station prob-
ably no later than Frame 225. It reached the second station no
later than Frame 234. We cannot teU from the Zapruder film
what the train was doing before these two locations, or even
where our “floating” stations one and two are located.

It was not necessary for Mr. Specter to devise, nor for the
O Commission to buy, the “one bullet” theory to eliminate the
^ necessity of adopting the embarrassing premise that two rifles
^ were used to do the shooting instead of one.

Dr. Hel pern’s theory of three separate bullets causing three
separate wounds, two in the President’s body and one in Gover-
nor Connally, is not at all inconsistent with the Zapruder movie

66


x.


J


£


<r

V


"The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws ”

when the movie is properly interpreted as being nothing more
than an open-end, one-station timetable where the separate and
distinct elements of time, distance, and location have been
confused.

Mr. Specter also failed to reckon with a creature called
chance, or fate, or luck and to consider the possibility that the
assassin may have fired a first shot blindly, without taking care-
ful aim Dr. Helpem recalls the case of a spectator who sud-
den y plunged forward out of his seat at the Polo Grounds
while watching a baseball game. He was dead from a .45 cali-
ber bullet hole through the middle of his forehead. Police subse-
quently traced the firing location to the roof of a house several
blocks away, where a man, without intent or purpose, had
pointed the gun into the air and pulled the trigger. The least
likely result that he could have anticipated was the death of
an innocent baseball fan.

., ''? at abou ‘ ‘ he “wound ballistics experiments’* conducted at
the Edgewood Arsenal?

“Well,” Dr. Helpem responds, shaking his head in disbelief,
the mere fact that they felt constrained to perform these tests
in the first place shows a total lack of knowledge on the subject
of bullet wounds in the body. They went down there and tried
to rig up dummies that would simulate the President's head and
neck area. They took human skulls, filled them with gelatin
and covered them with goatskin and hair. They rigged un a
dummy with gelatin and animal meat to simulate the neck area
of his body, pen they got a goat to simulate Governor Con-
nally s body They took the rifle found in the Texas School Book
Depository Building and began firing into these dummies. AH
they proved was that they proved absolutely nothing. One of
the experts was utterly surprised that a bullet could cause the
massive wound m the President’s head. His surprise alone
clearly indicates his limited experience.

‘We have all kinds of cases in our files that show what bullets
can and have done in the human body. So does everyone else
w lo is active in the field of forensic medicine. For example, Dr
LeMoyne Snyder has a case that almost duplicates the Presi-
ents head wounds in every respect. It arose out of a bank
holdup in Michigan. A dentist who had his office on the second
floor of a building directly across the street from the bank went
to the window to see what the trouble was. He saw one of the
bandits running down the street with people yelling after him.

67


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS


The dentist was quite a deer^hunter and kept a rifle in his office.
He reached for his rifleTraised the window, and hit the bandit
"* in the back of the head with a single shot. By that time, the
^ bandit was just about the same distance away as the Presidential
" limousine was from the sixth-floor window of the Texas School
£ Book Depository Building when the third shot struck. The head
^wounds this bank bandit sustained were almost identical in
. every respect to those of President Kennedy.

“Nevertheless, the Commission chose to rely on the synthetic
tests at the Edgewood Arsenal to support its conclusion that a
single bullet probably caused the wound through the Presi-
dent’s neck and all of Governor Connally’s wounds. This was
done even though one of the three experts. Dr. Light, testified
that the .anatomical findings alone were insufficient for him to
‘formulate a firm opinion on whether the same bullet did or did
not pass tlirough the President’s neck wound first before inflict-
ing all the wounds on Governor Connally.’ ”

Is there anything in the overall picture to cast serious doubt
on the principal conclusions reached by the Warren Commis-
sion?

“Of course, I haven’t seen the pictures and the X-rays of the

( President, but on the basis of the evidence that has been made
public, the Commission reached the correct opinion that all
three bullets were fired by one rifleman from the sixth-floor
window of the Texas School Book Depository Building. The
unfortunate autopsy and other procedures have merely opened
the door and invited the critics to enjoy a full-blown Roman
holiday at the expe nse of the dignity and prestige of the country
^Hw^vhole. "

^YlieTact that a rigorous cross-examination of the three
autopsy surgeons would have ripped their testimony to shreds
does not necessarily mean that their conclusions were totally
wrong. The fact that the Commission may have erred in con-
cluding that the same bullet that struck the President also
wounded Governor Connally does not mean that the Commis-
sion was totally wrong in its opinion that all the shots came
from the Depository Building. What it means is that the Com-
mission members themselves set the stage for the aura of doubt
and suspicion that has enveloped their work.”

The Commission, of course, was an unusual creature. It was
itself a synthetic entity. It was extrajudicial, extraexecutive, and
extralegislative. It was supposed to be a public forum for ta k i n g

68


"The Body Seems to Defy Physical Law ? 9

evidence because the normal forum of the courtroom was wiped
out when Jack Ruby killed Oswald. If Oswald had lived, all the
evidence about the President’s death could have been aired in
the courtroom and all the witnesses would have been open to
cross-examination. In its procedures, the Commission failed to
supply anything that would fill the disastrous void left when the
right or motive to cross-examine the witnesses was wiped out.
They did not provide for the essential T)evirs Advocate.’

The biblical saying that “a man is judged by his work” may
be appropriate. The Commission’s work opened the door and
invited the critics to flood in.

Is there anything specifically that Dr. Helpem would like to
see done at this point?

“It may well be too late to do anything, since the primary
evidence is gone. There is a possibility, however, that the X-rays
and photographs of the President’s wounds might contain some
clarifying information. I would certainly feel more comfortable
about the Warren Commission’s findings if a group of experi-
enced men, who have had a great deal of practical work in
bullet wound cases, could take a look at these X-rays and
pictures. I have in mind men like Dr. LeMoyne Snyder, author
of Homicide Investigation , Dr. Russell Fisher, the medical
examiner for the State of Maryland, Dr. Frank Cleveland in
Cincinnati, and Dr. Richard Myers in Los Angeles. These men
are all members of the American Academy of Forensic Sciences.
These pictures and X-rays might , and I emphasize might , settle
the questions raised by the critics once and for all.

The tragic thing is that a greatly loved President was not
given the same type of expert medical attention and medical
respect in death that he received in life. When he was having
his back problems, he properly consulted the leading experts in
the field of orthopedic surgery; but, you see, in death, the task
of evaluating his bullet wounds was not given to experienced
experts in this field. It was still the old saw that an autopsy is an
autopsy is an autopsy, and anyone can do it, particularly as long
as he is a general or ‘hospital’ pathologist.”

What about the portions of the autopsy protocol that have
not been released to the public?

These, I think,” Dr. Helpem answers, “are personal matters
that should be left entirely to the family, although I do think
that the public is entitled to the most expert and definitive
determination possible on the bullet wounds that caused death.”

69


WHERE DEATH DELIGHTS

> *- -«■

President did »' f d p rcsWen , W campaign. the P»W* »

SfiS SAS2 S -ete any ~P - -«

that tended to substantiate thffiaUega^ ^ afgue that if the
Some of Dr. H el P ern s . er i orat ion of the adrenal glands,

autopsy findings did show a n>g disease> it is a missed

which would be evidence ' ° f ’ of me dicine in general to

opportunity for showing th P > - Addison’s disease can

fail to disclose it. A disease can be con-

now be placed on medicatio diabetes is controlled by

trolled in much the same warmer that ^ ^

insulin. This, of caw*.' ™ draJlla tically show medicines

doctors continue that it disease could be treated so

progress if a man with Addison h t0 perform the

successfully that he could functi of g the Uni , e d States,

duties demanded by * e o( ^ „ Dr H elpern concludes,

- J, 5 tt?££kss: SXZX

fe <a„,iiy .o *> wio, . «

personally desire. fond the bewilderment of the Eu-

lt is not difficult to ^erstodthe^ feal ures

ropeans as they attempt to Warren Commission report.

Of the Kennedy autopsy and the Warnm^ ^ he , d by out .

Respected chairs m ! orc ™* Eur0 pean universities for many
standing professors ialty .

generations. It is a "^established m c<j ^ & Europea n

If President Kennedy bad teen ^ immediately dcsig-
country, the Minister of Justi med i c ine in the country

nated the leading professor of fore have been assisted by three
to perform the autopsy. He institutes Men experienced in
or four heads of table would have ap-

evaluating bullet wounds uM^ PV wounds of entry and
praised the head and ' neck ,,3 identified and labeled. There
of exit would have been c critics t0 che w on.

would have been nothing lett over

• r\r Hplncrn seriously wonders just
In private conversations, D< ’. P ^ acquainling the public

how much progress has , t orens j c medicine since that

nc» w-y ® ” ,te

70


“The Body Seems to Defy Physical Laws”

Edoardo Bonifacio case over a quarter of a century ago.

The Bonifacio case had an interesting personal sequel for Dr.
Helpern which he enjoys relating.

The years passed by after Bonifacio’s acquittal. World War II
came and went. Names by the hundreds, and then the thou-
sands, clouded Dr. Helpern’s memory.

He was on his way to work one morning when he opened
The New York Times. A four-column picture in the middle of
the front page caught his eye. In it, a man and a woman were
embracing. He immediately recognized the face of the woman
with its friendly expression, the warm eyes, and the beautiful
white hair. It was the mother of the young defense attorney in
western New Jersey who had been so proud of her son, and
who had graciously served as Dr. Helpem’s hostess.

There was something slightly familiar about the man’s face as
well, but Dr. Helpern could not immediately identify him. He
hurriedly turned to the caption under the picture. The man
was attorney Robert Meyner, just elected governor of the State
of New Jersey, and later a leading contender for the Democratic
nomination for the office of President of the United States.
