
MiiDiCiNE 1940-1970, Annotated Biblio^aphy.
'lick J.D., M.D. The Ohio State University Col-
icine, Legal Medicine Information Center, 1970,
10 .


idicates that this volume provides a reference
s to the world’s literature in the English lan-
ents are arranged listing the journals, index of
ind subject headings. This represents a great
assemble references from journals and books in
Tuage. This volume covers a period of 30 years
the library and departments of legal medicine.


July 1971


Photographic Evidence and the
Assassination of President
John F. Kennedy *

Don Olson, M.S** and Ralph F. Turner, M.S***
introduction

licrHon^nf+^'^w”*^ in 1963 and the pub-

at Kr ^ Warren Commission Report in 1964 has under-
standably generated a sizeable literature which deals with
doLf!”*® assassination and the interpretation of evi-

or5L Z*; 5 iiT I ® attempts

on the part of those charged with the responsibility of pro-

ruZht^ of cV of the tragedy, a considerable

Citizens and scholars continue to raise questions.
Admittedly, a certain portion of the published literature is of
a highly speculative and emotional nature, while some is suffi-

Ihe fact, neyertheless, remains that the Warren Commission
Report, supplemented by some official disclosures pertaining
to an examination of the X-rays of President Kennedy’s bodv

— S

The senior author has been concerned with the interpretation
0 some facets of the evidence in the assassination of President
Kennedy as outlined in the Warren Commission Lport for
severa years. The considerable study anT cZlecUon of
fo^ion in respect to this evidence has led to the following

A Ftensle SeZ pt """"“I

Received for publication May 17.’ 197i°Tec^^^^^ 26 , 1971.

23, 1971 Accepted for publication September


Vol. 16 . No. 4


399


JOUENAL OF rOEBNSIO SOIENOES ^


Simple that reported by

I;:w:?rerCoSssfom^ This paper presents the infonnatmn

and evidence supporting the hypothesis^ criminal investiga-

The common photographic techniques
tion are generally called into use ^ ^ photographs

of evidential value are taKeii y y . . . Qon-

til. one of the n.ost ‘‘f Se^fl^nnX

.„o„gh, perhep. the first ree.rded '««

dental" evidence *«•, f ^ “/'S““„g„phs from

that of President McKinley m 190 . Buffalo

original Edison Laboratory of the Presi-

Exhibition. Investigators studied thejitas^^^^^

dent’s speech easily identified toward the President,

made his way through e arge jj^jnes were studied in
Enlargements and drawings of stances

f.et'l»m Slrie^t

through the receiving line and fired tne rwo

^'^The^assassination of President Kennedy was a particularly

„j; hSrraph.d event. Over 25 'toS

on November 22, 1963, in Dealey PJaza of Dallas, lex
lVitne.ss Phil Willis, for example, was able to take six impor

color slides of the presidential limousine. -sassina-

Unhke the McKinley case, however, Kennedy a^sassm

Hon has raised wide controversies which show little sips
of easy resolution. Some 70 books have been written, defending
the IVarren Commission findings, attacking them, j

various alternatives to the official lone-assassin tbjry OMy
the conduct and findings of the Presiden s =^;?topsy at Bethesda,
Marvland may have received more attention than the dis
cussions and interpretations of the

deuce— particularly the 8-mm color film of Abraham Zapudei,
well known through the publication of selected frames in Lif
magazine (3).


400


October 1971


EEEOE IK INTEEPEEXATION OF WAEEEN OOMMISBION

This paper will show how the photographic e^dence ws
used to analyze the timing of assassination shote and vrfll
examine some of the problems raised by the Warren Commission
rLonstruction of the event. Specific details will be developed
regarding the first shot to strike President Kennedy.

Background Information , iVvm-rvbn

Some background information is necessary prior to the pho-
tographic analysis of the gunfire which killed President Kennedy
and seriously wounded Governor Connally. The events of the
assassination are generally placed in time sequence relative to
the Zapruder film frames, which were sequentially numbered
by the FBI (see 18H1-80) (4). For example, at a frame
numbered 313 a head wounding of the President is clearly
visible. During the frames 208-224 of this film, the President
was blocked from the view of the Zapruder camera by a
Stemmons Freeway road sign at the curb of Elm Stree
(R98) (5). This left a certain ambiguity, for many peoWo
believe that the President was first wounded during this in-

tovvai. . , , , •

.Wso. an VTU snvvev on May 'M, Uhbl, doternuned that dunug

the intevvai of i'.apvudov frames (66 ’209 the viesi of the
President from the alleged assassin's window in the Texas
School Book Depository was blocked by a tall live-oak tree
along the north side of Elm Street. Only for about a tenth
of a second at frame number 186 of this interval was the
President visible through a gap in the foliage (R98 18H87,
17H883). Thus, the period of frames 210-224 represents the
first interval during which an assassin in the southeast window'
of the 6th floor could have had a shot at the President clear
of the tree foliage.

FBI te.sts on the Mannlicher-Carcano assassination rifle estab-
lished a minimum time of abput 2.3 seconds for the firing
of two successive .shots (R97), although this time did not
include allowance for aiming at a moving target. Since the
FBI had determined that the Zapruder camera ran at 18.3
frames per second (R97), one can calculate that at least
12 frames of film time must elapse between any two shots,
under the lone-assassin theory. Thus, if an assassin fired a


Vol. Hi • No. 4


<101


JOUBNAL OF


rOBENSIO SOIEKOES


Clear shot as early as frame 210, his second shot could not
follow until frame 252 or later.


LS leiiardlng the «r« .hot to .trike th. Pr.»d«.t, An
FBI report prepared for the commission included .

Shot one was fired from a gun '’"“f . 5°"

shot sighted-in on a predetermined point on the parkway

just clear of tree foliage (6) .

According to the analysis of the Warren Commission

President Kennedy was first struck by a bullet which en-
tered at the back of his neck and exited through the lower
front porfron of his neck, causing a wound which would
not necessarily have been lethal. (R 19)

... the evidence indicated that the bv

until at least frame 210 and that he was probably hit by
frame 225. The possibility of variations in reaction time
ir^ddition to the obstruction of Zapruder's view by the
sign precluded a more specific determination. . . . (R106J

The above commission statements do not seem unreasonable,
sin^^ the FBI photographic analysts noted nothing unusual
"the frLes prL to number 210, and -nee President Kennedy
seems to be in strong reaction to a wound in frames 225-227,
as he comes from behind the sign. These

Tre not without some difficulty, however. It was the firin
belief of Governor Connally, as well as all the commenting
witnesses, that Connally was struck with the
Yet the Zapruder film shows the governor reacting sunstan
S!lV brfer. the fr.™ 262 .t which . .econd .hot cold have
been fired, and significantly after the frame 225 in ^hi^ the
President is seen reacting. In fact, the governor seems to
undergo no change until frame 234, at which point he slumps
suddenly; he appears to be in strong reaction t
bv frame 242. On these grounds, the commission was led
formulate the “single-bullet theory,” in order to avoid the

firintr nl the motorcade:


cnTiehision that


October 1971


EEROR IN INTERPRETATION OP WARREN COMMISSION

. . . there is very persuasive evidence from the experts
to indicate that the same bullet which pierced the Presi-
dent’s throat also caused Governor Connally’s wounds.

(R19)

Thus one bullet. Commission Exhibit 399, was believed to
have caused the wounds to the President’s neck, and to the
governor’s chest, right wrist, and left thigh. 'ITie governor
was theorized to have experienced a delayed reaction to his
wounds in believing that he had been struck by a second shot,
distinct from the one which wounded the President.

Although it was not possible to rule out completely that the
assassin had taken an early wild shot through the tree, the
commission strongly hinted that such was not the case, on
the reasonable grounds that there was no motivation for such
a blind shot :

... it is unlikely that the assassin would deliberately have
shot at him with a view obstructed by the oak tree when
he was about to have a clear opportunity. It is also doubt-
ful that even the most proficient marksman would have hit
him through the oak tree. (R98)

The commission seems to be on solid ground in favoring
that the first shot to strike the President was the first shot
fired. Virtually all of the witnesses were of this opinion.
Representative testimony is that of Secret Service Agent Clint
Hill: (2H138)

... I heard a noise from my right rear, which to me
seemed to be a firecracker. I immediately looked to my
right . . . and I saw President Kennedy grab at himself
and lurch forward and to the left. . . . This is the first
sound that I heard; yes, sir. I jumped from the car,
realizing that something was wrong, ran to the presidential
limousine.

Alternate Hypothesis

Besides the statements of Agent Hill, much related testi-
mony and evidence will be presented in the following sections.
In light of the previous discussions, the frames prior to number
210 may be referred to ns the “early frames.” The following


Vol. 16 • No. 4


402


403


JOURNAL or TOEENSIO BOIENOBS

sections of this paper will present evidence to support the
following hypothesis regarding this portion of the assassina-
tion: Contrary to the theory of the Warren Commission, the
evidence developed will show that President Kennedy was first
wounded in the early frames of the Zapruder fUm, prior both
to the time when he disappeared behind the Stemmam Free-
way sign and to the time at which a clear shot was possible from
the alleged position of the assassin. Specifically, during the
interval of frames 186-190 in the Zapruder film, the first shot
fired struck President Kennedy and threw him forward and to

theleft. , .

Nine points relative to the photographic evidence will be

developed.

(1) Phil Willis. Witness Phil Willis took his fifth color slide
from a vantage point on the south curb of Elm Street. Willis
can be seen in the early Zapruder frames; e. g., number 183,
where he identified himself as, “the individual who stands
almost directly behind the first motorcycle policeman in that
picture. . . . With my camera raised. . . (7H493) Willis

indicated that the first shot came just before this picture. He
testified about the fifth slide :

... in fact, the shot caused me to squeeze the camera
shutter, and I got a picture of the President as he was
hit with the first shot. So instantaneous, in fact, that the
crowd hadn’t had time to react. . . . (7H493)

Mr. Liebeler: Do you remember hearing the shot?

Mr. Willis: Absolutely. I, having, been in World War
II, and being a deer hunter hobbyist, I would recognize a

high-powered rifle immediately. . . .

Mr. Liebeler: And you heard it just about the time you
took the picture that has been marked?

Mr. Willis : That’s right.

Mr. Liebeler: Prior to the time you took the picture,
which is marked Hudson Exhibit No. 1? [Wiliis slide 6]

Mr. Willis: Absolutely. (7H495)

Fortunately, there is a simple and accurate method for
the determination of the time of exposure of the Willis slide.
Just as the Zapruder frames show Willis, the Willis slide in


404


October 1971


EBBOB IN rNTEBPBBTATlON OF WABBEN OOMBOSSIOK

turn shows Zapruder, standing with his movie camera on a
pedestal of a concrete arcade. The view of the motorcade
captured by the Willis slide must correspond to only one point
of the Zapruder film.

As a first step in analysis, one may consider the direct line
joining the two cameras of Willis and Zapruder. In the Willis
slide, this line is seen to pass just north of the Stemmons
Freeway sign (Figs. 1 and 2). Directly below this two-camera
line is the edge of the left shoulder of Agent Clint Hill, iCho
rides the left front running board of the presidential follow-up
car. Thus, at the time of the Willis picture. Agent Hill was
directly between Zapruder and Willis.

The timing of the Willis slide can now be found by watching
the motion of the follow-up car in the Zapruder film. Study
of the frames reveals that the corresponding view over Hill’s
shoulder is realized only at Zapruder frame 202. At this
frame, and at no other. Agent Hill is seen to lie directly
between Zapruder and Willis. Corroboration for this analysis


Fig. 1 — This map of Dealey Plaza locales most of the relevant landmarks.
The numbers in Elm Street show the position of the President at four' im-
portant frames of the Zapruder film. Also, the three photographers men-
tioned in the text are located. Just two of the many trees ^ave been
marked; the tree mentioned in the text is the one to the east. The sign
marked in the map is the “Stemmons Freeway Keep Right” sign which ap-
pears in the Zapruder film.


Vol. 16 . No. 4


405


JOUSNAL or .FORENSIO SOIBKOES


r- ^


Fig. 2-Llnes of View for the Willie and Betener f

numbered dots in Elm Street mark the ^ however, are the

fran^ee I®® 186. 210 and 313. ™^aX "ite^ of the

points marked A and B . motorcade. The

Willie-Zapmder h,, ‘‘A”, 8» does the Zapruder frame

camera does Zapruder frame number 186.

^ is noted, as Willis seems to be lowering his camera from his

eye in succeeding frames. _ 7oT>riider frames

Study of the motion of the motorcade in the ^apruder t

will ™tlr„ lb. ..curacy ot

Willis for the triangulation, Shaneyfelt testified .

... I first determined from

Willis was standing along the «°"th curb of Elm
approximately opposite the Texas School Book Depository

Building. (16H696)

After performing the triangulation, Shaneyfelt concluded
that the Willis picture;

was taken in the vicinity of the time that 2W

of the Zapruder picture was taken This >3 not^an ^ccurat
determination because the exact location of Mr Willis
unknown. This would allow for some variation, but the


40G


October 1971


EBBOB IN EN^fBBBBBTATlON OF WABBBN 00MUI8S10N

time of the photograph A [the Willis slide], as related
to the Zapruder picture, would be, generally, during the
period that the President was behind the signboard in the
Zapruder films, which covers a range from around frame
205 to frame 226. (15H697)

Although this testimony agrees perfectly with the Warren
Commission hypotheses on the first shot, Shaneyfelt may have
committed an error of some significance in placing Willis’
position about seven or eight feet too far back from the curb
(Figs. 1, 2, and 3). Thus his triangulation calculated too
high a frame number and placed the car too far down Elm
Street. In fact, the relevant Zapruder frames show Willis
standing exactly on the curb of Elm Street. If Shaneyfelt’s
triangulation technique is carried out again, using the actual
position of Willis, a value of frame 202 is obtained, in agreement
with the previous analysis of this section.

Thus, the testimony of Phil Willis and accurate analysis
of his photograph actually give strong evidence that the first
shot may have been fired in the early frames prior to number
202 .


Fig. 3 — "W" marks the actual position of Phil Willis as shown in the
relevant Zapruder frames. "S” marks the position given Willis by Agent
Shaneyfelt. Had Agent Shaneyfelt placed Willis forward nearer* the curb,
his triangulation would have been shifted upward and would have passed
through the motorcade curve at the correct figure of frame 202.


Vol. 16 • No. 4


407


JOURNAL OF FORENBIO S0IEN0E8


.f '.SLf r .r,s:ir

the first shot, she testified :

r.rr»^ «
t:s .rr - - -

first shot hit him. (5H180)

Three witnesses mention Mrs. Kennedy’s actmns at the ti^

of the first shot. Phil Willis, very near the car, testitie
"ofte reef wSn
ward, which caused me to wonder

?rior to the shots Mrs. Kennedy had been looking off.

in the southern direction . . . about that time he went
.vei l"kr.l„t .»d put hi. 1 ...J «p. “« *

‘ “t. “ned .h.

President and Governor '.“""‘‘‘*’'■,.^ 243 )’’®’ ”

realized what was happening. . . .

Kenneth O’Donnell, riding in the follow-up car, commented
similarly :

She appeared to be immediately nwm-e that something had
happened. She turned toward him. (7H449)

.er^v^irtth'tkirnVSar'f^f^^^^^^^^


408


October 1971


ERROR IN INTERPRETATION OF WARREN COMMISSION’

After that point Mrs. Kennedy seems to be looking directly into
the President’s face.

Mrs. Kennedy’s actions, corroborated by several witnesses
and the film, are a strong indication that the President may
have been struck by an early shot.

(S) Agent George Hickey. Secret Service Agent Hickey was
seated in the left rear seat of the follow-up car. He is easily
located in the still photographs of Phil Willis and Hugh Betzjier,
as well as the Zapruder frame, where his head and shoulders
are visible above the windshield of the follow-up car. Agent
Hickey is the man who handled the AR-15 rifle just after the
assassination shots were fired.

Discussing his reaction to the first shot, Hickey stated :

... I heard a loud report which sounded like a firecracker.
It appeared to come from the right and rear and seemed to
me to be at ground level. I stood up and looked to my right
in an attempt to identify It. . . . (18H762)

The beginning Zapruder frames show Agent Hickey watching
the crowd on the left side of the street, up until frame 194. At
frame 195, however, he can be seen to begin turning about to
the right. Half-standing in the rear seat, Hickey continues
turning to the right for as long as he ean be seen In the frames ;
i. e., up to frame 207, at which point he is looking off to the
right of the motorcade. A still photograph, taken by James
Altgens and identified by the commission as having been taken
at frame 255 (R112), shows Hickey and several other agents
twisted around and looking back in the direction of the de-
pository building.

Agent Hickey seems to be a good witness and his actions
are another indication that an early shot was fired.

(i) President Kennedy. It is clear that the actions of Presi-
dent Kennedy in the early Zapruder frames are of interest.
FBI Agent Shaneyfelt testified before the Warren Commission
about these frames :

... in some frames it is obvious that he is smil|ing. . . .
His arm is up on the side of the car and his hand is in a
wave. ... I see nothing in the frames to arouse my sus-
picion about his movements ... as he disappears behind
the signboard. . . . (5H151)


Vol. 16 • No. 4


409


JOURNAL OF FORENSIC SCIENCES

Frame 183 shows the essential features described by Shauey-
felt The President is sitting on the extreme ««ht ®ide of
the car and is leaning back against the rear seat. His head
is turned almost directly to the right as he
His right arm extends out over the side of the car, and his
Sght elbow can be seen well below a chrome strip visible on

the outside of the car. , u £ 9R0

A verv marked change is apparent by frames 225-230, as

the President emerges from behind the

been mentioned previously, the President seems to be n strong
reaction to a wound at this point. For example, in frame
230 the President is leaning forward, away from the seat
back and away from the right edge of the car. His head
has turned back from the crowd, and he faces f

forward. More importantly, these frames show that Presi-
dent’s hands have been raised to the area of his chin and ^k'
Also, his arms are in an extremely unusual position, with both
elbows raised very high, almost to the level of his chin.

The Warren Commission believed that frames 226-230 rep-
resented the President’s reactions to a shot fired somewhere
in the interval of Zapruder frames 210 - 224 , while the Presi-
dent wa.« behind the road sign. However, certain observations
in the Zapruder film will be noted here to indicate that the
first wounding of the President may not have been blocked
from the record by the road sign. The transition in the Pres -
dent’s appearance between frames 183 and 230 (described
above) in fact seems to begin with certain reactions in the in-
terval of frames 194-206.

First a general trend in the frames ’194-206 may be noted.
Beginning as early as frame 194, the President’s body seems
to undergo a motion forward and to the left. This motion, whic
can be visually approximated to be on the order of six or seven
inches, seems to begin in frame 194 and continues through
about frame 200. The President seems to move away from the
seat back and to tilt to the left, away from the window ledge.
The witness statement of Kenneth O’Donnell may be noted:

He was leaning out waving. He may have just been with-
drawing his hand. And the shot hit him, and threw him
to the left . . . looking at the manner of the President s


410


October 1971


ERROR IN INTERPRETATION OF WARREN COMMISSION

movement, I would think you would have to feel the
thrust of the shot was from the right rear. (7H449)

Study of the frames reveals further information. Recalling
the descriptions above, it is clear that between frames 183 and
230, two specific changes occurred in the President’s position.
First, the President turned his head and shoulders back from
the crowd until he was facing forward. Also, the President’s
right arm moved from a position with the elbow b^low a
chrome strip on the outside of the car, into a position with
the arm and elbow well inside the car and raised almost to
chin level. These frames and motions have been described in
such great detail because both of these specific changes in
Kennedy can be observed to occur in the "early Zapruder
frames,” i. e., those before the President disappears from view
behind the road sign. In this context, it happens that frame
204 is very important.

On the Interval 194-200 the President’s body is seen to narrow
.somewhat to the view, indicating that he not only leans to
the left front, but also is rotated to the left. The rotation of the
shoulders begins as early as frame 195. His head comes around
at 200-202. By frame 204 the President is facing almost direct-
ly forward.

As the President moves and rotates to the left, his right arm
is pulled back into the car. While his elbow has been resting
outside the car, it comes up noticeably at frame 195. The
President’s elbow can be seen to cross the chrome strip on the
.side of the car at frames 198-199. As President Kennedy dis-
appears from view behind the sign, his right arm .seems to
be in a particularly unusual position — the clearly visible gray
of his suit coat indicating that his right arm and elbow have
been raised at least to the level of his chin.

At this point, three of the most detailed witness de.seriptions
may be quoted ;

David Powers: President Kennedy was sitting on the ex-
treme right-hand side of his automobile, with his arm ex-
tending as much as two feet beyond the righlj edge of the
car . . . the first shot went off and it sounded to me as
if it were a firecracker. I noticed then that the Presideni


Vol. 16 • No. 7


411


JOURNAL or rOEENSIO SOIENOES


„ove.l quite far to his left after the shot from tte extreme

right-hand side where he had been sitting. (7H473)

Mr Holland: And the motorcade was coming down in this
fashion, and the President was waving to the people on this

side (indicating). . . •

Mr Holland- And about that time he went over like that
nndicating) , and put his hand up, and she was still looking
off, as well as I could tell.

Mr. Stern: Now, when you say, “he ^ like that.” you
leaned forward and raised your right hand .

Mr. Holland: Pulled forward and hand just stood like that
momentarily.

M r. Stern : With his right hand ?

Mr. Holland: His right hand; and that was the first report
that I heard. (6H243)

William Newman: We were looking back "P ^h"

<ee if the motorcade was coming and the first two sho
ere fired, and of course the first shot, boom, the Presiden
threw his arms up like that, spun around sort of . . . t7>.

These witness statements compare
of President Kennedy noted in the frames 194-206. The fol-
Cl..r: Ih. a.ti.nB ot Pre.W.nt K.«">dy .n h.
earlv Zapruder frames are not at all inconsistent with the
hypothesis that the President was firqt struck in these earl.

frames nrior to frame number 195.

Linda Willis. Witness Linda Willis, a daughter of the
witness whose photographs were mentioned above, can be located
n 7 -um der frame 183, in which she is dressed in a red dress
::<f uLitf scarrand is at the extreme right of the frame. She
described for the Warren Commission :

well, I followed along the street with the car • ■ • ^
was directly across when the first shot hit him . . . was
right in line with the sign and the car, and I wasn t very
far awav from him . . . When the first one hit
President turned from waving to the people, and he grabbed
his throat, and he kind of slumped forward • • • ^
there . . . where the Stemmons sign is. . . . (7H4aH;


412


October 1971


EEEOE IN INTEEPEETATION OE -WAEEEH OOT^S^^SST'

In all the Zapruder frames up to 199 Linda Willis c&n be
observed as she runs along the grass on the south side of
Elm Street, following the presidential limousine. At frame
200, however, she abruptly stops running. In succeeding frames
(200-204) she turns sharply and looks back to the right and
rear of the motorcade. At this point the car is indwd directly
between her and the Stemmons Freeway sign. Linda Willis
then remains fixed in the same spot for as long as she is visible ;
i. e., up to frame 222.

It is reasonable to suggest that these frames are showing
Linda Willis reacting to the sound of an early first shot.

(6) Governor Connally. It is well known that the governor
and his wife believe that the President was struck -with the
first shot and that the governor was hit by the second shot.
The governor has stated ;

My recollection of that time gap, the distinct separation
between the shot that hit the President and the impact
of the one that hit me, is as clear today as it was then.
They talk about the "one-bullet” or “two-bullet theory,” but
as far as I’m concerned, there is no “theory.” There is my
absolute knowledge, and Nellie’s too, that one bullet caused
the President’s first wound, and that an entirely separate
shot struck me (8) .

After hours of study of the clear Life magazine enlargements,
Connally chose frame 234 as the point where he was hit by
the second shot. No record is found indicating that he was
asked when he thought the first shot had come, even though
he claimed a clear recollection of the time gap.^ Fortunately,
he had volunteered his opinion on this point during an earlier
session with the Zapruder pictures, on April 21, 1964. At this
commission screening of 35-mm slides prepared from the frames.
Governor Connally’s opinion was recorded in a memorandum
for the record : '

... He felt the President might have been hit by frame
190. He heard only two shots and felt sure that the shots
he heard were the first and third shots. He is positive
that he was hit after he heard the first shot; i. e., b\
the second shot, and by that shot only (9) .

4i:


Vol. 16 • No. 4


JOURNAL OF FOKENSIO SOIENOES


Governor Connally’s estimate for the time of the President’s
reaction to the first shot is striking corroboration for the
previous analysis of this report. The above memorandum was
not introduced into evidence and thus did not become a part
of the commission’s published record.

(7) Blurred frames. Study of the Zapruder frames im-
mediately reveals that some of the frames are much more
blurred than others. For example, highlights in the wind-
shield and chrome of the presidential limousine appear as dots
in frame 193, while they become horizontal streaks in frame
197. The phenomenon of blurred frames has been studied in
some detail by Dr. Luis Alvarez of the University of California,
Berkeley. It is his hypothesis that the blurred frames do not
just appear randomly in the Zapruder film, but rather they
seem to occur in distinct chains of blurs. His analysis indicates
that the chains of blurs are attributable to horizontal oscilla-
tions of Zapruder’s camera, possibly as a neuromuscular re-
sponse to the sounds of shots fired.

Without going into the details we can see how this can be
related to the analysis of the first shot (10). A very pro-
nounced chain of blurs occurs over the entire interval of
frames 190-207. This can be interpreted as a possible reaction
of Zapruder to the sound of an early first shot.

(H) Hugh Betzner, Jr. Witness Hugh Betzner, Jr., took the
last of a series of three black and white still photographs
from a vantage point on the south curb of Elm Street. His
location can be established from his photograph and the Zap-
ruder frames; frame 183 shows Betzner at the curb, with his
camera raised to his eye. He is dressed in white and is located
almost directly above the red searchlight on the left front of
the Secret Service follow-up car.

In an affidavit of November 22, 1963, Betzner reported
that the first shot came just after he took his last picture:

I took another picture as the President’s car was going
down the hill on Elm Street. I started to wind my film
again and I heard a loud noise. I thought that this noise
was either a firecracker or a car had backfired. (19H467)

To calculate the time of exposure of the Betzner picture,
one can u.se the same method that was described in detail for


414


October 1971


error in interpretation of warren oommisbion

are nowTrn%rbe%ramL^?6\S1ol'' re"'

th?;im?"f ^ ‘=‘>'’ed resectioning to determine

Hve W ^oniputed the President’s car to be

first statement, for reasons simifar to Ag^t Sh

roneous triangulation : •’^Hent Shaneyfelts er-

oTl^eT “"‘f November

1967 ... and have found the distance to be IS.rfeet


Vol. 16 . No. 1


415


JOURNAL OF FORENSIC SCIENCES


with one method using single frame resections, and 16.5
feet with a second method in which the two photographs
were positioned by synchronization with a Zapruder
frame. . . . Our discrepancy occurred because we lacked
reliable information concerning the exact locations of
Betznet and Willis (12) .

Regarding the second Itek statement above, Mr. Sprague
said that the Itek report contained "no insinuated relation-
ship with the sequence of gunshots” (13). Thus, the second
sentence quoted above is exclusively a Life conclusion and has
no scientific support from Itek.

In summary, the Betzner and Willis pictures, while simi-
lar in view, provide an interesting contrast of the beginning
and the end of a period of particular interest in the Zapruder
film.

CffJ Secret Service reconstruction. This final point consists
more in corroboration of the above points than in further evi-
dence. Surprisingly, a document in the National Archives shows
that an agent of the Secret Service made observations of Presi-
dent Kennedy in the Zapruder film very similar to those of
section 4 above. An FBI document, filed on November 29,
1963, includes :

SA John Joe Hewlett, United States Secret Service, Dallas,
advised that with the aid of a surveyor and through the
use of 8-mm movie films depicting President John F.
Kennedy being struck by assassin’s bullets on November
22, 1963, Hewlett was able to ascertain that the distance
from the window ledge of the farthest window to the
east in the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository
Building, 411 Elm Street, to where the President was
struck the first time in the neck was approximately 170
feet. He stated this distance would be accurate within two
or three feet. . . . SA Hewlett advised that it had been
ascertained from the movies that President Kennedy was
■struck with the first and third shots fired by the assassin,
while Governor Connally was struck with the second
shot (14).


416


October 1971


ERROR IN INTERPRETATION OF WARREN COMMISSION

A map was included, which showed a point "A” at 170 feet
from the window, with the notation: "President struck with
iirat bullet.

The reference to distance of firing clearly indicates that
Agent Hewlett meant neither the "blind” period behind the
sign (indeterminate to about 12 feet) nor the frames of obvious

nSHOoVS J f window).

Indeed, Howlett’s figure of 170 feet corresponds to

atve from secSon I

above, that at this point of the film the reaction of President
Kennedy first becomes particularly noticeable.

Hon the assassina-

the same day that the Warren Commission was
fomed), clearly represents the original Secret Service analysis
of the assassination, before the permutations of rifle speed Lid
the single-bullet theory had been added. One other relevant
archives document concerns a screening of the 35-mm slides

1964 '^ r Washington on April 14

1964 A memorandum for the record contains remarks which
niay be attributable to Agent Hewlett;

(b) The reaction shown in frames 224-225 may have
started at an earlier point-possibly as early as frame
199 (when there appears to be some jerkiness in his move

S)Zo6 LwlTer b‘ Possibility, at frames

4U4-06 (where his right elbow appears to be raised to
an artificially high position) (15).

the detailed FBI reconstruction of May 24 1964
which established the obstruction by the oak tree nrior f'

Conclusions

The Warren Commission conclusion of a firoi j-
of b,lh Pre.ld.„, ,„d


^ ol. 1 6 , No. 4


417


JOUENAL OF FORENSIC SCIENCES


bullet theory”) occurring during _ the \

to some extent the process of elimination based on the bl^k
ing by the road sign, the conviction that the first shot v?m
fired clear of the tree foliage, and ignorance ^ evidence

in the early Zapruder frames. The evidence developed in this
s.p'port.'the c.nclu.l.P

first wounded during the interval of frames 186-190 in the

^^Such*^topiM as the medical evidence or the detailed ballistic
evidence clearly go beyond the photographic analysis of this
report. For the present, however, one thing can be concluded
with some certainty, the exact

assassination did not happen as described m the Warren R
port.

Ackncvlcdgmcnts: Many individuals have been of assistance in
information for this paper. Many of the

served by Ray Marcus, Lillian Castellano, and Harold Weisberg. Gary
Schoener and Paul Hoch have been particularly helpful in the.r d.scussmns,
as has Professor James Harrington at Michigan State University. Senatoi
John Sherman Cooper was kind enough to f

commission and its hearings. Finally, at the National Arch'ves Marion
Johnson. Joe Fernandez, and John Swanson made possible s udy of the
voluminous Warren Commission files, as well as hours of study of the
excellent 35-mm color slides prepared from the Zapruder frames.

To anyone familiar with the writings on the assassination, it is un-
necessary to add that the conclusions of this report are not to be taken as
necessarily representing the views of the persons mentioned here or those
mentioned in the text of the report. ^

REFERENCES

1. Gross, Hans. Criminal Investigation, 146. Richard Jackson (Ed.).
Carswell Company, Ltd., Toronto, Canada (1962).

2. Smith, Albert. Two Reels and a Crank, 132. Douhleday, Garden City,
New York (1952).

3. Life, Time, Inc., Chicago, Illinois. November 29, 1963, pp. 22-39,
October 2, 1964, pp. 40-60B; November 25, 1966, pp. 38-B3.

4. 5. Shorthand notations such as these will be used to refer to the volumes

published by the Warren Commission. For example, R98 indicates the
Report of the President’s Commission on the Assassination of Presi-
dent John F. Kennedy, 98. United States Government Printing Office,
Washington, D. C, (1964); 18H1-80 indicates the Hearings Before the


i


418


October 1971


ERROR IN INTERPRETATION OF WARREN OOMMIBBION

President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, 1-
80. United States Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C
(1964).

6. National Archives, Warren Commission File 298, 14. Washington, D. C.

7. Private interview by Josiah Thompson, Six Seconds in Dallas, 37.
Bernard Geis Associates, New York, New York (1967),

8. Life, 48. Time, Inc., Chicago, Illinois. November 25, 1966.

9. National Archives, Warren Commission Administrative File (un-
numbered). Washington, D. C.

10. White, Stephen. Should We Now Believe the Warren Report?, fs-77,
226-229. The MacMillan Company, New York, New York (1968).

11. Life, 93. Time, Inc., Chicago, Illinois. November 24, 1967.

12. Author’s correspondence from Howard Sprague, Jr. February 12, 1969.

13. The full report mentioned is the Life-Itek Kennedy Assassination Film
Analysis, Itek Corporation, Lexington, Massachusetts 02173.

14. National Archives, Warren Commission File 6, 117. Washington, D. C.

15. National Archives, Warren Commission Administrative File (unnum-
bered). Washington, D. C.

School of Criminal Justice
College of Social Science
Michigan State University
East Lansing, Michigan 48823


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 1972— TREATMENT AND
PREVENTION

January 10, 11, 1972. Eden Roc Hotel, Miami Beach, Florida

Legal aspects of ho.spital infection will be discussed by at-
torneys and physicians. For information, write, Mrs. Gwen
Hendel, Office of Postgraduate Medical Education, Mount
Sinai Hospital, Miami Beach, Florida 33140.


Vol. 16 • No. 4


419
