CIA Organized
Secret Army in
Western Europe

Paramilitary Force Created
To Resist Soviet Occupation

ulmho

By Clare Pedrick

Special to the Washington Poet

ROME, Nov. 13 — A secret army created by the Cen-
tral Intelligence Agency during the 1950s to organize
resistance in the event of a Soviet invasion of Western
Europe has finally come in from the cold, and the dis-
closures of its past actions are producing a political flap
that stretches across the continent.

The existence of a clandestine paramilitary network
code-named “Operation Gladio” was disclosed last
Thursday by Italian Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti in
a speech to his nation’s Senate. Since then, European
officials have described similar operations in most of the
other NATO countries.

The CLA-backed paramilitary network included units
in Belgium, France, Greece, West Germany and the
Netherlands, according to European newspaper and
news service reports.

“The operation was expanded to all of Western Eu-
rope by 1959,” including neutral Sweden and Switzer-
land, according to a story scheduled to appear Wednes-
day in the German newspaper Die Welt.

European officials familiar with the paramilitary net-
work have come forward in the last several days and
described stockpiles of weapons and explosives hidden
in Western European countries since the start of Cold
War, news services have reported. The arms were to
be used by hundreds of resistance fighters trained to
counter a Soviet invasion, the officials said.

A former Belgian army intelligence official quoted by
the Associated Press today said at least six arms caches
were spread over the countryside in his nation until two
months ago. In addition, the wire service quoted a for-
mer Dutch defense minister who said large weapons
dumps also existed there and that some were discov-
ered over the last decade.

Andreotti told the Italian Parliament that at the
height of Cold War tensions in the late 1950s and early
1960s, the Italian unit had hidden caches of arms at
depots throughout the country. The operation has now
been scaled down, Andreotti said, but more than 600
people remain on the payroll.

Andreotti said he believes the operation should now
be dismantled, given the new “climate which has freed
us from the nightmare of wars and divisions.”

In Washington, a U.S. government official familiar
with Operation Gladio— Italian for “sword“— said the
continued existence of the force in Italy was “solely an
Italian operation. We have no control over it whatso-
See GLADIO, A20, CoL 1


•• * • 77:7 tow ? »N 7 n w .,7


CIA Set Up Secret Army
Across Western Europe


GLAD10, From A 19

ever.” The official would not com-
ment on allegations that Giadio was
part of a broad resistance network
throughout Western Europe.

Andreotti disclosed the covert
operation after a Venetian magis-
trate, Felice Casson, stumbled on
its existence during an investigation
into a neo-fascist terrorist attack
that took place 18 years ago.

The investigation revealed that
the explosives used in a 1972 car-
bombing came from one of the 139
secret weapons depots kept for the
use of Giadio forces. The bomb,
which killed three policemen near
the town of Gorizia in northeast
Italy, was placed by neo-fascist ac-
tivist Vincenzo Vinciguerra, who
was sentenced to life imprisonment.

. Andreotti said the 139 arsenals
were broken up in 1973, but that
Weapons from 12 of them were nev-
er recovered.

Casson and fellow magistrate
Carlo Mastelloni are now investi-
gating possible links between Op-
eration Giadio and extreme right-
wing terrorists who are thought to
have been responsible for a string
of unsolved bombings in Italy during
** the 1970s and early 1980s.

; In Washington, the U.S. govern-
ment official familiar with Giadio
said, “If there are allegations that
the CIA was involved in terrorist
activities in Italy, they are absolute
nonsense."

: Andreotti said the United States
first approached Italy as early as
1*951 when the CIA broached the
idea of mounting what it called a
“stay behind" organization, one of
several in post-war Europe.

The American and Italian intel-
ligence agencies worked together,
he said, to establish a network of
crack military troops, most of them
concentrated in the northeast near
the Yugoslav border, where the
threat of a Communist invasion


seemed most credible. In 1959, Op-
eration Giadio came under the um-
brella of NATO, he added.

In Paris, the newspaper Liber-
ation said the French arm of the
secret network was dissolved only
after disclosures of the Italian op-
eration created a controversy.
French Defense Minister Jean-
Pierre Chevenement on Monday
confirmed France's involvement in
the project.

The network was dissolved on
presidential orders, Chevenement
said, declining to specify when the
order was issued. For most of its
existence, the group had been “dor-
mant," Chevenement said.

In Belgium, a former Belgian
army intelligence official, Andre
Moyen, told the leftist newspaper
Le Drapeau Rouge he knew of “at
least six arms caches" that existed
in Belgium as recently as two
months ago.

Henk Vredeling, the Dutch de-
fense minister from 1973-77, told
the Associated Press he had been
briefed about the existence of
weapons caches on Dutch soil des-
tined for behind-the-lines sabotage.

Former Belgian defense minister
Francois-Xavier de Donnea said
paramilitary “exercises were
scrapped, perhaps as long as one or
two years ago." During his 1985-
1988 tenure, he said he was briefed
on network operations.

In Greece, where the anti-Com-
munist network was known as
Sheepskin, caches of arms, ammu-
nition, flashlights and other equip-
ment were dug up between 1985
and 1988, when the network was
dismantled, the AP said.

In a television interview on
Italy's Channel 4, former CIA direc-
tor William Colby confirmed the
U.S. role in Italy’s secret army and
described how he was sent to
Stockholm in 1951 to set up a sim-
ilar network in Scandinavia.

Colby, who headed the CIA from


. . . disclosed existence of operation I

t

1973 to 1976, also revealed that '
U.S. intelligence agencies chan-
neled large sums to Italy's right-of- j
center Christian Democrats and
other “anti-Communist" political j
parties during the Cold War era — a <

connection that has long been al-
leged by Italy’s left-wing parties.
The money, said Colby, was used to c
ensure that Italy did not “fall into *
Communist hands."

Meanwhile, details have emerged ‘
of the role played by civilians in the {
secret operation. One of them,
Verona businessman Roberto |
Cavallaro, told the Italian newsmag-
azine L’ Espresso that he was re-
cruited after taking part in anti-So-
viet demonstrations. In the event of
a Communist takeover, his task ,
would have been to cause as much ]
civil unrest as possible, Cavallaro
said.

Cavallaro described how he was
paid 700,000 lire (now worth $635)
each month, which was handed to
him in a yellow envelope by one of
the two intelligence officials who
had recruited him. He left the or-
ganization in 1973, he said, after he
heard of a plot to murder two for-
mer Communists, one male and one
female. The plan was later aban-
doned.

Staff writer George Lardner in
Washington contributed to this


TV*,---- - ^ - » -- ' ' ■ - •• V,* •••-— .'••Cl-*-. • •• » ". 30 ’ *v>. m. • •>.. •. y> .. n-.r.nvvr*?^?*
