Dear Walter, 8 / 6/77

Although usually I look for a quidt period to be free to write this is not such an
afternoon. I’ve been ait ting and wondering which of the friends I can't afford to
I'd like to be talking to.


I§ve just began a new book, too. Writing under bad conditions but writing. With
materials that even for me are unprecedented, in itself a major problem.

I’m not upset, although 1 have been. Four hours ago my blood— pressure was takaa
and it was rather good for one of 64, 130/00.

I guess it is that while I'm tranquil I reULize ^ have still another adjustment
to make. I've just learned that I may have an gina . There may bo more.

Earlier this year I became aware that I have been losing my physical capabilities
rather more rapidly than from increasing age. The doctors paid no attention, no doubt
because I pay more than SI 300 a year for medical care that is supposed to be preventive,
too. Then I went to Dallas June 10 to work on one of my Freedom of Information cases.
While I was there the ABC Good warning America show wanted me to go to New York* I did
not want to and said no twice. I don't get to Dallas that often, wanted to do more work
there and then go to C a li f ornia. Friends, particularly Jim Cesar, persuaded me to go if
only to let some people know there are others than nuts ^working in my field.

(it worked out that way, too.)


Early the following morning I had a little trouble with the more severely damaged
leg. It wore off during the morning but repeated after several days, then lasting three
ox- four days. Ky medical insurer ignored this so I wait to a local doctor, who indicated
there might be an arterial condition to go along with the severe vein damage that was
allowed to develop. I went to my medical insurer expecting to be hospitalized for tests
that had been indicated to me and got only a long and disagreeable hassle.

I started a new fight-by-letter with the new medical director who untilmately
responded by agreeing that the record troubled him and with a written promise to provide
me with local emergency protection. The second part was important because the local doctor
is in an awkward position when I am not his patient. This relieved him. n e is now caring
f*or mo* albeit at my expenses 9 no iny insurer* s.

Prior to this I f d been able to make an appointment with a Washington doctor who has
a big reputation in phlebitis. I used the name of a doctor who had mentioned him to me.

I knew he had been a consultant. When I got there I found out he was chief of surgery
At Georgetown University ^capital. And that he and his assistant both examined me. They
will b- writing recommendations to the local doctor. They also made a couple of tests,
raey, too, indicate the possibility of an arterial problem. But they made ldl and mo
feel so good from the time they took, that both of them examined me together. They
also impressed us professionally, as they did as human beings.


I m back on the anticoagulent, with the dosage being worked on. I think it has
benefit ted my legs and that may be what brought on what I do not call pain and doctors
do. To me I had some mildly annoying pressures in the chest. After three days I had
today a check. But when my logs seems better I walked more.


So, we’ll see before long what if anything the rest is and what
besides take nitroglycerine sublingually.


one does about thia


You probably caught some of the attention to the CIA and drugs last weak. That became
another interest several years ago. I had all those records a month before Marks let some out.

i se carry that rotten business further but in ways 20 clearly visible more than a year
a£o 1 registered a story idea that is close to non-fiction now.


I keep obtaining: records with which I can, alas, do nothing: right now* u ett±n,T them
requires a groat amount of effort and time that cameo froi* other . ork that does not
get done*

However, I have arranged a home for them* They 1 11 be ctopo deposited in the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin system through the Stevens ^oint branch, whore there is a fine
and level-headed professor* to be in ior-ediate charge and a whisbang of a chancellor,
unless he runs for governor, which 1‘ve heard he may do.

I f ve already sent nine file drawers of older materials. I expect him this coining
week to take a few more. Some visuals, too. This si less than 1 & 9 not countinr what I 1 11
continue to get.

Ore source ie a memorable fight ^im and I have won against the FBI. They were able
to draw us thin and waste much time, I suppose one of their objectives, but 1*0 getting
almost all I want and in the end will have immeasureably more than I antidated. They
finally asked us to agree to etipulatioas that include their performance by a specified
date after all these months of delays.

They have also begun to disgorge their files on mo. Tiie first batch should have
reached me but as of today had not. On this, if their compliance is only partial, they
are being smarter than other agencies. I expect Jim to sue a bydoh of than for damages.
From the FBI, from a file not on me, I have obtained a few of their crooked records on
me. One states high policy pf denying me the fruit of y cwn labor.

I suppose all of this can f t bring your mind to focus on what I'm saying. I-igybe it
will help if ^ out in in numbers* about 3,000 once— secret pages a month from various
sources in the government over the past 10 months alone. In dimension this is a stack
of solid paper perhaps two stories high.

Our swimming pool has missed you and Agnec.

I # d have called you when I waa in NYC for the ABC show except that your phone is
unlisted. I did not expect to go to A< ew York so x had no “ew York numbers with me
when 1 left home. I was there only overnight, getting there about 9 p.m. or later.

I close with what may entertain youl my host in Dallas was the third man wounded
in the JFK assassination. Jim will be filing an affidavit from him soon, ^his was the
main purpose of the trip.


$opej£ you are both well.
