THE ASSASSINATION OF PRcSIDj^Tf. JOHN F. KENNEDY 
v' * ON NOVaCHEd 22,^1963, AT DALLAS, TEXAS 
Stat<fcent of Special Agent Paul E. Landis, Jr.', United States Secret 
Service, concerning his activities and official duties on November 22, 1963. 
On November 22, 1963, I arrived at Love .Field Airport, Dallas,. Texas, 
at 11:35 a.a*, having traveled from Ft. Worth, Texas,- to Dallas, Texas, on , 
board U. S. Air Force Flight #6970. Upon ay arrival I disembarked froa the 
aircraft and immediately walked to where the motorcade vehicles were parked. 
Special Agent Saa Kinney was the first person that I recognized, and I remember 
speaking to him and standing by the Follow-up car and jokingly asking hi» if he 
could tell me where the Follow-up car was. 
After speaking to Sam, I walked over to Special Agent Win. Lawson just 
to double check to see if I was still assigned to working the Follow—op car as. 
had previously been arranged. He was standing by the front right fender of the car 
in which the President would be riding, and he told me that I was still to ride 
in the Follow-up car. _ 
Only a very few moments later the Presidents Aircraft was pulling up 
to its mooring spot and I moved up to where I would be near the President and 
First Lady when they disembarked from the aircraft. 
There appeared to be a very large crowd at the airport and most of the 
people were restrained behind a chain-link fence which was about four or five 
feet high- On the opposite side of the fence from the crowd there was a very 
narrow sidewalk and curbing which ran along the fence-line. 
There were several people on the same side of the fence as the 
President but most of them were photographers. 
As soon as the President and First Lady disembarked from the Aircraft, 
lire. Kennedy was presented a bouquet of roses. The President was also presented 
what appeared to be two hand-drawn charcoal portraits of himself and Mrs. Kennedy 
in a black leather and glass folding frame. I believe that this was given to 
him by a lady wearing a. red coat. 
Just after the President received the black leather frame I held out 
wy hand and he handed it to me. I had been standing just off to Mrs. Kennedy's 
left, slightly in front of her. She was on the left side of the President. 
At this time the President and First lady started walking towards"the ; 
crowd which was restrained behind the fence. On the way, they did stop for a few 
seconds to talk to.an elderly lady in a wheel chair who was.bn the field area - 
about thirty feet from where the above presentations were made. ' 
- - . . "j-:.' ' W i 
f They then walked over to the crowd and walked along the fence from" — 
their right to their left. At first I was in front of the President, clearing m . 
pathway through the photographers and observing the crowd reaching over the fence; 
• 'hr■ •*». ‘ £ 
. - , . 
• ‘ -*• * 
\m - 
- ? 
*" •r left. At first I was in front of the President, clearing m . 
pathway through the photographers and observing the crowd reaching over the fence; 
• 'hr■ •*». ‘ £ 
. - , . 
• ‘ -*• * 
\m - 
- ? 
*" •

--- PAGE BREAK ---Page^*off Statement of "Special Agent Paul K.

Landis, Jr., dated Nor.

30, 1963: 
I- noticed that Mrs.

Kennedy was moving along slower and becoming separated 
from the President so I asked another agent, X don*t recall who, to'more up 
where I was and I dropped back to assist Special Agent Clinton Hill who was next 
to Mrs.

.Kennedy.

I continued to keep a pathway clear for Mrs.

Kennedy, removing 
small hand • signs that had be en dropped in her pathway on the sidewalk and 
occasionally cautioning to watch out fow the curbing.

At one point, where the 
direction of the fence made a right angle turn to the left of the way we:.were 
moving, I do remember reaching up and holding a fairly large flag away that 
someone was waving over the fence.

Only a few f6et further and the fence and 
sidewalk made another 90 degree turn in the direction in riiich we were originally 
moving.

'At this point we stopped momentarily and started in the direction of 
the cars which were slightly behind us and had been moving along towards us.

Mrs.

Kennedy asked where the President was and SA Hill noticed him continuing 
along the fence shaking hands with the crowd; so Mrs.

Kennedy returned to the 
fence and did the same.

Only a short distance later the President and First Lady stopped shaking 
hands and entered their automobile.

I stood by the right rear side until the car 
started moving and then hopped on the right rear portion of the right running 
board of the Follow-up car.

I was standing with_my right legion the running 
board and my left leg up over and inside the Follow-up car.

I stayed in this 
position until we were leaving the Airport area and remarked that, "I might as 
well get all the way in, " and I did so.

I glanced at my watch but I don*t 
recall the time.

Special Agents Glen Bennett and George Hickey were seated to my left 
respectively in the rear of the Follow—up car.

Mr.

David Powers was seated 
directly in front of me in the center portion of the Follow-up car and Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mr. David Powers was seated 
directly in front of me in the center portion of the Follow-up car and Mr. Kenneti 
0*Donnell was seated on Mr. Power*s left. Special Agent Sam Kinney was driving 
and ATSAIC Heberts'was seated in the right front seat. Special Agents John Headyj 
Clinton Hill, and Tim McIntyre were standing on the right front, left front,* and 
left rear portions of the running board, respectively. The motorcade had not proceeded far when ATSAIC tioberts asked me to get 
back on the outside running board, “Just in case," which X immediately did. The 
crowd was about two-deep along each side of the road and I would guess that we 
were-traveling about twenty miles per hour. As the antorcade proceeded towards the main business section of ddwntowi 
payiflu I watched the crowd for anyone trying to run tawardsAtbe President*s car 
or any person who might be holding anything harmful in his hands. I observed 
the rooftops and windows of the buildings along the route. On the outskirts of 
town most of the buildings were of a one or two story type structure and very 
few people were on the rooftops. The crowd was three or more deep along the 
street as we proceeded towards do mitewn Dallas with most intersections more 
heavily crowded. The outskirts seemed to consist.mostly of used car lots,. Junk

--- PAGE BREAK ---'Page Three of Statement of Special Agent Paul is.

Landis, Jr., dated Nor.- 30, 1963: 
dealers, auto parts stores, and this typical type of neighborhood.

At one inter- 
section there were some Cuban Pickets but I don't recall exactly what their signs 
said except ttfht they did have "Cuba” on them.

A little further towards town some people had a sign a_siH ng the 
President to please stop and shake handsx which he saw as he passed and stopped.

.

I immediately ran up to his car as it stopped and assumed a position next .to him* 
and observed the crowd as it merged on the car, especially watching the hands.

- 
Most of the people were children but I do remember one of the adult ladies who was 
holding the sign, remarking, 
MIt worked, our sign workedl" 
At various places along the route I remember Mr.

Dave Powers standing 
up and taking movies of the President's car and the crowd.

The closer we came to downtown Dallas the larger the crowds became.' At 
several places they were forcing their way into the street and there was just 
barely enough room for the cars to get through.

There were two motorcycle escorts 
on each side of the President's and the Follow-up car and in several instances 
the crowd was so close that the motorcycles could not get through and had to drop 
completely behind the Follow-up car.

During these instances SA Clint Hill would 
run up and jump on the left rear bumper of the President's car and he would ride 
there until the crowd was further back away from the President's car.

Just before we reached the heart of downtown Dallas, I remember noticing 
some new looking, very high, multi-storied skyscrapers and I remarked to Jack 
Ready that there were even people way up on the roof of one.

I think the motor- 
cade ofide a right turn onto n Street,’ as that is the only street sign I saw 
and remembered.

I remember thinking to myself that about every town I know of .

has a Main Street.

.--- PAGE BREAK ---

has a Main Street. . * * 
* I'm not sure how far we traveled on Main Street, but I do know that 
this is where the crowd seemed heaviest. The buildings were tall on both sides 
of the street but X didn't notice many people in the windows. X continued to- 
scan the crowds on the street and the buildings along the route. 1 glanced at 
the President*s car somewhere along Main Street and saw Clint Hill again standing 
on the left rear bumper behind Mrs. Kennedy who was seated, to the President's 
left. Governor Connally was seated in front of the President and Mrs. Conna.lly 
was in front of Mrs. .Kennedy. • — v 
The crowd lined both sides of the street and in several places was " 
right out into the street leaving barely enough room to get through. Hot long after we turned onto Main Street there. wasTone boy who, I 
would say, was in his early teens who ran out from the crowd after the president's 
apri Follow—up cars passed and tried to overtake the President's .car. X saw 
Mm gpwing anH tapped SA Ready on the shoulder and pointed towards him. He was 
carrying a camera. SA Ready jumped off the running board, overtook the boy and. poshed him back into the crowd.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Page Four of Statement of Special Agent Paul b.

Landis, Jr., dated Hov.

30, 1963: 
f 
„ , , ?

"e reached t.he end of Uain Street we turned right and approached 
a gradual left turn.

As we approached the intersection and while we were turning 
left, the crowd seemed to thin and almost disappear around the turn...

I then rale 
a quick surveillance of a building which was to be on the President*s right once 
the lefw turn was completed.

It appeared to be the last one in sight.

It was & 
modernistic type building, approximately eight stories high, and it had large 
glass windows.

I also seem to recollect orange paneling or siding.

None of the 
windows were open, and I did not see anyone standing by them.

I surmised that the" 
building was closed or that all its employees were out on the street corner.

As the President’s car continued around the corner, I continued to 
surrey the crowd along the righthand side of the road and noticed that it was 
fairly scattered, with hardly enough people to form a single line.

I continued 
to look ahead to an overpass over the route we were traveling.

At approximately 
this point, I would say, the President’s car and the Follow-up car h«=d just 
completed their turns and both were straightening out.

At this moment I heard what sounded like the report of a high-powered 
rifle from behind me, over my right shoulder.

When I heard the sound there was 
no question in my mind what it was.

My first glance was at the President, as I 
was practically looking in his direction anyway.

I saw him moving in a manner 
which I thought was to look in the direction of the sound.

I did not realize 
that President Kennedy had been shot at this point.

I-uamediately-returned my gaze, over my right shoulder, toward the 
modernistic building I had observed before, with a-quick glance I saw nothing 
and immediately started scanning the crowd at the intersection from myright— 
my left.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I did not realize 
that President Kennedy had been shot at this point. I-uamediately-returned my gaze, over my right shoulder, toward the 
modernistic building I had observed before, with a-quick glance I saw nothing 
and immediately started scanning the crowd at the intersection from myright— 
my left. I observed nothing unusual and- began to thi nk- that the sound had been 
that of a fire cracker but I hadn’t 3een any smoke. In fact, I recall Special 
Agent Jack Ready saying, "What was it? A Fire Cracker?" I remarked, "I don’t 
I don’t see any smoke." So far the lapsed period of time could not have 
been over two or three seconds. All during this time I continued to scan the crowd, returning my gaze 
towards the President's car. It mist have been another second or two before the 
next shot was fired because, as I recall having seen nothing out of the ordinary, 
I then thought that maybe one of the cars in the motorcade had had a blowout that 
had echoed off the buildings. I looked at the light front tire of the President’s 
car and saw it was all right. I then glanced to see the right rear tire, bat 
could not because the Follow-up car was too close. I * * * 
I also thought of trying to run and jump on the President’s car bat did 
not think I could make it because of the speed at which we were traveling. I 
decided I had better stay where I was so that I would at least be near the First 
Lady, to whom I am. assigned. I think that it was at this point that I thought, 
"Faster, Faster, Faster," thinking that we coaid not get oat of the area soon 
enough. However, I don’t have any idea as to how fast we were then moving.

--- PAGE BREAK ---his point that I thought, 
"Faster, Faster, Faster," thinking that we coaid not get oat of the area soon 
enough. However, I don’t have any idea as to how fast we were then moving.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Paga FIT. of Stateaent of Special Agent Paul a. Landle/ Jr., daw (for. 30, 1963: 
V . * 
• r> » 
I had drawn my pin, -twit I am not sure exactly when I did this. T did 
tiaa^hatT1 vC^t all during the motorcade movement, thinking at the 
time that I could get to ay gun faster this way, if I had to,. 
„ . , , . 1 g^ced towards the President and he still appeared to be fairly 
^aeat> leaning slightly toward Mrs.* Kennedy with his head tilted. - 
3, ^ F think Mrs. Kennedy had her right ara around the President*a -. 
s oulders at this time. I also remember Special Agent Clinton Hill attempting' . 
to climb onto the back of the President's car. 
A. monient that 1 heard a second report and it appeared that 
Hh S h!ad 3pLLt °F*n ldth a mffled axploding sound. I can best 
escribe the sound as I heard it, as the sound you would get by shooting a high 
powered bullet into a five gallon can of water or shooting into a mellon. I faw 
pieoes of flesh and blood flying through the air and the President slumped out of 
sight towards Mrs. Kennedy. , ^ . 
Ihe time lapse between the first and second report must have been about 
four or five seconds. 
~ v A thought was that the President could not possibly be alive 
after being hit like he was. I still was not certain from which direction the 
second shot came, but my reaction at this time was that the shot came from soi 
where towards the front, right-hand side of the road. 
~ 1 did not notice anyone on the overpass, and I~scanned~t5e~area to the— 
right of and below the overpass where the terrain sloped towards the road on 
which we were traveling. The only person I recall seeing clearly was a Negro ' 
male in light green slacks and a beige colored shirt running from my left to right 
up the slope, across a grassy section, along a sidewalk, towards some steps and 
what appeared to be a low stone wall. He was bent over while running and I startec 
to point towards him, but I didn't notice anything in his hands and by this t.iw 
we-were going under the overpass at a very high rate of speed. I was looking 
back and saw & motorcycle policeman stopping along the curb approximately adjacent 
to where I saw the Negro running. . ■. - 
After we rode under the overpass I again looked at the President's car 
and saw Special Agent Clint Hill lying across the trunk. He ms looking back 
towards the Follow-up car shaking hi3 head back and forth, and gave a thumbs-down 
sign with his hand. 
v- . • . • 
ATSAIC Eoberts asked if anyone got the exact time-.of the shooting apd 
someone _said"aboufc 12:30 p.m. ;* then someone told me to get inside the car and 
pulled me by. the 
them to 
spots along the way waving as we went by 
My. sun glasses fell off and Special Agent Bennett handed 
TV-  ’    ' * * ** *V. > ... *W vt r*" :,5- . _ _ 
>• By now we were on an Expressway and & few people were -standing, in 
«•as we went by 
My. sun glasses fell off and Special Agent Bennett handed 
TV-  ’    ' * * ** *V. > ... *W vt r*" :,5- . _ _ 
>• By now we were on an Expressway and & few people were -standing, in 
«•

--- PAGE BREAK ---sun glasses fell off and Special Agent Bennett handed 
TV-  ’    ' * * ** *V. > ... *W vt r*" :,5- . _ _ 
>• By now we were on an Expressway and & few people were -standing, in 
«•

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Page Six of Statement of Special Agent Paul H. Landis, jr., dated Nov. 30, 1963: 
A'JLSA^C Roberts was telling-the other agents in the Follow—up car to 
cover vice-president Johnson as soon as we stopped. 
f Sometime around 12:37 p*m. we arrived.at parkland Memorial Hospital. 
'I inmediately ran to the left rear side of the President*s car, reached-over and 
tried to help Mrs. Kennedy up by taking hold of her shoulders. She did not .want.-'*' 
to let go of President Kennedy whose head she held in her lap and she was- bending 
over him. She said something like, "No, i want to stay with him!11 
Agent Hill had in the meantime opened the left rear acor of the 
Presidential Convertible, stepped inside and took Urs. Kennedy by the arm. She 
released the President and someone said, "Cover up his head." Agent Hill took 
off his suit coat and covered up the President’s head. I also remember Ur. powers 
leaning in the car and saying, "Oh, Nol, Ur. President 1 Ur. Presidentl" 
By this time someone was lifting the President’s body out of the right 
side cf the car. Agent Hill helped Urs. Kennedy out of the car, and I followed. 
Urs. Kennedy’s purse and hat and a cigarette Lighter were on the back seat. I 
picked these three items up as I walked through the car and followed Mrs. Kennedy 
into the hospital. 
The President’s body was taken directly to an Emergency Hoorn, and I 
think I remember Urs. Kennedy following the people in but coming out almost 
immediately, The door to the Emergency-Hoorn was closed and I stayed by Urs. 
Kennedy’s side. Someone, in the meantime, had brought a chair’for Urs. Kennedy 
to sit in and she sat just outside of the Emergency Hoorn. Tnere were several 
people milling around and with the help of a nurse we cleared all unauthorized 
~~—personnel out of the immediate area.* 
Someone came out of the Hoorn that the President was in and asked if 
anyone knew his Blood Type. ASAIC KeHerman and SA Hill immediately reached for 
their -wallets. ASAIC Ke Herman gave the man the information first. - . 
At one pointy someone else came out of the President’s Room again and 
said he was stiH breathing. Urs. Kennedy stood up and said, "L)O you mean he may 
Hve?" No one answered. 
Most of the time while in the hospital X stayed right next to Urs. . 
Kennedy. Twice, I beHeve, she went into the- Room where the President was; hidweve: 
X remained outside by the door. A short time later I still remember several 
people standing around, and I asked a doctor for help in clearing the area, -;. • . 
- At approximately 2:00 p.m. the President’s body was wheeled from the 
hospital in a 'coffin into an ambulance. Special Agent Andrew Berger drove the • . 
ambulance; ASAIC Kellerman and AESAIC Stout were in the front seatf Mrs. Kennedy, 
Admiral Barkley, and Agent Hill rode in the rear of the ambulance with the ! 
President’s body.Berger drove the • . 
ambulance; ASAIC Kellerman and AESAIC Stout were in the front seatf Mrs. Kennedy, 
Admiral Barkley, and Agent Hill rode in the rear of the ambulance with the ! 
President’s body.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Page Sevan of Statement of-Special Agent Paul j$. Landis,. Jr., dat'ed Nov. .30, 1963: 
• » •" 
1 »* 
I , _ 1 ^oda 111 the Follow-up car behind the ambulance which departed the 
F hospital at 2:^4 p.m. • 
At 2:14 p.m., the Presidents body arrived at Love field Airport and 
several Secret Service agents immediately carried it on board U.- S. Air Force No. 
One via the rear door. I followed on boa^d behind Mrs. Kennedy and then-moved to 
the forward section of the plane. I witnessed the swearing in of president -- ‘ •**’’ 
Johnson at 2:39 p.m. in the center compartment on board Air Force #1, and ‘at 
2:47 p.m. departed Love Field Airport, Dallas, Texas, via Air Force No. One, with 
Urs. Kennedy and the body of the late President Kennedy. 
Upon our arrival at Andrews Air Force Base, Ud., at 5:58 p.m. I helped 
carry the late President Kennedy's coffin from air Force ffl. The body was placed 
in an ambulance which departed Andrews Air Force Base at approximately 6:10 p.m. 
cinven by Special Agent William Greer, ASAIC KelleriDan, Admiral Burkley, and X 
rode in the front seat of the ambulance. Mrs0 Kennedy and Attorney General Robert 
Kennedy rode in the rear of the ambulance with President Kennedy's body. * 
The above party arrived at Betnesda Naval Hospital, Betnesda, Ud., at 
approximately 6:55 p.m. Special Agent Hill and I escorted Urs. Kennedy to the 
17th Floor where we immediately secured the area. Only hospital personnel 
assigned to the area, Kennedy family members and friends, and authorized personnel 
were allowed irf the~area. —“edy to the 
17th Floor where we immediately secured the area. Only hospital personnel 
assigned to the area, Kennedy family members and friends, and authorized personnel 
were allowed irf the~area. —“

I only left the 17th Floor twice while Urs. Kennedy was there. Once, 
to find ASAIC Kellerman in the hospital morgue and give him a telephone message 
from Chief Rowley, lhe other time was to find a rtnite House driver. 
At 3:56 a.m«, on November 23, 1963, Mrs. Kennedy and Attorney General 
Robert Kennedy departed Bethesda Naval Hospital via ambulance, accompanying the 
late President John F. Kennedy's body to the White House. Special Agent William 
Greer was driving and ASAIC Kellerman accompanied. Special Agent Clinton Hill 
rode in_the first limousine behind the ambulance and I rode in the second limousine 
The above Party arrived at the White House at 4:24 a.m. 
/%uf - 
Paul b. Landis, Jr. 
Special Agent 
U. S. Secret Service