Cn
Kerel s0.1069
"F.will wlBom.AeetLsty
Conorel,Cridnelrivielea
Lopartaont or Justioe
Wonhiagton, Do.
（Arm Mr.Corl .blober）
Door Sir.
Ii is ot fron my letiers to the opertmont or Justiee, to bieh,te
thet further aebengo of cerreopondonce...rill serw me nmful pmrpece". FMe
o!Morel M Is ppe ndly eddroeood, you uill find this ie true.I ooply mogos
tiaDr ft fo thi. offieiel blinimoee,this con timing mortgaging to te crms
oessery prohian em emoyeoo to the idninietretfca ef ieh you ebe prt.
or polltiee playd bo ole La the Lnwstutioa of the aoonooins tien ot Prodo
Tlos. You noy beve roed Tm panphreoee. inu ay on by mi Lere stuty o?
ti: the profoesfeesl lne onpetene el ihome Nnetto thst fe e mn jor couse o!
te existing problan end uf tuetien.I es prerof te prowe tig et Tmr con
It ie not witn the fanmletien er the gulhlimes thet I guarrel Dat
yith thadr interpretetien emd cpnlleetion.Tur enemle,my time you #nt I uill
o!hioh l ovo mou lelp fo ecastemt,Salls inbbingle potten.I ao
to tho TBI egonts. n tbe otaer henl, utceanot pre orly Doappreesed hes
fregumts of bullet ceie t. bsve wes uoed in tae esosseimetion, mos han yos
ity for close to throo yeere. The only rsponee apd boen sn F faloehool. Iou
meg and I recontly elludei te It, that M.iaoon told mo e roviow we underwy
end I woulc coon hor ebout one Poouost.Iot sut intoo, hen I made In
I think you snould by Bow underetand thet in eddrosaag yourcelf to the "form-

--- PAGE BREAK ---.iaoon told mo e roviow we underwy
end I woulc coon hor ebout one Poouost.Iot sut intoo, hen I made In
I think you snould by Bow underetand thet in eddrosaag yourcelf to the "form-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the sense in ia you use e vord, thero ie no waBrunt for
eying I boliow "plitiea" ployod o"nle in ths inwatigatlon or tho
ora emocret me tter. nor ean I reeell erer ering mid enytning th could
v tortured into sug'esting thi s. Iowrr, in tho mleotion and appoiatmont
ofthe monbore of the Cemmi aniol,there woopolltieel goniue.I have orbd
recall no single lnotonce in vhich any edminlstretien owr appointod omjority
the orervhelming ma jority of th sombors ol the Prron Cemniosion, Yos theroby
ers meidled with the roopondblity or tho prooaing eminiotretion,of th
other pbiitieal party. Anyoae in suthority toley who might oonsider lookiag
into poseible orror by the rron Comleslon la immoiietely confrontod dth
the considorotion thet eelnowlodging nuch orror vill De to eeeue plftleal
Pesponsibility for it. waile I do not apet you to pey ettention to mo o
thet for sghort whlle you do beve eporiol of preco in 咖lah thie will mot
Do trae, throug the anlnteadod dininess or forner Lt teraoy onoral Clark,
herce fter you, by your si lenoe, by yonr refuoel to de vhet inpertial rooliyg
Mas done.His tranegroeeions vfll woome your To th dogroe I oan,I dll
see tcthia,for it le my obllgatlon os e ditfsen.
Eeeh one of you ln eutmorlty ls tho wptiwo or him upon whon yoe
Boy properly.takoe on fait whot lo giren hin,vhet he la toll.I I eeh
phich enyone in sutheri ty eTer oougt eapontent,ctal de bmowleige end eird.
I cannot concoive or thi. hoviag lopened vithout my kaowlefoe. fer tmro an
rery fevg indoed,from mhoe su ecumoel could be sougdt.Whether yot boLieve
Lappons ir you are, for whe terar mrpes,vit heterer motire or Leek or
You see,I heve mrer Mliord there ms the monster consfiraey ay
ureeucracy, end I heve ortea said thie,whether or mot 1t is in o matoriel
eveilablo to you.Homever, the more tine pasmee, the less credible thie will
becone. In the future,these orrora vill aot b mseeptible of such explanetiom.
(Ani if ycu porchunoe think I m pammoid in coying there hee boen federel
espionnge on no,I will put copies ofit in your hamd.)
I direotly challenge your totally erroneous ste tonsnt, "tho sub-
etantial co roctuess or the Commiasion' Report remeias ualapeeched by sny
ill tuv:tc nske "further investigotion"thot would eorve to eliminete tho
doubtsI hve.nd I aere you to accept zy cbellengo.I wlll rostriet myself
t-on9 narrow point, a.l thd oviuence oL whieh is in your oseession.Now.if
the covrnmrnt ul! like tc prcve or to eetieiy itselr that I am Bome dnd ofe you to accept zy cbellengo.I wlll rostriet myself
t-on9 narrow point, a.l thd oviuence oL whieh is in your oseession.Now.if
the covrnmrnt ul! like tc prcve or to eetieiy itselr that I am Bome dnd of

--- PAGE BREAK ---bellengo.I wlll rostriet myself
t-on9 narrow point, a.l thd oviuence oL whieh is in your oseession.Now.if
the covrnmrnt ul! like tc prcve or to eetieiy itselr that I am Bome dnd of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

dor nut or that my roeeereh is iaeoglote or mndepenleble or mcrely that I
mong, here i: yonr chenoe.In afvaaeo I mrs you thet in eloeting thfo
siagle point I have eolectod ome oe wMeb I ull cmfront you witt whs I
pvermont. Yet I do, Tary much, noat · dialogo on tai. mbjoet. I do roeline
Mot e cinglo cae of you us or could lrw thsn the fime aero lovotd to this.
aenous an error reouires an lmordinate mmoust of cournago of cnyone in autbority.
Ef you accept my challenge end an not persuedod,but ir I m contlnced you aoe
Jineen,Irill tharoefter tob othors,me by one,umtll you are mtifid or
1an thet you have no intentien of being otislled.
Iegree with your statement thet for Pa onesto tc slender se would
peviolatlon of Dooartnent peliq.I cen oaly toll you thet lt boe mon
oportod to mo.I do not erpeet you oouli orer be sotfofied oa this point, for
ya wonl. heTe to neoopt the lenfpls of the egvnts thet they dil.I mue one
Isf tiio den I woto.Evon thoug I hev there could aowr bo e eertein doter-
fastructions of the Directer end I rould not expect then to confoss it to hime
With mueh of whet ycu my oi tho conhoodon of porjury by Doan
Annms I agree.ou do not sey enoug,hower.I m In hoerty egrocaat
thet there ehould be no feloral Intruston into stete pro coedinge.I wi I
ho finde hinsolf. Po beve ha. a number or long conTersutlons over the paat
wrerul years. It ls my boliei that the greotest haa of Mle contoseed per-
onfoseel in New Orlcens is the total inedegmoy ol hls folerel toetimony.
It e. quite fnpoirteat In the oliereticae sad oonelnalons of the Conmi ssion.
Ler do I mugcest thut it wee apontenoeus.I an In pesseealon of proof thst it
doee notiag about It the mtter mey mot drop thore.And I elso sugsest thet
la the totel pieturo, thls and other inddoguecies or tho Nev Orleena lnvesti-
getions ney uitlmotely be morn of en marresment to tho government thst now
mey ppeer likoly or than the mumerou lawyors you had observing the triel
may bave boen able to dtect or report to yo.Tbey, regerdlens of competenco,
ere limitod by hut wae presentod in court end by tay state of their oag
moml.dgo. Neuapeper accountog my prosonoe at tne trial ero fa orrcr. I let
reported t me by friends ia the pross. But my knoxleuge of fact is not by
anyen:limited to wht wes presentoi i courteeir oag
moml.dgo. Neuapeper accountog my prosonoe at tne trial ero fa orrcr. I let
reported t me by friends ia the pross. But my knoxleuge of fact is not by
anyen:limited to wht wes presentoi i courte

--- PAGE BREAK ---uapeper accountog my prosonoe at tne trial ero fa orrcr. I let
reported t me by friends ia the pross. But my knoxleuge of fact is not by
anyen:limited to wht wes presentoi i courte

--- PAGE BREAK ---

gOOXFA
3/30/69
Youy could uot be more righs than you are ln seying thetI intend to
pursuo this. Whet I have slreedy done hao been finanaielly rainous nd thet hes
mot doterrod mo.If y u hcve follomd ny publiehed work car fully. Jou han but
Little indicetion of wlot I hove nov loareod,beliore I hew osteblisbod. And
you are corroet in ceylag thet tho reloese of eddiuonel moteriale in the nles
is unieretord by the gowrnnoat,it will pot unilereand the stako eech and
erery mploy of whetever rsnk hes in thie,nor cel theoo mployoee uaderotend
het this cun moen to the presont eainistretics ani tho tresidont,in tho
lmnediate nuturo or iu the hietorieal rocor.
I tabo you ot fooo value when you sey "wn will welcome rosoipt or
y Viewg cnd o moek.se you do to sorv the bont intereeto of zbe netion
on thie greve subjoet.I ham rn you indicuticn ofmy cood falthea1
dvo you the opuortuni ty of shoung me youreI ogk for diroct caswdr to tho
Ioall to your ettontion.In tbe penel rerort elleged to bo on tbe eutopey
there is referenoe to en April l9os monorsndum of trensfer. I roquested thie
In Jenuery,vith ths eddi tional renuest thct If it mre not wn me an -
plenation be dvea in wziting.I vos then an:  on o nu.bar of s.beogueat
occecione esourod this wuld be forthcoing. It be zot hp penod. I bollew
hio l: ontirely indofonble.Tnile thon mey bo toetoms of whioh kmov
roason for tho dolay in rospon, for huw witton nany timoa, or for whet
mowmounto to the rofumal to ll e my itisdenied mo.AndI toll you ln
 #   
and ye.ilso,Ioula liko to h7e roroz copoe o1or bo able to borrow
eversl tranecmpte oi tentimouy. thet oi tho aftermooa prcceaaing In Judge
pleintifr (dith copies of the erridavto offered by the governmens and f
its subeequent motiona), and shat ol Pr'Agents Shanoyfele end Frezier snd
Colomel Yinck in Now Orleeae.
If ve con estebliak a besis olautual trunt, tbere lo gront potenoffered by the governmens and f
its subeequent motiona), and shat ol Pr'Agents Shanoyfele end Frezier snd
Colomel Yinck in Now Orleeae.
If ve con estebliak a besis olautual trunt, tbere lo gront poten

eny couijencoe（ for Ihve whe: for me ie cn cmormoue investmont i my ork）
Idohoperecanecbiewothim。
sincerely.
Herold 'eiaterg