Rt.

12, Frederick, Md.

21701
9/24/75
Mr.

Carl Bohling
Pawtucket Public library
13 Summer St.

Pawtucket, R.I.

02860
Dear Mr.

Bohling,
In answer to your note of the 22d., first a caution I hope you will not mindt
all that many people are saying about Rrank Sturgis (Fiorini) and that he says about
himself ought not be taken as necessarily true in some case or possible in others.

This is not to say he is not a person of interest.

i!y own goes back to 1966-7 and my files, rather those 1 had, date to that
period aside from what has been published Watergate.

When his name surfaced in that affair I took my file to B0b Woodward who has
not returned it.

I do not know the extent of your interest but there is more than CD812.

My
copy of it is gone and I presume Just not returned.

The duplicate copies still
have do not include this and are not suitable for copying or I'd send copies
to you.

The Commission used CD and CR interchangably.

He is mentioned in CR MS 1020.

(Also these are called "aommission No.)
his consists of an opening summary and pages numbered at least to 7.

The copies
someone sent me after Watergate does not include pages 4 and 5 and any after 7.

He is also in CD 59» which has a summary and two pages.

Aside from these pages if ypu get any documents I'd appreciate copies because the
Archives charge is no* 150 per page and I have no financing.

I'll return to thiB.

_Y°u can obtain copies from the National Archives and Records Service, Washington
20408.

ttider any circumstances they will in the end respond.

But if you are in a
hurry and if you anticipate asking for other records, it is better to send a check
for more than the expected cost and open a deposit account.

If you do this your
future requests will be speeded up beoause they will be prepaid.

The person whose
knowledge is most complete and extensive, a man who under normal oircumotancds is
veiy cooperative and helpful, is Mr.

Marion Johnson.The person whose
knowledge is most complete and extensive, a man who under normal oircumotancds is
veiy cooperative and helpful, is Mr. Marion Johnson. (You won't sue them as I do!)
Today I have no special interest in Fiorini/Sturgia but I would like my files to
be as complete as possible. (Over the years they have been gutted by those in whom I
misplaced trust.) It is my hope that they will end up as an unofficial archive with
the support of some foundation. I attempted this years ago but have not been hhle to
take time for it since original disinterest. I think these are unique and the most
extensive files on this and related subjects. One state historical society wants them
^ “ if0reat- ** 1 “ 62 . have no regular income, and while I
™thf “8t Prople can, am not yet ready to stop either writing
£ 5?r3*fr,lnquixy* 1 do not extend the meaning of the "lucker Trust Fund" on your
check but I mention this because you may know of others who may have an interest. If
fS * tMS 0an b? made 1 would k0*
1® it would include a provision
unlimited, access except to a small percentage of data that by its content ought
not for some years* be available when it can hurt innocent people/
Sincerely,
Harold Weisberg