.. •.w.imw ; . •44iv» Itau « , _ .


p.^ Plan to destroy CIA files halted


WASHINGTON (AP) - The new
Senate intelligence committee has
unanimously recommended a six-month
moratorium on CIA plans to destroy files
of improper and illegal activities.

The decision was reached by the panel
in a closed-door session on Wednesday
and publicly disclosed Thursday by
chairman Sen. Daniel K. Inouye, D-
Hawaii in a letter to Senate leaders.

“It is the further recommendation of
the committee that the CIA and other
intelligence agencies should submit an
inventory of the records to be destroyed”
to the panel, Inouye said in a letter to
Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield
and Minority Leader Hugh Scott.

Mansfield and Scott earlier in the week
had left it to the new panel to decide
whether the CIA should be allowed to de-


stroy its files on its past misdeeds.

The controversy was prompted when
CIA y Director George Bush wrote to
Mansfield and Scott to tell them he
planned to destroy the files now that
congressional investigations into
allegations of improper conduct had
been completed.

These same Senate leaders had been
the ones who had asked the CIA to save
the files while Congress was
investigating the alleged misdeeds.

The Bush statement generated sharp
criticism from Rep. Bella Abzug, D-
N.Y., who chairs the House government
information subcommittee, and from
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass.,
chairman of the Senate administrative
practice and procedure subcommittee.

Kennedy had called it inconceivable


that the CIA lacks the storage capacity
to store the files, which were used by the
special Senate intelligence committee
which recently completed its
investigation and was disbanded .-

- / • ' • •

The new, permanent oversight
committee, in one of its first official acts,
“is unanimously of the opinion that there
should be a moratorium on the
destruction of these records for
approximately six months and that
notice should be given of the moratorium
... so that those who may wish to take
legal or other action may do so,” In-
ouye said.

He also said the panel had
recommended that its staff be allowed to
review all ‘‘documents intended to be de-
stroyed.”
