THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF

WASHINGTON 25, D.C.


■ 13 March 1962


MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE .

Subject: Justification for US Military Intervention
in Cuba (TS) ,-. .


' 1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered the attached
Memorandum -for .the Chief of Operations, Cuba Project, which
responds to a^re quest of that office for brief but precise
description of "pretexts which would provide justification
for US military intervention in Cuba.

2. The ..Joint Chiefs of .Staff recommend that the
proposed memorandum be forwarded as a preliminary submission
suitable for planning purposes. It is assumed that there
will be similar submissions from other agencies and that
these inputs will be used as a basis for developing a
time-phased plan. Individual projects can then be
considered on a case -by -case basis.

3. Further, it is assumed that a single agency will be
given the primary responsibility for developing military
and para -military aspects of the basic plan. It is
recommended that this responsibility for both overt and
covert military operations be assigned the Joint Chiefs of
Staff.


For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:


Memo for Chief of Operations, Cuba Project excluded from gds


EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADIHG; DOD DIE 5200,10
' DOES NOT APPLY


TOP SECRET

JCS 1969/321
lg^ March ^1962
Page 2165


COPY NO.


1


SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION


NOTE BY THE SECRETARIES
- ' - to the

JOINT CHIEFS OP STAFF
on

NORTHWOODS (S)

A report* on the above subject is submitted for consider-
ation by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.


F. J. BLOUIN
M. J. INGELIDO
Joint Secretariat


* Not reproduced herewith;


file in Joint Secretariat

^ClODfo FROM GD S

EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADING; DOD DIRECTIVE
520Q.10 DOES NOT APPLY


TOP SECRET
JCS 1969/321


2165


a& Vr2 Ji^i llA


9 March 1962 copY op copiES

spegIaITdistribution


REPORT BY THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AND
JOINT CHIEFS OP STAFF REPRESENTATIVE ON TEE
CARIBBEAN SURVEY GROUP

to the

JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF

on

CUBA PROJECT (Tfj)

The Chief of Operations, Cuba Project, has requested
that he be furnished the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
on this matter by 13 March 1962.


EXCLUDED FROM GDS


""W-mffiTTflW-IIT^^


JUSTIFICATION FOR US MILITARY INTERVENTION IN CUBA (?S)


THE PROBLEM

1. A3 requested* t>y Chief of Operations, Cuba Project, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff are to indicate brief but precise
description of pretexts which they consider would provide
justification for US military intervention In Cuba.

FACTS BEARING ON THE PROBLEM

2. It is recognized that any action which becomes pretext
for US military intervention in Cuba will lead to a political
decision which then would lead to military action.

3. Cognizance has been taken of a suggested course of
actiwn proposed** by the US Navy relating to generated
Instances in the Guantanamo area.

4. For additional facts see Enclosure B.

DISCUSSION

.5- The suggested coursesof action appended to Enclosure A
are based on the premise that US military Intervention will
result from a period of heightened US-Cuban tensions which
place the United States in the position of suffering justif-
iable grievances. World opinion, and the United Nations
forum should be favorably ^affected by developing the inter-
national Image of the Cuban government as rash and irresponsible,
and as an alarming and unpredictable threat to the peace of
the Western Hemisphere.

6. while the foregoing premise can be utilized at the
present time it will continue to hold good only as long as
there can be reasonable certainty that US military Intervention
in Cuba would not directly Involve the Soviet Union. There is


* Memorandum for General Craig from Chief of Operations,
Cuba Project, subject: "Operation MONGOOSE", dated
5 March 1962, on file in General Craig's office.
** Memorandum for the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, from
Chief of Naval Operations, subjeot: "Instances to
Provoke Military Actions in Cuba (TS)", dated 8 March 1962,
on file in General Craig's office.

2


as yet no bilateral mutual support agreement binding the USSR
to the defense of Cuba, Cuba has not yet become a member of the
Warsaw Pact, nor have the Soviets established Soviet bases
in Cuba in the pattern of US bases in Western Europe. Therefore,
since time appears to be an important factor in resolution of
the Cuba problem, all projects are suggested within the time
frame of the next few months.

CONCLUSION

7. The suggested courses of action appended to Enclosure A
satisfactorily respond to the statement of the problem. However,
these suggestions --should be forwarded as a preliminary submission
suitable for planning purposes, and together with similar inputs
from other agencies, provide a basis for development of a single,
integrated, time-phased plan to focus all efforts on the
objective of justification for US military intervention in Cuba.

RECOMMENDATIONS

8. -It is recommended that:

a. Enclosure A together with its attachments should be
forwarded to the Secretary of Defense for approval and
transmittal to the Chief of Operations, Cuba Project.

b. This paper NOT be_forwarded to commanders of unified
or specified commands.

c. This paper NOT be forwarded to US ^officers assigned
to NATO act'ivities.

d. This paper NOT be forwarded to the Chairman, US
Delegation, United Nations Military Staff Committee.


3


MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OP DEFENSE


Subject: Justification for US Military Intervention
in Cuba (TS)

1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered the attached
Memorandum for the Chief of Operations, Cuba Project, which
responds to a request* of that office for brief but precise
description of pretexts which would provide justification
for US military intervention in Cuba.

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that the proposed
memorandum be forwarded as a preliminary submission suitable
for planning purposes. It is assumed that there will be
similar submissions from other agencies and that these inputs
will be used as a basis for developing a time -phased plan.
Individual projects can then be considered on a case-by-case
basis. .„.. . . . X>

3. Further, it is assumed that a single agency will be
given the pri mary responsibility for developing military and
para-military aspects of the basic plan. It is recommended
that this responsibility for_bqth overt and covert military
operatiorsbe assigned the Joint Chiefs of^taff .


* Memorandum for Gen Craig from Chief of Operations, Cuba
Project, subject, "Operation MONGOOSE", dated 5 March
1962, on file;.irt Gen Craig's office


Enclosure A


APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE; A

MEMORANDUM FOR CHIEF OP OPERATIONS, CUBA PROJECT

Subject: Justification for US Military Intervention
in Cuba (TS)

1. Reference is made to memorandum from Chief of Operations,
Cuba Project, for General Craig, subject: "Operation MONGOOSE",
dated 5 March 19&2, which requested brief but precise
description of pretexts which the Joint Chiefs of Staff
consider would provide justification for US military inter-
vention in Cuba.

2. The projects listed in the enclosure hereto are forwarded
as a preliminary submission suitable for planning purposes.

It is assumed that there will be similar submissions from
other agencies and that these inputs will be used as a basis
for developing a time -phased plan. The individual projects
can then be considered on a case-by-case basis. X

3. This plan, incorporating projects selected from the
attached suggestions, or from other sources, should be
developed to focus all efforts on a specific ultimate
objective which would provide adequate justification for

US military intervention. Such a plan jroyild enable a logical
build-up of incidents to be combined with other seemingly
unrelated events to camouflage the ultimate objective and
create the necessary impression of Cuban rashness and
irresponsibility on a large scale, directed at other
countries as well as the United States. The plan would also
properly integrate and time phase the courses of action to
be pursued. The desired resultant from the execution of
this plan would be to place the United States in the apparent
position of suffering defensible grievances from a rash and
irresponsible government of Cuba and to develop an inter-
national image of a Cuban threat to peace in the Western
Hemisphere.

p Appendix to

ShvLRww" Enclosure A


4, Time is an important factor irs resolution '"of the Cuban
problem. Therefore, the plan should he so time-phased that
projects would he operable within the next few months.

5. inasmuch as the ultimate objective is overt military
intervention, it is recommended that J^nary _respjDnsibility
for developing military and para-military aspects of the plan
for both overt and covert military operations be assigned the
Joint Chiefs of Staff.


Appendix to
6 Enclosure A


uiluihl MHiiuur^ nururtn


ANNEX TO APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE A HftU IWWflW-


PRETEXTS TO JUSTIFY US MILITARY OTERVENTION IH CUBA

(Note: The courses of action which follow are a preliminary
submission suitable only for planning purposes ^ They are
arranged neither chronologically nor in ascending order.
Together with similar inputs from other agencies, they are
intended to provide a point of departure for the development
of a single, integrated, time-phased plan. Such a plan would
permit the evaluation of individual projects within the context
of cumulative, correlated actions designed to lead inexorably
to the objective of adequate Justification for US military
intervention in Cuba) .

1, Since it would seem desirable to use legitimate
provocation as the basis for US military intervention in Cuba
a cover and deception plan, to include requisite preliminary
actions such as has been developed in response to Task 33
could be executed as an Initial effort to provoke Cuban
reactions. Harassment plus deceptive actions to convince the
Cubans of imminent invasion would be emphasized. Our military
posture throughout execution of the plan will allow a rapid
change from exercise to intervention if Cuban response justifies.

2. A series of well coordinated incidents will be planned
to take place in and around Guantanamo 'to' give genuine
appearance of being done by hostile Cuban forces.

a. Incidents to establish a credible attack (not in
chronological order):

(1) Start rumors (many). Use clandestine radio.

(2) Land friendly Cubans in uniform "over-the-fence"
to stage attack on base.

(3) Capture Cuban (friendly) saboteurs inside the
base.

(4) Start riots near the base main gate (friendly
Cubans ) .

Annex to Appendix
7 to Enclosure A


rr— mrromr


(5) Blow up ammunition Inside the base; start fires.


(6) Burn aircraft on air base (sabotage),

(7) Lob mortar shells from outside of base into base.
Some damage to installations.

(8) Capture assault teams approaching from the sea
or vicinity of Guantanamo City.

(9) Capture militia group which storms the base.

(10) Sabotage ship in harbor; large fires — napthalene.

(11) Sink ship near harbor entrance. Conduct funerals
for mock-victims (may be lieu of (10)).

b. United States would respond by executing offensive
operations to secure water and power supplies, destroying
artillery and mortar emplacements which threaten the base.

c. Commence large scale United States military operations.

3. A "Remember the Maine" incident could be arranged in
several forms:

a. We could blow up a US ship in Guantanamo Bay and
blame Cuba.

b. We could blow up a drone (unmanned) vessel anywhere

in the Cuban waters. We could arrange to cause such incident
in the vicinity of Havana or Santiago as a spectacular result
of Cuban attack from the air or sea, or both. The presence
of Cuban planes or ships merely invefs f&gating the intent of
the vessel could be fairly compelling evidence that the ship
was taken "under attack. The nearness to Havana or Santiago
would add credibility especially to those people that might
have heard the blast or have seen the fire. The US could
follow up with an air/sea rescue operation covered by US
fighters to "evaouate" remaining members of the non-existent
crew. Casualty lists in US newspapers would cause a helpful
wave of national Indignation.

4, We could develop a Communist Cuban terror campaign in
the Miami area, in other Florida cities and even In Washington.


8


Annex to Appendix
to Enclosure A


«. uluuli i w . orcGTffir*nfnr win L if {C N O HIfr *"


The terror campaign could be pointed at Cuban refugees seeking
haven in the United States. We could sink a boatload of Cubans
enroute to Florida (real or simulated). We could foster attempts
on lives of Cuban refugees in the United States even to the
extent of wounding in instances to be widely publicized.
Exploding afew plastic bombs in carefully chosen spotsj the
arrest of Cuban agents and the release of prepared documents
substantiating Cuban involvement also would be helpful In
projecting the idea of an irresponsible government.

5. A "Cuban-based, Castro-supported" filibuster could be
simulated against a neighboring Caribbean nation (in the vein
of the 14th of June invasion of the Dominican Republic). We
know that Castro is backing subversive efforts clandestinely
against Haiti, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, and Nicaragua at
present and possible others. These efforts can be magnified and
additional ones contrived for exposure. For example, advantage
can be taken of the sensitivity of the Dominican Air Force to
intrusions within their national air space. "Cuban" B-a6 or
C-46 type aircraft could make cane-burning raids at. night.
Soviet Bloc incendiaries could be found. This could be coupled
with "Cuban" messages to the Communist underground in the
Dominican Republic and "Cuban" shipments of arms which would

be found, or intercepted, on the beach. 1 ' **

6. Use of Mia type aircraft by US pilots could provide .
additional provocation. Harassment of civil air, attacks on
surface shipping and destruction of US military drone aircraft
by MIO type planes would be useful as complementary actions.

An F-86 properly painted would convince air passengers that they
saw a Cuban MIG, especially if the pilot of the transport were
to announce such fact. The primary drawback to this suggestion
appears to be the security risk inherent in obtaining or modify-
ing an aircraft. However, reasonable copies of the MIG could
be produced from US resources in about three months .


Annex to Appendix
to Enclosure A


IMA


•mi uiin


7. Hijacking attempts against civil air and surface craft


should appear to continue as harassing measures condoned by the
government of Cuba. Concurrently, genuine defections of Cuban
civil and military air and surface craft should be encouraged.

8. It is possible to create an incident which will demonstrate
convincingly that a Cuban aircraft has attacked and shot down
a chartered civil airliner enroute from the United States to
Jamaica, Guatemala, Panama or Venezuela. The destination would
be chosen only to cause the flight plan route to cross Cuba,
The passengers could be a group of college students off on a
holiday or any grouping of persons with a common Interest to
support chartering a non-scheduled flight.

a. An aircraft at Eglin AEB would be painted and
numbered as an exact duplicate for a civil registered
aircraft belonging to a CIA proprietary organization in the
Miami area. At a designated time the duplicate would be

■ substituted for the actual civil aircraft and would be
loaded with the selected passengers, all boarded under
carefully prepared aliases. The actual registered
aircraft would be converted to a drone.

b. Take off times of the drone aircraft and the actual
aircraft will be scheduled to allow a rendezvous south of


Florida. From the rendezvous point the passenger-carrying
aircraft will descend to minimum altitude and go directly
into an auxiliary field at Eglin AFB where arrangements will
have been made to evacuate the passengers and return the
aircraft to its original status. The drone aircraft
meanwhile will continue to fly the filed flight plan. When
over Cuba the drone will being transmitting on the inter-
national distress frequency a "MAY DAY" message stating he
is under attack by Cuban MIG aircraft. The transmission
will be interrupted by destruction of the aircraft which will
be triggered by radio signal. This will allow ICAO radio


10


Annex to Appendix
tto Enclosure A


stations in the Western HSAi^P!^ a W ,£ tell the US what
has happened to the aircraft' instead of the US trying to
"seal" the incident.

9. It is possible to create an incident -which will make it
appear that Communist Cuban MIGs have destroyed a USAF aircraft
over international waters in an unprovoked attack.

a. Approximately 4 or 5 F-101 aircraft will he dispatched
in trail from Homestead AEB, Florida, to the vicinity of Cuba
Their mission will be to reverse course and simulate fakir
aircraft for an air defense exercise in southern Florida.
These aircraft would conduct variations of these flights at
frequent intervals. Crews would be briefed to remain at
least 12 miles off the Cuban coast; however, they would be
required to carry live ammunition in the event that hostile
actions were taken by the Cuban MIGs.

b. On one such flight, a pre -briefed pilot would fly
tail-end Charley at considerable interval between aircraft.
While near the Cuban Island this pilot would broadcast that
he had been jumped by MIGs and was going down. No other
calls would be made. The pilot would then fly directly
west at extremely low altitude and land at a secure base, an
Eglin auxiliary. The aircraft would be met by the proper

■ri

people, quickly stored and given a new tail number. The
pilot who had performed the mission under 'an alias, would
resume his proper identity and return to his normal place
of business. The pilot and aircraft would then have
disappeared.

c. At precisely the same time that the aircraft was
presumably shot down a submarine or small surface craft
would disburse F-101 parts, parachute, etc., at approximately
15 to 20 miles off the Cuban coast and depart. The pilots
returning to Homestead would have a true story as far as
they knew. Search ships and aircraft could be dispatched
and parts of aircraft found.


11


Annex to Appendix
to Enclosure A


pA;

m

#


f

Ft'.-
.Ife:


IS


1.

■ft
■■'Ilk
•it

mi


mis

'far, v

•ft*!

M

■

if

■'" ■ '<:•

■ '' ''4%

•,|!

, 'iff!

■ IS

is
1

- 11

If

. . 'lift

■

.


■

■- W'iT"

■

•'M'

■ x-m


ENCLOSURE B
PACTS BEARING ON THE PROBLEM

1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have previously stated*
that US unilateral military intervention in Cuba can be
undertaken in the event that the Cuban regime commits hostile
acts against US forces or property which would serve as an
incident upon' which to base overt intervention .

2. The need for positive action in the event that current
covert efforts to foster an internal Cuban rebellion are
unsuccessful was indicated** "by the Joint Chiefs of Staff

on 7 March 1962, as follows:

" - - - determination that a credible internal
revolt is impossible of attainment during the next
9-10 months will require a decision by the United States
to develop a Cuban "provocation" as justification for
positive US military action."

3. It is understood that the Department of State also is
preparing suggested courses of action to develop justification
for US military intervention in Cuba.


* JCS 1969/303
** JCS 1969/313


12


Enclosure B
