THE

MALACHI

MARTIN

TRAITOR

FILE


The Final Nail in Malachi Martin's Coffin

For the 50th anniversary of the opening of the Second Vatican Council.

We recently documented that Malachi Martin wrote the book, The Pilgrim under the pseudonym
Michael Serafian.


'Iilirhi iNUnui, i I'ltn •• *•»< Ptintlf

IWif* il lnxiturr in Km- wh tn.mH 1*1 rho-kw m 1 .


Vim, «pri i.il.nng tn rhr I VkI V« S* n I «ml lulcrtrMn - ’•
t«ry fftMiin. I fc frcehnl li*» *Wt»ir*i* J*i Scmtiit Uuimw
archeology, end Oriental liwrnry, fit «, irmly mudud
41 Ox/iHtl imf si the Kriirev fniyirw')', rnncwnttng "tt
knowledge of J«ot 1* mu- 1' • it m Icw.vh and hUnuc

stju/vu. lie iMMUlMil |K.*virui «.!iMlariy contact with
several id the men VdOK iht>u|rhr hai pr'vfiraixUy int'u
nvr.i the direct v'.'i of > »dem life » 5 eth with so foumtfrly
in »Jir*r jMgrt ncu Mich a* CHardiu Pisgi-r. mil i*tn*n
Vow an American t iti/en and a New \ nrlurr, l)t Mtnm n
the a.ir/inr iff Vof ’i .r . 1 f/ i • " - ' ‘ . T 1 h

ter, The Senh*t Ckirsettr of r\ / >* • 1 S<*J N rtAlt and
' r, n< end nuiofimiv ruck* tor inafrszinf inti tcurm

F. P. DITTOS' h CO., IM
J(/l P«fi Avenue South, N’c* York N S

The CV from Malachi Martin's other books confirms that he was the author of The Pilgrim


According to the biography of Rabbi Abraham Heschel, Spiritual Radical (pp. 253-254), Rabbi
Heschel, with the AJC, arranged for Malachi Martin's book, The Pilgrim to be published as a
political tactic in hopes that it would influence deliberation on the draft for Nostra Aetate which
had met setbacks at the close of the second session of the Second Vatican Council.

The Pilgrim was published in May of 1964, between the second and third sessions of the council.
As we will see below the book was calculated to impart to Catholics the message "You are
Nazis," and that Christianity 'paved the road to Auschwitz' and is therefore in need of radical
reform. We previously documented Rabbi Heschel's candid admission that he intended to attack


Christian souls by such 'dialogue.’ It will probably be news to most traditional Catholics that
their prophet Malachi Martin was Rabbi Heschel's comrade in this attack.

The Pilgrim was flanked by similar editorials, articles and interviews published in the New York
Times , Time magazine and elsewhere. One article published October 1964 in The Jewish World
quoted an unnamed Vatican source invoking extermination language saying "the Most Holy
Father still has not made up his mind on the Jewish issue at this time, the final solution is still to
come."

Those familiar with Malachi Martin may recall his admission to Ben L. Kaufman of the
Cincinnati Inquirer that during the Second Vatican Council he "enjoyed" making Cardinals who
didn't go along with the Nostra Aetate agenda sweat by "shaking long-closeted skeletons" at
them ("Jesus Now Author Not A Swashbuckler," Ben L. Kaufman, The Cincinnati Enquirer ,
December 22, 1973). Traditionalists have typically interpreted this to mean that Martin dug up
dirt on prelates of a personally sinful nature.

I submit that at the dawning of the "post-Auschwitz" dispensation there was no 'skeleton' more
terrifying than accusations of 'anti-Semitism.'

With that thought in mind, consider some 'skeleton shaking' from Malachi Martin's writing in,
The Pilgrim:

There is yet another tension which is ominous for Christianity because its roots not only go back
to the very origins of Christianity, but involve the historical act of Jesus Christ by which
Christianity came into being as a principle. The tension is that between Jew and Christian, the
historical act is the sacrifice and death of Jesus himself. The manifestation of this tension on the
part of Christians is generally called anti-semitism or Hebraeophobia ...

... if we listen to the chorus of the ages, we find a strangely consistent note of disapproval,
sometimes of hate, and always of unmitigated condemnation for the Jew, as such, echoing down
the corridors of time and blending with latter day sentiments which can be recognized as nothing
else but rank anti-Semitism. And these ancient voices are not merely those of secular or freelance
thinkers: they are no less than the Fathers of the Church, an Irenaeus, a Tertullian, a John
Chrysostom, an Augustine, as well as Aquinas, modem theologians and ancient exegetes, an
Origen, Grotius, a Muller.

Somehow or other, the stream of this perennial Christian bias grates on our modem ears, and yet
there is hardly any Christian or Catholic who cannot, in spite of himself, hear some echo in his
own sentiments.

... It is true that we can set down a list of statements by popes theologians, saints, writers, to
show that the extremer forms of anti-Semitism ... are not admissable. But none ever asserted the
religious rights of Judaism in itself, nor declared that Judaism was a valid moral outlook, nor has
any theologian or theological school courageously re-examined the millennial attitude of
Christians and Catholics to the Jews. (Malachi Martin aka. "Michael Serafian," The Pilgrim,
pp.44-46)


Martin then goes on to re-examine Christianity himself, finding fault in the "radically changed
outlook" of St. John's Gospel which he finds at variance with Sts. Peter and Paul (who
themselves are not without blame, according to Martin). By the time we reach page 49, Martin is
weaving Christianity into a tapestry with Nazi 'extermination' camps:

From the 6th century onwards, we find that anti-Semitism is an integral part of Christianity. And
down to our own day, it has taken various forms. It may assume the form of an accepted
radicalism with sociological overtones, in business, in social life, at the club, on the beach: one
does not marry into Jewish circles or consort with Jews, for they are a different race with
different customs and differing mentality. It may take the form of mere isolationism: the Jew is
somebody apart, somebody irrevocably separate from the truth. Here there is an instant refusal to
treat them like others, a blind feeling that this person, the Jew, is marked out by divine decision
as untouchable. It may, though, take on a more mobile form: the Jews are to be reckoned with as
active enemies of the Faith, and therefore they must be restricted, watched warily. It may, finally,
go further and translate such feelings into action: the Jews must be expelled, must be warned,
must be punished, must be dispossessed, must be liquidated.

In these extremest forms, we meet some phantasmagoric developments: the Protocols of Sion,
The Nazi Final Solution, the massacres by their Catholic Majesties of Spain, the so-called Judeo-
Communist world plot against Christianity, and the unholy alliance between the Grand Lodge
and the Synagogue to subvert Christian principles. In whatever form or shade or colouring we
meet this anti-Semitism, its peculiarly Christian characteristic is clear.

... Between the burning and plundering of all Jewish synagogues in Mesopotamia in 388 A.D.
on the order of the Bishop of Callinicum and the destruction and desecration of all synagogues
under the recent Nazi regime, we cannot but see a relationship of origin. And no one conscious
of what has made modern Europe can deny that the pyres and the crematoria, the mephitic smoke
and stench of the extermination camps in Nazi Germany, were, if not the logical conclusion, at
least one extremist consequence of the normal Christian attitude to the Jews. Here we see
Christianity standing at the thin edge of self-destruction due to this admitted tension, moving to
what Laurence Dobie has called aptly the anus mundi [i.e. anus of the world], the ultimate in
excretion of the badness which Christianity never undertook to extirpate. (Malachi Martin aka.
"Michael Serafian," The Pilgrim, pp. 49-52)

As we can see from Malachi Martin's own words, he was not merely a womanizer, liberal, spy,
and con-man, but one of the most treacherous figures in the entire history of the Church, a hater
of Christians and Christianity at its very core and an active destroyer of both. He was a partner of
Rabbi Heschel and the AJC in attacking Christianity and Christians' souls, invoking Nazi
exterminationist imagery in the international press to instill guilt and embarrassment to shape the
outcome of a Church council.

Martin worked with Rabbi Heschel and the AJC towards the outlandish and hypocritical goal of
promulgation of a Church document which would denounce Christian pressuring of Judaic
conversion while themselves employing the unbearable pressure of outrageous 'anti-Semitism'
accusations and Nazi exterminationist comparisons amplified by the international establishment
press. They schemed for a condemnation of the charge of Deicide by leveling the charge of
Judeocide.


While Heschel and Martin were unsuccessful in achieving the full extent of their ambitions, they
did set in course the technique and operation of the 'Holocaust' guilt chambers within the Church
which largely accounts for the miserable state of affairs we find ourselves in today.


A Church that apologizes for its teachings and kneels at a counterfeit 'Holocaust' is fit to be
trampled upon.

Will traditionalists finally bid good riddance to the bad rubbish of Malachi Martin and come to a
proper understanding of what assails them?


Mgr. Oesterreicher on Malachi Martin and the Fraudulent "Prayer for 'The
Jews"

Mgr. John Oesterreicher was one of the three Judaic fellows of evidently conflicted interests [also
Gregory Baum and Bruno Hussar] who Cardinal Augustin Bea arranged to draft the Judaic portion of the
Second Vatican Council document, Nostra Aetate joining with the input and cloak and dagger exploits of
neo-bolshevik figures such as Rabbi Abraham Heschel and his helper Malachi Martin. In
fact, Oesterreicher was involved in preliminary efforts to the actual drafting of Nostra Aetate.


As such, Mgr. Oesterreicher speaks with some authority on the characters and intrigue surrounding this
document and what it stands for, as Cardinal Willebrands says in his foreword to Oesterreicher's book
on the topic quoted below, "It is well known that [Mgr. Oesterreicher] had an important role to play in
the drafting of Nostra Aetate, and I dare say he remains the foremost witness of this exciting episode of
modern history."

One of the most remarkable events in this "exciting episode of modern history" is the outrageous
"Prayer for 'The Jews" which appeared in the American Jewish Committee publication, Commentary,
January 1965. Here is what one of the foremost witnesses on the matter, Mgr. John Oesterreicher
testified under the heading, Fraud and Other Problems:

The most alarming examples of "disclosures" which, for want of better information, are accepted by
many as authentic reports, are The Pilgrim by M. Serafian, and an article on the history of the
Declaration on the Jews, entitled "Vatican II and the Jews" (Commentary, January 1965) by the same
author. He is an ex-Jesuit, Malachi Martin, this time using another pseudonym, F.E. Cartus. The article
contains a prayer ascribed to Pope John that has had wide currency, though everyone who knew the
Pope's mind and style is convinced that it was fabricated. Moreover, Mr. Martin has in all these years
refused to offer any proof of the prayers authenticity, a photocopy of the original, for instance. Nor did
he reveal how he came into possession of the alleged prayer of Pope John.


This is the prayer that Mr. Martin maintains was found after the Pope's death, without telling us by
whom:

We are conscious today that many, many centuries of blindness have cloaked our eyes so that we can no
longer see the beauty of Your Chosen People nor recognize in their faces the features of our privileged
brethren.

We realize that the mark of Cain stands upon our foreheads. Across the centuries our brother Abel has
lain in the blood we drew, or shed tears we caused by forgetting Your love.

Forgive us the curse we falsely attached to their name as Jews. Forgive us for crucifying You a second
time in the flesh. For we know not what we did.

(John M. Oesterreicher, The New Encounter, p.155 Philosophical Library Inc. 1986)


1 might add to Mgr. Oesterreicher's observation that this prayer does match the preposterous thinking
and style of the author of The Pilgrim, Malachi Martin, in its fanatical zeal to heap a blood libel upon
today's Christians and their predecessors of "many, many centuries" HERE.

Posted by Maurice Pinay at 12:17 AM *

Email ThisBIogThisIShare to TwitterShare to FacebookShare to Pinterest

2 comments:


Nynorsk Bokmal said...

Dear Mr. Pinay,

The evidence for thinking of Msgr. Oesterreicher as a lifelong subversive of the Faith
seems quite strong to me. Assuming for the sake of argument that he was indeed a
crypto-Jew and spent his post-"conversion" years in the service of the Enemy, why do
you think he would launch this attack on Father Martin, who was clearly a brother in
arms? Did Oesterreicher perhaps see Martin as overplaying the Judaic hand so badly that
failing to call Martin out would cost the crypto side more ground in the medium and long
term than a brief and uncharacteristic lurch in the direction of frankness would?

I'd welcome a comment from you, since the Judaic game plan in this instance is anything
but plain to me.

July 16, 2013 at 1:45 PM

0


Maurice Pinay said...


Oesterreicher was much more subtle than Martin and Heschel. He even postured as a
defender of Pius XII against 'The Deputy' hit job, while simultaenously validating
antisemitism inquistion

September 2, 2015 at 10:58 PM


More on the AJC's Nostra Aetate Errand Boy, Con-Man, Malachi Martin


Malachi Martin received a fellowship from the Judaic gatekeepers of the Guggenheim foundation to
write The Encounter in which he extolls post-Nostra Aetate Judaizing developments at the parish and
school level.


The title page of Malachi Martin's book, The Encounter states that he wrote the Judaizing book The

Pilgrim under the alias "Michael Serafian"


"In New York's Roman Catholic Parochial Schools a new course in Judaism and on the Jew in literature
was planned for the autumn of 1968. The Sisters of Notra Dame de Sion and the Union of American
Hebrew Congregations plan to sponsor jointly a series of two-week institutes on Judaism for Catholic
educators. On January 21, 1968, sermons were preached in all 225 Roman Catholic parish churches in
Brooklyn and Queens on the theme of 'better understanding and charity towards our Jewish neighbors.'
Catholic Universities have inaugurated courses in Judaism given by resident or visiting rabbis. As a
means to stem, influence, and destroy Roman Catholic Hebraeophobia, these measures are both
necessary and good." (Malachi Martin, The Encounter, p.376)


The title page of Martin's book, The Encounter (see above) plainly reveals that Martin wrote an even
more outrageous Judaizing book, The Pilgrim, under the pseudonym, Michael Serafian. The documents
HERE plainly reveal the American 'Jewish' Committee's financing of this book.


7 comments:


Kev said...

Breaking! ! Israel Lobbyist - We Need a False Flag to Start War with Iran!
http ://www. youtube. com/watch?v=PfoaLbbAixO&feature=plcp

September 26, 2012 at 8:29 AM


Nynorsk Bokmal said...


A great many Traditional Catholics believe Martin not only repented of his conciliarism
and Judeo-voluptuarism later in life but indeed became their enemy. I would be curious
to know whether you do or don't share this view. I ask as one who is by no means certain
whether to view the guy in sum as a hero, a fraud, or just a crank.


September 26, 2012 at 10:03 AM


Alan Aversa said...

Reality is much more interesting than finction; Malachi Martin is a quasi-crank,
nothing of the caliber of Vatican II critics like Romano Amerio, De Mattei, Gherardini,
Tissier, et al.

September 26, 2012 at 8:43 PM

0

Maurice Pinay said...


It's actually far worse than that. He played an indispensible role in pushing Nostra Aetate
through Vatican II by every corrupt means. His writings after its promulgation clearly


express his opinion that Nostra Aetate didn't go far enough; that it should have stated that
the Patriarchs and the Old Testament belong only to The Jews" and not Christians.

This is the thinking of a man who wants to tear the foundation away from Christianity.

It's a theme we keep seeing over and over in the Judaic expectations in Judeo-Catholic
dialogue.

Even up until the year of his death he swore to his gullible conservative audience that he
was against Nostra Aetate and that he thought it went to far. His own writing (The
Pilgrim, The Encounter) put paid to that lie.

The outrageousness of Malachi Martin is beyond what most people can comprehend, but
the behavior is familiar to those knowledgeable of Judaic tradition.

Here is a similar example:

http://mauricepinay.blogspot.com/201 1/09/alex -jones-provides.html
People have to get up to speed on how to detect these fraudsters.

September 26, 2012 at 9:04 PM


Alan Aversa said...

Alex Jones is a "bona" fide fraudster. Look at how he addresses "the Jesuit question" and
how he describes Freemasonry. He even said he was offered to join to Bilderburg group,
but "refused."

September 27, 2012 at 12:13 AM

0

Maurice Pinay said...

Jones has nothing on Rabbi Bendory or Malachi Martin.

September 27, 2012 at 12:34 AM

0


Maurice Pinay said...


Rabbi Mayer Schiller is another:

http://maurieepinay.blogspot.eom/2010/l 1/rabbi-mayer-schiller-and-fatality-of.html
September 27, 2012 at 12:39 AM


Nynorsk Bokmal said...

Thanks for your comments, Mr. Pinay. In light of them, it's striking that even a quite
cynical hardliner like Father Morrison of Traditio thinks well of Martin.

I saw Martin frequently on Bill Buckley's TV program many years ago. His secularized
garb always left a bad taste in my mouth, as did Buckley's near-sycophancy toward him.
It seems I should have trusted my instincts !

September 27, 2012 at 12:38 PM


Maurice Pinay said...

"... Buckley's near- sycophancy ... "


Thanks for that insight Nynorsk Bokmal.

In my observation it's essential to tribal, Judeomasonic tradition to build up credibility for
one another, often to degrees that seem comical once one develops an eye for it. It can
also be subtle, depending upon circumstances.

The same goes for diminishing the worth and accomplishments of outsiders, however
genuine, particularly of those who are on to them.

For those not aware, we allude to 'traditionl Catholic' Bill Buckley's membership in the
masonic Skull and Bones fraternity at Yale, a recruiting pool for the CIA which Buckley
also worked for.

September 27, 2012 at 5:10 PM


Anonymous said...


Anonymous Nynorsk Bokmal said...


A great many Traditional Catholics believe Martin not only repented of his conciliarism
and Judeo-voluptuarism later in life but indeed became their enemy. I would be curious
to know whether you do or don't share this view. I ask as one who is by no means certain
whether to view the guy in sum as a hero, a fraud, or just a crank.

September 26, 2012 10:03 AM


Perhaps if he was really sincere in his conversion he would have written an autobigraphy,
hanging it all out to dry!

September 28, 2012 at 1:52 AM


Anonymous said...

....it's striking that even a quite cynical hardliner like Father Morrison of Traditio thinks
well of Martin

For some reason Fr Morrison also thinks well of JohnXXIII, that great "Window-
opener"

September 28, 2012 at 8:35 AM


Maurice Pinay said...

Perhaps if he was really sincere in his conversion he would have written an
autobigraphy, hanging it all out to dry!


Based upon his work with The AJC, Cardinal Bea et al, few people were better
positioned to explain what actually was going wrong with the Church. He knew it
intimately, as the quote from 'The Encounter' I've supplied shows. Instead he mystified
people with stories about the bishops disemboweling a puppy and ceremonially
enthroning Satan in the Vatican, claims for which no evidence ever appeared. And this
while 'The Holocaust' was in fact being enthroned in the Church by the people he worked
with.

His mantra was that "the Church is collapsing" and "there's no going back." Yet, he
personally, fanatically exploited every means imaginable to ensure that Nostra Aetate


was promulgated and its errors were spread afterwards. He was instrumental in
precipitating the collapse, but then as a 'convert' he told his large conservative audience,
'there's nothing we can do about it' except go underground and pray. This is precisely the
'resistance' that the rabbis want.

What a difference the 'converted' Malachi Martin could have made if he demonstrated
even half the zeal for Christ as he had for the rabbis, AJC and Guggenheim Foundation,
during and after Vatican II!

September 28, 2012 at 9:15 AM


Maurice Pinay said...

One followup thought: doesn't it seem inconsistent with traditionalism and anti-
modernism to harp on the (false) notion that "we can't go back"?

This theme, that the Church is collapsing and there's no going back underlies nearly
everything Martin wrote and every interview he gave until the year he died.

September 29, 2012 at 3:41 PM


Maurice Pinay said...

There's been an objection raised to the quote from The Encounter which I supplied at a
discussion forum. I'm unable to register at that forum to respond. I invite the fellow to
raise his objection here. I think his misunderstanding can be cleared up pretty easily.

September 29, 2012 at 5:54 PM


Michael Hoffman said...

Triple agent (double-agent is too modest a term to describe him) Malachi Martin was,
according to the Cincinnati Enquirer, the descendant of Judaic bankers who somehow
ended up in Ireland. After he announced his alleged traditionalist credentials, he told Art
Bell in the course of an interview before a liberal radio audience that the state had no
business regulating abortion ( I saved the tapes from the show for years; traditional
Catholics were not interested and I eventually tossed them).

He’s still a hero on the traditionalist scene, thanks in part to a Canada-based audio


recorder who for years marketed his interviews with MM.

Malachi was Cardinal Bea’s peritus for Nostra Aetate. He’s the architect of it. A guy who
was pretty much a crypto-rabbi landed on his feet in middle age as a traditional Catholic,
and most bought it. A very wealthy and adroit scam artist.

I had dinner with him in 1978 in New York and at that time gave him some of my
research into conspiracies and Satanism. It ended up in “Windswept House,” unattributed
of course.

I’ll say this for him, for a slender guy of small stature he could drink anybody in the room
under the table and remain as lucid as ever; a very sharp intellect. Imagine what he might
have accomplished for good had he actually been a believer in the gospel of Jesus Christ
and an honest man.

Instead, he betrayed God and advanced the rabbinic agenda inside the 20th century
Church to a degree that is truly astonishing, and never owned up to it.

If I were Dante I know where I would place him, but since I’m just an Idaho country boy,
I’ll leave him to heaven.

M. Hoffman

September 29, 2012 at 8:40 PM


Nynorsk Bokmal said...

Dear Messrs. Pinay and Hoffman:

Thank you both very much for these illuminating and instructive comments.

Among the many things we are taught by society's Judaic masters is that such old saws as
"talk is cheap" and "actions speak louder than words" are mere foolishness. Why should
our wise leaders deceive us, and why venture to explain or even examine the seeming
contradictions of their actions and speech? We simply aren't equipped to fathom their
wisdom!

The dissonance between Martin's words and actions, as you recount them, underscore yet
again the necessity of placing trust only in those who earn it by their actions.


October 2, 2012 at 8:31 AM


Carl Grillo said...


I have found material for heresy in some of his other writings and radio interviews. ..in
Hostage to the Devil, he insinuates that the Devil can force a possessed person to
consumate an external sin against chastity against that person's will. Sound theology
teaches that the Devil can only influence - but not compel - the intellect and free will of
man. On a radio interview, Fr Martin presents Jesus as "perplexed and confused," when
accosted about the death of Lazarus...

September 2, 2013 at 3:00 PM

Post a Comment

Links to this post


Tuesday, December 4, 2007

More Documentation on AJC Agent, Malachi Martin

The following is from the book, Spiritual Radical: Abraham Joshua Heschel in America by Edward K.
Kaplan. This is an important book for those interested in the machinations of the American Jewish
Committee in the Second Vatican Council. It recreates this history, presumably from copious AJC notes,
documents, transcripts, interviews and cataloged letters. Rabbi Abraham Heschel was the primary AJC
player in the authoring of and shepherding of the document Nostra Aetate through the council. I will be
returning to him later. But for now we offer further documentation of what has already been revealed
of Malachi Martin's role in this matter:

"Less overtly, [AJC European director, Zachariah] Shuster found other ways to obtain restricted
information, and even copies of secret documents. He developed a clandestine source of information, a
"mole" within Cardinal Bea's Secretariat. The secret agent was an Irish Jesuit, Malachi Martin, a voluble,
larger-than-life figure variously referred to as "Forest," "Pushkin," and Heschel's "young friend" in
Schuster's confidential reports and transcripts of transatlantic phone conversations. Martin ... was
sympathetic to the Jewish position ...

"With a mixture of motives, lofty and ignoble, Martin became close to Heschel and Schuster. He enjoyed
their company immensely, especially when they vied with each other in telling jokes in Yiddish ... Martin
primarily advised the AJC on theological issues, but he also provided logistical intelligence and copies of
restricted documents." ( Spiritual Radical: Abraham Joshua Heschel in America, Edward K. Kaplan, Yale
University Press, p.243)


Cited sources for this information are an interview with Malachi Martin, a letter from Martin to the
author, and a file on Zachariah Schuster at AJC/NY.


Documentation of AJC payments to Malachi Martin for his services and more here:

http://mauricepinay.blogspot.com/2007/06/malachi-martin-american-jewish.html

On Rabbi Abraham Heschel who Martin as "Heschel's young friend" refers to:

http://mauricepinay.blogspot.com/2007/12/vatican-ii-kabbalist-sage-rabbi-abraham.html
Posted by Maurice Pinay at 1:17 AM *

Email ThisBIogThisIShare to TwitterShare to FacebookShare to Pinterest

1 comment:


Anonymous said...

I would like to point out that Robert Faurisson wrote a book entitled Pope Pius XII's
Revisionism and in it, Faurisson very methodically shows how that prayer that was made
up by Malachi Martin and attributed to John XXIII had insinuated itself over a span of 40
years into all the Churches, and that even though the history showed it to be apocrophal,
that they are, just the same, reciting it in many Catholic Churches today. I find it very
disturbing that its recitation in the Churches was the plan of the AJC from the
beginnning.

I wish someone would look into the ordination of Malachi Martin. He was supposed to be
ordained as a Jesuit on August 15, 1954 in Rome, I would presume. I frankly have my
doubts that he was ever ordained, and the reason I believe that is because there was an
article I read about him which stated that he was about to leave the seminary before his
ordination when Cardinal Bea came to fetch him out of Louvain and made him his
assistant. Mary Ball Martinez makes reference to a secretary in the Vatican's new Lay
Apostolate Department run by Jewish convert from Australia Rosemary Goldie in the
1950's who said that during the fifites and in that department, they were laying the
blueprints for Vatican II, and that both Bea and Martin were in and out of that Lay
Apostolate Department all the time.

December 27, 2007 at 7:45 PM


Malachi Martin: "God Could Have Incarnated as a Cow;" "Priests Should Have
Been Female"


"One of the big deficiencies in Christianity is there is no theology of women at all. Although the one
thing Jesus needed, the one thing he needed, having decided to become human, the only thing he
needed was a woman, and logically all priests should have been female, you know. But male chauvinists
got in the way. And as some theologian said, you know -and this is a sideline but let me finish it. As you
know it's theologically possible for God to have become a cow if he decided. He could be incarnated as a
cow. But even if he had been incarnated in a cow, we men would have taken over, that's the extent. But
we've no theology of woman and no theology of love, really human love, because it involves the essence
of woman and I don't think we know that theologically." (Malachi Martin, December 7, 1973, Firing Line,
interviewed by Skull and Bones Bill Buckley)

Posted by Maurice Pinay at 10:38 PM *1

Email ThisBIogThisIShare to TwitterShare to FacebookShare to Pinterest

14 comments:

o

Diego said...

The enraged cuckolds speak clearly towards Martin's "theology" of women.

Nostra aetate speaks clearly to his role in breaching the Church's Magisterium of the
synagogue of Satan.

That this forked tongue deceiver has obtained a cult following among practicing
Catholics is a scandal.

January 11, 2013 at 12:40 AM


Alan Aversa said...

He needs to read St. Thomas Aquinas's Summa Theologica, e.g., Ill q. 3 a. 7, "Whether
one Divine Person can assume two human natures?", which addresses, among other
things, whether the Second Person of the Holy Trinity could have assumed another type
of body. (The body would have to be that of an intelligent being, not a brute animal.)

January 11, 2013 at 1:35 AM


Anonymous said...

I missed that one. Did Ole Skull and Bones say "Forgive me Fr.,but I think you're out of
your skull."..?


January 11, 2013 at 1:39 AM


Anonymous said...

No Theology of Love? Didn't JPII come out with a Theology of the Body ( which
incorporated Martin's "Theology of Love"? ).

I always thought that the Beatitudes were a Theology of Love.

January 11, 2013 at 4:32 AM


I am not Spartacus said...

God Could Have Incarnated as a Cow;

And men would then worship Rosie O'Donnell
January 11, 2013 at 7:44 AM


kev said...

Jewish & Protestant church's of Ireland support legislation to kill the unborn in the
womb.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qF_SEPqyUqM
January 11, 2013 at 7:56 AM


Anonymous said...

Anonymous said, "I always thought the Beatitudes a theology of love." To that I say
Amen+++.


January 12, 2013 at 2:54 AM


Anonymous said...


Here's some of the latest swill from Tikkun.org
Special Section: Christianity Without the Cross?

The Cross as a Central Christian Symbol of Injustice -

http://www.tikkun.org/nextgen/the-cross-as-a-central-christian-symbol-of-injustice

The Death of Christianity
by LAWRENCE SWAIM

Christianity is buckling under the weight of the cross — a symbol that suggests violence
can be redemptive. Must the crucifixion be at the center of Christianity?

January 12, 2013 at 4:45 PM


Anonymous said...


The Dialogue is Over by Malachi Martin

http://worldview.carnegiecouncil.org/archive/worldview/1974/01/2268.html/_res/id=sa_F

ilelM7J001_a005.pdf

January 13, 2013 at 3:33 AM


Anonymous said...

Find it strange Mrs. Livanos was married to a George Livanos but she shares a tombstone
with Malachi Martin?

Paid Notice: Deaths LIVANOS, KAKIA

http://www.nytimes.corn/2002/05/14/classified/paid-notice-deaths-livanos-

kakia .html: http :/w w w .nytimes .com/2002/05/ 1 4/classified/paid-notice-deaths-livanos-

kakia.html

the Malachi Martin - Kakia Livanos gravestone

http://upload.wikimedia.Org/wikipedia/commons/9/99/Malachi_Martin_Footstone_2011C

•jpg


Henry Allen Moe Papers (Guggenheim connection)


http://www.amphilsoc.org/mole/view?docId=ead/Mss.B.M722-ead.xml


search for Martin, Malachi & Fitzmaurice-Martin, Malachi
January 13, 2013 at 4:40 AM


Anonymous said...

3 reviews of Malachi Martin's book, Jesus Now
'Jesus Now:' Reader Works Io Understand

http://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1873&dat=19731208&id=e24pAAAAIBAJ&sji
d=18 wEAAAAIB A J&pg=205 1,3487501

Humanity's Lost Self

http://news. google. com/newspapers?nid=2507&dat=19750522&id=eItAAAAAIBAJ&sji
d=76QMAAAAIBAJ&pg=43 86,4893207

Jesus Now

http ://books .google.com/books?ei=N8TzUKPEK-

mlOAH_wIHoAw&id=cZiBllRUIC4C&dq=%22miserable+primal+couple%22&q=mala

chi+martin#search_anchor


January 14, 2013 at 4:42 AM


Anonymous said...

another review of Jesus Now
Jesus in cameo.

http ://ne ws .google.com/newspapers ?nid= 1 454&dat= 197311 25&id=2MY s AAAAIB AJ&s
jid=0 AkEA A A AIB A J &pg=4 104, 5989090

January 14, 2013 at 5:06 AM


LeonG said...


When I listened to MM for the first time I thought he was making it up. I've never really
taken his viewpoint in. I recently deleted the few items I had forgotten about on my
laptop. Bye Bye Malachi! !

I found it strange he wanted to leave the priesthood (like the 32000 after the vat councils)
Thanks maurice Pinay

January 24, 2013 at 4:52 PM


Anonymous said...

Martin was quite the connoisseur of this sort of feminist yammering so I gather, probably
because it was endlessly useful for manipulating women — another of his favorite
hobbies. I understand he lured Robert Kaiser's wife into adultery by crooning such rot
into her ear. This guy was total bottom-feeding scum. He should be dug up and thrown
into a sewer.

March 16, 2013 at 10:43 PM

Malachi Martin Files

How the Jews Changed Catholic Thinking - This entire article by Joe Roddy (LOOK Magazine,
January 1966) is relevant, but the sections highlighted specifically refer to Malachi Martin and
his role during the Second Vatican Council. The piece touches on Martin’s work for the
American Jewish Committee and his threatening of Council Fathers in order to get them to go
along with the liberal’s version of Nostre Aetate - the revolutionary VII document dealing with
how Catholics are to relate to Jews in the modern world.

This article is also one of the earliest published references to Martin’s adulterous affair with the
wife of Time Magazine correspondent Robert Kaiser.


Martin interviewed in the Cincinnati Enquirer - In this article from 1973, Martin relates to
reporter Ben Kaufman how he blackmailed reluctant fathers of the council into going along
with liberal and Jewish vectors on Nostre Aetate. This is the second written account of such, the
first being Joe Roddy’s article - How the Jews Changed Catholic Thinking - eight years earlier.
What makes this account important is that it comes straight from Malachi Martin himself years
after the fact.


Malachi Martin’s Double Agent Status Documented - Regarding Martin’s activities during the
Second Vatican Council, this is the proverbial smoking gun - hard documents obtained from the
New York Public library. Indisputable proof of the various pseudonyms Martin used.


Documentation of the Swiss bank account opened on Martin’s behalf by the American Jewish
Committee. Memos showing Martin getting referred by his publisher to the American Jewish
Committee and various left wing and Jewish media organizations. More evidence, if any is
needed, that Joe Roddy’s article was spot on.


Malachi Martin’s Adulterous Affair Documented - Unless you’re willing to completely suspend
logic and believe that these well-known preists were fabricating complicated stories out of whole
cloth, during his time at the Vatican, Malachi Martin had an affair with the wife of Time
correspondent Robert Kaiser that tore apart the young Catholic family.


Malachi Martin was not an Exorcist - After writing his book on exorcisms, Martin suddenly
began claiming that he was an actual exorcist. However, an overwhelming amount of
evidence shows that he could not have possibly performed even one single legitimate exoricism
in the Diocese of New York or anywhere else.


Malachi Martin’s Actions Against the Church During the 1960s - In timeline format, this
article is a summation of many of Martin’s underhanded activities during and after his work on
the Second Vatican Council. Covered are Martin’s many pseudonyms, the paid work he
performed for the American Jewish Committee and the prayer he fabricated and attributed to


John XXIII.


Malachi Martin's Fake 'Jews '-Worshipping 'Papal Prayer' Appears in
Ecumenical Journal

Malachi Martin's anti-Christ legacy; see his fake 'Jews'-worshipping 'papal prayer' peddled as authentic
once again:

The Holy Journey of Two Popes
Also see:

Mgr. Oesterreicher on Malachi Martin and the Fraudulent Prayer for 'The Jews'

The File on Malachi Martin


Posted by Maurice Pinay at 11:49 PM "►


Email ThisBIogThisIShare to TwitterShare to FacebookShare to Pinterest

4 comments:


Anonymous said...

John XXIII and JPII are fake popes, just as Fellay's SSPX is proving to be a fake counter-
reformation movement.

March 26, 2014 at 1:33 PM


Annely said...

Maurice Pinay, are you familiar with an "organization" Veterans Today? You probably
are. I am not really familiar. I've been to their website once or twice via a link. In recent
months I've become a little more familiar through a handful of VT "members" whose
article appear at another site. About three weeks ago I discovered that Malachi Martin
was co-founder of this group. Gordon Duff of VT published an article about CIA
activities in

methods of mind controlling or akin to, the American Public. He cited M.M. and his
"revelations" of Satan worshipping Jesuits etc. etc. This having connection to CIA and
their plan to destroy religion. I stopped reading Gordon Duff for awhile (before this) as
G.D. in nearly every article irritates my sense of truthfulness. I might be wrong about
G.D. and who else in the VT crowd? I might not be. Do you have any insight pertaining?

March 27, 2014 at 1:33 AM


Maurice Pinay said...

Dear Annely, personally, some sources require sifting to such a degree that I find it better
to do my own research.

I did a brief search of the site you mention and saw this:

"Fr. Martin was a good friend, part of our original group that became VT along with
Col. David Hackworth, Col. Ted Guy and others. "

I don't know if this is true or another case of an ambitious alternative media figure
hitching their wagon to Martin's star.


Whatever the case, Martin was definitely connected to other known spooks (e.g. Bill
Buckley) and claimed to have worked for the CIA himself.

March 27, 2014 at 10:11AM


annely said...

Thank you MP. I have never known more about Malachi Martin than I needed to know. It
was enough for me to assess him as a man without integrity and probably wicked. I had
been a new reader of three VT guys and each time I read them I felt a lack of confidence
in much of their claims

and at times felt the reader was being put on though most commenters joined in and
praised the author. I felt rather insulted. But the CIA and other government coverts are
not my particular field of interest thus categorized as general interest.

Having tired of "deceptions" I didn't read them for awhile. Then one day did and there
was Malachi Martin in this instance cited and endorsed as a source of Satan Worshippers
in the Church being a fact. Then the claim of he being co-founder with David Hackworth
of VT. This reinforced anyway to me that the suspicion I'd had of VT was probably well
founded. So today I read elsewhere that G.D. is a "government" agent and agent for
globalization and that another VT man J.F. is a liar.

I can't endorse these claims either but I would put a tenner on them. And if I may say a
tenner on you who do your own research and are very adept, credible, reliable and
singular.

p.s. I'm not claiming that that VT is lies only but it seems to me they lie liberally and
must have an agenda.

March 28, 2014 at 2:31 AM


Tuesday, July 30, 2013

L.A. Times Publishes Rabbi Adlerstein's Regurgitation of Counterfeit Papal
'Prayer'

When Malachi Martin devotees are confronted with his own indefensible words and deeds of treachery
against the Church which he never retracted or made reparation for, they're wont to cry, "you're
attacking a dead man who can't defend himself!"


This entry is on the topic of the fake papal 'prayer' which Malachi Martin put into the mouth of the dead
Pope John XXIII, years after he had passed away and was unable to defend himself, and the disastrous


effects that this fake 'prayer' has had in the 48 years since Malachi Martin first published it in the
American Jewish Committee periodical, Commentary in January of 1965 under cloak of anonymity.

The L.A. Times recently published an editorial by Rabbis Abraham Cooper and Yitzchok Adlerstein of the
Simon Weisenthal Center of Holocaustolatry titled, "John XXIII and John Paul II: Righteous popes." Rabbi
Yitzchok Adlerstein's fanatical desire to kosher slaughter Catholicism is documented HERE and HERE.


Rabbi Yitzchok Adlerstein is also a professor at the nominally Catholic Loyola law school, where nominal
Catholics learn the modern lawyers' racket which is really secular Talmudism, hence, among other
reasons, Adlerstein's presence there.

From the L.A. Times editorial of Rabbis Abraham Cooper and Yitzchok Adlerstein we read:

Perhaps because of what he saw during the Holocaust, [Pope] John XXIII never lost an opportunity to
modify church practices that nurtured anti-Semitism ... The pontiff decried theological anti-Semitism:
"Across the centuries, our brother Abel was slain in blood which we drew...." he once prayed. "Forgive
us. Lord, for the curse we falsely attributed to their name as Jews." ("John XXIII and John Paul II:
Righteous popes," Rabbis Abraham Cooper and Yitzchok Adlerstein, L.A. Times, July 13, 2013)

These phrases are taken directly from the fake 'prayer' that Malachi Martin published in the American
Jewish Committee publication, Commentary, January 1965 which read:


We are conscious today that many, many centuries of blindness have cloaked our eyes so
that we can no longer see the beauty of Your Chosen People nor recognize in their faces the
features of our privileged brethren.

We realize that the mark of Cain stands upon our foreheads. Across the centuries our
brother Abel has lain in the blood we drew, or shed tears we caused by forgetting
Your love.

Forgive us the curse we falsely attached to their name as Jews. Forgive us for
crucifying You a second time in the flesh. For we know not what we did.

Now, this fake 'prayer' on its face constitutes a blood libel against Christians put in their own mouths, "...
Across the centuries Abel has lain in the blood we drew ..." It also constitutes a curse upon Christians
("... the mark of Cain stands upon our foreheads..."), an idolatry of Judaic 'race' self-choseness
(Your Chosen People ... our privileged brethren) and a misidentification of Christ with people who
reject His teaching, messiahship and divinity ("Forgive us for crucifying You a second time in the
flesh ... "), so it's easy to understand why the rabbis would want to keep this fake 'prayer' in circulation.

And indeed, that zealous helper of the rabbis, Malachi Martin also published a fake claim that Pope John
XXIII intended for the 'prayer' to be recited in all of the churches of the world (see: "Vatican II and the
Jews," Commentary, January 1965). While that extravagant goal was not reached, the 'prayer' has been
recited in many churches throughout the world, even regularly in some areas such as in Poland. As we
can see in the L.A. Times this ridiculous counterfeit 'prayer' still circulates widely even in the


mainstream.


A paper has been published by the Council of Centers on Jewish-Christian Relations in which the author,
a Rev. Dr. Murray Watson, reluctantly documents and acknowledges that the 'prayer,' which he views as
a "beautiful and stirring" ... "[summation] of the repentance of post-Shoah Christianity," is indeed a
counterfeit, but he nevertheless sees it as bearing good fruit by engendering other papal prayers and
gestures of contrition to 'The Jews.'

There are people who will tell you there is no such thing as the revelation of the method, but that is
exactly what we see here; 'yes, the revolution was subversive, but so what, look at the "good fruit" it
bore.' In other words, the 'good' end justifies the subversive means. In addition, you're being subjected
to conditioning via a narrative which has it that the Church and your ancestors were so channeled in
traditions of "Jew hate" that it was only by subversiveness that they could be brought around to their
present state of pholojudaic 'good,' which I attempted to illustrate HERE.

And so, getting back to Malachi Martin's devotees, yes, he is dead and unable to "defend himself" from
responsibility for his own words and deeds, but I am alive and able to defend against his legacy of
treacheries, which I will do so long as God permits me.

Also see:

The Self-Deception of Judaism and its Offshoot, Holocaustolatry

"Some events do take place that are not true; others are [true]-although they never happened."

Purim Shpiel 2009

The Pontificate of Benedict XVI began and ended with the 'You are Nazis' Meme

The File on Malachi Martin

Posted by Maurice Pinay at 5:53 PM 4

Email ThisBIogThisIShare to TwitterShare to FacebookShare to Pinterest

8 comments:


Michael Hoffman said...

Jesuit Malachi Martin. Jesuit Pope Francis. Coincidence?

Also, slightly off-topic, the “conservative” blog that is read in Rome and quoted by the
NY Times, Rorate Caeli, has yet to breath a word about the pope’s “Who am I to judge
‘gay’ orientation?” outrage — perhaps because, and I hope I am wrong here, there is no
way to spin it. It is, patently, spittle from a demon-possessed person who happens to be
the Church of Rome’s pontiff. See;


http://revisionistreview.blogspot.com/2013/07/vicar-of-christ-on-earth-asks-who-am-

i.html

Lastly, it is good to see Maurice publishing more frequently.

July 30, 2013 at 11:02 PM


Hans said...

""you're attacking a dead man who can't defend himself!"

Whats wrong with that? He could have defended himself when he was alive but he
didn't !Ecc. 3:1

August 1, 2013 at 10:33 AM


Anonymous said...

Many thanks for this very important work.
August 2, 2013 at 11:08 PM


annely said...

Maurice Pinay and readers, Here is something very interesting,
theeye-witness.blogspot.

Aug. 5 2013. Jean Madiran 1920-2013.

It is about VII and the Judaeising
of the Church.

August 5, 2013 at 6:47 PM


Reagan's Bush said...

You mean anti -pope, Mr. Hoffman?

Btw, I'm glad you've dropped all Catholic pretentions and are showing your true, apostate
colors. You had most of us fooled, but some knew you were full-of-**** from the very
beginning.


August 6, 2013 at 2:42 PM


Anonymous said...

What does Reagan's Bush mean?
August 7, 2013 at 3:32 AM


Anonymous said...

for your other blog

http://forward.com/articles/177166/boston-bombers-pal-slain-in-florida-eyed-in-

jewish/?p=all

August 7, 2013 at 11:59 AM


Anonymous said...

that rabbi praver sure does get around!


Rabbi Shaul Praver echoed that sentiment.

“The greatest value in the Jewish faith and all great religions is safeguarding the sanctity
of life. It says in the Talmud that the one who saves a life saves an entire world. An
ambulance is a very effective tool for saving lives. The Great Vest Side Club has decided
to give this ambulance to the state of Israel in memory of those slain on Dec. 14 at Sandy
Hook Elementary School. I can not thank them enough for this most generous, heartfelt
gift; it will save lives while preserving the sacred memory of our dear ones.”

Ambulance for Israel dedicated in memory of Newtown victims

http://www.jewishledger.com/2013/07/ambulance-for-israel-dedicated-in-memory-of-

newtown-victims/


August 7, 2013 at 12:26 PM


The Jesuit Operative Malachi "Maimonides" Martin Reconsidered


The Jesuit Malachi Martin was periti (theological expert) to Augustine Cardinal Bea, the Jewish-
Catholic prelate who was instrumental in imposing the shattering change in Rome's teaching on
the Jews at the Second Vatican Council (declaring them, in the document Nostra Aetate, not
guilty of the charge of Deicide). Martin was at that time a priest (he has since been laicised), of
the most liberal bent and lent his scholarly faculties to Cardinal Bea's calamitous exculpation of
the Jews.

Like the Vatican Council II modernist Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger, Bea's adviser Malachi Martin
was a reborn conservative who has been widely embraced as a "prophet," a status he also—
curiously— enjoys in the Establishment media.

While Martin had been upholding the notion that Satanic rites are being practiced in the Vatican,
he had, since 1978, also been the chief support for the idea that the pope of Rome is personally
orthodox and not himself an agent of Talmudism or Freemasonry. How can a Christian leader
who tolerates Satanism be "orthodox"?

In the N.Y. newspapers in 1978, Malachi Martin decreed that John Paul II "held in more than
contempt" the destructive mother lode of our contemporary modernist toxicity, the
Enlightenment.

Yet, in practice John Paul II quite patently hews to Enlightenment doctrine— in his approval of
Evolution and of the writing of Henri de Lubac, the disciple of Tielhard de Chardin, the priest
who made a religion out of evolutionism and who may have played a part in the evolutionist
hoax, "Piltdown Man."

Moreover as a phenomenologist and follower of Edmund Husserl, John Paul II's Enlightenment
philosophy has inspired his "prayer meeting" with the Dalai Lama in Assisi and his benediction
of African Voodoo, when the Pope of Rome informed the witchdoctors of Benin that their
devilish tradition contained "seeds of the Word."

This is the pope who is portrayed by the establishment media as a staunch anti-feminist, yet who
is responsible for the most powerful feminist symbol ever to enter the papist church— altar girls.
This is phenomenology of the "Enlightenment" sort in its most protractedly diseased variant.

In the days of the pontificate of Paul VI, his tyrannical, neo-Bolshevik regime was explained
away with the propaganda that Paul VI was a "prisoner" and that a "double" was performing the
repression. This claim neatly acquitted the pope of all responsibility and kept his subjects
endlessly confused about amorphous "Vatican forces."

In the same vein, Dr. Martin lays blame for the Vatican's subversion of Christianity not at the
feet of John Paul II, but at the door of "Vatican satanists" and disobedient cardinals.

In an interview with "The Wanderer" newspaper, Martin was asked: "Will the Pope succeed over
time, or is he in an ecclesiastical end-game?"


Martin: "...His Papacy has been successful in this basic sense: that nobody can ever doubt his
consciousness of carrying the burden of Peter. He has carried the message of Christ all over the
world, and given millions the richness of the Gospel."

This is nonsense. John Paul II has, in Christ's name, carried a message across the planet, of pagan
syncretism and Pharisee-worship (the Biblical anti-Christs who were condemned in I John 2:22-
23 , John-Paul has praised as "our elder brothers in the Faith") and of One Worldism (Benin and
Assisi). The main prop for John Paul's supposed orthodoxy and credibility in traditional circles
has been the Jesuit Malachi Martin.

Martin's novel, Windswept House is described by The Wanderer newspaper as one wherein "the
Holy Father is cautiously temporizing as disloyal cardinals subvert his Papacy... to advance the
New World Order.. .the Pope's unfaithful cardinals plot to isolate John Paul II."

Once again the same schema advanced during the pontificate of Paul VI is being advanced now,
during the reign of John Paul II, implying that John Paul is paralyzed by the bad actions of
disloyal underlings (many of whom he himself appointed to high Church office!).

Another puzzling exchange with The Wanderer:

Question: "You describe (in Windswept House ), a gruesome murder in Century City (Chicago)
when introducing readers to your Cardinal Leonardine (Bernardin). There are a number of people
who will be very disturbed when they see that murder described, because they know you are
recording an event that actually took place. If you have the story on that ritual murder, why not
tell it as fact, and not fiction?"

Martin: "Because I am writing a novel, and I am not blaming any body, living or dead, nor am I
fixing any responsibility to anyone no more than any novelist does. Let those who write factual
reports please write it. It is about time they fulfill their duties."

Am I the only one who finds something strange about Malachi Martin being aware of the
circumstances of a ritual murder in Chicago and failing to name the guilty parties and assist in
whatever manner to help to bring them to justice? Why is the bringing to justice of these alleged
murderers only the duty of those "who write factual reports" ? And what precisely is Malachi
Martin writing, by the way?

In an interview with the John Birch Society publication, New American (June 9, 1997, pp. 39-
41), Malachi Martin alludes to his high degree of education and his insider status at the Vatican:

"...I was told I could expect to be made a cardinal, that I had Biblical knowledge, a facility with
languages. ..a good memory, all of which made me a candidate for advancement" (p. 39).

Very curiously, at the end of the interview Martin compares himself to Moses Maimonides: "In
the 12th century, the Jewish scholar Maimonides wrote a 'Guide for the Perplexed' for his people.
I hope to write a book somewhat like his to help Catholics..." (p. 41).


Moses Maimonides was the foremost interpreter of the Jewish Talmud and one of the most
implacable enemies of Christ in the annals of Judaism. Maimonides is on record, in his
commentary on the Mishnah, calling for the execution of all Christians and hoping that the name
of Jesus, the "name of the wicked, shall rot."

Since Martin is alleged to be a highly educated and "secretly informed" authority on the esoteric,
he surely knows the public record of the notorious Maimonides, with whom he compares
himself.

Maimonides, in his Mishnah Torah , (Moznaim Publishing Corporation, Brooklyn, New York,
1990, Chapter 10, English translation, p. 184), delcares: "It is a mitzvah [religious duty],
however, to eradicate Jewish traitors, minnim, and apikorsim, and to cause them to descend to
the pit of destruction, since they cause difficulty to the Jews and sway the people away from
God, as did Jesus of Nazareth and his students, and Tzadok, Baithos, and their students. May the
name of the wicked rot."

Given the facts concerning Maimonides, the question arises, was Malachi Martin sending a
signal to masonic and Jewish Talmudic initiates that, as a follower— or at least a sympathizer—
with the ferociously anti-Christian Maimonides, Martin is no genuine threat to these initiates,
and is in fact in league with them?

Or, if we can exculpate the Jesuit on this count, based on his ignorance of Maimonides'
published writings, what does this say about Martin's expertise in occult and similarly recondite
matters, if he can't even get Maimonides right?

April 4—5, 1997, Malachi Martin was a guest on the Art Bell radio talk-show. Malachi Martin
agreed with Art Bell that non-Christian American Indian "shamans" do in fact perform authentic
exorcisms which drive Satan away, supposedly by the power of Christ.

This is New Age ideology in its essence; pure syncretism; completely contradictory to the Bible,
for as Christ said, "Satan cannot cast out Satan."
